ADMINISTRATION AND INDIGENT HEALTH
Services Highlights
Access to School?Based Health Centers (SBHC) has been improved,
with 18 sites operating and another six sites under construction.
The expansion increased the number of students with access to
school?based services by 14% from 19,000 in 2009?10 to 21,727 in
2010?11. Utilization also increased, with SBHCs providing 41,051
visits to 9,109 students (44% of all students). The Our Kids Our
Families (OKOF) School?Based Behavioral Health Services served
1,867 students who received 44,454 hours of services. From
intake to discharge, the OKOF clients showed statistically
significant improvements in several areas, including positive peer
interactions, and motivation to do well in school. The Court
Appointed Special Advocates (CASA) Program increased both the
number of youth served and volunteers by 9%.

All 18 school districts in the County continue to face State budget
cuts. The resulting reductions in staff, such as vice?principals and
counselors, put stress on students and families, and directly
impact some positions that are funded and developed by the
Health Care Services Agency, as well as school?based behavioral
health providers.

PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT
Service Highlights
The Building Blocks collaborative, a partnership of organizations
convened by the Office of the Director to develop a blueprint for
community conditions to support well?being from the earliest
stages of life, celebrated its one year anniversary. Project
LAUNCH was established to promote healthy development of
young children through community services, raise the standard of
pediatric care for low?income children, and enhance early
childhood developmental and mental health screenings and
referral pathways. A teen pregnancy prevention grant of almost
$5M for five years was received by the Department which, in
collaboration with Girls Inc., Asian Health Services, Oakland
Unified School District, and the Health Care Services Agency’s
School?Based Health Centers, will fund an intervention program
for all sixth grade students enrolled in the Oakland Unified School
District.
Challenges for 2012?13
Challenges include ongoing threats to various sources of funding
for Public Health services to children, including funding for
California Children’s Services, Women, Infants and Children (WIC),
and dental and tobacco programs. The Department continues to
operate at understaffed levels in order to meet annual savings
targets, resulting in waiting lists for various services.

BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES
Service Highlights
• Effective collaboration with the five County special education
local plan areas to develop new mental health service
delivery protocols necessitated by the end of AB 3632 and
the beginning of AB 114.
• In the third year of implementation of the Early Connections
0?5 System of Care Substance Abuse and Mental Health Act
grant. Developed infrastructure for broad?based governance
decision making that includes: Full Partnership, Coordinating
Council, six Action Teams, and Early Connections
Management team.
• Developed and implemented a new Community Functioning
Evaluation (CFE). Data on the new CFE is being collected for
all BHCS school?based programs and will be used for
evaluation and service planning.
• Expanded Family Partner Services at the Guidance Clinic and
Early Childhood Program.
Challenges for 2012?2013
In 2012?13 funding and sustainability are the primary challenge
facing Children’s Services. The current State plan for realignment
could result in a significant increase in the County share of cost
for services delivered and billed under Medi?Cal.

DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND FAMILY SERVICES
Service Highlights
The Department’s participation in the five?year Title IV?E federal
waiver demonstration, which allows federal dollars to be used more
flexibly to improve child welfare outcomes, has been extended by ten
months. The Department has submitted a letter of interest to
continue the Waiver. Participation in the waiver has resulted in the
implementation of a range of innovative programs and strategies. It
has also meant that Alameda County is able to expand staffing and
service resources at a time when most counties are experiencing
severe budget reductions and cutbacks. The major service strategies
being implemented are summarized on the next page.
Challenges for 2012?13
During the upcoming fiscal year, the Department will continue to
focus on the successful implementation of AB 12, which extends
foster care for youth until their 21st birthday, and modifications to
the KinGap (kinship guardianship) program. Effective January 1st of
2012, youth may remain in foster care with continued funding for an
additional year, until their 19th birthday, as non?minor dependents.
The program will increase annually until foster care eligibility is
extended to the age of 21.

PROBATION DEPARTMENT
Service Highlights
The Probation Department reorganized Juvenile Field Services to
introduce the “Alameda County Model of Supervision,” which
includes a new tool for the assessment of risk, a Response and
Services Matrix, and Individual Achievement Plans for every youth
placed on probation. The Department continues to facilitate a
Screening for Out?of?Home Services Process to ensure multiagency
input for youth being considered for removal from the
home. Additionally, the Department participates in Collaborative
Court, a combined effort by Probation, the Courts, District
Attorney, Public Defender and Behavioral Health Care Services
that provides specialized services in accordance with best
practices for youth with severe emotional and mental disabilities.
Challenges for 2012?2013
Assembly Bill 12, newly enacted legislation that permits youth to
elect to remain in foster care beyond age 18, will require staffing
and resources beyond current capacity. Additionally, the foster
care case management system does not provide simultaneous
access by multiple users. This limitation may negatively impact
Federal Title IV?E fiscal allocation and consequently the delivery of
services to minors.

SHERIFF’S OFFICE
YFSB started a life skills group for at?risk and probationary youth.
Juvenile Investigations ensured compliance with sex offender
registration requirements by monitoring approximately 200
registrants and juvenile sexual assaults, crimes of domestic
violence and crimes involving physical abuse of children. Last year,
the Sheriff’s Office took over the Drug Endangered Children (DEC)
protocol for Alameda County, which was established to ensure the
safety and protection of drug endangered children. The DSAL
received funding and secured gymnasium space to expand its
Exercise is Medicine (Ex is Rx) project, a partnership between DSAL
and Tiburcio Vasquez and La Clinica de la Raza health centers, that
provides recreational and fitness opportunities in the
unincorporated communities for both youth and adults.
Challenges for 2012 – 2013
Most of this programming is discretionary, which means that it is
critical to continue to try to identify alternative funding for these
programs, rather than relying on County appropriations.

DISTRICT ATTORNEY
Service Highlights
Juvenile Justice Center, Child Sexual Assault Unit, Child Abuse
Listening, Interviewing and Coordination Center (CALICO), Victim
Witness Unit, Family Justice Center, Human Exploitation and
Trafficking (HEAT) Unit, Youth Summer Employment, Truancy.
Challenges for 2012?2013
In light of current budgetary constraints, as children are often the
most vulnerable in the criminal justice system, it will be the
challenge of the DA to balance resources to ensure children’s
services are not sacrificed.

PUBLIC DEFENDER
Services Highlights
The Public Defender’s Office staffs the Juvenile Justice Center at
2500 Fairmont Drive, San Leandro, with five full?time and two half
time (job share) attorneys on?site. These attorneys represent
minors at all stages of proceedings, from intake and interview of
minor clients (whether in detained or out?of?custody status),
through disposition and subsequent review of placement, both
local and out?of?state. All juvenile court appearances are
conducted at the Juvenile Justice Center.
Challenges for 2012?2013
The delivery of outstanding defense services to an inherently
vulnerable population is both a priority and a challenge. This
challenge reflects an increase in statutory responsibilities,
concurrent with a decrease in staff in recent budget years.

SOCIAL SERVICES AGENCY
Services Highlights
Despite the elimination of some funding, the Agency was able to
retain the essence of the Cal?Learn program (under a new name,
the Young Parent Opportunities program), and offer a Summer
Youth Employment Program that resulted in employment for
approximately 400 Probation and Foster youth. Both programs
were funded, and will continue to be funded, by the Title IV?E
Waiver.
Challenges for 2012 – 2013
The recently enacted State budget contains significant long?term
cuts affecting families served by the CalWORKs program.
Effective January 1, 2013, new applicants who are unable to
meet work requirements within 24 months will be timed out of
the program. Although their children will continue to be eligible
to receive support, family grants will decrease significantly,
potentially disrupting already fragile living arrangements. This
fiscal year, SSA is anticipating a 12% ($8 million) cut in the
revenues that support CalWORKs eligibility, employment and
child care services, which are the services essential for helping
clients to find and keep jobs.

DEPARTMENT OF CHILD SUPPORT SERVICES
Services Highlights
Promoted family self?sufficiency by collecting a current child
support payment for over 86% of formerly and never?aided cases,
ensuring these families do not return to or become active on
public assistance.
Challenges for 2012? 2013
To increase collections for and provide support to the children in
the Department’s caseload during the current unstable economic
climate.

CHILD CARE PLANNING COUNCIL
Service Highlights
Recent major accomplishments include convening local
subsidized early care and education programs to retain over
$74 million dollars in subsidies serving 8,300 children
throughout the County. Other accomplishments include:
overseeing a training program for over 1,000 teachers, leading
and initiating efforts to leverage grant funding of $1.4 million
over 10 years, promoting best practices on quality, cultural
responsiveness, early childhood mental health consultation
and inclusion, and leading policy work for children with
special needs.
Challenges for 2012?13
The FY 2012?2013 State budget continues years of major child
care subsidy and infrastructure cuts, with significant
statewide child care cuts of $130 million, resulting in
reductions of almost $9 million to Alameda County subsidized
child care programs, payments and support organizations.
These cuts will result in a loss of an estimated 943 Alameda
County child care slots for low?income children.

COUNTY LIBRARY
Service Highlights
Public Services provide direct customer services to children and
systemwide coordination of quality library services. Services
include book collections, magazines, newspapers, videos, audiocassettes,
compact discs, and technology resources for children.
Special programming for children is provided, including the
Summer Reading Games, Homework Centers and the Booklegger
Program, which utilizes volunteers to give book talks to school age
children.
Challenges for 2012?2013
Challenges include ongoing threats to various funding sources to
provide library services to children. The County Library is unable to
address the increased need for services to children due to limited
resources. The State budget crisis and resulting budget cuts
threaten library services for children. Alameda County Library will
continue working with all agencies to leverage resources to provide
services.

LEAD POISONING PREVENTION
Service Highlights
The Department is also working with the Community Assessment,
Planning, and Evaluation (CAPE) Unit of the Public Health
Department in the implementation of the Screening Through
Outreach Project (STOP) to dramatically increase screening for lead
exposure countywide. Additionally, the department has received
funding from the Kresge Foundation, which will fund healthy homes
interventions in the homes of asthmatic children countywide.
Challenges for 2012?2013
State law makes increases in the CSA charge, which has remained at
the same level since 1992, extremely difficult. Additionally, a major
funding challenge for the Department is the elimination of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Healthy
Homes Production grant program in 2011. The Lead Department
was unable to apply for funding to address housing related health
and safety hazards in an estimated 200 housing units with asthmatic
children.