In FY 2013/14 the Calaveras County Library System experienced a $36,000 shortfall which was made up with revenues from the Friends of the Library. To meet the budget target of $331,324 for FY 2014/15, the Library will experience a shortfall of $65,569. No revenues from the Friends of the Library have been built into the targeted budget of $331,324.
Discussions were held in March 2014 with Friends of Library board members, Library Commissioners, Central and Branch library staff to discuss ways to meet the budget target. Several budget scenarios (with no Friends support initially built in) were discussed with these stakeholders. Each support group was then charged with deciding how much support they could provide during FY 2014/15. Whatever budget scenario is chosen by the Board of Supervisors, the Friends of the Library support groups will have the option of making a revenue commitment to bring their service levels closer to that of FY 2013-14.
The budget reflects the required reduction in the County's allocation to Calaveras Adult
Tutoring by $4,591 in order to meet the County target of $22,413. This figure is the smallest
department allocation in Calaveras County and represents how its county government and
administration value a literate and educated population.
The Adult Tutoring Budget has always been a blend of funding from as many sources as could
be found and utilized. The Department Schedule 9's total amount of $44,321 reflects
revenues of $14,000 from the California State library literacy Services which have been
indicated, but will not be guaranteed until state budget approval. Additional revenue of
$7,908 in donations, of which the Calaveras Friends of the library have offered $5,000, is
expected.
The expenses are minimal. Services and supplies are $1,500. Salary and employee benefits
are $42,821. This amount is .60 FTE of the Program Coordinator position's salary/benefits.
In an attempt to compensate for a reduced AB109 budget allocation to Adult Tutoring, an
opportunity to utilize specifically dedicated funds in the Jail's Inmate Welfare Fund
(54200000) has been agreed upon. The .20 FTE salary supplement that is necessary to the pay
the sole position to normal .80 FTE level has been authorized by the Sheriff's Department/Jail
for Adult Tutoring to provide education programs to inmates. The BEC's that accompany this
memo show the division of the .80 FTE position costs. Additionally, attached is appropriation
memo outlining the cost allocation of $13,841 for that purpose in 2014-15 and reducing the
fund's previous year's $5,000 CAT allocation to zero.
Also this packet includes a copy of line item allocation for GED/DRC office supplies in the
pending '14-'15 AB109 budget amounting to $1,407. This is budgeted as direct expense and
will be paid upon approval of purchase.
One other item of note is that the previous years' $10,000 contribution to CAT from Cal
Works Health and Human Services has not been continued at this time, due to uncertainty
about the state budget. I was informed by Mary Sawiki that she would like to revisit the
possibility of 'Welfare to Work' GED education program cost reimbursement after the state's
budget is finalized.

Item 1 directs that County Counsel office’s General Fund Contribution for FY 2014/2015 be the
same as FY 2012/2013. The majority of County Counsel’s General Fund contribution is for
Budgeted Employee Costs (BEC) and therefore the budget directions will severely impact
staffing in the office. As you are aware, I gave notice that I will be retiring at the end of this
fiscal year. In order to address my retirement and meet the proposed budget reductions, I make
the following recommendations:
1. With my retirement, there will be a reduction in staff from four attorneys in the
office to three attorneys.
2. The County Counsel position will be filled through Board of Supervisors’
appointment of Megan Stedtfeld as the Interim County Counsel effective June 28,
2014 for a six month period. The proposed budget assumes that Ms. Stedtfeld will
be appointed County Counsel at the existing salary grade (with the 4% COLA) for
County Counsel. The reduction in staff will result in a savings of $115,260. A
new salary grade for Interim County Counsel will be proposed for Board review
which may result in additional savings for the first 6 months of the fiscal year.
Ms. Stedtfeld is willing to accept this proposal while serving as Interim County
Counsel and I have discussed it with Ms. Osborn who is also willing to consider
this proposal. The final decision on the salary grade will be made by the Board of
Supervisors when they appoint an Interim County Counsel.

3. Reclassify Camille Bakker from Legal Clerical Assistant to Paralegal in order to
assign certain activities to her that would otherwise be performed by an attorney as
a partial solution to the loss of one attorney. These activities could include
coordination of Public Record Act requests, initial preparation of pleadings and
discovery documents for existing and future litigation as well as preparation and
participation in document productions and interrogatory responses, additional
coordination and monitoring of claims and adjustment of claims (which currently
involves a significant portion of my time and Ms. Anthenien’s time), and review
and updates to billing issues with court ordered public defender costs which the
court has been open to for discussion in the past. This last task will need to wait
until the two new judges are seated but needs to be a priority task due to the recent
escalation in court ordered public defender costs that appears to be related to an
increase in appointment of local attorneys to serve as alternate public defender.
The former court executive officer and I briefly discussed creating billing
schedules that would provide recommended maximum investigator and forensic
expenses, subject to good cause and further court order, based on the charges in
the case (ex. misdemeanor vs. felony). This conversation needs to be renewed as a
possible solution to escalating costs.
The total increase in BEC for reclassifying this position is $9,449.00.
4. During the first 6 months of FY 14/15, the Interim County Counsel needs to
conduct further staffing review for potential changes in positions and salary grades
for the attorneys in the office. If the long term potential for staffing the office
remains at three attorneys, there may need to be deletion of the Assistant County
Counsel position and addition of a Senior Deputy County Counsel and Deputy
County Counsel III position in order to address further requested budget cuts yet
still provide for adequate supervision and opportunities for advancement in the
office. This would provide an alternative to Voluntary Time Off for the three
attorneys if additional budget cuts are required as there is nothing left to cut in the
office but BEC expenses. Other alternatives may involve increased use of outside
counsel for litigation as a potentially more efficient and cost effective way to
State law provides that County Counsel “may” provide legal representation to special
districts and “may” charge for that service.1 To date, County Counsel has not charged for
services to special districts, including litigation defense. Over the past few years, service
requests from special districts have increased and there have been occasions where one
and even two attorneys in the office have been working full-time on special district
requests for multiple hours. This is a General Fund cost paid for by all taxpayers in the
County, not just the taxpayers residing in the special district for which the service is
being provided. County Counsel understands that many special districts are underfunded
and cannot afford outside counsel. County Counsel therefore proposes to provide up to
and including ten hours of County Counsel time per fiscal year to each special district in
the County with any additional hours to be paid by the special district at a cost that covers
the actual costs in providing the service. County Counsel has made this proposal several
times in the past but there has been no clear Board direction on whether to proceed with
the ordinance. County Counsel requests that the Board be polled on this proposal and
that if there is Board support, County Counsel will agendize the attached ordinance for
Board review and action. If adopted, the A-87 rate charged by County Counsel for
billable attorney time will be approximately $100/hour to $120/hour, an amount still
significantly lower than any outside counsel public agency rate, which averages $300-
$350/hour. At least one other county has adopted a similar ordinance. County Counsel
anticipates that the revenue generation from this proposal will be minimal but will
reimburse the General Fund for costs associated with these services.
Item 4. Eliminate non-essential expenditures.
Item 4 directs the office to curtail spending and eliminate all non-essential expenditures.
County Counsel has during past difficult budget years, eliminated the $2,000 per attorney
continuing legal education budget. However, continuing legal education is mandatory in order
for attorneys to practice law. One-half of that education can be done using online free education
from the County Counsel shared website provided through CoCoNet but the State Bar mandates
personal attendance at conferences for the remaining half of continuing education. County
Counsel believes the $2,000 per fiscal year allotted is an essential expenditure for that reason.
There will be a $2,000 reduction in this cost with the elimination of one attorney position.
County Counsel is also requesting CPS reimburse for the State Bar dues County Counsel has
previously paid for the attorney assigned full-time to CPS so that will be a minor reduction in
the budget. County Counsel will also eliminate $33,000 of the $50,000 that has been budgeted
for the past few years to cover the anticipated costs of a temporary hire to create an

administrative record should the County adopt a General Plan Update that is the subject of a
lawsuit brought under the California Environmental Quality Act. If an administrative record is
necessary, County Counsel will first look to alternative sources of funding to prepare the record,
including potentially a down payment from petitioner(s) although potential reimbursement of
that down payment always remains a risk with litigation along with payment of petitioner(s)’
attorney fees if they prevail in the litigation.
Summary:
County Counsel’s FY 14/15 General Fund Contribution Target is $554,569.20. The above
proposals, if approved by the Board, will meet this request.
Alternatives:
Should the above proposals not be approved by the Board, staff will propose Voluntary Time
Off in the amount necessary to reduce BEC costs to meet the target General Fund Contribution.
This will increase the impacts to service delivery as discussed below.
Impacts of Reductions:
Loss of one attorney will result in reduced County Counsel availability. Litigation work must
remain a priority due to court ordered deadlines.
If A-87 direct charging is instituted, it is possible that County Counsel opinion requests will be
reduced as those requests should be directed through department heads before being sent to
County Counsel and incurring a departmental charge. It is also likely that the office will need to
institute a more formal opinion request policy other than direct emails to attorneys which
interrupt the flow of work, often seek information that is not a legal issue and are easy to
overlook with the volume of daily emails received. That policy may include written requests
only or if still by email, to a general County Counsel email inbox for distribution to individual
attorneys when available, similar to the help desk ticket used by TSD. The turnaround time for
opinion requests will be longer and requests that do not provide sufficient information will be
returned to the department to supplement before attorney review. Contract and board packet
review will take longer and there may need to be an adjustment to board clerk agenda schedules
related to that review. County Counsel has taken steps to make contract review more efficient
and when the purchasing policy is updated, coordinating templates and a contract informational
document will be made available on the intranet for departments to use.

(“Ciummo). The Board of Supervisors approved a three year agreement with Ciummo
effective July 1, 2012 with an annual cost of $327,540 for FY 2012/2013, $337,366 for FY
2013/2014 and $349,174 for FY 2014/2015 with an additional annual supplement to the Public
Defender’s investigative services line item of $20,000 to be earmarked each year for use by
Ciummo. Additional funds left in this account at the end of each fiscal year are rolled over to
the next year and will account toward that year’s $20,000 total. The County is obligated to the
contractual increase of $11,808 for FY 2014/2015.
Conflicts Public Defender.
When Ciummo has a conflict, the Court appoints a Conflicts Public Defender. The Board of
Supervisors entered into a two year Conflicts Public Defender contract effective July 1, 2012
with Cyril Ash, who provided this service for Five Thousand One Hundred Twenty Five
Dollars ($5,125.00) per month ($58,913/year) for the length of the contract. Mr. Ash has
requested an approximate 7% increase per month (to $5,500) and a new two year contract.
County Counsel responded with a recommendation of a 3% increase of an additional $155 per
month (total =$5280/month) and Mr. Ash reduced his request to an additional $225 per month
($2,700/year) for a total of $5350/month or $64,200 annually, a 4.4% increase. County
Counsel agendized Mr. Ash’s contract for the April 8, 2014 agenda.
Reductions.
In order to meet the recommended budget reduction to a General Fund contribution of
$510,434, County Counsel proposes the following reductions in the Public Defender budget.

A reduction in funding services and supplies from miscellaneous line items which have
historically been reserved for such services as court transcripts, special department expenses,
and other professional services totaling $12,300, and a reduction of $7,400 for the alternatecourt
appointed attorney(s) would be sufficient to reach the $19,700 needed to meet the
proposed General Fund contribution.
County Counsel advises that with the exception of the two above-mentioned contracts, all
public defender expenses are based on Court order and must be paid. Therefore, it is
impossible to accurately predict total annual expenses for this budget as recent history indicates
it is heavily dependent on the number and type of criminal cases filed by the District Attorney
and in particular the number of alleged murders that occur during the fiscal year as those types
of cases routinely generate significant court-ordered defense costs.

Development of the 2014-15 Assessor's Office budget was as challenging as advertised.
Several options were considered and staff members were asked for ideas in order to reduce
costs. As requested by the CAO, our proposal meets the targeted contribution or "net cost to
the General Fund" of $791,518 as defined by Calaveras County budget practices although my
department generates far more in revenue than it costs to operate.
Two employees have offered to reduce their work hours to help meet the targeted reduction.
My Chief Appraiser will reduce his work hours by 40% and take a Partial Selvice Retirement.
One of my Assessment Technicians has offered to take one day off every week as Voluntary
Time Off. Those cuts leave a shortfall of $54,431 between the department's net cost to the
general fund and the "Contribution Target." Accordingly, it is my plan to use the Assessor's
Designated Fund to make up the difference, as needed.
For the past three years, we've proposed capital improvements to the office space in order to
improve safety and efficiency. The capital improvements will be funded by the Assessor's
Designated Fund. This year we were able to complete the electrical project but we have
continued to experience considerable delays with the balance of the project. We hope to
complete the project in early summer.
The impacts of this budget proposal continue to be analyzed. A more detailed analysis will be
provided to the County Administrative Officer in early May for consideration by the Board.

The decision to layoff the Account Tech IV position is a difficult one as it means a county
employee will be losing their job. However, given that 91% of my expenses are personnel, there
is little room for any other options. The work done by this higher level Account Tech will be
spread across Accountant Auditor I, Accountant Auditor II, and the Auditor-Controller.
Additionally, my office will be implementing additional uses of the finance software to transition
from duplicated entry (once in the requesting department and once in the Auditor’s office) to
single point of entry and electronic approvals. This should mitigate some of the work that was
being done by this position and others.
Due to reductions in A-87, I am absorbing a $51,823 loss of revenue. This has created a
downward spiral for A-87 revenue for this department. The more we reduce costs, the more the
A-87 revenue will continue to go down for this department which will cause further cuts if I have
to continue to match cuts in revenue with cuts in expenses. It is widely considered a “death
spiral”.
With that in mind, I am asking for the Board of Supervisors to approve direction for collection
efforts on Special Districts. Similar to County Counsel recommending the “giving” of 10 hours
of time and charging for anything in excess of that for outside entities, I am recommending
“giving” 75 transactions of General Accounting and charging in excess of that for outside
COUNTY OF CALAVERAS Office of AUDITOR-CONTROLLER

entities. Additionally, I cannot legally charge Veterans Districts. With those limitations, only
the Special Districts who are utilizing the Auditor-Controller’s Office in excess of those units
will be collected on if approved by the Board of Supervisors. This is vital in the continued
operations of this office. If successfully approved, this office could see additional revenue in the
amount of $75,630 for the 2014-15 fiscal year. While this will not eliminate the layoff, it will
mitigate the need for additional cuts as A-87 revenue is already projected to be lower in 2015-16.
The MGT Contracts for SB90 claims and A-87 were moved from the Auditor’s budget to Non-
Departmental. The basis for this was the contract expense should be located in the same area the
SB90 revenue. The A-87 contract is a benefit to ALL central service departments not just the
Auditor. As such, the unallocated A-87 contract was moved to where the unallocated A-87
revenue is posted. –Savings of $23,300
In reviewing miscellaneous expenses, I evaluated additional areas for savings:
 Any training for staff will be limited to mandated training for a savings of $2,035. No
payroll training, no property tax training, and no general accounting training unless it can
be found free of charge and available via the internet.
 No printers are being budget for replacement for a savings of $4,000. Remember the
Auditor’s office prints checks, W-2s, 1099s, reports for departments, special districts, and
other entities. We have printers in place for redundancy. However, as the aged printers
begin to fail, replacement will be required and contingency draws will be required. We
will be working with vendors to switch them over to receive EFT payments instead of
hard copy checks AND working with employees to stop receiving paper EFT stubs,
utilizing Employee Online as their source for payroll records.
 Office Expense is a savings of $1,500. Note that the Auditor’s office produces all of the
accounting documents for the county. All the printing costs, paper, binding, shredding is
born by the Auditor’s budget. This office is working to become as paperless as possible
to limit paper and ink costs.
Over the next year, we will be relying on technology to replace manual processes still in
existence and find alternate methods to our current workloads. With the reductions in services
costs, implementation of efficiencies using more technology, reduction in staffing due to reduced
workloads because of those implementations, and increases in revenue recovery through Direct
Billing and A-87, the Auditor-Controller’s Office should be in an appropriate position for the
long term, utilizing the limited resources we have in the most effective manner possible.

The County Contribution budget unit is established to collect Trial Court revenue and centralize
General Fund operating transfers and disbursements to outside entities, such as the Calaveras
Visitors Bureau, which is being reduced by 10%, and the State Controller’s Office for Transient
Occupancy Tax, Trial Court MOE payment, and audit repayments.
This budget is requiring $103,551 less in General Fund contribution than requested in 2013/14
due to a notable increase in court collection revenue.
The Certificate of Participation budget unit is established to pay the debt service for the
Certificates through November 1, 2037. The County receives Tobacco Settlement revenue and
uses that funding sources to make payments on this debt. The balance of the funds borrowed sit
within a separate designated fund to be used solely for capital investment, per the terms of the
Official Statement.
The debt service payments for 2014-15 are budgeted at $432,518 with $400,000 coming from the
County Contribution fund. The difference will be paid using this funds equity balance.

The General Obligation Bond debt is calculated and paid annually through property assessments.
The final payment will be August 1, 2038. Any unspent Measure J funds can be used to pay
down the debt service and mitigate the obligation from the tax payer.
The total payments to be made in 2014-15 are $1,615,750. Accordingly, that should be the same
amount collected in bond assessments. However, any excess collections will again go toward the
future debt service payments, including paying off early, if possible.

The County Side Fund is a debt service fund that collects and pays for the portion of CalPERS
benefits that funds the 3% at 50 formula for “classic” members of CalPERS.
Currently, the county is paying 10.744% to fund this debt. In 2014-15, the county will increase
that rate to 11.5470%. This rate is included in cost to the Employer as budgeted for employees
that fall under this formula.
The term of the loan is 5 years with the final payment to occur on 6/30/2018. The rate is based
on “classic” members continuing to make up the employee base in the safety departments,
namely the Sheriff’s Department. However, if there are reductions in staffing OR “classic”
CalPERS members are replaced with “new” employees who fall under the pension reform
formulas, the rates needed to pay this balance off will increase and at that point, there will be
added costs to the General Fund in order to make up that rate change. However, even with this
potential of added cost in the future, the move to refinance this loan saves the county money
overall.

Projected revenue for FY 2014-15 decreased by approximately 36% from FY 2013-14,
We are anticipated reimbursement in the amount of$18,000 for implementation of
VoteCal, the statewide voter database, VoteCal funds will be explicitly used to integrate
the County's voter registration management system with the VoteCal Statewide Voter
Registration System. State reimbursements implemented to reimburse the counties for
election related state mandates will continue with suspension.
EXPENDITURES
Election expenditures decreased by 13% from final budget FY 13114. This includes
expenditures from a federal grant, Help America Vote Act (HA V A) Section 261,
specifically designed for updating polling place accessibility. The Election Department
plans to purchase new equipment for the polling places by the 2014 calendar year end
when the grant funds expire. There will be no general fund impact for these
expenditures.
We are not anticipating any special elections this fiscal year. Office expenses were
budgeted at a minimum.
GENERAL FUND IMPACT
As presented, this budget represents a 7% decrease from the 2013114 Final Budget. The
additional target reduction is reflected in the Clerk's (10100280) which shows a total
budget reduction of 21 %.

Revenue has increased by 39% compared to FY 2013/14 Final Budget. This is due
to increases in marriage licenses applicants, maniage ceremonies, Fictitious Business
Name filings and Notary Bonds.
EXPENDITURES
The spending in this area is at the bare minimum. With the reduction of staff, services
to the public will be impacted heavily. The impact will be realized in respects to
customer service. It is anticipated that the Clerk will no longer offer passport services
to the public.
GENERAL FUND IMPACT
As presented, this budget represents a 21 % budget reduction that will compensate the
shortfall in the budget reduction for the Elections Department for FY 14/15.

FY14115 revenue is projected to be reduced by 15% compared to final budget FY13114.
It is anticipated that we will not collect the revenue target for FY 13/14 and this trend is
expected to continue into FY 2014115. Projected revenue is comprised of fees collected
for the recording of documents, copies of vital records, and documentary transfer tax. In
FY 13114 revenues for Documentary Transfer Tax (4073) increased 10% from year end
FYI2/13, however revenue for Recording fees (4646) decreased by 21 % from year end
FY 12113.
EXPENSES
Two full time employees retired effective March 14,2014. In effort to meet the requested
10% cuts and offset the revenue loss experienced in FY 13114 the Clerk-Recorder Office
Technician position will remain vacant unfunded providing an annual cost savings of
$50,743, the Recorder II position will remain funded at a lower level Recorder I position
with an annual cost savings of$9,349. The total annual salary savings is $60, 0092.
With the reduction of staff, services to the public will be impacted heavily. The impact will
be realized in respects to customer service, requests for copies ofland records, vital records
and recorded document mail out turnaround time will increase dramatically.
NOTE: The Recorder's Department will be sending out a Request for Proposal for a new
Recording System in April, 2014. In the beginning ofFY 14-15 the Clerk-Recorder will be
asking the board to award a contract to the selected vendor. Total cost is not expected to be
over $300,000 and all fees/costs will be paid out of the Recorder's designated fund (5466) for
Modernization, which will have no impact to the general fund.

Another daunting budget year approaches and unti l property values go up on our tax rolls, we will
continue to see a decline in services. Homes are being sold for double their value of what is enrolled
on our tax rolls but the Assessor continues to decline them in value. Until values are on the ri se, we
will continue to see government services dwindle.
My department is a service department and does not generate revenue. Property taxes make up 78% of
our total revenue and, without it County government would cease to exist. 23% of one employee's
time is spent on Business Licenses. Although we do all the work compi ling, processing, and mailing
the licenses, my department does not receive any of the revenue generated. All monies collected go
directly to the General Fund. The same goes for Transient Occupancy Tax. We are responsible for
collecting, reporting and keeping track for delinquency purpose; however, we are not compensated for
the cost of maintaining.
A-87 fees are declining and in order to cover department costs direct billing for services rendered wil l
need to be allowed. Currently participants of the Treasury pool pay for monthly Treasury expenses
through Treasury Admin Fee; however, some do not. Schools (30% of Treasury) and Special Districts
(5%) do not pay for Treasury services. A mechanism will need to be put in place so service
departments can charge an Administrative fee to all those involved. The added revenue wil l help
offset transfers from my Trust Fund (5455) to cover pay increases and/or unforeseen cost hikes (i .e.
postage, publications etc.).
The Treasurer-Tax Collector's Staff is a truly committed group and will continue to perform the
collection and guidelines as outlined in the Revenue and Taxation and Government Codes. I would
ask that you approve my budget as submitted.

The Department’s Requested Budget of $419,853 represents an overall increase of $12,181, or
3% in expenditures and a decrease of ($2,009) or (100%), in revenues when compared to FY
2014/15 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution increased
$13,470, or 3.3%.
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
An increase of $8,766 to salaries and benefits due to the 4% COLA due in January 2015
and increased PERS Employer costs.
An increase of $16,050 as a result of transferring the CSAC dues back to the Board
budget from the Insurance budget.
A decrease of ($10,000) for transportation, travel and training.
Reimbursed Expenses transferred to revenue line County Reimbursements.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
No appropriation was included for the Mountain Counties Water Resources Association
($1,250) or for the Central Sierra Economic Development District member entity contribution
($6,920). The Board may want to add funding for one or both of these entities.




The County Administrative Office provides support for the implementation of the Board of Supervisors’ adopted policies, goals and objectives for the county. Staff has the overall responsibility for developing, administering and managing the county budget; implements countywide administrative policies; plans and implements capital improvement projects; administers special grants and projects; and acts as the purchasing agent on behalf of the county. The County Administrative Office has been responsible for Buildings and Grounds, the Airport, Museum/County Archives, the Public, Educational and Governmental Access Commission/Public Access Television (PEG TV), County Fire, Community Organizations, Grand Jury, Non-departmental and Capital Improvement Program budgets.
During FY 2013/14 significant structural changes have been made to the Administrative Office. In October 2013, the Board approved the transfer of the Supervising Board Clerk (1.0 FTE) and the Board Clerk (0.5 FTE) from the County Clerk’s Office to Administration. In January 2014, the Chief Assistant Administrative Officer retired. This provided the County with the opportunity to eliminate the Chief Assistant Administrative Officer position and add a Senior Administrative Analyst position for an estimated savings of $126,460 in FY 2014/15. At the same time, the Board approved the reclassifications of the Supervising Board Clerk and the Account	Technician	III to	the	broader	classification	of	Administrative	Assistant	IIs
encompassing a larger set of duties which achieved cross-training, assignment flexibility and backup support. The 0.5 FTE Board Clerk position was also eliminated in recognition that the County Administrative Officer would not be filling this position.
In December 2013, the Chief Information Officer/Director of Technology retired. In February 2014, the Board approved the reclassification of the department head position to a midmanagement position, Information Technology Manager. The new Technology Manager position reports directly to the County Administrative Officer, consolidating Technology Services into the Administrative Office.
In an effort to further align like duties and responsibilities, the Administrative Office recommends the following actions be adopted as part of the FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget:
 Transfer responsibility of Buildings and Grounds and the Lighting Districts, and associated budget units, to Public Works. As mentioned in the Buildings and Grounds budget memo, this department encompasses the maintenance of county facilities and
grounds, oversight of the CGL/Kitchell contract for the maintenance of the new Jail and Sheriff’s Offices, and custodial services. These duties are often managed by a General Services Department. As Calaveras County does not have a General Service Department, these duties more closely align with Public Works.
	Transfer the Administrative Analyst (1.0 FTE) and associated funding of $97,744 from the Administrative Office to Buildings & Grounds. The Administrative Analyst oversees the facilities maintenance and custodial staff. In addition, this position will be responsible for the oversight of the CGL/Kitchell contract, Computerized Maintenance Management System (CMMS) and lighting districts. This position will also be available to assist with the possible development of a fleet management system.
	Transfer the responsibility and administration of Community Development Block Grants (CDBG) from Health and Human Services to the Administrative Office. With the consolidation of Calaveras Works and Human Service and the Heath Service Agency into one department and the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the Health and Human Service Agency no longer has the capacity to administer the CDBG program. The CDBG program was previously administered by the County Administrative Office and will be returned to the Administrative Office effective July 1, 2014.
 Transfer Human Resources and Risk Management to the County Administrative Office, eliminating it as a separate department and reclassify the department head, Director of Human Resources and Risk Management to Assistant County Administrative Officer- Human Resources and Risk Management. Prior to March 2008, Human Resources and Risk Management was part of the County Administrative Office. In March 2008, the Board adopted a resolution and ordinance reorganizing the Administrative Office. This resolution and ordinance created a separate Human Resources and Risk Management Department and appointed a Director of Human Resources and Risk Management. With the resignation of the Human Resources Business Administrator and proposed elimination of that position for a savings of $106,982, a combined Human Resources and Administrative Office will provide the ability to share resources while further reducing costs (a combined reduction in expenditures of $224,332). The Senior Administrative Analyst will be able to assist with Risk Management duties previously performed by the Business Administrator and the Office Technician can provide administrative support to the combined County Administrative Office staff. Salary and benefits comprise the largest cost to the county budget requiring close coordination and oversight to ensure our Human Resource activities are considered in light of the county’s limited resources. Coordination of resources will be further facilitated by the relocation of Human Resources to the Legal Building. Human Resources and Insurance will continue to retain separate budget units within and under the control of the County Administrative Office.
Departmental Budget Request:
The Department’s Requested Budget of $675,478 represents a decrease of ($139,066), or (17.1%), in expenditures and an overall decrease of ($78,886) or (28.2%) in revenues when compared to the FY 2013/14 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution is decreased by ($87,060), or (16.3%).
Revenues: Factors Contributing to Significant Revenue Changes
The County’s A-87 Cost Allocation Plan is approved by the State Controller and reflects costs incurred by central service departments, which support overall countywide departmental service delivery. Costs for providing specific administrative services are reimbursed two years in arrears through A-87 charge backs. The Administration budget for FY 2014/15 reflects:
	A decrease of ($14,976) in A-87 General Fund Charges.
	A decrease of ($66,410) in A-87 Non-General Fund Charges.
Expenditures: Factors Contributing to Significant Expenditure Changes:
	Salaries and Benefit costs decreased ($125,062) as a result of the elimination of the Chief Assistant County Administrative Office, the addition of the Senior Administrative Analyst, the reclassifications of the Account Technician III and Supervising Board Clerk, the transfer of the Administrative Analyst to the Buildings and Grounds budget, contract negotiations, normal merit and longevity increases for eligible staff, and increase PERS employer contribution rate.
	Reflects decreases in services and supplies of ($19,004) due to the reduction to most line items and the re-budgeting of appropriations for the electronic agenda system contract.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations:
	Continuous budget analysis, monitoring and economic forecasting for short and long range budget management and accountability has become the norm and requires intensive amounts of staff time.
	ADA modifications to the Legal Building and the remodeling of County Counsel office space are included in the Capital Improvement Projects budget. These modification will allow for the relocation of Human Resources to the Legal Building facilitating the merger of Human Resources and Risk Management with the Administrative Office.


The Department’s Requested Budget of $152,548 represents an overall decrease of
($232,400), or (60.4%), in expenditures and an overall decrease of ($1,404,967), or (6.1%), in
revenues when compared to FY 2013/14 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost /
General Fund Contribution has decreased by ($1,172,567), or (5.2%).
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
 A decrease of ($125,000) in Transfers to Designated Fund, due to the elimination of a
$125,000 transfer for future costs of the 27th paycheck.
 A decrease of ($136,500) for costs related to the upgrade of IFAS to One Solution.
 An increase of $23,600 for professional services contracts with MGT America for
preparation of the A-87 Cost Allocation Plan and the SB90 claims.
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
 An increase of $89,385 in Current Secured Property Tax Revenues based on the
projected 1% decrease in the assessment roll.
 An increase of $36,555 in the Vehicle License Fees (VLF) tied to the estimated 1%
increase in property tax revenues.
 An increase of $67,338 in State Homeowners Property Tax
 A decrease of ($34,200) in Rents & Leases as a result of the Courts move into new
facilities.
 An increase of $38,259 in Federal Property Tax In-Lieu.
 A decrease of ($17,079) in A-87 Cost Allocation Plan revenues.
 A decrease of ($1,628,526) in Transfers from Designated Fund as a result eliminating
the prior year transfer of $180,351 from the General Liability Fund and $20,000 for
Library computers; and reducing by $1,428,175 the amount of Teeter Funds used to
balance the FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
Although the FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget projects a 1% increase in the property tax
assessment rolls, the actual change will not be known until the assessment roll is closed at the
end of June 2014. Anticipated revenues may require further adjustment at Final Budget.
Additionally, based on the close of the FY 2013/14 budget, actual fund equity balance may
change.

The Department’s Requested Budget of $260,111 represents an overall decrease of ($34,864),
or (11.8%), in expenditures and no change in revenues when compared to FY 2013/14 Final
Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost/General Fund Contribution decreased ($34,864) or
(12.9%).
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
? Funding of $5,190 has not been included for the Calaveras County Senior Center.
? The required Administrative Match for the Area 12 Agency on Aging only increased $51.
? A decrease of ($29,725) in funding for Federal Forest Reserve Title III Projects.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
An appropriation of $15,000 for Common Grounds Senior Service for the Meals on Wheels
program is included in the budget.

The Department’s Requested Budget of $438,400 represents an overall increase of $55,882, or
14.6% in expenditures and a decrease of ($1,962) or (4.1%), in revenues when compared to FY
2013/14 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution increased
$57,844, or 17.3%.
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
? An increase of $42,000 is the result of an increase to electrical rates and the addition of
the new Jail and Sheriff’s Offices.
? Water increased by $4,000.
? Other Utilities increased by $3,400).
? Reimbursed Expenses transferred to revenue line County Reimbursements.
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
? A decrease of ($13,344) in A-87 revenues.
? An increase of $2,382 in Miscellaneous Revenue.
? Transfer to County Reimbursements from Reimbursed Expenses - $9,000.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
The actual impacts to the Utilities budget as a result of the opening of the Jail and Sheriff’s
Office is still unknown. Although costs are expected to increase, some of those costs may be
mitigated by green technology incorporated in construction of the buildings.

The Department’s Requested Budget of $85,920 represents an overall decrease of ($2,890), or
(3.2%) in expenditures and an overall decrease of ($2,476) or (18.2%) in revenues when
compared to FY 2013/14 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost/General Fund
Contribution is decreased by ($414), or (0.6%).
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
? A decrease of ($5,476) in A-87 revenue.
? An increase of $3,000 due to the transfer of Reimbursed Expenses to revenue line
County Reimbursements.

The Department’s Requested Budget of $34,174 represents an increase of $663, or 2%, in
expenditures and an overall decrease of ($225), or (10.8%), in revenues when compared to FY
2013/14 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution has
increased by $888 or 2.8%.
Pending Issues and Policy Consideration
Any further reduction in extra hire staff time will impact the hours of operation and public access
to the County Archives. The County currently has a contract with the Calaveras County
Historical Society to operate the Museum on the County’s behalf in the amount of $500 per
month ($6,000/year).

The Department’s Requested Budget of $158,537 represents an overall decrease of ($8,595),
or 5.1% in expenditures and an overall decrease of ($2,771), or (3.9%), in revenues when
compared to the FY 2013/14 Final Budget. The Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution
has decreased ($7,771) or 10%. This decrease conforms to budget instructions.
Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
? A decrease of $8,000 in Salaries and Benefits due a reduction in Extra-Hire.
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
? A decrease in Operating Transfers from General Fund (1024-4720) of ($7,771).
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
Public Access TV uses cameras that use Digital 8 tapes. They only manufacturing plant for
these tapes was destroyed in the tsunami that hit Japan. Since then Public Access TV has been
unable to purchase new tapes. These tapes have a maximum number of times they can be rerecorded
on. When the tapes have degraded to the point that they cannot be used, Public
Access TV will need to purchase new cameras.
Currently, the Public Access TV Studio operates with one full time staff member and one extra
hire person. Creation of a permanent part-time position would provide the studio with the
support necessary to handle increased requests for services and afford consistent and reliable
coverage in the absence of the PATV studio manager. Please see request for permanent parttime
position.

The Department’s Requested Budget of $2,248,623 represents an decrease of
($2,746,419), or (55.3%), in expenditures and a decrease of ($7,911,527) or (64.3%) in
revenue when compared to FY2013/14 Final Budget. This budget unit has no Net
County Cost/General Fund Contribution.
Status of Pending Projects:
? Jail/Sheriff’s Office – Construction of the new Jail and Sheriff’s Offices have
been completed. However, some costs associated with the construction of
these facilities have yet to be paid; therefore $825,000 has budgeted to cover
any additional cost that may need to be paid in FY 2014/15. Final payment of
AB 900 funds from the State are not expected to be received until July 2014.
Reimbursement of infrastructure costs by the Administrative Office of the Courts
(AOC) will not be received until FY 2014/15. Appropriations and revenues will
be updated at Final Budget to reflect any changes in expenditures and revenues
by fiscal year end.
? MDT-Phase II Project – Phase II of the MDT project is will not be completed until
FY 2014/15. The balance of $362,263 for the project has been budgeted, with
expected revenue of $427,390 from grant funding.
? Cosgrove Creek Feasibility Study – Certificate of Participation (COP) funds were
set aside for the completion of the feasibility study. It is unknown when
completion of the Feasibility Study will occur.
? Government Center Roofing - $45,000 has been included to reroof building at
Government Center and the Murphys Library.
? Land Use Building – $100,000 has been included in the FY 2014/15 budget for
changes to the Land Use building to correct electrical feeder Issues identified
this past winter. These changes will be funded with COP funds.
? ADA Improvements – $250,500 is included for the Legal Building to address
ADA issues and bring the County into compliance. This includes remodeling the
current bathrooms (2 mens/2womens) and the stairs, including the addition of a
chair lift. These changes will be funded with COP funds.
? Legal Building - $79,000 is included to remodel a portion of the recently vacated
court space to create new office space for County Counsel. The remodel will be
funded with COP funds. This is the first phase of a multi-year plan to move
departments located off campus back to government center. The Administrative
Office will move into the current County Counsel space and Human Resources
will be re-located as part of the Administrative Office in the Legal Building.
Future phases will allow the Ag and Probation Offices to vacate the Colombo
Building and return to the Government Center campus for annual savings of
$220,000.
? Government Center HVAC - $15,000 for needed updates to HVAC system.
? Structural Improvements–Solid Waste - $356,233
PENDING ISSUES AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
It is necessary to begin the remodeling of the old Courthouse n order to return the
Probation and Ag departments to the government center complex when the lease on the
Colombo building expires in 2016. The first and most critical stage of the remodel is to
make the necessary ADA improvements to the bathrooms and stairway, complete with
chair lift. In addition, minor remodeling of court office for new County Counsel office
space will allow for the re-location of Human Resources into the combined
Administrative Office/current County Counsel offices. As mentioned above, this phase of
the project is included in the FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget.
Future projects may include: the relocation of the Board Chamber to the old Department
1 courtroom, allowing for further ADA improvements; Board of Supervisors offices; the
relocation of Technology Services to the legal building; relocation of the Ag Department
and Ag Lab to the Land Use Building, and the relocation of Probation to Government
Center.

The Department’s Requested Budget of $12,679 represents an overall decrease of ($419), or
(3.2%) in expenditures and a decrease of ($50) or (50%), in revenues when compared to FY
2014/15 Final Budget. There is no General Fund Contribution to the Parks and Recreation
Budget. Estimated Fund Equity at June 30, 2014 is $12,629.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
Funds in the Parks and Recreation budget are to cover the cost of any necessary repairs to
Proposition 40 projects and the lease for White Pines Park related to a Proposition 40 project.

COUNTY FIRE - 11301760
Departmental Budget Request
The Department’s Requested Budget of $347,098 represents an overall decrease of ($5,847), or (1.7%), in expenditures and an overall decrease of ($11,061), or (3.3%) in revenues when compared to the FY 2013/14 Final Budget. With an expected year-end fund equity balance of $0, the General Fund Contribution is expected to decrease by ($2,475).
Factors contributing to significant changes include:
•	A decrease of ($19,701) to Professional and Specialized Services for the Cooperative Agreement between California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) and Calaveras County to provide annual fire dispatch services.
•	A decrease of ($10,000) in Maintenance of Equipment-Auto due to the transfer of all remaining water tenders to the fire districts prior in FY 2013/14.
•	An increase of ($20,000) to Retire Long Term Debt and an increase of ($2,615) to Interest-Long Term Debt to begin making the payments on the West Point water tender financed thru the Certificates of Participation.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
The only water tender payment remaining is for the West Point Fire Protection District which was purchased through the Certificates of Participation (COP) program.
The reimbursements from the Water Enhancement Fund to the Certificates of Participation program for the purchase of the West Point water tender was deferred for FY 2008/09 thru FY 2013/14. This will be the first year the annual debt service payment for the West Point water tender will be paid from the Water Enhancement Fund. Until there is an increase in new home construction, there will not be sufficient funds in the Water Enhancement Fund to reimburse the COP Debt Service Fund for the FY 2008/09 through FY 2013/14 debt service payments. This should be the first priority when additional funds are received. 
The fiscal year 2014/15 budget request for Technology Services (10100070) of $ 1,358,505 represents a reduction in total expenses of 8.6% from fiscal year 2013/14 total of $1,485,958.
Due to reductions in A-87 General and Non-General Revenues totaling $372,186 the Department’s Budget request represents a net impact to the General Fund of $881,647. This is substantially above the targeted General Fund contribution identified in the Budget Development instructions distributed to Department Heads.
Although savings were realized in Salaries and Benefits due to:
•	 Reorganization under filling the Department Head position with a Manager level position.
•	Budgeting a Network Systems IV position at half time
•	Committing to hold a Network Specialist III position vacant until December 2014.
and savings were recognized in Departmental Expenses attributed to fiscal year 13/14 completion of the Microsoft Enterprise Agreement 5 year payment plan, which contributed to a savings of $84,500.
The overall Departmental savings could not be reduced enough to meet the targeted General Fund amount. This is due to the already reduced staffing levels and nature of many of the contracted services and maintenance obligations. It is unclear at this time how to further reduce expenses without not only eliminating essential services but causing the County to be out of compliance with licensing and maintenance of hardware and software components.
There also seems to be some merit to an examination of the method by which A-87 cost allocations are being determined for Technology Services. An overview analysis would indicate that past methods are not properly identifying and dispensing services to departments who receive a bulk of the primary desktop, server, network, and computer support functions. 
The Communication budget for fiscal year 2014/15 represents a net impact to the General Fund of $25,601 which represents an increase over fiscal year 2013/14 budget of $12,566. Upon examination and analysis this increase is directly attributable to current year collection fee charges and the fact Internet fees, Smartnet Cisco equipment maintenance charges and Telemate services have not been properly identified and included as A-87 charges. This has not only attributed to a reduction in A-87 revenue from $29,795 in 2013/14 to $17,173 in 2014/15 but is far less than the actual expense of $44,761 for these services.
It is requested that the Department be allowed to revisit the method of allocating costs associated with A-87 in order to make this division much closer to its intended breakeven point. 
The budget request for fiscal year 2014/15 will result in a positive impact to the General Fund of $9,919 which is an increase over fiscal year 2013/14 which was $908.
The main contributing factors to this increase are the removal of Department Head salary from the budget and a reduction in the maintenance agreement cost for the Postage Machine which was replaced. As with other divisions the Department would like to conduct an analysis of the A-87 cost allocations to ensure that appropriate costs are identified and included in the allocation process. 
The FY 2014/15 recommended budget request for Human Resources includes the following significant changes:
Revenue
A decrease in total budgeted revenue of $183,898, the net result of decreased A-87 revenue ($35,914), and one time Teeter money put in the budget for the cost of SilkRoad’s Life Suite ($147,984).
Expenditures
A reduction in total budgeted expenditures of $138,754, primarily the result of a vacancy not being filled in addition to the following line item cuts:

Budget Impact
The return of $105,881 (40%) of two staff members’ salaries formerly charged in Risk Management (Insurance budget) now being absorbed into the Human Resources budget, along with A-87 lost revenue ($35,914), and the required cut of $62,436 equals a reduction of $204,231. In addition, the department has also been required to absorb the annual maintenance and user expense of SilkRoad ($72,600) for a grand total reduction of $276,831.
Human Resources is a service department that provides a broad array of customer service to a workforce of 527 allocated positions, 455 employees, 116 temporary/extra- hire staff, and 477 volunteers. While the economy continues to struggle, the services, programs, vendors, insurance, legal requirements, risk management programs, employee benefits, and assistance provided to employees, managers, department heads, and the public continue to expand. I cannot stress enough the importance of Human Resource services, programs, and assistance during these challenging times as they are essential to departments and staff.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
The current resignation of the Business Administrator position will prevent the department from having to layoff two employees but will also require staffing adjustments. To follow with the Administrative Office’s restructuring, the department will not be refilling the Business Administrator vacancy but is requesting to reclassify two existing employees for coverage, cross-training, and service level needs.
Emphasis will be placed upon department support, workforce restructuring, expanding technology, and reducing non-mandated services.
As we look to the coming year and the challenges ahead, we remain optimistic in our plans to work closely with departments to assess internal structure and processes. As budget constraints continue to place a burden on the County, we will look to shape County business processes through SilkRoad’s workflow and online systems. The Human Resources Department will continue to be challenged to provide a myriad of support to County employees during this sustained period of economic downturn. The department will be training and executing SilkRoad to assist employees and managers in streamlining and improving workflow and processes to increase efficiency and productivity.
New Legislation
Two new California laws were passed that will change the way we currently do business.
AB 556 adds "military and veteran status” to the existing list of categories protected from employment discrimination under the Fair Employment & Housing Act. "Military
and veterans status” is defined as "a member or veteran of the United States Armed Forces, United States Armed Forces Reserve, United States National Guard and the California National Guard.” The bill also provides an exemption for an inquiry by an employer regarding military or veteran status for the purpose of awarding a veteran’s preference as permitted by law. This will require a new check box on our application and educating department heads regarding military and veteran preference.
AB 218 adds Section 432.9 to the Labor Code. The new legislation will prohibit a state or local agency from asking an applicant to disclose information regarding a criminal conviction, except in specified situations such as criminal justice positions or jobs that legally require a criminal background check, until the agency has determined the applicant meets the minimum employment qualifications for the position. The law provides that the minimum qualifications are those that are stated in any notice for the position. This changes current law which allows both public and private employers to ask an applicant to disclose information concerning a conviction. This will require two job applications. 
The goal is to maintain adequate financial reserves to protect the County against any unknown and unpredictable monetary demands in any given fiscal year. If the recommended cut of $441,246 was taken the proposed budget would not have adequate funding levels, would be required to cut critical and cost saving programs, and exposes the County to extreme risks.
If the risk management division took the recommended cut of $441,246 the result would be elimination of funding for the following line items and programs:
>	Unemployment Insurance
>	Employee Assistance Program
>	Department of Transportation (DOT) testing
>	PARS Alternative Retirement Program
>	BCC benefit enrollment
>	ASI Flexible Benefit Carrier
>	Chemente & Associates (Section 125 & and Voluntary products provider
>	Outside legal counsel, arbitrators, mediators, court reporters, etc.
>	Mandatory training and posters
>	Fitness for Duty Examinations
>	Actuarials
>	Safety related expenses
The division gave $184,000 at mid-year and has annually returned unused funding to the General Fund over the last several years. However, if required to take the recommended cut, this will leave the County at huge risk and exposure. As it is, the actuarial has not been received and it is anticipated that the Liability Expense line item will need to be increased to achieve the necessary targeted percentage of funding due to the existing number of high value claims.
In addition, without knowing the result of department budget reductions and the potential for staff reductions and layoffs, the unemployment insurance line item may not be funded adequately as costs typically rise in these circumstances. As of this date, the Senate has not been able to agree on legislation to reinstate the Emergency Unemployment Compensation program. The program expired on December 28, 2013. However, it is still a possibility and if approved unemployment costs will increase further due to the benefit being extended.
POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
Affordable Care Act
The department continues to monitor the implications of the Affordable Care Act. The first phase included plans to cover the adult children of participants up to the age of 26, coverage must include preventive services, immunizations and screenings without cost sharing requirements, Cost of coverage must be reported on employee’s W-2, and over- the-counter drugs are excluded from reimbursement by Flexible Spending Accounts,
Health Savings Accounts and/or Health Reimbursement Arrangements. The next steps will be determining full-time status, variable hour and/or seasonal employees. Another issue will be tracking employees who work over 30 hours per week for over three months. Issues that will need to be determined will be who is defined as seasonal, can we offer a new lower benefit/lower cost plan to some employees and pay less of the premium, and who pays the Cadillac tax. Calaveras County will be required in 2015 to offer coverage to 70 percent of full-time employees and 95 percent in 2016 to avoid being subjected to tax penalties.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) created new reporting requirements under Internal Revenue Code, sections 6055 and 6056.
•	Individual Mandate (6055)
o The IRS requires health insurers and some employers to report to them whether employees have Minimum Essential Coverage or "MEC”. With this information, the IRS can determine if an individual has sufficient coverage to avoid the penalty under the individual mandate.
•	Employer Shared Responsibility Mandate(6056)
o The IRS mandates that employers report to them whether the large employer (50 or more f/t employees) offered sufficient health plan coverage to full time employees or risk a penalty.
These additional reporting requirements are intended to promote transparency to health plan coverage and costs. It will also provide information to administer other ACA mandates, such as the large employer shared responsibility penalty (also known as Pay or Play) and the individual mandate. Information is reported and provided to both the IRS and covered employees. For the 2014 and 2015 plan year, there are no penalties for not complying. However, the first deadline to submit these reports is early 2016 (first quarter of 2016). The information would be from 2015 data for the 2016 deadline.
These are just some of the key ACA matters that will need to be addressed in the upcoming fiscal year.
CalPERS New Actuarial Assumptions
Recent changes have been adopted by the CalPERS Board to asset allocation and actuarial assumptions that will have an impact on employer contribution rates. This came after an experience study produced data reflecting substantially earlier retirement ages and longer life expectancies among public employees. Costs will be implemented in 2016-17, and phased in over 5 years.
Proposed New Legislation
Several new bills are of concern and have potential for considerable cost to the County.
I will be watching:
AB 2030 - Employees: Time Off (allows parents, grandparents and guardians to take time off from work to participate in school activities without having to use existing vacation, personal leave or comp time. Covers up to 40 hours/year)
AB 2053 - Employment Discrimination or Harassment Training (includes new training component on prevention of abusive conduct.
AB 2126 - Meyers-Milias-Brown Act: Mediation rules & requirements
SB 1278 - Animal Control Officers (requires every person appointed as an Animal Control Officer prior to 7/15/15 to complete Penal Code Section 832 training, and requires 40 hours ongoing training.)
SB 1219 - Service After Retirement (clarifies PEPRA reinstatement provisions by specifying that a retired person appointed without reinstatement is prohibited from receiving any benefit, incentive or compensation in lieu of benefits.
AB 2052 - Workers’ compensation (increases number of peace officers that are eligible for presumptions - currently only extended to Sheriff and now would extend to Correctional & Probation.)
AB 2378 - Removes the 2 year cap on 4850 temporary disability benefit payments to law enforcement.
SB 1234 - Extends 4850 leave to Coroner, Welfare Fraud, Child support investigators)
If you have any further questions or need additional information or backup, let me know. :fo 
o FY 2013-2014 Budgeted Amount: $5,154,063 o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $4,775,756
Services and Supplies
o FY 2013-2014 Budgeted Amount: $517,264 o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $451,367
Other Charges
o FY 2013-2014 Budgeted Amount: $153,906 o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $22,130
o AB 443 will finance the vehicles leased in FY 2013-2014 for a General Fund cost savings of $62,613. AB 443 is also financing $47,387 in other expenses, for a total General Fund cost savings of $110,000. EBMUD vehicle is budgeted for in General Fund Patrol (10100320).
Capital Assets
o FY 2013-2014 Budgeted Amount: $155,000 o FY 2014-2015 Budgeted Amount: $0
Policy Considerations for Fiscal Year 2014-2015
Although the County Administrative Office requested a 10% reduction, as your Sheriff I believe it is imperative that we submit a budget that outlines safety for our community and for our employees. As your Sheriff, I have travelled the County for the last three years talking with, and listening to, the citizens of our County. Those citizens made it very clear that they expect both the Sheriff and the Board of Supervisors to staff and provide Deputy Sheriff’s and Investigators to respond to calls for service and investigate crimes committed against our citizens. This is why the Board of Supervisors and I chose to begin to restore some of the positions lost during the recession.
As you recall, the Sheriff’s Office, along with the Board of Supervisors, started with a multiyear plan to restore massive cuts to the Sheriff’s Budget and to restore the large number of positions lost since the recession began. The Sheriff’s Office was allowed to restore (7) seven deputy sheriff’s positions within the past two years; (3) three in FY 2012-2013 and (4) four in FY 2013-2014. Six (6) of those positions were to be assigned to Patrol to create a new centralized beat to reduce response times and fill other cover shifts in an effort to reduce overtime. The seventh position was a deputy sheriff position that would allow the Department to restore a detective position that had been lost.
Unfortunately the plan has suffered a setback due to this year’s sweeping of five (5) positions at midyear. In addition, the Sheriff’s Office has lost 4 sworn employees to other agencies. Three were lost to other agencies that paid higher salaries and one position was a result of a retirement.
A reduction of $543,749 has been made to the General Fund Patrol Budget Unit (10100320). This is not a funding proposal I would consider implementing nor should the Board of Supervisors. As the Sheriff of Calaveras County it is my duty to inform both the Board of Supervisors and the citizens of Calaveras County that this proposed budget fails to provide reasonable public protection for the citizens and visitors of this county.
The cumulative effect of the frozen positions and layoffs within the Sheriff’s Office over the last 5 to 6 years has forced the Sheriff’s Office to reduce services to the Public. Over the last two years, the Sheriff’s Office, with the help of the current Board of Supervisors, had just begun to repair the damage caused by previous and unprecedented reductions to the Sheriff’s budget and staff.
The County Administrative Office’s budget instructions represent a reversal of the progress and teamwork that citizens of the County deserve. We want to thank the new members of the Board of Supervisors for making some early and important decisions in reversing long standing practices that have severely impacted the public. The deputy sheriffs on patrol have responded to dangerous calls for service without appropriate and timely support for years.
The Board of Supervisors has slowed, and in some cases stopped, this trend due to adding deputy sheriff positions, therefore decreasing response times to both the public and officers needing assistance. The County Administrative Office’s budget instructions jeopardize safety for our citizens and our staff; the instructions from the County Administrative Office are neither productive nor supportive of the community. As county managers we are charged with keeping the public and our employees safe.
I am recommending the Board of Supervisors reject the County Administrative Office’s request. While the Sheriff’s Office can try to work with some reductions, the 10% reduction and the absorption of increased personnel costs and the addition of A-87 costs and the addition of direct charges, significantly reduces the Sheriff Office’s capacity to protect and serve the public of Calaveras County. 
AB 443 is financing $110,000 in expenses that were financed by the General Fund in FY 2013-2014. This measure was adopted by the Sheriff in an effort to avoid requesting $110,000 from the County to finance mission critical items. 
Policy Considerations for Fiscal Year 2014-2015
The Sheriff s Office is not recommending any further reductions within this budget unit. When you look at the historical information regarding this budget the Services and Supply lines have already been cut to unrealistic levels, which do not properly support operations. The training and travel lines had already been decimated due to required cuts in previous years. It is important to note that this budget unit brings in a considerable amount of revenue by providing a service for the city of Angels. Any further reductions would likely negatively impact the service provided to the City which could result in a considerable loss of revenue.
The Board of Supervisors should consider the amount of discretionary county funds currently being sent to Cal Fire for dispatching and/or communications services. The old Sheriff s Office Communications Center lacked the space to expand Dispatching or Communications Services. The new Center has ample space for such a transition and could accommodate and operate those services with additional equipment and staffing. Considering the budget situation, we recommend the board re-evaluate the current system and agreements in a Study Session. 
Policy Considerations for Fiscal Year 2014-2015
During FY 2013-2014, a General Fund contribution of $137,972 was made to the CNEU budget. Calaveras Narcotics Enforcement Unit requests a General Fund contribution of $116,804 for FY 20142015. The reduction of General Fund financing will cause the supervisor of CNEU to be partially funded by grant funding, in place of county funding. This shift is possible because of the unfunding of the vacant deputy sheriff position in CNEU.
Among all financing sources, CNEU’s FY 2014-2015 FY budget includes funding for 2.00 FTE deputy sheriffs, 1.00 FTE sergeant, and a 0.25 FTE deputy district attorney. 
Policy Issues for Fiscal Year 2014-2015
The Marine Safety Unit conducts vessel patrols within the 5 lakes in the County. The unit also operates a Dive rescue and recovery team, which facilitates the recovery of drowning victims, sunk vessels, and submerged vehicles.
Historically, the unit had employed two full time deputies and three extra hire deputies. Marine Safety’s financing sources are: a subvention grant from Department of Boating and Waterways; unsecured property taxes; and the County’s General Fund.
Since FY 2007-2008, the Marine Safety’s General Fund financing has been reduced by 50% and financing from unsecured taxes has been reduced 31%. Funding reduction has created a “bare bones” budget for Marine Safety in FY 2013-2014. 
Due to continual funding reductions over the last five years, the Sheriff s Department has been forced to decrease patrol activity within the County’s lakes. In FY 2011-2012, the Marine Safety unit was unable to employ extra hire deputies due to lack of funding; two deputy sheriffs were left to patrol 5 lakes. Marine Safety has not had the fiscal resources to maintain its marine vessels, trailers, and dive gear and has been unable to replace aging and fully depreciated equipment.
The Marine Safety Unit averages seven drowning victims each boating season. Poor funding and the inability of the program to purchase, replace, and maintain dive equipment is making it extremely difficult to locate and recover drowning victims.
Any further reductions in General Fund financing will drastically reduce the presence and effectiveness of law enforcement presence within the lakes of Calaveras County, including elimination of the Marine Safety unit in its entirety. 
Policy Considerations for Fiscal Year 2014-2015
The information provided above has been developed to reflect the operation cost of the new jail at a capacity of 80 inmates. It is unknown at the time of this budget submission what the true actual Average Daily Population (ADP) will be. Currently the existing jail has a maximum inmate population of 65, and an ADP of 72. Our budget request reflects our attempt to stay within the operational plan submitted in 2010 to the Board of Supervisors and the State to comply with AB900 grant requirements and to be open and operational within 90 days of completion. The current operational component for the new facility is based on the effort to operate the new facility in the same general manner as the old facility. It is unknown at the time of this budget submittal if the purposed intermittent supervision model will be adequate to supervise the inmates in the new facility.
In addition, it is unknown if the Custody Division will be able to maintain an 80 inmate capacity as previously planned for, during the 2010 staffing submission. At the time of the adoption of this plan the previous Sheriff had notified the board that he would place this capacity on the Jail to ensure that it could operate safely and within compliance of applicable law, while operating under the elements of the old jail. It is assumed that maintaining a capacity of 80 inmates will require the continued early release of inmates, due to constraints in staffing and purposed operational costs.
The Custody Division requires significant investments in personnel resources for FY 2014-2015 in order to operate the new Jail. Staff strongly recommends a limited in scope staffing study be completed for the new Jail within the first six months of operation in order to determine the proper amount to invest in personnel resources. Additional personnel resources are essential for the safe and effective operation of the new Jail, for the provision of an adequate relief factor per the BSCC, and to maintain compliance with applicable laws.
The Custody Division has been notified by the Bureau of State and Community Corrections (BSCC) that the new facility will be inspected on June 13, 2014. It is anticipated that BSCC staff conducting the inspection, based on prior inspection and information of current operating procedures, will find that the new facility is not adequately staffed at a level to provide for relief for daily operations or shift vacancy. When this occurs the County will be in a position to conduct a limited staffing study that is based on actual operations of the facility, and not assumptions.
The AB109 inmates in custody during 2013 were one third of the population of inmates within the old jail. AB109 inmate sentences are for periods of 2-5 years. It is unknown at what point this population will increase to 100%. When this occurs any inmate sentenced to 1 year is likely to not spend any time in custody. In an attempt to assist the CCP with its sanctions for AB109 offenders, the Jail must walk a balancing act when determining which inmate to release early in order to provide bed space for sanctions. During 2013 the Jail made every effort to hold AB109 inmates, however on several occasion was unable to: making bed space available would require the release of an inmate up to one year early so an AB 109 inmate could be hold for up to 10 days.
The CCP had allotted $60,000.00, to house parolees and flash incarcerations in the Jail, during FY 13/14. It is anticipated that the jail will receive approximately $17,000.00 for housing these offenders during this same budget year. During 2013 State Parole did not violate parolees who committed new crimes as the department previously did. During budget development at the CCP meeting on March 26, 2014, the committee reduced the amount for the housing of paroles and flash incarcerations. This reduction will further reduce the jails ability to house sanctioned inmates and remove the program’s ability to discipline inmates by incarceration.
The Sheriff s Office believes it will be difficult to finance 80 beds at the new facility due to, in part, the reduction of AB 109 funding by the CCP for the housing of parolees in the County Jail. The Sheriff s Office will either need to leave beds at the new facility vacant or find an alternative financing source. The Sheriff Offices believes the funding request for Fiscal Year 2014-2015 is inadequate for the financing of staffing, services, and supplies at 80 beds for minimal and intermittent supervision and that comply with the minimal requirements of Title 15 .
We request the Calaveras County Purchasing Agent assist Sheriff Office staff in putting all service and supply contracts in the Jail out to bid in FY 2014-2015. A competitive bidding process will create cost savings, create cost avoidances, and improve purchasing power for the County. A competitive bidding process would also help make the current funding request “bare bones” rather than “below bare bones.” Furthermore, if the new service and supply contracts covered multiple departments, when and where applicable, the County could achieve additional cost savings through improved economies of scale.
The Custody Division will closely monitor the operations of the new facility, once it is opened and occupied, to determine where procedures can be implemented or changed to reduce its operational cost. It is anticipated that the new pod and housing designs will allow the staff to monitor the actual usage of inmate supplies within the facility that are mandated by Title 15. The close monitoring of inmate supplies will reduce these costs within this operational aspect. It is further expected that there may be a cost savings once the new Jail is occupied and the kitchen, due to additional storage space, can order bulk food supplies on a monthly or bi-monthly bases, rather than daily or weekly. In addition to implementing procedural changes, the Custody Division is re-evaluating the commissary purchased of the inmates and will be allowing inmates to purchase additional items. These purchases will generate additional revenue in the Inmate Welfare Account. This additional revenue will be used to purchase allowable inmate supplies or implement inmate programs. 
Department 30 is a General Fund department and the main source of funding for the operations of the District Attorney’s Office. The District Attorney is responsible for the litigation of all matters that come under the jurisdiction of the District Attorney including all criminal cases, juvenile cases, and certain related civil and appellate matters.
Pursuant to Board direction at mid-year budget wherein Departments are to receive credit for the voluntary reduction of personnel costs in FY 3 3/14 and budgeted but unspent FY 13/14 litigation costs are re-budgeted for FY 14/15, Department 30’s adjusted GF contribution target is $1,245,630. Department 30’s requested GF contribution of $1,225,676 is reached through the following cuts/reductions to personnel:
I. Lay off FTE Investigative/Trial Support Assistant
The Investigative/Trial Support Assistant was added at FY 13/14 final budget as part of the District Attorney’s restructuring plan to voluntarily reduce the personnel costs of Department 30. This position has provided many valuable services to the District Attorney’s Office at a lower cost than the sworn investigator temporarily assigned to the District Attorney. This position has successfully completed training in crime scene processing, rural crimes, and child abduction.
As part of the restructuring plan to voluntarily reduce personnel costs at FY 13/14 final budget, the District Attorney also eliminated funding for extra hire District Attorney Investigators. With this lay off of the Investigative/Trial Support Assistant, the District Attorney investigation’s unit will be comprised of 1 FTE District Attorney Investigator E At this staffing level, the District
Page 1 of3
891 Mountain Ranch Rond • San Andreas, CA 95249 • 209-754-6130 • Fax 209-754-6645 
Attorney’s Office will be severely limited in the number of follow up investigations it can conduct on cases received from law enforcement agencies resulting in delays and/or lower filings and, potentially, loss of evidence due to the passage of time. Increasing numbers of incomplete investigations will be referred back to the initiating law enforcement agency for completion. Many trial support services will go incomplete or flow to other employees resulting in the inefficient use of personnel resources. Many cases will be more time consuming for both the Deputy District Attorneys and support staff since those cases are not as strong as they could be otherwise. Since the budget crisis began, the ability of the District Attorney’s Office to initiate and complete investigations has become increasingly restricted. This staffing level may, for all practical purposes, eliminate this ability altogether.
The following tasks will go incomplete where remaining staff is unable to absorb the task:
 Investigate the possession of firearms by persons prohibited from owning or possessing firearms due to psychiatric history, restraining order, or conviction Provide investigative support in child sexual assault cases including coordinating with members of the Multi-Disciplinary Interview Center team ¦=> Perform follow up investigation for law enforcement agencies as directed ^ Perform follow up investigations on Grand Jury referrals as directed ^ Obtain witness statements in filed cases as witnesses come forward ¦=> Assist Investigator at crime scenes taking photographs, measurements, and collecting physical evidence
Arrange for forensic testing of evidence and preserve chain of custody of evidence O Prepare photographs, sketches, diagrams and transcripts for courtroom presentation Provide technical support for prosecutors in court O Provide transportation and/or travel arrangements for victims and witnesses to and from court or interviews as needed Serve subpoenas for time sensitive witnesses
Locate and obtain necessary documents from other agencies, businesses and jurisdictions Process and serve legal documents c> Track the location of persons including witnesses and suspects
II.	Reduce FTE Administrative Assistant to .6 FTE
This voluntary reduction will negatively impact the administrative operations of the District Attorney’s Office including budget and bill processing, support staff training and supervision, and inter-agency/grant compliance issues. All administrative duties of this position will be prioritized on a monthly basis and completed as the reduced schedule permits.
This position is currently held by an employee with over 20 years of experience with the District Attorney’s Office who is cross-trained to perform all non-attorney and non-sworn functions within the office. The District Attorney’s Office relies on the Administrative Assistant’s institutional knowledge and breadth of experience to perform functions including paralegal level legal research, legal processing, processing evidence, taking statements, victim advocacy, court support for adult and child victims/witnesses, processing restitution claims for property crimes, and public relations whenever needed. These services will be reduced commensurate with the reduced position.
III.	Reduce FTE Deputy District Attorney II to .6 FTE
This voluntary reduction maintains status quo attorney staffing. MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES
/. Court Relocation & Calendaring
The Court relocation and consolidated criminal calendar has negatively impacted the efficiency of the District Attorney’s Office. Staff must now frequently drive to Court due to the distance and the number of cases set to be heard at one time. With criminal matters currently consolidated in Department 11, Deputy District Attorneys are waiting in Court for much longer periods of time than they were prior to the move. At the same time, however, the unpredictable availability of additional criminal courtrooms for trial has required that two Deputy District Attorneys be prepared for the same trial to ensure that the People are represented at trial.
II.	Litigation Expenses
The overwhelming majority of the People’s cases are resolved by plea or trial and do not require expending resources for experts or additional litigation costs. However, certain cases do require retained experts and other litigation resources in order to pursue justice. The District Attorney has the Constitutional authority to decide which cases to pursue and must maintain a litigation budget in order to protect this Constitutional authority. An underfunded litigation budget would require the District Attorney to seek Board approval for litigation funds by a 4/5 vote. This is in contrast to defense attorney requests for litigation funds which are confidentially submitted to the Court and, if approved by the Court, are then charged to the County without Board approval.
III.	Technology
The District Attorney’s Office has not transitioned to a paperless system and it is unlikely to do so in the near future due to budget constraints. Unfortunately, the Court has begun sending documents electronically resulting in increased costs to the District Attorney’s Office in terms of paper, ink, and staff time. The District Attorney’s Office does not have access to the Sheriffs Office RIMS but, fortunately, the Sheriffs Office continues to accommodate the District Attorney’s Office with paper copies of reports.
IV Community Corrections Partnership
This budget does not include additional funding approved by the CCP on March 26, 2014,
! Department 2 has begun training in infractions and traffic matters and also conducts Drug Court, which has required the appearances of Deputy District Attorneys in Department 2. It is unclear if criminal matters will remain consolidated or if the Court will revert to hearing felonies in Department 1 and misdemeanors in Department 2. 
The Probation Department has been directed to prepare its budget assuming a General Fund contribution of $1,084,561.00. This is a reduction of $223,583.00, or 17.09%, from the 2013/2014 fiscal year. The department is submitting a budget that comes under that target, with a General Fund contribution of $1,083,854.00.
The reduction was realized primarily via the following:
¦	Leaving vacant two positions, for savings of $167,471: (1) Deputy Probation Officer III, vacated by a retirement in December 2013; (2) Deputy Probation Officer I, a new position created in October 2013 by the deletion of a supervisor position.
¦	Leaving vacant for all but three (3) pay periods the Assistant Chief Probation Officer position (with a potential start date of May 2, 2015), for savings of $91,793.
¦	Decrease in extra-hire probation aide hours from 3,640 to 2,000. This is made possible due to two factors: (1) A new juvenile hall contract with Nevada County includes transportation services. (2) The newly created (October 2013) full-time clerical position obviates the need for extra-hire clerical help.
¦	Decrease in probation officer overtime hours from 300 to 150.
¦	Decrease of $6,712 in budgeted stand-by pay. The number of stand-by hours remains the same as prior year; however, a correction is made to the rate at which the pay is calculated. In FY 1314, the pay was mistakenly calculated at $3.00 per hour; the correct rate is $2.00 per hour.
It should be noted that the department is not budgeting for any federal "Title IV-E" revenue. In November 2013, the federal government stopped reimbursing (retroactively to October 1, 2013) all California probation departments for pre-foster-care-placement preventive services to juveniles on probation. This federal action was taken as a result of site visits to San Mateo and Sacramento Counties, which called into question the claiming practices of all California probation departments. A statewide corrective action plan was accepted by the federal government in late January 2014, yet the timeline for full implementation of the plan and the resumption of reimbursements remains unclear. Therefore, the department was directed by your office to budget no Title IV-E revenue at this time. The loss of revenue has had no adverse effect on the department's budget, due to disproportional A-87 costs triggered by the revenue. With both the revenue and the A-87 costs zeroed, the net effect is beneficial to the department: In FY 13/14, the department budgeted for $175,000 in Title IV-E revenue and $182,758 in A-87 costs. A budget adjustment will be requested once federal reimbursements resume.
Attached are the department's Budgeted Employee Costs and the required budget forms. 
Lori Norton, County Administrative Officer Samuel Leach, Chief Probation Officer
Fiscal Year 2014/2015 Proposed Budget — AB109/Day Reporting Center (10100510)
The Department's budget is primarily funded by the State "AB109" allocation through the Community Corrections Subaccount, with additional funding this year from the Probation Department's "SB678" (Community Corrections Performance Incentives) designated fund.
The FY 13/14 statewide "AB109" allocation was $998.9 million; Calaveras County, per Government Code, received 0.0943%, or $941,963.00. The FY 14/15 statewide "AB109" allocation is expected to be $934.1 million; however, the county allocation formula has not yet been determined by the Department of Finance. If the formula remains the same as the prior year, the county's allocation would be $880,856.00—more accurately, $885,949.00 due to delayed receipt of the final installment of the prior fiscal year. There is also a fund balance, i.e. unused carry-over from prior years, and a "set-up and training" fund from which to draw.
On March 26, 2014, the Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee voted 6-0 to approve a FY 2014/2015 spending plan, with technical adjustments approved by a 5-0 vote on May 9, 2014.
The attached, four-page spreadsheet details the equipment, programs, and positions funded by the proposed FY 2014/2015 spending plan. Substantial changes over the prior year spending plan are detailed below:
¦	Probation Department "SB678" revenue ("SB678", i.e. Community Corrections Performance Incentives funds allocated by the state to the Probation Department to be used to provide supervision and rehabilitative services to adult felony offenders subject to local supervision) will offset half ($118,632) of the BI Inc. contract for the Day Reporting Center (DRC), as a large portion of the offenders referred to the DRC are on probation supervision, not PRCS or Mandatory Supervision
¦	New $132,000 per annum BI Inc. contract for in-custody jail re-entry programming.
¦	Funding of 75% of a Substance Abuse Counselor II, not the previous Substance Abuse Counselor III, to provide counseling services at the DRC
¦	Funding of 20% of Adult Literacy Program Coordinator to organize provision of GED tutoring and employment readiness services at the DRC
¦	Premium for the jail inmate catastrophic medical insurance will increase to an anticipated $50,000 and will now be paid out of fund balance
¦	Ongoing Library/GED software ($3,000.00) and supplies ($1,470.00) costs to be paid out of fund balance
¦	DRC transportation costs: $14,000 for drivers and bus tickets, to be paid out of fund balance
¦	DRC vehicles' fuel and maintenance costs ($6,000.00) to be paid out of fund balance.
¦	$15,000 for DRC drug testing costs, to be paid out of fund balance
¦	AB109 offenders' electronic monitoring costs no longer funded
¦	Crisis Center to receive $2,650 from Set Up and Training fund for a victim services program training seminar
¦	PRCS flash incarceration reimbursement to the jail no longer funded
¦	Parolee housing reimbursement to the jail reduced from $50,000 to $20,000, based on data received from the Sheriff's Department
¦	$19,100 in equipment and training for Sheriff's Deputy and 2 Correctional Officers, paid out of Set Up and Training fund
¦	$6,250 in equipment and training for probation officers, paid out of Set Up and Training fund
Attached are the CCP's recommended FY14/15 Spending Plan, the Department's Budgeted Employee Costs, and the required budget forms. 
The Public Health budget is expecting to have several significant changes in the upcoming fiscal year. The Community Transformation grant, originally scheduled to be funded for five years, has had the fourth and fifth years of funding eliminated from the Federal budget.
Thus funding for this program is scheduled to end September 29, 2014. The projected loss of income in FY 2014/15 is $177,750.
The announcement for Public Health Emergency Funding for FY 2014/15 shows a potential increase of 6.7% at the Federal level while the Hospital Preparedness Program is projecting a 13.65% decrease under the CDC. As these funds are on the Federal cycle we projected current amounts of revenue until exact figures are known.
Positions
The Agency requests elimination of the following position in Public Health:
51-13 Clerical Assistant III	1.0 FTE
The clerical position is vacant. Given the recent loss of funds, we are recommending this position be eliminated at this time. If needed in the future, we will request permission to fill at that time.
The Health Education Manager, Joan Mazzetti, plans to retire in January when the Community Transformation Grant ends.
Contracts
Public Health was able to secure an Emergency Preparedness Manager in March.
Human Services	Public Health Services	Behavioral Health Services
509 East St. Charles Street	700 Mountain Ranch Road, Suite C2	891 Mountain Ranch Road
San Andreas, CA 95249	891 Mountain Ranch Road (Mail)	San Andreas, CA 95249
Phone (209) 754-6452	San Andreas, CA 95249	Phone (209) 754-6525
Fax (209) 754-3293	Phone (209) 754-6460	Fax (209) 754-6597
Fax (209) 754-1709
For the past year, to insure continuity of preparedness and to adequately train and prepare the Federal and State grants for continuous funding, the services of Doug Buchanan have been secured as a consultant. We did request an increase in his contractual amount to train the new manager in the grant areas of Emergency Preparedness, Hospital Preparedness Planning and Pandemic Flu. The contract is for $93,000.
cc: Francine Osborn, Director, Human Resources and Risk Management 
Substance Abuse
There are no scheduled changes in the substance abuse budget for FY 2014/15 outside of the scheduled merit steps, 4% Board approved COLA scheduled for January 2015 and the scheduled rental rate increase within the Board approved space lease which is $800.00.
Mental Health
Mental Health is proposing the following changes to the budget with the Board and CAO’s permission:
• Public Health has been subsidizing rental space in the Annex for space currently being utilized by First Five Calaveras (who also pays a portion of the rent and utilities) and formerly by Public Health staff. Mental Health is in need of the full building space in order to implement its Children’s Clinic for its Children’s System of Care. This will enable all staff working with children to be unified into one building for better communication, planning and service delivery. The additional monthly cost for rent is estimated at $2,674.50 for a projected FY cost of $32,094.00.
Human Services	Public Health Services	Behavioral Health Services
509 East St. Charles Street	700 Mountain Ranch Road, Suite C2	891 Mountain Ranch Road
San Andreas, CA 95249	891 Mountain Ranch Road (Mail)	San Andreas, CA 95249
Phone (209) 754-6452	San Andreas, CA 95249	Phone (209) 754-6525
Fax (209) 754-3293	Phone (209) 754-6460	Fax (209) 754-6597
Fax (209) 754-1709
Positions
Mental Health is requesting a Clinician I/II position to work with and be a liaison between Child Welfare and Behavioral Health Services. The funding for the position is paid for from Child Welfare. In the last two years, particularly since the advent of the Katie A Lawsuit, coordination, planning and receipt of services for children within the Child Welfare System has received heighten attention and frequent report to the state by the county.
We are requesting that this position be moved from extra hire to a .5 FTE. Funding for this position will continue to be paid from Child Welfare for FY 2014/15.
Presently there are three Community Services Liaison positions at .48 FTE. We are respectfully requesting to make these positions .5 FTE permanent in order to attract and retain qualified personnel.
Fixed Assets
Mental Health is also in need of a new network copier/printer for the Children’s System of Care Clinic to replace the existing machine which is too small and inadequate to meet staff needs, especially when the remaining children’s treatment staff moves into the clinic, upon exit of First Five. The cost of the copier is estimated at $16,000.
Lastly we are asking permission to replace two vehicles which have high mileage and the cost of repairing the vehicles is escalating. We propose replacing the following vehicles:
2001 Ford Taurus: 124,305 miles 2003 Ford Taurus: 125,281 miles
Both vehicles have mechanical issues that are regularly being addressed, including transmissions, brakes, starter, fan belts, etc. They have been breaking down frequently and mechanics are having an increasingly difficult time diagnosing the issues. Additionally, many items on the interior of both vehicles are broken. The upholstery is tattered; door panels have fallen off and are being held on be duct tape; seatbelts have broken and been replaced. These vehicles are becoming increasingly unreliable leaving staff stranded in remote areas of the county. 
The preliminary budget for Behavioral Health for FY 2014/15 is composed of two programs, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services.
Substance Abuse
There are no scheduled changes in the substance abuse budget for FY 2014/15 outside of the scheduled merit steps, 4% Board approved COLA scheduled for January 2015 and the scheduled rental rate increase within the Board approved space lease which is $800.00.
Mental Health
Mental Health is proposing the following changes to the budget with the Board and CAO’s permission:
• Public Health has been subsidizing rental space in the Annex for space currently being utilized by First Five Calaveras (who also pays a portion of the rent and utilities) and formerly by Public Health staff. Mental Health is in need of the full building space in order to implement its Children’s Clinic for its Children’s System of Care. This will enable all staff working with children to be unified into one building for better communication, planning and service delivery. The additional monthly cost for rent is estimated at $2,674.50 for a projected FY cost of $32,094.00.
Mental Health is requesting a Clinician I/II position to work with and be a liaison between Child Welfare and Behavioral Health Services. The funding for the position is paid for from Child Welfare. In the last two years, particularly since the advent of the Katie A Lawsuit, coordination, planning and receipt of services for children within the Child Welfare System has received heighten attention and frequent report to the state by the county.
We are requesting that this position be moved from extra hire to a .5 FTE. Funding for this position will continue to be paid from Child Welfare for FY 2014/15.
Presently there are three Community Services Liaison positions at .48 FTE. We are respectfully requesting to make these positions .5 FTE permanent in order to attract and retain qualified personnel.
Fixed Assets
Mental Health is also in need of a new network copier/printer for the Children’s System of Care Clinic to replace the existing machine which is too small and inadequate to meet staff needs, especially when the remaining children’s treatment staff moves into the clinic, upon exit of First Five. The cost of the copier is estimated at $16,000.
Lastly we are asking permission to replace two vehicles which have high mileage and the cost of repairing the vehicles is escalating. We propose replacing the following vehicles:
2001 Ford Taurus: 124,305 miles 2003 Ford Taurus: 125,281 miles
Both vehicles have mechanical issues that are regularly being addressed, including transmissions, brakes, starter, fan belts, etc. They have been breaking down frequently and mechanics are having an increasingly difficult time diagnosing the issues. Additionally, many items on the interior of both vehicles are broken. The upholstery is tattered; door panels have fallen off and are being held on be duct tape; seatbelts have broken and been replaced. These vehicles are becoming increasingly unreliable leaving staff stranded in remote areas of the county. 
Revenue
The Human Services budget for FY 2014/15 is projected upon current allocations as the May Revise and State Legislative discussions on program allocations have yet to occur as of this writing. We also were notified recently, by our state association, that the realignment dollars listed on the State Auditor’s website are wrong and we will be notified once they are corrected.
Services - Foster Care
During 2013 and through February 2014, the number of children placed in foster care rose from 89 to 167. The greatest referral source has been law enforcement. Law enforcement frequently requests response from social workers when they believe children are in the home and they may need services immediately. Immediately is defined as within two hours or less for an investigation under emergency response. Child Welfare does not take children into custody. The determination is done by either law enforcement or the courts.
Additionally AB12 was passed a few years ago which allows non-minor foster youth to remain in foster care until age 21, under certain circumstances. As a result of the significant increase in foster care cost the department is projecting the use of cash reserves to address the significant increase as the current foster care allocation within realignment is insufficient. Additionally, a meeting with fiscal, eligibility and child welfare staff is planned for later this week to review each case individually to look at finance options and to review the internal application system, in general, for possible solutions.
Contributing to the issues has been the difficulty of finding social workers with the appropriate background for child welfare. At present we have 2-3 vacancies to fill. We did hire three trainees amid the doubling of caseload. However some cases do need intensive social worker services which trainees may not necessarily have the ability to meet initially.
Affordable Care Act
As of 2/3/2014 there were 4,087 Medi-Cal cases with 439 pending applications. There are no current figures available on the Premium Tax Credit Applications. Cutoff for ACA is March 31, 2014. Enrollment will reopen in October 2104. Regular Medi-Cal applications will continue to be accepted and processed on an ongoing basis. The majority of CMSP clients transferred to the Affordable Care Act in January 2014 and new applicants forward will be eligible for up to three months eligibility for emergency medical services. If their emergency goes beyond three months they will need to reapply.
Positions
The Agency is requesting to change vacant position #83-18 from an Office Technician to a Clerical Assistant I/II for Child Welfare. The person in this position would log court reports and make copies for the courts and attorneys, ready cases for transfer to the ongoing unit from the emergency response unit, make appointments for psychological evaluations and referrals to Substance Abuse or other service providers, call to schedule visitations, check for emergency placements, prepare some initial paperwork for placement, schedule transportation and generally assist the Child Welfare staff.
The agency would like to request that Clerical Assistant position #51-23 be transferred from Public Health and downgraded to a Clerical Assistant I/II for the Welfare-to-Work program as the program requires significant data entry, monthly reporting on each of the 246 active cases, as well as on every employable applicant, making client appointments, processing mileage vouchers for employment interviews and the like. This will enable the three counselors to work with clients directly in the classroom, doing home visits on sanctioned clients, working with Adult Education and the junior college and working with employers.
The Agency is also seeking permission to retain the transporter that was transferred back from Mental Health to continue to provide transportation services to child welfare clients primarily for visitation and court hearings. 
Capitol Assets
There are three purchases Human Services is requesting permission to obtain:
•	Computers
-	We are requesting permission to purchase 1 laptop for the new Rail Road Flat outstation.
-	To replace the 57 C-IV computers in eligibility, fiscal and clerical in keeping with the County’s recommended replacement policy.
-	We will utilize 8 of these older computers in our Welfare-to-Work classroom where we are requesting permission to purchase ten licenses from the WinWay Corporation for their resume deluxe software for a full purchase price of $372.
•	Copier/Fax/Scanner - We also are in need of a replacement copier/fax/scanner in services due to the high volume of documents needed in service provision including documents for court. The previous copier is considered beyond its age and life span.
•	Vehicles - Lastly, if funding permits, we would like to consider replacement of our most aged and high mile vehicles that are no longer considered trustworthy to be utilized beyond the immediate vicinity. This FY, we have already surplused two vehicles because of high mileage with two more in the process due to mileage and extremely high maintenance costs. The vehicle we are asking to replace in FY 20142015 is a 2003 Caravan with mileage of 200,227. Beyond that, our fleet includes at least three others with mileage over 150,000.
Merit Systems
While Calaveras County has notified California Human Resources of its intent on becoming
an Approved Local Merit System (ALMS) county, two issues remain outstanding at this time:
1)	The financial amount of assistance that would be transferred to the county to cover the costs presently given to CPS HR Consulting for recruitment and testing services has not been determined.
2)	The guidelines that a county must meet in validation of showing it can meet and continue to meet the six Federal goals. These guidelines are presently being developed in a subcommittee and are not scheduled to be out for discussion until June to August 2014 with later adoption by the State HR Board. 
Responsibility for Buildings & Grounds will move from the Administrative Office to Public Works effective FY 2014/15. The Buildings and Grounds budget encompasses three distinct functions: facilities and grounds maintenance, oversight of CGL|Kitchell contract and custodial services. As part of the transfer of Buildings & Grounds to Public Works, the Administrative Analyst has been transferred from the Administrative Office to Buildings and Grounds. This position will oversee the CGL|Kitchell contract, Computerize Maintenance Management System and supervise the facilities and custodial Staff, as well as oversee the lighting districts.
Two facilities maintenance workers maintain the buildings and grounds for all county owned properties and facilities except the new Jail and Sheriff’s Office which are covered by the CGL|Kitchell contract. They also maintain several leased properties that county staff occupies such as the Public Works yards and the branch libraries. Maintenance includes lights, plumbing, electrical, HVAC, roof leaks, window leaks, broken windows, and other miscellaneous repairs.
In a continued effort to be more efficient, facilities staff utilizes the County help desk ticketing system. This system has simplified the process for identifying maintenance issues and provides staff a way to prioritize maintenance requests.
Custodial Services consists of seven full-time employees. Custodial staff are responsible for all buildings at Government Center as well as all off campus buildings in San Andreas, with the exception of the CalWorks & Human Services Agency. The Custodial Staff will be servicing the new Jail and Sheriff’s Office. Staff is responsible for annual carpet cleaning, vinyl floor striping and waxing, securing all Government Center buildings after business hours, and locking and unlocking the Board of Supervisors chambers after hours for community groups that have reserved the chambers after regular business hours.
Departmental Budget Request
The Buildings and Grounds Recommended Budget of $1,123,251 represents an increase of 113.8% or $597,869 in expenditures and an increase of 124.5% or $213,721 in revenues when compared to the FY 2013/14 Final Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost/General Fund contribution for the department increased 108.6% or $384,148.
891 Mountain Ranch Rd, Ste 31 <» San Andreas, CA 95249 Tel: (209) 754-6025 O Fax: (209) 754-6316
Factors Contributing to Significant Expenditure Changes
Salary and Benefits
•	An increase of $201,471 in Salaries and Benefit costs due to labor negotiations and the addition of 2 new custodial positions and the transfer of the Administrative Analyst from the Administrative Office to Buildings and Grounds.
Services and Supplies
•	Increase in Profession and Specialized Services of $351,334 for the CGL|Kitchell contract for Jail and Sheriff’s Office maintenance.
•	A decrease in General Jail Repairs of ($15,000) due to the CGL|Kitchell contract covering these costs.
Other Financing Uses
•	Transfer Reimbursed Expense to Revenue line item County Reimbursements - $65,000.
Factors Contributing to Significant Revenue Changes
•	Reduction of ($2,693) in A-87 General Fund Revenue and a decrease of ($8,411) in A-87 Non-General Fund Revenue. This results in an overall decrease of ($11,104) from FY 2013/14.
•	Transfer of Reimbursed Expense to County Reimbursements - $65,000.
•	Increase of $200,000 to Transfers from Designated Fund to fund a portion of the CGL/Kitchell contract for Jail and Sheriff’s Office maintenance.
Pending Issues and Policy Considerations
•	Some identified facility needs are:
¦ Replacement of the heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) units and refrigerant chillers at the Old Courthouse and Land Use Building.
¦	Roof repair projects including: Central Library, Administrative building, Land Use building, current Jail, Public Works shop, Legal building and Murphys Library.
¦	Neilson Park lighting
¦	Government Center signage
¦	Concrete pathway repairs, and grinding
¦	Exterior building/brick maintenance
¦	Painting of Government Center buildings
¦	Replacement of parking bumpers
¦	Restriping of existing parking areas
Building and Grounds staff do a remarkable job keeping old systems operating, and coordinating emergency repairs with very limited funds. 
The position of Fleet Manager has been vacant since July 13, 2012, and this vacancy has delayed the implementation of the Department and Countywide centralized fleet program. Until such time as the Public Works Department successfully recruits and fills this position, this program will not be implemented. Once the Fleet Manager position and the vacant Lead Mechanic position are filled, the Public Works Department will fully integrate its entire fleet into the database and be the "Beta" Department prior to Countywide implementation of the centralized fleet program as proposed and approved in last fiscal year's budget.
On July 1, 2011 the County took on the responsibility for maintaining the Calaveras County Transit Fleet. The Fleet is comprised of seven buses, aged from 2009 to 2010. At that time, Public Works Department asserted that County maintenance of the Transit buses would result in an overall reduction in maintenance expenses. Unfortunately, the cost of maintenance on the Transit buses has increased to a level where our cost per service hour is greater than most other transit agencies of a similar size.
The Calaveras Council of Governments (CCOG) is funding a study commencing late in April 2014, with a final report due to CCOG by early summer. This study will assess the cost per hour of providing maintenance by County staff. It will also compare the County costs for maintenance to similar agencies with transit systems and make recommendations including:
1.	Should the County continue performing the maintenance and what costs made transit repairs almost three times higher than initial estimate;
2.	Should the next operating contract for the transit system include operations and maintenance; and
3.	Should the County contract with an outside agency to provide transit vehicle maintenance separate from the operations contract for operating the system transit.
Public Works Administration budget provides the funds necessary to support all administrative functions. The administrative costs are captured in this budget and then allocated to the other divisions of Public Works based on the proportionate services each unit receives.
In Fiscal Year 2014/15 Public Works will continue to operate with reduced budgets. The primary focus in FY 2014/15 for Administration will be to initiate and complete recruiting and hiring staff to fill vacancies in the engineering, transit and administration divisions.
Staff has been working and will continue working in FY 2014/15 to assess every grant project for roads and bridges engineering to determine if the proposed projects make financial sense (i.e. a $20 million dollar bridge, versus a $60 million dollar bridge with matching fund requirements of $2 million to $6 million) before continuing some current projects or applying for grants for additional projects, determining if we have the staff to manage all the projects.
Public Works Administration is also working on a process whereby the Board of Supervisors, County Administrative Officer, and the Auditor/Controller can confirm and track the status of all major work in the Department in terms of the funding sources and the availability of local match funds. This process is necessary in order to ensure that projects don't languish on the work schedule for several years, and then get dropped, de- obligated, or otherwise not completed after raising the public expectation of a long term project.
The transit program is staffed by one full time position, transit manager. This position has been vacant since September 25, 2012. Repeated recruitments have been unsuccessful, and Public Works has relied on a contract with a transit consultant. Calaveras County Council of Governments (CCOG) staff has been instrumental in assisting and supporting the Public Works Department with transit related matters.
The Transit Budget has been struggling to keep costs in control, but with an aging fleet, this becomes more difficult. Revenue to replace buses has been identified in the Public Transit Modernization Improvement and Service Enhancement Account (PTMISEA), which included funds for complete replacement incrementally over the next three to five years. We anticipate a reduction in the size of some of the buses that will be replaced over the next five years.
The Fiscal Year 2014/15 budget will continue to have funds earmarked for construction and installation of bus shelters at locations in the County identified in the Bus Shelter Phase III 
The Integrated Waste Division of Public Works does not rely on any General Fund support. Consequently, it contributes very little financially to the County budget with the exception of A-87 costs and reimbursement to other Public Works Divisions that perform work or provide services to the Rock Creek landfill and the Red Hill (closed landfill site).
The County has been assessing a $150 per year parcel fee since 1992 (with no increases) on all residential parcels that have homes constructed on the parcels. Business, industrial, and commercial properties pay a parcel fee based on a residential/equivalency basis.
The Public Works Department has been tasked with finding a way to increase the fee on all users that is equitable and legal under proposition 218. This effort has started and stopped a number of times and no effort has been made this past year to find a mechanism (i.e. a nexus) to apportion integrated waste costs across the tax base.
As costs continue to increase, funds may not be adequate to complete projects like the construction of the next waste cell at the landfill in 2018. This problem was identified in
Integrated Waste Management
2008, and as of today staff has not found the appropriate legal way to raise the parcel fee. This cell will have to be built in the next three years and gate fees, revenues from sales of recyclable materials, as well as additional revenues from other sources are not enough to cover the impending shortfall. This year is a critical year to get 
The Department of Agriculture and Weights & Measures FY 2014/15 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the targeted General Fund contribution. In order to achieve the targeted contribution the Department found it necessary to decrease the contract to hire a detection trapper through Cooperative Ag Support Services by $6,360.00 (35%) and decrease the Federal Wildlife Services Contract by $1,200.00 (1.8%). The detection trapper services traps that detect Glassy-winged sharpshooter and other agricultural insect pests, the Federal Wildlife Services trapper controls predators such as mountain lions and bears and other nuisance pests such as raccoons and skunks.
The Department of Agriculture has historically conducted roadside spraying for the Department of Public Works on public roads and within Community Service Areas. It is not known at present if we will provide this service during FY 2014/15. Consequently, no revenue or expense has been included in the recommended budget for this service. If revenue is realized from this activity, the detection and wildlife contracts can be increased while maintaining targeted General Fund contribution.
The Animal Services Department FY 2014/15 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the targeted General Fund contribution. In order to achieve the targeted contribution, the Department is proposing to eliminate 1 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Animal Control Officer I (ACO I) position and is reducing its extra hire funding. The ACO I position is a sole position with the Department and as a result of the elimination of this position, there will only be two remaining ACO’s to meet animal control needs and concerns throughout the County for this seven day a week operation. The primary activities that will be affected by the loss of this position include a reduction or the elimination of nuisance call response (barking dogs), front office assistance, data input, and assistance in shelter cleaning and general Animal Services calls. As this position occupies the shelter office on Saturday’s, allowing for the ACO III to respond to calls in the field, the elimination of the position will result in the elimination or severe reduction to field calls on Saturday’s. When taking into consideration vacation, sick, holidays and weekend shelter duty of the remaining staff, it should be noted that the department will be absent an ACO for at least 35 days over the next fiscal year.
While we have reduced the number of hours for extra hire to 200 hours (statistically, 270 hours are needed to cover for vacation and sick time of the Shelter Assistant), the elimination of the ACO I position directly jeopardizes the Department’s use of the existing extra hire list. When layoffs occur within a department, extra hire lists are automatically eliminated. As extra hire is used to cover the Shelter Assistant during vacations, holidays and during unanticipated staff illness, we are requesting that an exception be made to keep the extra hire list intact. The ACO I position that is being eliminated would be at the top of the extra hire list.
It should be noted that our Animal Services volunteers (numbering over 100!) and the Calaveras Humane Society (CHS) continue to be invaluable partners in helping Animal Services meet all of its obligations. Our volunteers clean cat cages and walk dogs on a daily basis while others help maintain the current shelter from weed eating the grounds to hanging shelves to painting our buildings. Our volunteer Registered Veterinary Technician (RVT) is on campus several days in any given week helping to screen animals for disease including performing blood draws and assisting the Shelter Assistant with a myriad of other tasks. The help we receive is truly remarkable.
CHS continues to be one of the strongest advocates for our animals in need, having provided funding in an amount of $9,551.25 for medications and vaccines last calendar year as well as $387.99 for cat cages and another $1,500.00 from their Juanita Newell trust for the new puppy shed. CHS also provides financial assistance as necessary for spay and/or neuter of animals being adopted. One of the more impressive recent accomplishments was the "dog lift” where 15 dogs were air-lifted from the Calaveras County Airport and brought to Idaho! This was completely funded by CHS. These activities are in addition to the CHS primary purpose and mission of building a new Animal Services Facility.
A brand new non-profit 501 c3 has also recently been formed by the volunteers for the purpose of helping Animal Services maintain and enhance our existing facilities. This organization is named "Friends of Calaveras Animal Services” or "FOCAS” and is currently housed under the Calaveras Community Foundation.
If it were not for the tremendous amount of donated work hours by our volunteers and the significant financial help as provided by CHS, Animal Services would not be able to meet its mandate. 
The Onsite Wastewater Department FY 2014/15 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the targeted General Fund contribution. In order to achieve the targeted contribution, the vacant Registered Environmental Health Specialist (REHS) II position has been eliminated from the Department budget. This leaves one REHS II to cover the entire County to perform onsite wastewater (septic system) inspections. Environmental Health Department REHS staff will continue to provide assistance in helping the Onsite Wastewater Department inspections as necessary.
The necessity to eliminate the Registered Environmental Health Specialist II position remains a concern as the Department is currently experiencing an increase permit activity as a result of the modest housing recovery. Should permit activity continue to increase, it may be necessary to add the position back into the Department at a future date. When joining the Agency in 2007, the Department had three full time inspectors.
The sole Permit Technician III position has also been reduced from 1 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) to .78 FTE. The remaining .22 FTE is being covered by the Air Pollution Control District (APCD) budget. The Permit Technician currently assists the District in tracking APCD permits, performing file review, billing and issuance of burn permits.
The Environmental Health Department FY 2014/15 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the targeted General Fund contribution, which in the case of the Department, is no net cost. In order to achieve this goal, the Department continues to substantially rely on grant funding. This year, an amount of $244,396.00 is anticipated in grant funding including $60,000.00 in Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) Rural Reimbursement Account (RRA) funds. The RRA funding is a result of the passage of SB 1824 in 2000 of which staff helped author and has brought $60,000 to the Department annually since 2001. Although businesses storing hazardous materials must cover their permit and inspection costs, fees incurred by these businesses are significantly reduced as the RRA funds help offset Department costs in implementing the CUPA program.
There are two significant requests that are being presented for consideration in the Department’s FY 2014/15 budget. In both instances, there will be no cost to County General Funds. The first request is to purchase a 4x4 Sport Utility Vehicle as funded through a State CUPA Forum Board Grant. The vehicle will be used by CUPA staff to perform inspections and to transport staff to CUPA Forum Board meetings and other required trainings. The second request involves opening a limited term Registered Environmental Health I (REHS I) position as funded through CUPA related Underground Storage Tank (UST) and Local Primacy Agency (LPA) - Small Public Water System grant funds. We are proposing that the position be limited term as it will solely rely on grant funding.
Finally, the sole Permit Technician I/II position has been reduced from 1 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) to .95 FTE. The remaining .05 FTE is being covered by the Air Pollution Control District (APCD) budget. The Permit Technician currently assists the District in issuing APCD burn permits.
The Air Pollution Control District FY 2014/15 recommended budget is being submitted meeting the targeted General Fund contribution which in the case of the District is zero dollars. The current cash carry within the District is $80,200.00.
The District will be covering .22 Full Time Equivalents (FTE) of the Onsite Wastewater Department Permit Technician III position. As cited in the Onsite Wastewater budget memorandum, the Permit Technician III assists the District in tracking APCD permits, performing file review, billing and issuance of burn permits. The District will also be covering .05 FTE of the Environmental Health Department Permit Technician II position. As cited in the Environmental Health Department budget memorandum, the Permit Technician II assists the District in the issuance of burn permits. The District will now consist of 1.74 FTE’s.
The proposed budget for the Planning Department meets the targeted reduction and attempts to maintain the levels of service of prior years’ budgets. Funding for the General Plan update consultant contracts is carried over from previous encumbrances. Conservative estimates were made for fee revenue. Primary savings come from leaving two positions vacant. These savings are partially offset by increases in consultant costs to complete the General Plan and to hold in reserve funds in the event of unexpected costs or a need to recirculate the EIR.
Net County Cost Reduction
The proposed budget provides a net county cost of $899,182, which is under the target of $900,369 as directed by County Administration.
General Plan Update
The top priority for the department continues to be the development of the General Plan Update and its associated Environmental Impact Report. In addition to the already encumbered amount to cover the existing contracts with Remy, Thomas and Moose for legal services (approximately $115,000) and the two consultants for the plan and EIR, Raney Planning and Management and Augustine Planning Associates (APA) (combined approximately $267,000) I have requested an additional $215,000 to cover an extension of the APA contract and for potential costs if significant changes are necessary due to public comments during the adoption process or extensive additional work becomes necessary on the EIR in responding to comments in the Final EIR process. An additional $30,000 has been allocated toward completion of the Housing Element, which has not been a part of the prior work program for the General Plan, and an increase of $10,000 for additional legal expenses.
The FY2013-14 budget identified a Planner IV position to oversee preparation of the General Plan and a Program Manager to handle the day to day work. The Planner IV position was not filled (instead the work was contracted out) and the Program Manager position has become vacant due to retirement. Due to the necessity to complete the General Plan in as timely a
manner as possible, I am proposing to extend the contract with APA, to work under the Planning Director’s supervision to complete the draft General Plan and to assist with review of the EIR.
Staffing
The proposed budget provides for six full-time positions. Currently filled positions are the Planning Director, two Planner III positions, one Planner II and a Planner I. Vacant authorized positions include two Planner IVs and a Program Manager. I am proposing to reclassify the existing Planner I to an Administrative Assistant II. The person in this role does primarily administrative work, including accounts payable, preparation of Planning Commission minutes and agendas, and reception duties. This results in an increase in costs of under $2000. As discussed under the General Plan Update, the Program Manager position would not be filled. One of the Planner IV positions would be replaced with a Planner III to augment staff processing development applications and meeting other day to day public assistance needs. The other Planner IV position would remain unfilled. This results in a net reduction in personnel costs from FY2013-14 of $162,477.
Revenue
Revenue for the department, primarily in the form of application fees has been reduced by approximately $35,000 from FY2013-14. The main reason for this is last year’s budget identified $50,000 in pass-through revenue and costs associated with project-related CEQA review. The County would contract with selected consulting firms to prepare the CEQA documents necessary for projects, and the applicant would pay those costs. This amount far exceeded the actual work done, so was reduced to reflect a more realistic projection of that work. Other adjustments were made reflecting the trends from the past three years. We do not expect a significant change in the project mix and number of applications and have provided a conservative estimate, given the current situation with the General Plan and development trends in the County.
Other Expenses
Other minor adjustments have been made in other expense items. Increases are proposed for Planning Commission stipends to cover potential special hearings on the General Plan and training for staff to enhance their effectiveness. Reductions are reflected in other consultant costs, primarily for the CEQA work discussed above and other contracts in last year’s budget that were completed. With the proposed change of the Planner I position to an Administrative Assistant, it will no longer be necessary to allocate $15,000 to Public Works to complete certain accounting tasks. This has been removed from the budget.
Delete any of the above mentioned Classes not found in your Departmental Budget and add as necessary any which may not appear above.
In stating reasons for increases and decreases, include explanation why the change. Example: "Rents/Leases - Bldg./Impr. increased by $8,500” needs more explanation. Instead state "Rents/Leases - Bldg./Impr. increased by $8,500 due to occupancy of new rental office space beginning in January 2013.”
PENDING ISSUES AND/OR NEW POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
The building department has been conducting the fire prevention planning for commercial projects for development. Ebbetts Pass Fire Department and the Copperopolis Fire Department conduct fire prevention planning in their respective districts, leaving the remainder of the county to the responsibility of the Building Department. The current down-turn in the economy has not produced a negative impact in the Building Department’s functionality for fire prevention plan review and inspections. However an increase in commercial building activity would produce a hardship on the Building Department to perform timely and comprehensive fire planning plan review and inspections, leading to delays for commercial development. The best option for service in fire prevention planning would be to "out-source” by contract, plan review and inspections by a qualified consultant with over-sight of the Building Department.
Nearly all of the building department vehicles have odometer loggings over 100,000 miles. It is anticipated the vehicles will continue to remain in reliable service for the fiscal year of 2014-2015. A slight increase in vehicle maintenance line item 5182 of additional $2000 over the previous year is incorporated in anticipation of possible vehicle needs of the department’s older fleet. 
Building Department/Code Compliance (10100600) DEPARTMENTAL BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS OR REQUESTS
The Department’s requested budget of $481,124.00 represents an overall increase of $43,097, or 9 % in expenditures and an increase of $ $43,097.00 or 9%, in revenues when compared to FY 2013/14 Adopted Recommended Budget. As a result, the Net County Cost / General Fund Contribution has remained $ 0, or 0%.
SIGNIFICANT BUDGET CHANGES
Employee costs increased by $4,438.00 and Services and Supplies by $22,152.00. Factors contributing to significant expenditure changes include:
• Increase in employee costs and increase in projected abatement activity.
Factors contributing to significant revenue changes include:
• Increased abatement activity which result in an increase in cost and cost recovery that will offset the increased costs.
PENDING ISSUES AND/OR NEW POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
The Code Compliance case load continues to grow and currently exceeds 1100 active cases and well over 100 that have not been entered in to the existing data base or addressed in any way. In addition to Code Compliance cases Abandoned Vehicle Abatement activities occupy much of the units time and 225 vehicles will be abated by fiscal year end.
At current staffing levels the Unit will continue to struggle meeting the needs of the public. At this time there is no administrative support and the number of cases the public demands immediate action on continues to grow. The result is the impression that many high priority cases do not get resolved or remain incomplete for an extended period of time.
This budget will maintain current staffing levels. Additional staff will be needed to provide improved service. As a result of increased staffing the number of enforcement actions resolved will increase therefore revenues from those actions will increase which would offset the cost of increased staffing.
