Agriculture
CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost includes $139,233
of decreased revenues and $128,738 of
increased expenditures when compared to the
FY 2011-12 Adjusted Budget.
The recommended net County cost reflects a
reduction of $89,748 to the Department of
Agriculture. The service level from the
Department of Information Technology was
decreased ($20,000). The impact to the
department should be minimal as the
department is not anticipating any
enhancements during FY 2012-13.
The newly created Pest Detection Program
Assistant position will be eliminated due to lack
of revenue, resulting in a salary and benefit
savings of $69,748.

Assessor
CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline and recommended budgets
reflect a $179,216 total general fund cut from
the fiscal year 2011-12 current adjusted
budget. This reduction is due in large part to
salary savings from wage reductions and the
elimination of retirement subsidy.
The Assessor’s Office has experienced a high
level of turnover in the past few years resulting
from resignations and retirements. The
Department currently has 27 vacant positions
out of 122 authorized positions, which
represents a 22% reduction in workforce.
Reduced staffing levels make it extremely
difficult for the Department to close the regular
and supplemental assessment rolls in a timely
fashion. Further reductions will negatively
impact the amount of property tax revenue
and supplemental tax roll cost recovery that
the County receives during the year.
Therefore, the County Administrator is not
recommending any further budget cuts.

Auditor-Controller
CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline Budget
The baseline net County cost represents an
$80,222 increase over the FY 2011-12 Adjusted
Budget.
Despite labor contracts resulting is reduced
salary and benefit expenses, salary and benefit
costs increased due to the addition of one
position assigned to the ADP timekeeping
project ($35,899). This increase is partially
offset by a reduction in services and supplies
($18,632).
Finally, as a result of declining revenues, the
Auditor’s Office is projected a net reduction of
$62,955 in revenues for FY 2012-13.
Recommended Budget
The County Administrator is recommending no
reduction to the Auditor-Controller’s baseline
budget. The recommended net County cost will
provide the funding necessary to maintain
mandated services in FY 2012-13.

CAO’s Recommendation
This Budget covers the administrative
requirements of the Board’s operations.
Services and Supplies include the costs of
memberships in the California State Association
of Counties (CSAC), Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG), Urban County Caucus
(UCC) and National Association of Counties
(NACO). Services and Supplies also include
electronic support of the County Code as well as
funding for the Countywide Single Audit.
The County Administrator is recommending no
reduction to the Board of Supervisor’s baseline
budget. The difference in appropriations
between prior year and current year is due to
appropriations of fund balance in Board
Mitigation Programs. These funds will be added
to FY 12-13 at FY 11-12 year end when final
amounts are known.

CAO’s Recommendation
The recommended budget for Central Support
Services reflects a net County cost of
$5,434,079. This amount will fund the
aforementioned departments at a level that will
enable them to provide the current level of
services into fiscal year 2012-13. Additionally,
$5,000,000 is appropriated to strategically fund
deferred facilities maintenance and capital
renewal for the highest priority projects in
County facilities as detailed in the Budget
Message.

CAO’s Recommendation
For the Clerk-Recorder-Elections Department
general fund budgets, baseline expenditures
reflect a $193,343 decrease over FY 2011-12.
This expenditure decrease is primarily due to the
decreased cost of elections for the upcoming
year. Salaries and benefits increased due to the
second phase of the reorganization in the Clerk-
Recorder Division. The department was able to
fund these changes through new revenues
(SB676 2010). SB676 allowed the Clerk-
Recorder Division to increase recording fees to
pay the costs associated with recording and
indexing of documents. The Clerk-Recorder-
Elections Department general fund revenue is
projected to decrease by $193,000, which is
primarily attributed to decreased revenues from
suspended SB90 or other State reimbursements.
The Recorder negative net county cost
offsets a portion of the elections net county cost
for the upcoming year. The department’s overall
net county cost for FY 2012-13 will decrease
$343 from 2011-12.

CAO’s Recommendation
1. Land Development Fund
DCD’s operations are funded primarily through
the Land Development Fund (programs funded
in the General Fund are discussed separately
below.)
A. Baseline Budget Adjustments
DCD’s baseline request for 2012-13 is
$28,272,635, a reduction of $987,561 from
2011-12. This has resulted from the following
specific baseline reductions:
(a) A net decrease in projected salary and
benefit costs totaling $256,908; and,
(b) A net decrease of $648,927 in services and
supplies [through an increase of
$4,924,127 in services and supplies, offset
by decreased expenditure transfers of
($5,572,824), as a result of implementing a
cost allocation program]; and,
(c) a reduction of $81,956 in other charges and
fixed assets.
It is noteworthy that in fiscal year 2012-13, two
programs in the Land Development Fund will be
eliminated: the State Energy Program grant will
not be renewed, and the plant acquisition
program for renovations at 30 Muir Road will
have been fully expended due to project
completion.
B. Recommended Budget
DCD will further reduce its expenditures in fiscal
year 2012-13 by $48,000 to reflect a reduced
level of service to the Contra Costa Futures
Fund; and by $406,485 through the elimination
of five vacant project positions in the
Weatherization program. The latter reduction
was necessitated by the termination of Federal
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA) funds for Weatherization projects
throughout the unincorporated areas. Since both
expenditure reductions were funded by nondepartmental
revenue (which also will be
eliminated), neither results in savings to the
Land Development Fund.

CAO’s Recommendation
The $10 million contingency reserve was
eliminated in FY 2006-07 after remaining
basically unchanged for 16 years. The County
Administrator’s Office recommended that the
practice of appropriating $10 million for
contingency be discounted and that the funds be
designated for Contingency on the General
Ledger. The recommendation was implemented
to offset a portion of the County’s $45 million
budget reduction in that year. The anticipated
impact of that recommendation was that
appropriations would no longer be inflated and
annually generated scarce resources would not
be required to balance them.
The County Administrator is recommending that
the contingency reserve be reinstated for
several reasons. General Fund contingencies
include funding necessary to provide continued
County operations despite economic
uncertainties. As a general rule, a contingency
fund should be maintained at a level sufficient to
finance all issues/items which occur during the
fiscal year but which were unforeseen during the
budget process. Continued failure to appropriate
a reasonable level of funding for contingencies
would not be prudent and could likely result in
the continuing phenomena of the “midyear
budget crisis”. The County Administrator
recommends that the Contingency for General
Fund is budgeted at $5,035,561. This amount is
($4,964,439), or (50%), lower than the FY 2005-
06 Final Budget. There are several important
components in this Contingency: 1) It includes
Contingency for any unforeseen emergency that
the Board may need to fund during the fiscal
year; 2) Contingency as designation to
financially manage any State budget uncertainty
(this is especially important given the State’s
deficit); 3) appropriations without a dedicated
earmark to help to rebuild and grow the County’s
fund balance; and 4) appropriations for
technology projects to increase efficiencies and
economies.

CAO’s Recommendation
The fiscal year 2012-13 baseline net County
cost shows a reduction of $3,176,755 from fiscal
year 2011-12. The reduction reflects the
elimination of $2,935,875 in restricted prior year
fund balance from CATV franchise fees and a
reduction of $240,880 in salaries and benefits.
The anticipated cost decrease for salaries and
benefits will result from the transfer of one
Senior Management Analyst position to the
Clerk of the Board’s Office and the mandated
salary decreases and elimination of retirement
subsidy approved in October, 2011.
The Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2012-
13 includes the addition of a Senior Clerk
position for the County Administrator’s Office.
This action, along with the loss of the Senior
Management Analyst position, will keep the
position count at 23 (same as fiscal year 2011-
12).

CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost reflects a
$195,936 increase from the FY 2011-12 budget.
Operating costs, revenues and expenditure
transfers are anticipated to decrease by
$384,270.
The County Administrator is recommending a
net County cost for FY 2012-13 of $1,524,000.
This action will require a reduction of $286,758
to the County Counsel’s Office:
As a result of retirements, County Counsel
currently has two vacant positions that will be
unfunded and held vacant for FY 12-13
(266,893).
During staffing transitions and special projects
County Counsel contracts for part-time/
temporary help. These contracts will be reduced
in FY 12-13 ($19,865).
These reductions may delay the ability of the
County Counsel’s office to provide legal
services. Most notably, the Contra Costa
County Redevelopment Agency was dissolved
on February 1, 2012. The process to finalize
this step will require numerous actions over the
next several years that will require legal
assistance and advice. Additionally, the Auditor-
Controller will have significant new
responsibilities associated with the dissolution of
the Redevelopment Agency and that will require
assistance, including administering a new
property tax trust fund and auditing each former
redevelopment agency within the County.
CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline budget reflects a net decrease of
$144,159 from fiscal year 2011-12. The
reduction reflects the removal of fund balance
rebudgeted from fiscal year 2010-11. Prior year
trends are used to predict assessed valuation in
the coming year. The actual return-to-source
shares are determined each year in the Fall.

CAO’s Recommendation
The current year budget does not include the
West Contra Costa Healthcare District
agreement impacts adopted in April, 2011 after
printing of the Recommended Budget. The
Baseline Budget reflects the anticipated first
transfer and the Recommended Budget the
second transfer. It is anticipated that the
obligation will continue into FY 2014-15. Each
year’s transfer will appear as a negative net
County cost in our schedules.
In the Retirement UAAL Bond fund,
appropriations were increased to cover the FY
2012-13 debt service (pension obligation
bonds), which are budgeted in each department
as a compensation expense. Transfers for the
Retirement Litigation Settlement Debt Service
are also budgeted in each department as a
compensation expense. We do not anticipate
issuing Tax Revenue Anticipation Notes
(TRANs) in FY 2012-13.

CAO Recommendation
The Department of Information Technology
baseline budget decreases total expenditures by
$1,505,003. This decrease can be attributed to
the removal of a one-time expenditure
appropriation for fiscal year 2011-12 in the
amount of $1.5 million to partially fund the
purchase of real property commonly known as
“Kregor Peak” to accommodate the need for
current and future countywide radio
infrastructure. Department user fee rates
charged to departments and other clients have
been set to match anticipated expenditure
increases, resulting in a net county cost of
$95,000, which reflects a portion of the annual
debt service for the digital microwave system.
The Recommended Budget includes two
program modifications with a net county cost
impact of zero: 1) a new Service Level
Agreement (SLA) between the County
Administrator’s Office and the Department for
the provision of support services to support the
Law and Justice departments that rely on the
County mainframe. Once these departments
have migrated to new case management
systems, we will recommend that this
augmentation be redirected to increase Law and
Justice Systems staff to support the new
systems; 2) a reduction of hours for one (1)
Network Analyst position from full-time to parttime
due to a request from the Treasurer-Tax
Collector’s Office to reduce the service level of
information technology support provided. The
Dept of Information Technology
General Government
County of Contra Costa FY 2012-2013 Recommended Budget C1-73
Network Analyst position scheduled for
reduction is currently vacant and will result in no
negative impacts to permanent personnel.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline Budget reflects a net decrease of
$5,532,664. The net decrease reflects the
elimination of prior year fund balance totaling
$5,104,359 as well as decreased costs of
$428,305 for maintenance of the County payroll
and benefits system and anticipated reductions
in retiree health costs.
The recommended budget reflects sufficient
funding in order to maintain the County payroll
and benefits system as well as funding for
retiree health benefits for Court employees and
other retirees that cannot be attributed, and
therefore charged, to current departments.

CAO’s Recommendation
The County Administrator’s Office is again
projecting relatively flat revenues for FY 2012-13
compared to FY 2011-12. Due to the downturn
in the economy, there was a $700 million
decrease in the local tax base for FY 2011-12.
This represented a .49% loss in assessed value.
Projected property tax revenues are projected at
a zero percent growth or loss for FY 2012-13.
In the past, the Recommended Budget for
General Fund departments relied on significant
increases in General Purpose Revenue to offset
increases in the cost of doing business.
Normally, the most significant increases in
revenue from year-to-year are due to increased
assessed valuation on current secured property
tax. The current economic downturn has
eliminated growth in assessed valuation,
significantly reduced interest rates, and greatly
impacted Supplemental Property Tax revenues.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline budget for fiscal year 2012-13
reflects a net decrease overall of $128,254 from
the current year. Costs increased by
approximately $692,000 – the majority of which
is attributed to increased costs for benefits
administration. Revenue increased by
approximately $820,000 for personnel services
and benefits administration.
The Recommended budget reflects sufficient
funding in order to maintain the existing level of
service in fiscal year 2012-13 for the Human
Resources Department.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline costs for salaries and benefits are
decreased due to wage reductions and benefit
realignment. Services and Supplies are
decreased to reflect one time purchases in
2011-12 of equipment, computers, and
materials. Other Charges are reduced due to
decreased facilities maintenance costs and
decreased charges from other departments.
Fixed Assets are decreased due to one time
appropriations for replacement of self-check
machines in 2011-12. The Library continues to
be a partner with cities as well as strives to
maintain an up-to-date technology base to meet
the needs of the community.

CAO’s Recommendation
The fiscal year 2012-13 recommended budget
reflects the General Services Department as
part of the Public Works Agency. The general
fund budget units listed in this section include
Public Works operation, Road Construction,
County Drainage Maintenance, Purchasing,
Fleet Services, General County Building
Occupancy, Outside Agencies Services,
Facilities Maintenance, Print and Mail Services,
General Services Administration, and Resource
Recovery.
The Department reduced costs by $2,144,862 to
meet the General Fund target of $11,484,328.
To accomplish this, and as part of the overall
merger of Public Works and General Services,
the Department has proposed the elimination of
26 vacant positions for a salary and benefits
reduction of $2,034,982. Twenty-four of these
positions are in the general fund and two are in
the Fleet Services internal service fund. The
Department also reduced the budget for building
emergency repairs by $109,880.

CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost represents a
$195,887 increase over the FY 2011-12
Adjusted Budget.
Nearly all of this increase is a result of declining
revenues. The Treasurer’s Office is projecting a
revenue decrease of $286,500 in FY 2012-13.
As foreclosures have stabilized, the fees
collected on delinquent property taxes have
continued to decrease. At the same time
property values have remained low resulting in
decreased property tax revenues. Finally,
investment income is at a record low as interest
rates hover below 1%.
The recommended net County cost reflects an
additional reduction of $46,031 to the Office of
the Treasurer-Tax Collector.
The Office has reduced their service level from
the Department of Information Technology. The
impact to the department is expected to delay
implementation of new projects but it should not
impact the day to day operations.

CAO Recommendation
FY 2012-13 Baseline expenditures decreased in
comparison to FY 2011-12 by $258,545 primarily
through decreases in salaries and benefits and
one-time savings in overhead expenses.
Revenue remains unchanged. The FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget for Child Support
Services is balanced while maintaining current
service levels.

CAO Recommendation
The past five years could be characterized by
increased demands on the Employment and
Human Services Department (EHSD) to provide
services to an expanding number of applicants
and clients coupled with reduced County
General Fund (GF) allocations.
The difficult economic times have resulted in an
increasing number of Contra Costa low-income
residents applying for and receiving public
assistance. At the same time EHSD’s adopted
GF allocation has decreased by 46% since FY
2007-2008.
The economic turmoil of the past five years has
been particularly difficult for low income families.
The loss of jobs and home foreclosures has led
to increased applications for food stamps, child
care assistance and financial aid. EHSD’s core
assistance programs (General Assistance, Medi-
Cal, CalFresh, and CalWORKs) have seen a
21.0% increase in the total number of
applications received each month. In 2008
EHSD’s eligibility worker staff processed
approximately 8,200 applications each month. In
2012 the number of applications processed each
month increased to approximately 9,925.
Though each applicant may not qualify for public
assistance, each application must be fully
evaluated. Consequently, staff and personnel
expenses have increased.

GA/Medi-Cal/CalFresh / CalWORKs
The increasing number of applications resulted
in larger monthly caseloads. In 2008, the
aggregated monthly caseload for EHSD core
assistance programs was approximately 71,100.
In 2012, this number increased to approximately
100,160, a 41% increase. Each case requires
periodic monitoring and case management
reports prepared by EHSD staff.

GA/ Medi-Cal/ CalFresh/ CalWORKs
The County shares the cost for CalFresh, and
IHSS programs on a “matching” basis (each
dollar the county contributes is enhanced by
State and Federal matching funds.) General
Assistance (GA) is of particular concern
because GA is funded through County GF. The
County is solely responsible for all personnel
costs to process GA applications, and provide
case management services.GA cash assistance
payments are also funded 100% by County GF.
Monthly applications for GA have increased by
48% since 2008; growing from approximately
652 to 1209 by January 2012. Consequently,
there has been a corresponding 458% increase
in monthly caseload from 359 in 2008 to 1646 in
2012.

CAO Recommendation
The 2012-13 Baseline Budget for all programs
and funding sources in the Health Services
Department total $1.047 billion dollars. Of this
amount, $960.3 million, or 91.7%, is funded from
outside revenue. The balance of $87 million, or
8.3%, is funded from County general purpose
revenue. The County General Fund provides
$32.3 million to the Hospital and Clinics, $3.8
million to the Health Plan, and $50.9 million to
the other programs within the department.
The Department baseline budget for the General
Fund and Enterprise Fund programs (see table
titled General Fund & Enterprise Funds
Summary, at the beginning of this section)
increases $11.1 million or 1.1% from the FY
2011-12 levels. Revenue increases $10.7
million or 1.15%. The net increase in cost to the
General Fund to continue the current level of
services is $439,100, or 0.4% in the baseline.
The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
continues funding expenditures at the baseline
level. However, the County General Fund
contribution to the Department has been
reduced by $3.25 million from the Baseline
funding request ($2.8 million from the current
year funding level). The Department is
anticipating offsetting this reduction in funding by
efforts to drive FQHC revenue in the hospital
and clinics, thereby maintaining the current
service levels.
The Recommended Budget does not include
any funding changes that may occur in the State
of California’s 2012-13 fiscal year budget.
These changes are unknown at this point in
time.
The Department continues to face some major
challenges. The Department will launch an
electronic health record system in July 2012.
This technology, which CCHS named ccLink, is
a one-stop tool for obtaining patient and
membership data. CCHS providers and
caregivers will gain quick access to a patient’s
electronic record, allowing them to make the
best care decisions. Eventually, patients will
have access to their record and data through an
online web portal, giving them important
information about their health no matter where
they are.
Construction of the new West County Clinic is
anticipated to be completed in fall of 2012. This
new clinic replaces the aging Richmond Clinic.
Federal Health Care Reform, the Affordable
Care Act, has a number of legal challenges
pending. The Department continues to prepare
for implementation at the local level while
monitoring possible changes to key provisions
and funding.
The Department continues its efforts in
implementing the provisions of the Medi-Cal
Waiver "Bridge to Reform". A significant part of
the waiver implementation concerns establishing
a pathway to Federal Health Care reform in
2013. The Department is actively pursuing
enrollment of individuals in the Low Income
Health Program, restructuring the delivery
system, and implementing an Electronic Medical
Record as part of the Reform transition plan.
CAO’s Recommendation
The Department’s baseline budget fully funds
on-going services for FY 2012-13. Total
expenditures are reduced by $22,363 from the
current year largely due to savings from
negotiated salary and benefit levels.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2012-13 Baseline Budget increase was
modest. Increases in benefit costs and services
and supplies netted against a significant
reduction in the projected FY 2012-2013 GSD
fleet service cost as part of the Departments
ongoing efforts to reduce cost.
The Recommended Budget provides sufficient
funding to continue services to the community at
the same level in FY 2012-13 as provided in FY
2011-12.
CAO’s Recommendation
The County currently and has for many years
contracted with the Contra Costa County Bar
Association to provide conflict legal defense
services through private attorneys. Costs had
been trending upward due to an increase in the
number of homicide and capital cases referred
to the Bar, many of which involve multiple
defendants requiring separate legal
representation. In 2010, the County negotiated a
new contract with the Bar that incorporated
improved cost controls and presumptive
maximum fees, which have helped to reduce
overall program costs, and that contract has
been renewed through June 2013.
The Recommended Budget provides for the
continuation of services with the Bar at current
service levels. The County Administrator will be
entering into negotiations for the FY 2013-14
contract early next year.
The level of service for this program is mandated
pursuant to constitutional requirements. Should
the recommended appropriations prove
insufficient to fund the requisite level of defense
services, it will be necessary to shift resources to
this budget center from other programs or
County reserve.
CAO Recommendation
While the County has striven to maintain vital
public safety services during the recent
economic crisis, we are able to recommend a
budget for the new fiscal year that increases
County contribution from the Baseline Budget by
$593,000 and which, in combination with
anticipated cost savings from negotiated wage
and benefit reductions, will provide funding for
additional attorney positions.
The modifications comprise the following:
1. Increased Revenue – $500,000
Consumer fraud revenue is increased in
anticipation of a case settlement.
2. Personnel Adjustments – ($1,402,790)
Salaries and benefits are increased to
provide five additional Fixed Term Attorney
positions and to fund internal position
reclassifications.
3. Staff Vacancy Factor - $309,750
Provision for a staff vacancy factor is
increased from the Baseline, recognizing the
savings achieved from unplanned personnel
turnover and the time required to recruit new
personnel.
The District Attorney advises that the addition of
five attorney positions will enable him to staff
and successfully carry out critical public safety
programs such as the Richmond Ceasefire,
augmented gang prosecution, domestic violence
prosecution including the Family Justice Center,
and sexual assault, human trafficking and
firearm prosecution. The recommended staff
increase will bring the number of attorney
positions from 89 to 94, providing more
resources for the prosecution of general and
special crimes.
The Recommended Budget also maintains
appropriations for the District Attorney’s portion
of the Community Corrections Initiative under
Public Safety Realignment (AB 109). Under
Realignment, we expect more parolees will be
released to our county with less supervision.
Because of the state’s high recidivism rate of
nearly 70%, the realignment of state prisoners
and parolees to county jurisdiction will likely
result in more work for the District Attorneys’
Office. The District Attorney’s Office received
limited funding to provide increased victim
advocacy and to staff parole revocation
hearings.
The District Attorney’s office has embarked on
aggressive new crime prevention initiatives. The
office is pursuing a gang Cease Fire in
Richmond, gang injunctions, as well as
instituting a new countywide truancy program
that was recently adopted by Board ordinance.
The recommended increase in staffing will help
to see these programs implemented and firmly
established in the coming year.
Note: The County Administrator has developed
recommendations based on service level impacts
communicated by the District Attorney’s Office. It is
acknowledged that the District Attorney is an elected
official and has ultimate discretion on how to best
deploy resources within his Office using
appropriations allocated by the Board of
Supervisors.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline Budget is decreased by
$1,599,113 primarily due to the removal of onetime
appropriations for the purchase of
communications routers for the All County
Justice Information Network (ACCJIN), which is
budgeted in the Law & Justice Systems
Development Program, and for the justice
partners’ case management systems.
The Recommended Budget includes an
augmentation in the amount of $180,000 to
purchase mainframe support services from the
Department of Information Technology to
support the justice partners while they continue
to utilize the County mainframe. Once the
justice partners have migrated to new case
management systems, we will recommend that
this augmentation be redirected to increase Law
and Justice Systems staff to support the new
systems. The Recommended Budget also reestablishes
the General Fund Subsidy to the
Justice Automated Warrant System in the
amount of $22,480 and makes minor revenue
decreases totaling $2,097.
CAO Recommendation
The Probation Department’s baseline budget
decreases net County cost by $95,895. While
the baseline decreases County contribution,
salaries and benefits expense is actually
increased by $2,035,637, with offsetting
decreases in operating expenses of $455,469
and a net increase in revenues. Full time
equivalent staffing is increased by one
Administrative Services Assistant position to
strengthen budget and fiscal oversight in
recognition of the department’s recent
assumption of revenue collection activities.
The Recommended Budget decreases County
contribution by $420,346, which is primarily
attributable to an increase in Public Safety
Realignment (AB 109) revenue:
1. Operating expense – ($238,118)
Increase operating expense for Public
Safety Realignment programs.
2. Additional Public Safety Realignment
revenue - $658,464
The State has recently informed counties that
it will make twelve rather than nine annual
payments to counties under AB 109,
increasing the County’s Public Safety
Realignment Revenues over Baseline
projections.
Public Safety Realignment (AB 109).
Adult Justice Realignment. The 2011-12
State Budget enacted the realignment of public
safety programs from the state to local
governments through the implementation of the
Community Corrections Grant Program
previously authorized under AB 109. 2011
Realignment is funded with a dedicated portion
of state sales tax revenue and Vehicle License
Fees (VLF). The budget fully funds $500.0
million for local public safety programs
previously funded by the additional 0.15 percent
increase to the VLF, which expired on June 30,
2011. However, the budget plan does not
provide constitutional protections to counties for
the realigned programs. Governor Brown
proposes to place an initiative on the November
2012 ballot to seek voter approval for this
constitutional protection.
The Community Corrections Partnership
(chaired by the County Probation Officer)
completed the county-wide plan and budget for
public safety realignment, which was approved
by the Board of Supervisors last October. The
key role of Probation under realignment is postrelease
case management and supervision of
lower-level offenders (those released from
prison after having served a sentence for a nonviolent,
non-serious, and non-sex offense) by
creating a new category of supervision called
Post-Release Community Supervision (PRCS).
Included in the PRCS caseload are those clients
released from prison and jail after completing a
term for violation of their parole, and new
offenders who are given split sentences, which
are “County prison” commitments with a
subsequent probationary period or “tail”.
Probation has assumed a leadership role in
providing case management for these
individuals and ensuring that helpful services are
available, with the goal of providing the client the
best possible chance to avoid further negative
contact with the justice system. This could not
occur without proper staffing and effective
interventions developed in the community with
enhanced partnerships.
Juvenile Justice Realignment. A potential
second phase of realignment must be
anticipated and planned for next fiscal year. The
Governor has announced in his proposed
budget his intention to stop the intake of new
juvenile offenders to the Division of Juvenile
Justice (DJJ) effective January 1, 2013.
Recognizing that counties will need resources
and support to secure appropriate placements
and treatment options for additional offenders,
many of whom need mental health and
substance abuse treatment, the State Budget
proposes $10 million from the State General
Fund in FY 2012-13 for counties to begin
planning for this population. These funds are not
budgeted as it is not yet known how they will be
allocated amongst counties. To help with the
transition and prevent the disinvestment of funds
in juvenile justice at the local level, the state has
delayed collection of trigger fees (fees for
continuing to place wards at DJJ beyond the
closure date) for those wards housed in the DJJ.
The Probation Department has begun to
research the facility improvements that would be
required to ready one of the units in the old
Juvenile Hall in the event we must develop a
local alternative to DJJ. We will likely return to
the Board during the summer with
recommendations for implementation of juvenile
justice realignment.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Public Defender’s baseline budget
increases net County cost by $364,513, which is
attributable to the net of salaries and benefits
increases in the amount of $409,809, the loss of
State revenue that previously funded the Clean
Slate Program ($119,464), an increase in State
revenue under Public Safety Realignment (AB
109) in the amount of $193,470, and other
miscellaneous adjustments.
The County Administrator is recommending a
budget that increases County contribution from
the Baseline Budget by $71,880 which, in
combination with anticipated cost savings from
negotiated wage and benefit reductions, will
provide funding for additional attorney positions.
The modifications comprise the following:
1. Personnel Additions - ($442,219)
Add three Public Defender II positions to
adequately staff current caseload level as
assigned by the Superior Court.
2. Additional Public Safety Realignment
Revenue - $61,626
The State has recently informed counties that
it will make twelve rather than nine annual
payments to counties under AB 109,
increasing the County’s Public Safety
Realignment Revenues over Baseline
projections.
3. Personnel Vacancy Factor – $289,608
Provision for a staff vacancy factor is
included, recognizing the savings achieved
from unplanned personnel turnover and the
time required to recruit new personnel.
4. Miscellaneous Adjustments – $19,104
The Recommended Budget includes several
other nominal increases and decreases in
Services and Supplies accounts that net to a
slight decrease of $19,104.

CAO Recommendation
The Office of the Sheriff-Coroner Baseline
Budget decreases net County costs by
$2,052,125, primarily due to increases in
Proposition 172 Public Safety Sales Tax and
other revenues ($2,352,200) and a decrease in
salaries and benefits ($684,194) reflecting high
staff turnover, offset by a net increase in
operating expenses in the amount of $984,269.
The Baseline Budget reflects a decrease of 10
staff positions and $2.3 million in expenditure
and revenue appropriations related to the
elimination of the contract for provision of police
services by the Sheriff to the U.S. Army Military
Ocean Terminal Concord (MOTCO).
The Baseline Budget also relies on a projected
$3.5 million increase in Proposition 172 Public
Safety Sales Tax and additional Public Safety
Realignment (AB 109) revenue. These revenue
increases are offset by the elimination of State
Criminal Alien Assistance Program (SCAAP) and
parole hold funding by the federal government of
$1.2 million and a reduction in revenue from the
contract for custody services with the U.S.
Marshal’s office.
In past years, we have agreed to permit an
unresolved funding gap in the Sheriff’s budget
that we attribute to savings that result from
normal staff turnover – a budgetary vacancy
factor. To avoid personnel reductions and
permit an augmentation to authorized staffing
levels in the new fiscal year, we have agreed to
continue this practice and have increased the
vacancy factor to $4.9 million based upon recent
turnover experience. We recognize, however,
the high level of pressure this places on the
department to manage the filling of unplanned
staff vacancies in a manner that achieves the
$4.9 million savings. We have advised the
Sheriff to continue to recruit aggressively in order
to maximize staffing within authorized levels.
Should the Sheriff’s Office not achieve the
budgeted vacancy factor, we will return to the
Board later in the fiscal year with a
recommendation for a budgetary augmentation.
The Office of the Sheriff requested a budget
augmentation of $13,160,186 and 27 additional
staff positions:
1 Deputy Sheriff-Forensic Supervisor
1 Crime Scene Investigator
2 Sheriff’s Aids
1 Clerical Supervisor
1 Clerk-Specialist Level
2 Clerks-Senior Level
2 Fingerprint Technicians
1 Sheriff’s Fleet Coordinator
6 Sheriff’s Dispatchers
1 Sergeant
1 Sheriff’s Specialist
8 Deputy Sheriffs
While these positions may be justified
operationally, the County is not sufficiently
recovered from the economic crisis to permit
funding of this entire request.
The Recommended Budget represents a $1.3
million General Fund increase from the Baseline
Budget, comprising the following personnel
augmentations:
1. Add eight Deputy Sheriff positions in Field
Operations ($ 1,062,088)
2. Add three Sheriff’s Dispatcher I positions in
the Support Services Bureau ($ 263,217)
Successive years of cost-cutting had severely
compromised patrol services in the
unincorporated county area. In the interest of
safeguarding local communities, restoration of
patrol services has been given a high priority for
funding in the new budget year. The addition of
eight patrol deputies is an incremental step in
rebuilding patrol coverage and improving 9-1-1
and overall response time on service calls.
Dispatch services are augmented pursuant to
new service agreements with outside agencies.
Costs for the recommended additional three
Dispatcher positions are offset by new contract
revenue.
Public Safety Realignment (AB 109).
The 2011-12 State Budget enacted the
realignment of public safety programs from the
state to local governments through the
implementation of the Community Corrections
Grant Program previously authorized under AB
109. 2011 Realignment is funded with a
dedicated portion of state sales tax revenue and
Vehicle License Fees (VLF). The budget fully
funds $500.0 million for local public safety
programs previously funded by the additional
0.15 percent increase to the VLF, which expired
on June 30, 2011. However, the budget plan
does not provide constitutional protections to
counties for the realigned programs. Governor
Brown proposes to place an initiative on the
November 2012 ballot to seek voter approval for
this constitutional protection.
The Community Corrections Partnership
completed the countywide plan and budget for
public safety realignment, which was approved
by the Board of Supervisors last October. The
key role of the Sheriff’s Office is to manage the
incarceration of lower-level offenders in county
jail. The AB 109 detention population comes
from State parole violators and new non-violent,
non-serious, non-sex offenders whose crimes
would have merited a prison sentence prior to
realignment. The current realignment plan
provides for the operation of two additional jail
housing units and an increase in electronic
monitoring capacity by 100 units.
Note: The County Administrator has developed
recommendations based on service level impacts
communicated by the Office of the Sheriff-Coroner. It
is acknowledged that the Sheriff-Coroner is an
elected official and has ultimate discretion on how to
best deploy resources within his department using
appropriations allocated by the Board of
Supervisors.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline Budget was increased from the
current year budget by $130,457, which is
attributable almost wholly to a continuing
downward trend in court revenue collections.
The Recommended Budget reduces
appropriations for capital case defense in the
amount of $403,937. In better economic times,
we have historically budgeted in anticipation of
three to five open capital cases annually.
However, due to the very tight budget
constraints, we are recommending a budget that
anticipates only one capital case for the new
budget year. It should be noted that Superior
Court Programs are mandated and should the
recommended budget prove to be insufficient,
mid-year augmentations will need to be made
from the County’s reserves or through mid-year
reductions in other County programs.
The Recommended Budget also decreases the
provision for judicial benefits by $7,020 due to
the retirement of several judges. Appropriations
are increased by $38,000 for revenue collections
costs and by $5,000 for court-appointed counsel.
These changes result in a net County cost
reduction of $365,937.
The Recommended Budget includes
appropriations in the amount of $15.1 million for
transfer to the State to subsidize the cost of the
local Superior Court, and $2.4 million for court
functions for which the County is financially
responsible under the Trial Court Funding Act
and Public Safety Realignment (AB 109)*. The

General Fund subsidy to the courts for non-Rule
810 court operations includes judicial benefits for
current judges who were serving as judicial
officers in 1997, collection services, court
probation officer services, legal defense
representation in capital cases, and other courtappointed
counsel.
*Note that the Sheriff’s Department earns revenue in
consideration for providing bailiff and security services to
the Court. These costs and revenues are reported in the
County Local Revenue Fund and the Sheriff’s Department
budget.

CAO’s Recommendation
The District’s 2012-13 Baseline Budget reflects
a $4.5 million increase in expenditures. This is
primarily due to another significant increase in
contributions the District must make to the
pension system.
Prior to 2011 the Fire District pension costs were
pooled with other employer members of the
Contra Costa County Employees Retirement
Association (CCCERA). CCCERA depooled
assets and the Fire District is now paying its full
share of pension costs. The impact of depooling
pension assets by employer had the effect of
essentially doubling the District’s safety rate
from 2010-11 (16.3%) to 2011-12 (32.3%). The
safety rate is increasing by another 26% in
2012-13 (to 40.8%). The increase in
expenditures also reflects an increased overtime
appropriation for 2012-13. The District’s 2011-
12 Recommended Budget submission contained
a significant reduction to overtime based on a
plan to de-staff four fire companies. Subsequent
to the 2011-12 budget submission deadline, the
District received a two-year federal staffing grant
in the amount of $6 million. Additionally, the
District’s largest labor group, IAFF, Local 1230,
volunteered to take wage reductions totaling
10%. (Other District labor and management
groups have also taken wage reductions and are
paying for increased portions of their health and
retirement benefits.) These two actions -- the
staffing grant and voluntary wage reductions –
allowed the District to keep the four stations that
were targeted for reductions fully staffed
throughout 2011-12.
The 2012-13 Baseline Budget includes staffing
costs for 29 fire companies. The District has
historically staffed 30 fire companies on a full
time basis. In January 2011, one of the two fire
companies at Fire Station 1 in Walnut Creek
was de-staffed. Since January 2011, the District
has continued to operate with 29 functional
units. However, there were not enough
remaining reserves to balance the 2012-13
budget with a staffing level of 29 companies.
With 29 companies, the District would require
the use of $16.7 million in reserves to balance
the budget. The District’s available reserves for
FY 2012-13 are projected to be $15.7 million
(including the $2.6 million December 2012
Stabilization fund transfer).
Therefore, the District’s 2012-13 Recommended
Budget reflects a $2 million expenditure
decrease. The Department is proposing to meet
the decrease by de-staffing a company at Fire
Station 6 in Concord (the only other station with
dual company staffing). Even with de-staffing
another functional unit, the District will utilize
almost all of its remaining reserves in 2012-13.
In comparison with the 2011-12 Adopted
Budget, the 2012-13 Recommended Budget
also contains reductions in services and
supplies, interagency charges, and fixed assets.
It is important to note that capital expenditures
and other infrastructure needs have been
virtually unfunded for the last several years.
Capital expenditures are primarily needed to
replace aging fire engines, ladder trucks, and
other fire apparatus, as well as light vehicles,
and to make significant repairs to some 40
buildings including 30 fire stations. Continued
failure to fund capital expenditures will ultimately
result in a pent-up capital demand in the future
that will have to be addressed. However, at the
present time, all efforts are being made to
preserve service levels to the maximum extent
possible, which means capital funding needs are
being deferred. Any additional increases in
capital or employee cost drivers will put a further
strain on the District’s limited financial
resources.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline costs reflect a $611,857 decrease from
the FY 2011-12 Budget. This decrease is
primarily in other special departmental expenses
that included fund balance appropriations from
the FY 2010-11 closing. Baseline revenue
reflects no change from FY 2011-12 Budget.
The Recommended Budget reflects an increase
in temporary salaries and permanent wages.
These increased costs are covered with fund
balance.
In addition to the revenues shown here, the
District should begin to receive reimbursement
for services performed from their current Bay
Area Air Quality Management District (Green
House Gas Emissions Reduction) grant in FY
2012-13. The grant will fund various projects for
a total of $123,484.