CAO’s Recommendation
The Department of Agriculture has a number of
Standard Agreements and other revenue
distributions from the California Department of
Food & Agriculture (CDFA) and the Department
of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) as well as pass –
through money from the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA). These
revenue streams continue to be unstable. In
order to prevent layoffs, the Department of
Agriculture has held 1.5 positions vacant,
resulting in $100,951 savings in salaries and
benefits. The Department will continue this
practice until the revenue streams stabilize.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the
Department of Agriculture is balanced while
maintaining current service levels. Any
additional cuts would place unclaimed gas tax
revenue in jeopardy. California Food and
Agricultural Code (FAC) Section 224 (g) states
that counties must maintain a certain level of
County General Fund support or risk the loss of
unclaimed gas tax revenue.

CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost reflects a
$1,150,913 increase from the fiscal year 2013-
14 budget. This increase is due in large part
to estimated salary and benefit costs.
The Assessor’s Office has experienced a high
level of turnover in the past few years resulting
from resignations and retirements. The
Department currently has 35 vacant positions
out of 122 authorized positions, which
represents a 29% reduction in workforce.
Reduced staffing levels make it extremely
difficult for the Department to close the regular
and supplemental assessment rolls in a timely
manner, and make it difficult to meet the
statutory program obligations of the office.
In past years, we have agreed to permit an
unresolved funding gap in the Assessor’s
budget that we attribute to savings that result
from staff turnover – a budgetary vacancy
factor. To avoid personnel reductions and
permit an augmentation to current staffing
levels in the new fiscal year, we have agreed
to continue this practice and have increased
the vacancy factor to $992,913 based upon
recent turnover experience. We recognize,
however, the high level of pressure this places
on the department to manage the filling of
unplanned staff vacancies in a manner that
achieves the $992,913 savings. We have
advised the Assessor to continue to recruit
aggressively in order to maximize staffing
within authorized levels. Should the
Assessor’s Office not achieve the budgeted
vacancy factor, we will return to the Board
later in the fiscal year with a recommendation
for a budgetary augmentation.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline Budget
The baseline net County cost represents a
$394,310 increase over the FY 2013-14
Adjusted Budget.
Salary and benefit costs increased by $439,761
and are mainly due to increases in negotiated
Cost-of-Living-Adjustments, retirement benefits,
and employee group insurance. Other operating
costs increased by $60,494 due to increased
data processing services that support the
ongoing development of automated systems.
Expenditure transfers are estimated to increase
by $30,355.
Revenues are estimated to increase overall by
$75,590
Recommended Budget
The County Administrator is recommending no
reduction to the Auditor-Controller’s baseline
budget. The recommended net County cost will
provide the funding necessary to maintain
mandated services in FY 2014-15.

CAO’s Recommendation
This Budget covers the administration
requirements of the Board of Supervisor’s
operations as well as the costs of membership in
the California State Association of Counties
(CSAC), Association of Bay Area Governments
(ABAG), Urban County Caucus (UCC) and
National Association of Counties (NACO). The
budget also includes electronic support of the
County Code as well as funding for the
Countywide Single Audit.
The large net County cost reduction between the
baseline budget and the current year budget
($1,855,259) is primarily due to budgeting for
CCFutures Fund in the Board Mitigation
Programs Department. The appropriations in
the current year budget are supported by fund
balance and are a source of on-going revenue.
Any available fund balance will be carried over
at the end of FY 2013-14 into FY 2014-15 and
are therefore not included in baseline figures.
The County Administrator is recommending full
baseline funding for FY 2014-15.
Recommended increases include $190,695 due
to salary and retirement cost increases and
$36,000 to support the operations of the 12
Municipal Advisory Councils ($3,000 for each
Council).

CAO’s Recommendation
The recommended budget for Central Support
Services reflects a net County cost of
$16,060,515. This amount will fund the
aforementioned departments, enabling them to
provide the current level of services into fiscal
year 2014-15. Additionally, appropriations were
added to fund facilities maintenance and capital
renewal as well as minor non-capital
improvements, Countywide.

CAO’s Recommendation
General Fund Baseline expenditures reflect a
$491,778 decrease from the current year budget
due to a competitive bidding process that
resulted in two new printers for ballots and
election materials at a cost savings. The
Election Division is scheduled to conduct the
statewide Gubernatorial General election in
November 2014. Salaries and benefits
appropriations are increased accordingly to
reactivate five vacant positions. Not included in
the Baseline Budget are two positions that were
conceptually approved by the Board of
Supervisors in 2013 to implement the voter
Outreach and Education Program; formal
approval for these positions will be sought once
the positions are studied and classified.
General Fund Baseline revenue is projected to
increase by $65,981 over the current year
budget primarily due to a modest increase in
Recorder revenue. The department is still
feeling the effects of revenue that was lost due
to suspended SB 90 and other State
reimbursements for State-ordered services
delivered by the County.
The Clerk-Recorder Division’s negative net
county cost continues to offset a portion of the
Election Division’s net county cost for the
upcoming year, but to a lesser degree than in
prior years as recording volume continues to
recover at a slow pace.

CAO’s Recommendation
Land Development Fund
DCD’s operations are funded primarily through
the Land Development Fund (programs funded
in the General Fund are discussed separately
below.)
DCD’s Baseline budget of $26,833,560 is
increased by $29,121 over the current year
budget from a combination of personnel and
fixed asset increases of $931,476 plus
reductions in expenditure transfers of $45,677,
all substantially offset by decreases in outside
professional services and other costs of
approximately $948,032. Personnel cost
increases in the Baseline primarily reflect the
addition of six positions within the Land
Development Fund during the current year: one
Database Administrator, one Planner I, one
Grading Inspector, one Manager of Applications
and Permit Center, and one Principal Structural
Engineer positions, plus the transfer of one
Clerk-Senior Level position from the
Neighborhood Preservation Program.
The Weatherization program continues to
operate on a smaller scale with the loss of
ARRA and EECBG funding. This loss of funding
is mitigated by receipt of the Bay Area Regional
Network grant, which supports operation of the
Energy Upgrade Program.
The recommended budget reduces expenditures
and revenues from the Baseline by $232,020,
for a net fund change of zero. The reduction is
attributable to the proposed elimination of three
vacant positions in the Weatherization Program,
as it continues to operate on a much smaller
scale in response to the loss of ARRA funding
experienced last year. The recommended
budget of $26,601,540 reflects this staffing
adjustment.
DCD relies entirely on outside revenue sources
(such as construction permits, land development
fees, inspection fees, franchise fees and
intergovernmental revenue) to fund its Land
Development operations. DCD revenues are
closely tied to economic factors affecting
development activities by private parties. While
reasonable assumptions and trends were
considered in projecting DCD revenues for FY
County of Contra Costa FY 2014-2015 Recommended Budget 71
2014-15, actual revenues will depend on several
economic variables. DCD will continue to
closely monitor its revenue trends during FY
2014-15.
General Fund Programs
DCD administers numerous programs that are
budgeted in the General Fund, including Keller
Canyon Landfill Mitigation and Housing
Rehabilitation, which are local discretionary
grant programs, and a variety of federal grant
programs.
DCD’s Baseline and Recommended General
Fund budget is $11,817,765, a reduction of
$3,274,275 from the current year budget. This
significant reduction is attributed mostly to the
drastic cuts being proposed for CDBG funding.
The salaries and benefits costs budgeted in this
fund represent the 2.0 FTEs in Housing
Rehabilitation.
With respect to the two local grant programs
funded by General Fund revenues, the
FY 2014-15 recommended budget for the Keller
Canyon Mitigation program assumes steady
revenue of approximately $1.2 million and
appropriates an equivalent amount for
expenditures.
The Housing Rehabilitation program budget
anticipates a modest reduction in FY 2014-15
due mostly to a reduction of 1 FTE during the
year, bringing the FTE count from 3 to 2. This
staffing adjustment in Housing Rehabilitation
reflects DCD’s continued efforts to reduce costs
so this program can operate at a financially
sustainable level.
Other Special Revenue Programs
DCD administers funds for the Abandoned
Vehicle Abatement Service Authority (AVA)
collection and disbursement of State funds to
the City and County for reimbursement of costs
related to the abatement of abandoned vehicles.
In FY 2012-13 the Auditor redesignated this
County Special Fund as a New Agency Fund.
DCD will continue to administer the collection
and disbursement of State funds to the City and
County.

CAO’s Recommendation
The $10 million contingency reserve was
eliminated in FY 2006-07 after remaining
basically unchanged for 16 years. The County
Administrator’s Office recommended that the
practice of appropriating $10 million for
contingency be discontinued and that the funds
be designated for Contingency on the General
Ledger. The recommendation was implemented
to offset a portion of the County’s $45 million
budget reduction in that year. The
anticipated impact of that recommendation
was that appropriations would no longer be
inflated and annually generated scarce
resources would not be required to balance
them.
The County Administrator reinstated the
contingency reserve in FY 2012-13. General
Fund contingencies include funding necessary
to provide continued County operations
despite economic uncertainties. As a general
rule, a contingency fund should be maintained
at a level sufficient to finance all issues/items
which may occur during the fiscal year, but
were unforeseen during the budget process.
Failure to appropriate a reasonable level of
funding for contingencies is not prudent and
could likely result in a “midyear budget crisis”.
The County Administrator recommends that
the Contingency for General Fund be
budgeted at $4.9 million for FY 2014-15.
Although this amount is significantly lower
than $10 million, it does allow some funding
for: 1) any unforeseen emergency that the
Board may need to fund during the fiscal year;
2) appropriations without a dedicated earmark
to help to rebuild and grow the County’s fund
balance; and 3) appropriations for technology
projects to increase efficiencies and
economies.

CAO’s Recommendation
The fiscal year 2014-15 baseline net County
cost decreased by $3,571,889 from fiscal year
2013-14. The reduction reflects the elimination
of $3,852,733 of restricted prior year fund
balance from CATV franchise fees and an
estimated increase in operating costs, including
salary and benefits of $280,844.
The recommended budget was increased by
$228,492 to reflect two additional positions: one
Labor Relations Manager and one Senior Level
Clerk. The Labor Relations Manager is being
added as part of the reorganization of human
resources department functions. The clerk
position is being added to assist with the
Affirmative Action/Equal Employment
Opportunity program.

CAO’s Recommendation
The baseline net County cost reflects a $49,027
increase over the FY 2013-14 Adjusted Budget.
Salary and benefit costs are increasing by
$82,068 and are mainly due to increases in
retirement costs.
The County Administrator is recommending a
net County cost for FY 2014-15 of $2,400,000,
which will require a reduction of $6,235. This
reduction will have minimal impact on the
County Counsel’s Office operations and will be
absorbed by operational efficiencies and careful
monitoring of office supplies expenses.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline budget reflects no change from FY
2013-14. The budget is estimated based on
prior year trends of assessed valuations. The
actual return-to-source shares are determined
each year in the Fall.

CAO’s Recommendation
The budget includes the most recent West
Contra Costa Healthcare District agreement
impacts adopted in July, 2013. The tax transfer
will be approximately $3 million each year
(dependent upon tax generation) and continue
until $23.1 million is transferred (approximately
FY 2018-19). Each year’s transfer will appear
as a negative net County cost in our schedules.
In the Retirement UAAL Bond fund, FY 2014-15
appropriations were decreased to adjust for the
pay-off of one pension obligation bond in June
2014. The debt service expense is budgeted in
each department as a compensation expense.
Transfers for the Retirement Litigation
Settlement Debt Service are also budgeted in
each department as a compensation expense.
This debt will be retired in 2024. We do not
anticipate issuing Tax Revenue Anticipation
Notes (TRANs) in FY 2014-15.

CAO Recommendation
The Recommended Budget for the Department
of Information Technology for FY 2014/15
reflects no increase in net County cost because
all cost increases are charged out to service
recipients. Expenditures are increased by
$105,408 from the Baseline, reflecting the
addition of one Information Systems
Programmer Analyst position in February 2014
to support the Peoplesoft Payroll Project.
Recommended expenditures are $1,082,931
higher than the Current Year Budget, due mainly
to a combination of increases in compensation
costs, and appropriations for the replacement of
aging equipment, computer licenses, hardware
and software maintenance, and manufacturer
annual cost increases.
User fee rates charged to departments are
increased by 4.7% from the current year rates to
offset the recommended expenditure increases.
A General Fund allocation of $95,000 is
recommended to offset unreimbursed costs
related to the implementation of the East Bay
Regional Communications System.

CAO’s Recommendation
In the past, the Recommended Budget for
General Fund departments relied on significant
increases in General Purpose Revenue to offset
increases in the cost of doing business.
Normally, the most significant increases in
revenue from year-to-year are due to increased
assessed valuation on current secured property
tax. Over the past few years, the economic
downturn has eliminated growth in assessed
valuation, significantly reduced interest rates,
and greatly impacted Supplemental Property
Tax revenues. In the past two fiscal years,
assessed values have begun to experience
growth. Although the State Board of
Equalization has announced an inflation factor of
less than one-half of one percent* (1.00454) for
FY 2014-15, the County Administrator’s Office is
cautiously optimistic that assessed value growth
will be at least 5%. The 5% figure compares to
current year growth of 3.45% and 0.86% growth
in FY 2012-13. The inflation factor increase in
base year value is limited to 2% by California
Constitution, Article XIII A, section 2(b).
It should be noted that Recommended General
Purpose Revenues include $10 million in
transfers from the Tax Losses Reserve Fund for
deferred facility maintenance projects. This
extra $10 million is not a permanent source of
funding.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline budget for fiscal year 2014-15
reflects a net decrease of $804,926 from the
current year. The reduction is due mainly to the
removal of restricted, prior year fund balance
rebudgeted in fiscal year 2013-14 of $1,475,035
for Benefits Administration. Salary and benefit
costs are estimated to increase by $245,273.
Services and Supplies increased by $359,202 to
pay for a Labor Relations Attorney and
additional IT support for payroll. Revenue
decreased by $65,634 due to a reduction in the
A87 cost allocation for Personnel Services.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline costs for salaries and benefits are
increased over the current year budget due to
proposed cost of living increases and increased
retirement costs. Baseline services and
supplies are decreased to reflect one-time
purchases in 2013-14 of equipment, computers,
and materials. Baseline costs for other charges
are reduced due to decreased facilities
maintenance costs and information technology
and telecommunication costs. Baseline Fixed
Assets are decreased due to one-time
appropriations for security gates, self-check
machines, and computer equipment in 2013-14.
The Library has estimated an increase of 5% in
property tax revenue, which will enable the
Library to absorb increases to salaries and
benefit costs.

CAO’s Recommendation
Public Works increased the fiscal year 2014-15
General Fund baseline budget by a net of
$2,326,477. The increase reflects increased
salary and benefit costs for the department as
well as increases to fixed costs such as utilities,
insurance and building maintenance.
The General Fund divisions of Public Works are
Road Construction, County Drainage
Maintenance, Purchasing, Fleet Services,
General County Building Occupancy, Outside
Agency Services, Facilities Maintenance, Print
and Mail Services, Resource Recovery, and
Public Works.
Most of the General Fund costs for the
department are recovered through charge-outs
to outside agencies, other County departments
and Special Revenue funds. The exceptions to
this are some of the costs for the Purchasing
division as well as the costs for General County
Building Occupancy.
The Fleet Internal Service Fund increased
revenues and expenditures by $742,427. The
budget was adjusted to reflect salary and benefit
cost increases plus anticipated operations costs
– such as vehicle repairs – and corresponding
revenue from billings and revenue transfers.
County of Contra Costa FY 2014-2015 Recommended Budget 137
The Road Fund Budget decreased by a net of
$11.6 million to reflect the elimination of prior
year fund balance. Revenue increased by $8.9
million to reflect anticipated federal funds for the
San Pablo-Rodeo Creek Bridge Replacement,
the Marsh Creek Road Safety Project, the
Alhambra Valley Road Safety Project and phase
II of the Vasco Road Project.
The Land Development Fund, which supports
engineering functions, was decreased by a net
of $549,628. The net fund cost decrease
reflects the removal of prior year fund balance.
Revenues were increased by $229,800 for
anticipated revenues generated from land
development permits.
The Airport Enterprise fund, which supports
airport operations and capital development at
the Buchanan and Byron Airports increased
expenditures and revenues by $293,635. The
baseline budget increase reflects increased
salary and benefits costs as well as new and
ongoing airport improvement projects that
receive federal reimbursement.
Public Works continues to respond to the
growing challenges by proactively identifying
areas in its operations that can be modified,
streamlined, and/or restructured for better
service and cost efficiency, as well as
maintaining operations within their baseline
budget.

CAO’s Recommendation
Baseline Budget
The baseline net County cost represents a
$52,387 increase over the fiscal year 2013-14
Adjusted Budget. Salary and benefit costs are
anticipated to increase by $8,917, due to salary
and benefit costs. The Department is
committing to reducing operating costs by
$4,000. However, estimated revenues are
expected to continue to decrease by $50,000 in
fiscal year 2014-15.
As foreclosures have stabilized, the declining
number of new delinquencies has limited the
amount of service costs and redemption fees
that could potentially be collected. At the same
time, property values have remained low,
resulting in decreased property tax revenues.
Finally, investment income is at a record low, as
interest rates hover well south of 1%. The Office
has entirely mitigated this reduction in revenue,
however, with offsets to budgeted non-salary
expenditures.
Recommended Budget
The County Administrator is recommending no
reduction to the Treasurer-Tax Collector’s
baseline budget. The recommended net County
cost will provide the funding necessary to
maintain mandated services in fiscal year 2014-
15.

CAO Recommendation
FY 2014-15 Baseline Budget expenditures
decreased slightly compared to the FY 2013-14
Budget. This reduction is due, in large part, to
the completion of a project for the remodeling of
the office space. Baseline revenue decreased
slightly from the FY 2013-14 Budget. The slight
increases in salary and benefit costs are offset
by the reduction in expenditures.
The FY 2014-13 Recommended Budget for the
Department of Child Support Services maintains
current service levels. There are no reductions
from Baseline

CAO Recommendation
Significant changes occurred in the Employment
and Human Services Department (EHSD) that
are reflected in the FY 2014-15 Recommended
Budget. These include:
• Departmental reorganization
• Expansion of Medi-Cal services as a
result of the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
• Creation of the only County run
Covered California Call Center
• A slight reduction in the Community
Services Head Start contract
• Completion of the “Office of the Future:
project
EHSD transferred responsibility for determining
CalFresh (aka Food Stamps) eligibility and
Medi-Cal eligibility from the Adult and Aging
Services (AAS) Bureau to the Workforce
Services (WFS) Bureau. Responsibility for the
General Assistance program and the Indigent
Burial program was transferred from WFS to
AAS. The associated expense and revenue
were also transferred and there was no net
effect on the Department’s Baseline or
Recommended budget.
WFS anticipates growth in services in the
CalWORKs, CalFresh and Medi-Cal programs.
Additional staff will determine eligibility and
manage cases. State and Federal revenue will
also increase. The associated expense and
revenue increase will balance any impact on the
Baseline or Recommended budget.
EHSD successfully staffed and opened one of
three Covered California Call Centers – and the
only County operated call center. This added
204 FTE and $14.9 million in the FY 2013-2014
budget, including startup costs and $14.4 million
in the Baseline and Recommended budgets.
The Community Services Bureau (CSB) “recompeted“
for the Head Start contract in Contra
Costa County. The Monument Corridor portion
of the contract was awarded to a local nonprofit
corporation. This resulted in a slight reduction in
the program.

CAO Recommendation
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget funds
expenditures at $20.1 million below the baseline
level. The County General Fund appropriation
has been reduced by $20.1 million from the
Baseline funding request and $674,449 less that
the current year (FY 2013-14).
The Health Services Department budget is
based on what is currently known regarding
federal and State revenue that will be available
in the next fiscal year. The assumptions
regarding State revenues are based on the
2014-15 fiscal Governor’s Budget and may
change as the California State Legislature
considers the Governor’s recommendations.
The Department plans to return to the Board of
Supervisors in the fall with recommended
budget adjustments should funding from either
the State or the federal government significantly
change.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for all
programs and funding sources in the Health
Services Department totals $1.217 billion
dollars. Of this amount, $84,500,000 or 6.9% is
County General Fund, including a $26.7 million
contribution to the Hospital and Clinics and $3.7
million to the Contra Costa Health Plan. The
balance of $1.132 billion or 93.1% in program
costs is funded through outside revenue.
The 2014-15 FY Recommended Budget
maintains the General Fund support for the
Department at the 2013-14 level. Current
service levels may be impacted depending upon
final budget actions at the State and Federal
level.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Department’s baseline budget fully funds
on-going services for FY 2013-14. Total
expenditures have increased by $22,935 from
the current year largely due increases in
permanent salary and benefit costs.
The Recommended Budget has been reduced
by $73,404 to meet the CAO Target. This
reduction is necessary due to the elimination of
one time State funding. To reach the CAO
Target, the Department will delay filling one
vacant position. However, there is legislation
pending, SB 101, which, if passed, will restore
this one-time funding on a permanent basis.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Animal Services Department FY 2014-15
Baseline Budget increased by 2.3% compared
to the FY 2013-14 Budget, primarily through
increases in salaries, benefits and operating
expenses.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects
a 2.9% increase in personnel expenses and a
1.3% increase in services and supplies from the
previous year to maintain the current level of
service.
The Department will implement a variety of
strategies to increase revenues to offset the
increased expenses. These include increasing
animal licensing revenue, through utilization of
new scanning software to upload rabies
certifications from veterinary offices, automated
mailing of multiple notices to new and existing
dog owners, and online purchasing of animal
licenses. In addition, the Department anticipates
an additional $39,049 in City revenue in FY
2014-15. City Contract revenues are determined
on a capitated basis. A slight increase in Contra
Costa population, as determined by the
California State Department of Finance, resulted
in an increase in City Contract revenue.
Revenues resulting from these sources and a
slight increase in County General fund allocation
are projected to be sufficient to accommodate
the increased expenses.
In addition, the Department anticipates salary
savings of at least $100,000 resulting from
normal attrition of staff and recruitment
timelines.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for
Animal Services is balanced while maintaining
current service levels.

CAO’s Recommendation
The County currently and has for many years
contracted with the Contra Costa County Bar
Association to provide conflict legal defense
services through private attorneys. Costs had
been trending upward due to an increase in the
number of homicide and capital cases referred to
the Bar, many of which involved multiple
defendants requiring separate legal
representation. In 2010, the County negotiated a
new contract with the Bar that incorporated
improved cost controls and presumptive
maximum fees, which have helped to reduce
overall program costs.
The Recommended Budget provides for the
continuation of services with the Bar. Due to a
continued rise in caseloads referred by the
Public Defender throughout fiscal years 2011-12
and 2012-13, the Recommended Budget
includes a continuation of increased
appropriations estimated to be required to reach
a final disposition for the bulk of those cases.
The level of service for this program is mandated
pursuant to constitutional requirements. Should
the recommended appropriations prove
insufficient to fund the requisite level of defense
services, it will be necessary to shift resources to
this budget center from other programs or
County reserve.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2014-15 Baseline Budget increases
expenditure appropriations by $1.46 million, or
4.4% and estimated revenue by $0.34 million, or
1.8%, resulting in an increase to net County cost
of $1.12 million.
The Recommended Budget increases net
County cost by $429,245, which funds a portion
of the baseline increase over FY 2013-14. The
remainder of the difference is achieved by
establishing a vacancy factor at $685,087 within
the department budget to account for cost
savings associated with positions that are
currently or will become vacant during FY 2014-
15.
The District Attorney’s office continues to work
aggressively on new crime prevention initiatives
in addition to managing responsibilities
associated with AB 109. The County
Administrator’s Office acknowledges this
continued effort and believes that the
Recommended Budget reflects a balance
between continued funding of new initiatives and
preserving mandated, mainline prosecution
responsibilities within the District Attorney’s
Office.
Note: The County Administrator has developed
recommendations based on service level impacts
communicated by the District Attorney’s Office. It is
acknowledged that the District Attorney is an elected
official and has ultimate discretion on how to best
deploy resources within his Office using
appropriations allocated by the Board of
Supervisors.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline Budget is decreased from the
current year by $2,803,145 primarily due to the
removal of one-time appropriations in the
amount of $2.1 million from Law & Justice
Systems Development and prior year fund
balance in the amount of $731,000 from the
Vehicle Theft program. In anticipation of a
reduced state allocation of AB 109 Public Safety
Realignment funding, the Baseline Budget also
reduces, by half, the funding for a Business
Systems Analyst position that was established in
2012-13 for systems support of the public safety
realignment program.
The Recommended Budget augments the
Baseline Budget by $1,083,518 for the planned
implementation of case management systems
for the Probation, District Attorney and Public
Defender departments. The budget
augmentation is funded with a redirection of the
balance of lease/purchase financing for the
abandoned Justware case management system.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2014-15 Baseline Budget increases
expenditure appropriations by $2.82 million or
4.3% and decreases estimated revenue by
$1.85 million or 6.3%, resulting in an increase to
net County cost of $4.68 million. The two
primary drivers of baseline increases to net
County cost are (1) salary and benefit expenses
and (2) anticipated reductions in federal
assistance, namely Title IV-E pre-placement
administration claims for youth at imminent risk
of foster care placement. Alongside other
counties, the department is actively working with
the California Department of Social Services to
identify and correct systemic issues in
determining allowable cases and activities.
The Recommended Budget increases net
County cost by $3.31 million, which funds a
significant amount of the baseline increase over
fiscal year 2013-14. The remainder of the
difference is achieved by establishing a vacancy
factor at $1,366,830 within the department
budget to account for savings associated with
positions that are currently vacant or will
become vacant during FY 2014-15. While it
balances the department budget, this will create
a significant hardship to the department and
may result in increases of banked cases and in
the number of cases the department can actively
supervise.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Public Defender’s Baseline Budget
increases net County cost by $204,312, which is
wholly attributable to net increases in salary and
benefit costs.
The Recommended Budget increases net
County cost by $704,312, which reflects the
addition of four positions. The Office of the
Public Defender has seen substantial growth due
to two major factors. The addition of Public
Safety Realignment (AB 109) programs and
responsibilities outlined on the previous page
creates a critical need for additional support
staff. Secondly, there has been a steady
increase in felony referrals to the department,
with an increase of 9.3% in the last year alone.
The following additions to the management and
support staff will oversee and facilitate the
expanded programs and additional
responsibilities: Assistant Public Defender and
Information Systems Specialist I, both in the
Administration unit; Investigator I in the
Investigations unit; and Clerical, Experienced
Level in the Adult and Criminal unit.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2014-15 Baseline Budget increases
expenditure appropriations by $14.7 million, or
7.1% and estimated revenue by $3.9 million, or
2.8%, resulting in an increase to net County cost
of $10,830,410.
The Recommended Budget includes a
$6,588,242 increase in net County cost over FY
2013-14. This amount funds a significant portion
of the Baseline Budget. The remainder of the
difference to balance the budget, $4,242,168, is
achieved by establishing a vacancy factor within
the department budget to account for savings
associated with positions that are currently or will
become vacant during FY 2014-15.
In past years, we have agreed to permit an
unresolved funding gap in the Sheriff’s budget
that we attribute to savings that result from
normal staff turnover – a budgetary vacancy
factor. To avoid personnel reductions and permit
an augmentation to authorized staffing levels, we
have agreed to continue this practice and have
established the vacancy factor at $4.2 million for
fiscal year 2014-15. We have advised the Sheriff
to continue to recruit aggressively in sworn
classifications in order to maximize staffing
within authorized levels. Should the Sheriff’s
Office not achieve the budgeted vacancy factor
due to favorable recruiting and retention of sworn
personnel, we will return to the Board later in the
fiscal year with a recommendation for a
budgetary augmentation.
Note: The County Administrator has developed
recommendations based on service level
impacts communicated by the Office of the
Sheriff-Coroner. It is acknowledged that the
Sheriff-Coroner is an elected official and has
ultimate discretion on how to best deploy
resources within his department using
appropriations allocated by the Board of
Supervisors.

CAO’s Recommendation
The Baseline net expenditures were decreased
from the current year budget by $748,040 due
primarily to a reduction in appropriations for
outside attorney and witness fees to reflect prior
year experience. New policies adopted by the
Court and negotiated in the County’s conflict
defense contract have helped to curb costs that
had been escalating in prior years. Court
revenues have experienced a decline in the past
two years: an 8% decrease in FY 2013/13 and a
projected 13% decrease in FY 2013/14 based on
six months of receipts. Nevertheless, Baseline
revenues are increased by $101,960 over the
current year budget based on mid-year
projections.
The Recommended Budget funds the Baseline
budget resulting in a net County cost of $10
million. In better economic times, we have
historically budgeted in anticipation of three to
five open capital cases annually; however, due
to the very tight budget constraints, we are
recommending a budget that anticipates only
one capital case for the new budget year. It
should be noted that Superior Court programs
are mandated and should the recommended
budget prove to be insufficient, mid-year
augmentations will need to be made from the
County’s reserves or through mid-year
reductions in other County programs.
The Recommended Budget includes
appropriations in the amount of $15.1 million for
transfer to the State to subsidize the cost of the
local Superior Court, and $2 million for court
functions for which the County is financially
responsible under the Trial Court Funding Act
and Public Safety Realignment (AB 109)*. The
General Fund subsidy to the courts for non-Rule
810 court operations includes judicial benefits for
current judges who were serving as judicial
officers in 1997, collection services, court
probation officer services, legal defense
representation in capital cases, and other courtappointed
counsel.
*Note that the Sheriff’s Department earns revenue in
consideration for providing bailiff and security services to
the Court. These costs and revenues are reported in the
County Local Revenue Fund and the Sheriff’s Department
budget.

CAO’s Recommendation
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget provides
for the continued funding of 23 fire stations.
Historically, the Contra Costa County Fire
Protection District (District) has staffed 30 fire
companies in 28 stations. In January 2011, one
of the two fire companies at Fire Station 1 in
Walnut Creek was de-staffed and in July 2012,
one of the two fire companies at Fire Station 6 in
Concord was also de-staffed. In November
2012, the District had a ballot measure
(Measure Q) on the General Election ballot to
augment District revenue for the continued
provision of fire suppression services. The ballot
measure did not receive the necessary twothirds
super-majority it needed to be successful,
resulting in the closure of the following four fire
stations in January 2013: Fire Station 4 in
Walnut Creek, Fire Station 11 in Clayton, Fire
Station 12 in Martinez, and Fire Station 16 in
Lafayette. In July 2013, Fire Station 87 in
Pittsburg was also closed as a measure to
reduce the 2013-14 operating deficit.
The District is primarily funded by property tax
revenues. In 2013-14, the District experienced
an approximate 5% growth in assessed
valuation, its first growth in assessed valuation
since FY 2007-08. During the previous fiscal
year the District received an additional boost in
revenues due to the dissolution of RDAs, the
reallocation of CSA-EM1 (Measure H) funding,
and federal grant awards. In fact, the District
ended FY 2012-13 with a moderate operating
surplus due to many of these funding sources
being one-time in nature.
Prior to 2011, the District’s pension costs were
pooled with other employer members of the
Contra Costa County Employees Retirement
Association (CCCERA). The de-pooling of
pension assets by employer has had a
significant impact on the District beginning in FY
2011-12, when the Fire Safety Tier A rate
essentially doubled from 16.35% to 32.32%. In
September 2012, the Governor signed into law
the Public Employee Pension Reform Act
(PEPRA), which among other things, created
new retirement tiers for new hires effective
January 1, 2013. Because the new tiers apply
only to new hires and because the District loses
the 9% employee pickup of the employer
retirement cost with the new safety tier, it is not
expected that the District will realize cost
savings in the short term from the passage of
PEPRA.
In addition, in February 2013, the CCCERA
Board approved a decrease in the investment
return assumption of 0.5%, from 7.75% to
7.25%. This decrease adds an additional,
significant burden to already escalating pension
costs for the District.
A summary of the afore-mentioned rate
increases are outlined below:
In addition to direct employer retirement costs,
the District is making payments on a 2005 issue
of pension obligation bonds through 2022.
As noted in prior reports, capital expenditures
and other infrastructure needs have been
virtually unfunded for the past several years.

The 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes
appropriations for critical station repair projects
and the replacement of a portion of the District’s
light duty vehicle and heavy fire apparatus
fleets.
It is important to note that, despite many years
of tight fiscal controls and revenue enhancement
efforts, the 2014-15 Recommended Budget
balances only by using nearly $10 million in
operating fund reserves. This is consistent with
projections reported to the Board over the past
several months. Even with favorable revenue
projections for future years, the District will
continue to face significant operating deficits
through FY 2017-18 based on current estimates.
The County Administrator continues to work with
the District to monitor finances and operations
throughout the year and report to the Board
should there be a need to amend the
Recommended Budget.

CAO’s Recommendation
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects
a decrease of $510,966 in expenditures,
including a slight decrease of $14,968 in
operating expenditures from the FY 2013-14
Budget. Recommended revenue reflects a
$2,354 decrease from the FY 2013-14 Budget.
These items have resulted in the District
proposing the use of $43,390 in fund balance to
balance the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget.