The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $69,635 or 16% in revenues and $164,325 or 5% in appropriations
when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has increased $94,690 or
3.5%.
The increase in revenues is primarily related to fees, reimbursement for ERP personnel costs from the Accumulative
Capital Outlay fund and one-time revenues of $27,000 from the Automation special revenue fund. The increase in appropriations
is primarily related to reduced intrafund abatements due to less accounting services provided to the District
Attorney, Social Services. Public Health, Mental Health and Child Support. Salaries and benefits increased $64K related
to compensation and retirement costs. This increase would have been significantly higher, however the Auditor’s office
is recommending deleting two positions resulting in savings of $252K as well as reduced extra help of $66K.

The Recommended Budget for the Board of Supervisors includes no change to revenues and a decrease of $281,163 or
16% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased
$281,163 or 16%.
The decrease in appropriations is comprised of reductions to employee salaries and benefits (-$208,756), services and
supplies (-$63,486), fixed assets (-$9,500), and a small increase in intrafund transfers ($579).
The Chief Administrative Office recommends the Board consider rescinding Board Policy D-5, Board of Supervisors Departmental
Budget and Expense Reimbursement, consolidate the District budgets into a single budget unit, and establish
salaries and benefits appropriations at the estimated cost of current permanent employees. Following adoption of Policy
D-5, beginning in FY 2009-10 salaries and benefits for each district were budgeted to include costs associated with
each Supervisor, and the cost of each Supervisor’s Assistant at Step 5 of the salary schedule plus 10% of base salary so
that each district received the same level of funding. This resulted in over budgeting in those districts where actual employee
costs were lower. This change results in a budget reduction of $149,025. Further, in an effort to meet targeted
budget reductions, appropriations reflect the voluntary waiver of salary from the supervisor in District III resulting in a
savings of $98,838.
Services and supplies are reduced by $63,486, including decreases in liability insurance ($29,791), professional services
($20,000), minor equipment ($8,050) and transportation/travel ($4,600). An appropriation of $2,000 for each district is
recommended for individual board member expenses such as county owned cell phone use and mileage reimbursement,
a decrease from $2,500 per district in previous years. Further, it should be noted that with the revisions to salaries
and benefits identified above, no funding is provided for leased office space.

Fund Type 10 – General Fund
The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $52,281 or 3.5% in revenues and a decrease of $47,289 or
less than 1% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is
decreased by $99,570 or 1.5%.
The increase in revenues is primarily related to increased charges for service due to higher facility requests than
anticipated. The decrease in appropriations is comprised of several factors. Salaries and benefits are increasing by
$275K. This number would have been much larger but the department is recommending the deletion of 4 FTE’s, in the
areas of government affairs (2 FTE’s), custodial (1 FTE) and stores/courier (1 FTE). The budget also includes reduced
extra help of $70K, primarily related to custodial services. Services and supplies have decreased $359K primarily related
to insurance ($101K); utilities ($50K); building maintenance ($40K), and staff development ($24K).
The Department is requesting an add/delete of a Building Maintenance Worker with a Building Operations Technician to
true up an existing underfill. This change results in cost savings for the department. The department is requesting the
deletion of 2 vacant CAO Administrative Analysts, 1 custodian (anticipated to be vacant due to a retirement), and 1
Storekeeper/Courier that will result in a reduction in force. These changes result in a net savings of approximately $283K
annually.
Service Impacts
Changes within central mail/stores will result in reduced mail and stores delivery for departments. Departments located
in the government center will need to coordinate pick up and drop off of mail to the mailroom instead of direct delivery
from the courier. Mailroom staff will deliver U.S. mail, interoffice mail, and stores orders to remote sites only.
Reductions in custodial staff and extra help will result in reduced daily custodial activities to include trash and bathroom
only, eliminate the Building C recycle programs, less frequent light bulb replacement, and some facilities such as Main
Library may go to every other day schedule. Reduced CAO analyst staffing primarily affects public information requests,
intergovernmental affairs and special projects.
Fund 13 – Accumulative Capital Outlay
Capital Facilities Workplan
The table below includes the preliminary Facilities Capital Workplan. The total workplan budget is $19,274,969. This
amount includes the land acquisition for a public safety facility and the courthouse road. This budget also includes the
projected FENIX remaining budget of $3.8M as well as $6.8M for implementation of the VANIR study including a large
portion of the Building A&B renovations.


Fund Type 10 - Economic Development, Parks , River & Rubicon Trail Grants
The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $312,739 or 36% in revenues and a decrease of $548,924
or 16% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is
decreased by $861,663 or 34%.
For the Rubicon program, the budget is increasing ($313K) primarily due to an increase grant funding ($313K), with a
corresponding increase in appropriations tied to Rubicon activities and salary and benefits. There is no Net County Cost
associated with the Rubicon program.
The Recommended Budget for Economic Development has been calculated using 51% of actual Transient Occupancy Tax
(TOT) revenues for FY 2013-14; however, this amount will be revised in the Addenda process to reflect 51% of the actual
TOT revenues for FY 2014-15, once that amount is known. Additionally, the Recommended Budget does not include the
carry forward of any unspent funds from the current or prior fiscal years for the Economic Development program.
Recommended appropriations for Economic Development include funding for the Business and Economic Development
Manager and support staff; $766K for promotional contracts; and $115K for continuation of programs to benefit
veterans and facilities that serve and honor veterans. Professional services are decreased by a total of $201,584, or
9.2%. Promotional contracts are funded at current contract rates through September 2015 (the end of the contract
term). The Recommended Budget also provides funding to extend the current promotions contracts through June 2016
with a 4.1% rate reduction for the extended 9-month period. This term extension will align the contract terms with the
County’s fiscal year cycle. Additional impacts of budget reductions include the elimination of the Micro Grant program
($40,000), elimination of the Web Portal Project ($75,750 unspent from the budgeted $100,000 project), and
terminating grant consulting services contract at the end of the contract term (July 31, 2015). No funding for special
projects or contributions is included in the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Economic Development.
The River budget has a decrease in revenues and appropriations of $45K. Decreased appropriations are primarily in
Special Projects (River Master Plan completed in FY 2014-15) offset with a slight increase in salaries and benefits. As
such, less operating transfers from the River Management Special Revenue fund are needed as a form of Revenue.
There is no no Net County Cost associated with the River program.
Staffing information for the Economic Development program is included in the Chief Administrative Office.
Fund Type 11 - Housing, Community & Economic Development (HCED)
Fiscal Y ear 2015-16 is the second year that the Economic Development budget includes the Housing, Community and
Economic Development (HCED) budget. Revenues and Expenditures are decreasing by $1.5M. The HCED budget
includes a $63K General Fund contribution that supports General Plan implementation measures related to affordable
housing. These reductions are primarily related to less anticipated principal loan/notes repayment on HCED loans,
partially offset by an increase in Federal Grant funding.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $22,975 or 5% in revenues and a decrease of $92,882 or
3% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased
$69,907 or 3%.
The change in revenues represents a minor reduction in charges to departments for legal services based on current year
actual activity. The decrease in appropriations is comprised of salary savings of $7,565 for the currently vacant Chief
Assistant County Counsel, the Sr. Deputy County Counsel who is currently on acting assignment with the Chief Administrative
Office, and the elimination of one vacant Legal Secretary I/II position. Additionally, County Counsel has reduced
services and supplies by $80,021 which is primarily related to the completion of a billing and case management software
system upgrade in FY 2014-15 and the reduction of contracted legal services. The department is not requesting any
fixed assets at this time.
In an effort to minimize the service level impact of temporary position vacancies and the elimination of the 1.0 Legal
Secretary position County Counsel has adjusted attorney workloads and continues to identify and implement operational
efficiencies.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $2,827,027 or 6% in revenues and a decrease of
$3,070,439 or 7% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. The Net County Cost has decreased
$243,412 or 12%.
The Human Resources Division receives no revenues. Revenues for the Risk Management internal service fund are set
based on full cost billing for Risk programs and have decreased $2,827,027 from FY 2014-15 along with corresponding
program cost decreases (primarily in the health insurance program). Funding for the Liability and Worker’s Compensation
programs is based on actuarial analysis and recommendations of Bickmore Risk Services and Consulting.
Appropriations are decreasing $3,070,439 primarily due to reductions in costs for the County’s health insurance programs.
Salaries and benefits are decreasing based on savings for the Director of Human Resources for 6 months of the
fiscal year, and a vacant 0.5 FTE Human Resources Technician that will be deleted.
Professional & specialized services for Human Resources and Risk Management are recommended at $2,294,879 and
are decreasing $578,207 due to reductions in projected costs for legal services related to liability programs and third
Party Administrator agreements (-$154,299), and completion of contracts related to the County’s cultural assessment in
FY 2014-15 (-$257,488). Professional & specialized services for Human Resources in FY 2015-16 include:

The Recommended Budget includes the deletion of 1.0 FTE Principal Risk Management Analyst and the addition of 1.0
FTE Risk Management Technician to true up the department’s personnel allocation for a previously authorized underfill
at the Risk Management Technician level, and the deletion of a vacant 0.5 FTE Human Resources Technician. Additionally,
salary savings for the Director of Human Resources is included for 6 months of the fiscal year.
Impact of Budget Reductions:
Reduced salaries and benefits related to the 6 month vacancy of the Human Resources Director position will result in
less direct program oversight and deletion of 0.5 FTE Human Resources Technician will result in slower response times
to departments requesting assistance for personnel matters and processing of personnel recruitments.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $31,100 or 88% in revenues and a decrease of $393,955 or
5% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. Overall, Net County Cost is decreasing by
$425,055 or 5%.
Historically, Information Technologies direct-billed each department for mainframe, network and PC support services.
Beginning in FY 2014-15, these support charges were no longer direct-billed to departments or recorded in the
Information Technologies budget. Instead, the charges are now processed through the County’s A-87 Cost Allocation
Plan which is developed and administered by the Auditor-Controller’s Office.
IT continues to direct-bill departments for application and web programming support on an as-requested basis. These
charges are a reflected as revenues in Charges for Services (Class 13) at $66,600 and Intrafund Abatements (Class 73) at
$225,000 and are projected based on current year actual activity levels.
In order to achieve targeted budget reductions, salaries and benefits for the Information Technologies Department are
decreasing by $154,774. Salary reductions include the elimination of the following vacant positions:

Additionally, the Recommended Budget includes the deletion of 1.0 FTE System Support Specialist and the addition of
1.0 FTE Information Technology Technician Trainee/I/II/Sr. to true up the department’s personnel allocation for a
previously authorized underfill at Information Technology Technician level.
Services and supplies are decreasing overall by $528,421 primarily from reduced costs for telephone services under the
new CalNet 3 contracts with AT&T ($100K); reduced telephone equipment costs as a result of the completion of the
Voice Over Internet Protocol project in 2014 ($100K); and reduced software costs for Microsoft licensing and the
elimination of the FAMIS system support costs ($291K).
Fixed assets are recommended at $159,500 and consist primarily of network, server and disk storage components that
are needed to replace or upgrade end of life equipment and to maintain network security.

Impact of Budget Reductions:
The Director of Information Technologies position will remain vacant in FY 2015-16. Leadership and oversight of the
Information Technologies Department will continue to be provided by the Chief Technology Officer and Assistant IT Director.
Deletion of other vacant positions will have a number of impacts across the various IT functions. In general, the
IT department will move into a “maintenance mode”. Without the appropriate staffing levels or investments in technology,
the implementation and development of newer technologies will cease (with the exception of the current
FENIX project). It is not feasible to maintain the current environment and develop new technology with reduced resources.
The following summarizes the current state of each functional area within the IT department:
Desktop Support: In recent years, the County has moved to a primarily centralized IT model for network and desktop
support. This model provides more cost effective and standardized services for County departments. Currently, the IT
department supports approximately 1900 computers with a desktop support staff of 9 FTEs (including a supervisor). The
industry standard for desktop computer support is 1 analyst for every 125 to 150 computers. The current ratio in the IT
department is 1 analyst for every 238 computers, significantly higher than the industry standard. Insufficient staffing for
desktop computer support results in delayed response times to helpdesk calls and a backlog of helpdesk job tickets and
new computer set up/install requests. This ultimately results in a reduction in the efficiency and productivity of staff in
County departments that rely on centralized IT support.
Application & Web Support/Consulting Services: The application support team is currently overtasked with maintaining
and modifying older countywide legacy systems and department software applications. As a result the team is unable to
gain newer and more relevant programming language experience that is needed to migrate and upgrade to more modern
platforms and applications. Limited staffing in this area has also resulted in insufficient cross training and succession
planning for staff that support critical programs such as the County’s financial and payroll systems.
Server/Network Support:
The server/network team (including telecommunications) is currently at capacity supporting existing systems. Any reductions
in staffing for the server support function would have a negative impact on the implementation of projects currently
in development as well as future initiatives. County-wide deployment of the new ERP solution (FENIX) will shift
workload from the mainframe to the Windows server environment, requiring continuous performance monitoring and
optimization in order to ensure adequate system usability. Development of a “SharePoint” infrastructure to foster greater
collaboration and secure information sharing throughout the County will require a time investment of resources that
is not possible given the current staff workload. The implementation of a “Virtual Desktop” model will lead to greater
efficiencies in managing desktops in the field but also increases the work on the servers at the back end of that model.
Additionally, when systems such as land management and permitting move from the mainframe platform to Windows/
Intel based systems, the IT department will need a corresponding shift in resources from legacy system support to server/
network support. This will present a significant challenge due to the lack of capacity for developing the needed skill
sets for such a migration (as noted in the Application & Web Support function above).

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $191,204 or 8% in revenues and a decrease of $193,219
or 6% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased
by $2,015 or .2%.
The decrease in Net County Cost for the Registrar of Voters is due to a reduction in appropriations. The reduction is related
to an $110,000 decrease in extra help employee funding (e.g. short-term personnel help during elections). The
decrease is due to the Registrar of Voters being on a different election cycle (e.g. General Election in 2014 vs. Primary
Election in 2016) and the division budgeting closer to its spending during similar elections from the past (e.g. other presidential
primary elections). If certain election variables change during next fiscal year (e.g. legislature mandates one-stop
election sites before Election Day or absentee ballots for all county registered voters instead of a voter having to request
an absentee ballot) the division might have to come back to the Board of Supervisors for a contingency transfer to cover
the new election mandates. The division is closely following state legislation to see if it will be affected. In addition, services
and supplies decreased by approximately $141,500. This decrease is generally due to the department not needing
as many services and supplies during the upcoming primary election as compared to the prior general election.
The Recorder Clerk includes a Net County Cost increase of approximately $138,300. This increase is due to two factors.
One, salaries increased as a result of the five percent cost of living adjustment. Two, document recording fee revenues
were reduced to align the budgeted revenue estimates to actual collection amounts over the last two fiscal years. The
decrease in recording fees is mostly due to less property recordings (e.g. refinancing recordings etc.).
For the first time since 2003 and in most cases 1993, the Recorder Clerk’s recommended budget includes increases to
the following fees.

The above fees are proposed to increase due to many factors (e.g. align the fees more closely with regional and similar
sized counties etc.). However, the main reason for the increases is due to the cost of completing the related tasks for the
fees.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $175,197 or 9.6% in revenues and a decrease of $20,362 or
0.7% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased
$195,559 or 17%.
The increase in revenues is primarily related to a proposed increase in fees that have not been adjusted in many years.
Proposed fee increases include e-check return fee, Vacation Home Rental violation hearing fee, Vacation Home Rental
registration fee, Vacation Home Rental renewal fee, and a minimal increase to the Business License fee. Anticipated
revenue from these increases is projected to be approximately $130,000 annually.
The department requested the addition of a Sr. Accountant to look at ways to increase revenue collection in areas such
as transient occupancy Tax (TOT), Vacation Home Rental compliance and delinquent tax collections. Although the enhanced
collection efforts may result in additional revenues to the County, the Chief Administrative Office is not recommending
this position at this time. In keeping with the County’s Strategic Investment Plan, the Chief Administrative
Office recommends the department first work with Information Technologies to identify ways to enhance collection
efforts through improved use of technology, including potential solutions through the ERP, before any additional staffing
is considered.
The Treasurer – Tax Collector met the net county cost reduction primarily through the proposed increase in fees as noted
above. In addition several line items in services and supplies and costs associated with IT programming have been
reduced.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $269,681 or 10% in revenues and an increase of $573,370
or 7% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is increased
by $303,689 or 5%.
The increase in revenue is primarily related to the new grant award from the Office of Emergency Services to provide a
collaborative effort between law enforcement and the Center for Violence-Free Relationships to provide response to
victims of domestic violence.
The increase in appropriations is primarily related to increased salaries and benefits ($940K). Services and supplies are
decreasing $199K primarily in general liability insurance ($44K), medical/sobriety exams ($30K), contract services ($29K),
and law enforcement equipment ($27K). Other charges are increasing $50K due to pass through grant funding to other
law enforcement agencies. Interfund abatements are decreasing $220K due to additional funding for welfare fraud investigations.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of two (2.0) vacant Deputy District Attorneys as well as one add/delete
of a Department Analyst for a vacant Accountant Auditor to better support the departments fiscal needs. These changes
result in approximately $250,000 in savings in salaries and benefits.

The Recommended Budget decreases appropriations and Net County Cost by $4,848 for
a total Net County Cost of $75,299.
The membership and focus areas of the Grand Jury changes from year to year. The FY
2015-16 Recommended Budget includes a 6.25% decrease in general fund appropriations
based on Board direction to reduce spending.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $208,226 or 4% in revenues and an increase of $533,431 or
3.3% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is increased
by $325,205 or 3%.
The increase in revenue is primarily related to an increased use of funding coming from special revenue accounts such as
SB678 funding, AB109 funding and SLESF-JJCPA funding totaling $164K. In addition the budget included an increase in
Proposition 172 funding of $46,153.
The increase in appropriations is primarily related to salaries and benefits ($534K). $109K of this increase is related to
worker’s compensation costs. The overall increase in salaries and benefits would have been significantly higher; however
the department has left a number of vacant positions unfunded in order to meet the 6.25% mandated budget reduction.
The use of salary savings accounts for an approximate $873K reduction from the Probation Department’s salaries
and benefits budget.
The Probation Department has requested two personnel allocation changes which are included in the budget as part of
the Probation Department appropriation reductions. Total FTE’s for the department remain at 131.0.
Delete 1.0 FTE Assistant Chief Probation Officer;
Add 1.0 FTE Deputy Chief Probation Officer;
Delete 1.0 FTE Sr. Legal Secretary;
Add 1.0 FTE Legal Secretary I/II
Services and supplies increased slightly by $102,947, primarly due to liability insurance ($49K). Other cost increases are
in the areas of staff development, transportation costs and professional services. Costs associated with the care of juveniles
fluctuate based on population. The budget has been adjusted based on anticipated population in the areas of
food, and the medical care of juveniles. Other charges decreased $26K due to an anticipated decrease in contracted
ranch/camp commitments. Intrafund transfers decreased slightly by $8,598.
Overall, the Probation Department budget as included for the FY 2015-16 year maintains services in all areas. In final
review the Department had limited ability to make budget reductions in any area other than salaries and benefits without
the elimination of services. Probation will closely monitor their budget status throughout the year to ensure required
mandates are met.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $21,253 or 6.4% in revenues and a decrease of $144,372 or
3.8% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased
by $165,625 or 4.8%.
Revenue has increased slightly for Prop 172, Public Safety Sales Tax ($11,253). In addition the department worked with
Superior Court Judge Dylan Sullivan, the court Executive Team and County law and justice partners to apply for and receive
a Recidivism Reduction Fund Court grant in the amount of $10,000
Appropriation decreases are primarily related to salaries and benefits ($105K). The special projects line item includes
funding to move the Public Defender office in Placerville to a new location ($60K). This one-time expense is carried over
from FY2014-15 because the anticipated new location fell through. The department has occupied the current location
for approximately 10 years, but has now outgrown the space. Suitable office space is difficult to come by in the Placerville
area. The department is working with Facilities Management to identify new space.
The budget includes the elimination of one filled Legal Office Assistant I/II in the Placerville office as a budget cut towards
meeting the 6.25% budget target directed by the Board of Supervisors. The deletion of this position will result in
a reduction in force. The department anticipates that the “ACES” (Affording the Community Excellent Service”) case
management system being programmed for the Public Defender’s office by the County Information Technologies Department
will allow the attorneys and other staff to function effectively without this clerical position. The Public Defender
also cut services and supplies by $36,036 and did not include any fixed asset purchases in the budget. The budget
plan for FY 2015-16 maintains the investigation positions added in the FY 2014-15 budget which is critical to the effectiveness
of the Department.

The Recommended Budget represents a decrease of $443,176 or 3% in revenues and a slight decrease of $103,133 or
0.2% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. Overall, the Net County Cost is increasing
slightly by $340,043 or 0.8%.
The largest source of revenue for the Sheriff’s Office continues to be Proposition 172 - Public Safety Sales Tax revenue.
The CAO’s office closely monitors this revenue stream and if any adjustments are necessary, they will be made in the
addenda process.
Reductions in revenue in Federal: Other is primarily related to Homeland Security Grant funds. Homeland Security funding
will be added in the addenda process or by agenda item when the grant is awarded. A reduction of $620,399 represents
a reduction for special revenue funds coming into the Sheriff’s operating budget. This funding may be adjusted in
the addenda process once more funding information is received from funding agencies.
Salaries and benefits increased overall by $4,036,236, mostly due to Board approved salary increases and increases in
cost applieds relating to labor. The Sheriff, in cooperation with the Chief Administration Office, has agreed to further
reduce salaries and benefits by $2,900,000 in order to reduce the overall net county cost of the Sheriff's Office. The
amount was determined by looking at historical vacancy rates and assumes a vacancy rate of approximately 5.6 %. This
reduction in salaries and benefits does not result in any positions being eliminated or reductions in force. However, the
Sheriff will fill vacancies based on public safety needs and the CAO will return to the Board with any budget transfer requests,
if necessary. The budget transfer requests may consist of moving savings from other Sheriff’s Office budget areas
such as services & supplies or requesting an increase in appropriations from the Board.
In cooperation with the Chief Administration Office, the Sheriff reduced services and supplies by $1,199,079 or almost
13%. In addition, the Sheriff reduced fixed assets by $19,130 when compared to the FY 2014-15 budget. In discussing
budget reduction impacts with the Sheriff, it is difficult to predict the amount or extent of impacts since they are often
event driven.
The Sheriff is requesting the following changes in staffing:
 Delete 1.0 Correctional Food Services Supervisor;
 Anticipated Savings of $78,000
A new classification of Food Services Manager will be created to consolidate two Food Services Supervisor positions
down to one Food Services Manager position. The Department has been having difficulty filling a vacant Food Services
Supervisor position since August 2014. Since August, the remaining Food Services Supervisor has managed food ordering
and day to day operation of both jail facilities. During this time, the Department has been able to make changes that
they feel can be sustained over time. Adding the Food Services Manager will allow for better continuity and streamlined
operation between the two jail facilities. This new classification and allocation change will be brought to the Board of
Supervisors as a separate agenda item before September 2015 to put this plan into place. For now, the Department is
eliminating 1.0 FTE vacant Correctional Food Services Supervisor.
 Delete 1.0 Work Program Officer;
 Add 1.0 Sheriff’s Technician
 Anticipated Savings of $7,000
The Work Program Officer position will be vacant as of July , 2015. At that time, the Department would like to eliminate
the single position classification and replace it with the Sheriff’s Technician classification. This change results in a small
savings to the Department.
Fund Type 11 – Jail Commissary
The Jail Commissary budget is projected at a total of $1,025,143. This budget is completely offset by revenue from the
Inmate Welfare Trust account. There is no Net County Cost associated with this program.

The Recommended Budget for the Court Maintenance of Effort represents a decrease in revenue of $223,082 or 16%
and a decrease in appropriations of $786,448 or 25% from the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, there is an
overall decrease in Net County Cost of $563,366 or 32%.
The Court facilities budget with Department 20 continues to reflect the full year funding for the County Facility Payment
(CFP) as required by AB1491.
The appropriation for the conflict panel includes funding for ten attorneys, seven on the west slope and three in Lake
Tahoe. The budget also includes $10,000 to cover the cost of any criminal grand jury expenses should a panel be called
during the year.

The Recommended Budget represents an increase $17,542 or 2.0% in revenues and an increase of $9,954 or 0.8% in
appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost decreased by
$7,588 or 1.6%.
The change in revenue reflects an increase in funding for small farm inspections (based on three year cycle) and noxious
weed funding, both through the Sierra Nevada Conservancy, offset with a decrease for the Sudden Oak Death (SOD)
program ($31,478) as identified during the mid-year FY 2014-15 budget update. Funds from the State for SOD activities
have been greatly reduced due to no positive SOD finds over the past two years. As such, the State has transitioned the
County’s status to non-infested and non-regulated within the County. Department staff will continue to look for signs of
SOD during regular inspections, however only State requests for SOD inspections will be reimbursed. The estimated Unclaimed
Gas Tax funding amount for FY 2015-16 is $273,421 and is based on the actual amount received in FY 2014-15.
Appropriations remain relatively flat with a slight increase of $9,954. Salaries and benefits are increasing $55,371, largely
offset by a decrease in services and supplies ($38,160), and other smaller reductions (totaling $7,257). Extra help employees
utilized for weed eradication and similar duties are largely funded through State, Federal, and local grants totaling
$204,572 for FY 2015-16.
Service Impacts
In order to meet the 6.25% reduction target set by the Board, the Department is recommending a decrease in funding
for a contract with the USDA for Wildlife services that will likely result in citizens needing to contract for pest control
services with private professional pest control operators. Staff will explore options for either funding this contract entirely
or locating like services to assist resident.

Within the General Fund programs in the Transportation Division, the Recommended Budget represents an increase of
$397,701 or 32.2% in revenues and an increase of $285,276 or 15% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15
approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreasing by $112,425 or 16.9%.
County Engineer
The Recommended Budget for the County Engineer includes an increase in appropriations of $294,069 and an increase
in revenues of $395,001 resulting in a decrease in Net County Cost of $100,932. Net County Cost for this program is
$478,605. The increase in revenue is related to an increase in projected activity for developer funded work, offset with
an increase in appropriations related to consultant contracts for engineering work that is anticipated to outpace staff
availability for such work.
Cemetery Operations
The Recommended Budget for Cemetery operations includes a decrease in appropriations of $8,793 and an increase in
revenue of $2,700 resulting in a Net County Cost decrease of $11,493, for a Net County Cost of $72,617. This decrease is
due to an increase in salary and benefits of $5,800 offset by a decrease in services and supplies ($14,200) primarily related
to decreased professional service contracts for cemetery maintenance costs. Revenue is projected to increase based
on a projected increase in plot sales coupled with a slight increase in fee amounts tied to a fee schedule review currently
underway.
Special Revenue Fund – Fund Type 11
The Recommended Budget represents a decrease of $19,519,410 or 20.1% in revenue and appropriations when compared
to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. The budget does not include a General Fund contribution for FY 2015-16
($500,000 for the road maintenance program in FY 2014-15).
The Special Revenue Fund budget is comprised of Road Fund Operations, Road Capital Improvement Program, Road
District Taxes, Erosion Control, Placerville Union Cemetery, and Special Aviation. The chart below details the total revenues,
appropriations and use of fund balance included in the Recommended Budget for FY 2015-16.

The use of Road Fund - fund balance for the recommended budget is increasing by $602,529 or 10% compared to the
approved FY 2014-15 budget. This increase is related to the CIP program ($240,914) and additional various operational
increases for the Transportation Division ($361,615). The use of Fund Balance is a one-time revenue source and the
division will need to identify new revenues or sustainable savings to fund operations in the long term. Long-term financial
health of the Road Fund appears to be a concern in the near future unless significant changes are made within the
Division. Gas Tax revenue has declined significantly and long-term solutions are needed to structurally balance the Road
Fund.
Road Fund Operations
Road Fund Operations includes the Maintenance Division, Transportation Planning and Land Development, and Engineering
functions. The Recommended Budget includes a decrease in revenues of $1,321,943 and a decrease in appropriations
of $733,196 when compared to the current year approved budget. The reduction in revenue is primarily
attributable to a reduction in the allocation of Local Tribe Funding contributions that will only be partially re-budgeted in
FY 2015-16 per Board direction on March 31, 2015 ($1.25M for Road Maintenance activities; $1.25 to be “saved” for the
Diamond Springs Parkway project). This amount is down from the $2.5M allocated to the Road Maintenance program in
the FY 2014-15 approved budget. Additionally, Highway Users Tax/Gas Tax is being reduced ($1.4M) partially offset with
an increase in Regional Surface Transportation Program (RSTP) from the State ($273K).
Appropriations are reduced primarily related to salary savings ($102K), reduced services and supplies ($914K) related to
less road maintenance contracted work, and fixed asset reductions ($458K). Large items on the Capital Asset purchase
list include a Thermoplastic hot Pot and Cart, Rotary Snow Plow (carryover), Road Paint Striper Truck (carryover), Dump
Truck with Hook Loader, Pull Broom and Falcon Asphalt Hot-Box Recycler with 4-foot trailer.
There is no General Fund contribution to the road fund included in the Recommended Budget which represents a decrease
of $500K from FY 2014-15. This reduction is consistent with the Board direction to reduce the overall General
Fund budget.
Within the General Fund, Public Utility Franchise Fees are utilized to fund half of the NPDES program as well as Road
Maintenance activities. It is important to note that the Public Utility Franchise Fees (PUFF) are a discretionary source of
revenue and can be spent on any County function. The table below summarizes the recommended use of these funds in
FY 2015-16, and represent a $69,000 or 6.9% increase in total PUFF revenue.

Road Fund Capital Improvement Program (CIP)
The Recommended Budget for the Road Fund Capital Improvement Program (CIP) represents a decrease of $18,833,835
in revenues and appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. This budget fluctuates depending
on the Board approved CIP, as well as with the availability of funding. Funding and appropriations are consistent with
the Proposed 2015 CIP and is based on a per project basis.
Example of Major projects scheduled for construction during FY 2015-16 include:
 U.S. 50/Missouri Flat Road Interchange Improvements - Phase 1B.2
 U.S. 50/Silva Valley Road Parkway Interchange – Phase 1
 Gold Hill Road Overlay
 Silva Valley/Serrano Parkway Traffic Circulation Improvement Project
 Ice House Road Surface Rehabilitation
 Tahoe Basin Overlays (Black Bart Avenue, Barbara Avenue and Martin Avenue)
 Class II Bikeway on Green Valley Road
 Hollow Oak Drainage Improvements
 Cold Springs Road Realignment
 Salmon Falls Road at Glenesk Lane – Realignment
 Green Valley Road at Weber Creek – Bridge Replacement
 Pleasant Valley Road at Oak Hill Road Intersection Improvements
Erosion Control Program
The Tahoe Environmental Improvement Program (EIP) is included in the division’s Proposed 2015 CIP program and the
budget is being submitted consistent with that document. The Recommended Budget represents a decrease of $159,798
in revenues and appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. This budget fluctuates depending
on the Board approved CIP, as well as with the availability of funding. The Tahoe program is funded through available
grant funds primarily USFS, CMAQ, CTC, and TRPA mitigation funds. There is no cost to the General Fund for this program.
Projects scheduled for construction include:
 Tahoe Hills Erosion Control Project
 Montgomery Estates Area 3 Erosion Control Project
 Lake Tahoe Boulevard Erosion Control Project
 Sawmill 2B Bike Path and Erosion Control Project


Special Districts provides for the activities of County Service Areas 2, 3, 5, and 9, Zones of Benefit (ZOB), and the
Georgetown Cemetery Zone. Areas and zones are established to provide road and drainage maintenance, lighting, cemetery
services and other localized services to a specific area. Special Districts is primarily funded by taxes and special
assessments to benefiting parcels.
The Recommended Budget represents an increase of $142,336 or 3.5% in revenue and appropriations when compared
to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. This increase in appropriations is primarily due to the net effect of decreased fixed
asset appropriations ($366K) related to a one-time purchases in FY 2014-15 (Grader), an increase in retirement of debt
to the General Fund for the Grader ($69K), and increased charges from Road Fund staff to perform work on drainage
projects within the drainage ZOB’s ($124K) and a increase in professional services ($217K) for the distributed among
CSAs 2, 3, 5, and 9 housed within CDA. Revenue increases are primarily related to the use of Fund Balance increasing
($346K).
Airports /South Lake Tahoe Transit – Fund Type 31
The Airports are included in what is referred to as an Enterprise Fund. In governmental accounting an Enterprise Fund is
defined as a fund that provides goods or services to the public for a fee that makes the entity self-supporting.
Both the Placerville and Georgetown Airports continue to require General Fund contributions to sustain operations.
Staff continues to explore alternatives to reaching sustainable operations including a possible fee increase, alternative
staffing patterns, and capital improvements to provide additional hangers. A fee study is currently underway and is anticipated
to be brought before the Board for consideration in the Summer/Fall of 2015.
The Recommended Budget represents a decrease of $477,139 or 22.9% in revenues and appropriations when compared
to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. The total revenue includes a General Fund contribution of $96,344, a reduction of
$172K from FY 2014-15. This change is primarily related to the removal of the Placerville Airport waterline project from
the 2015 CIP book as this project will require further discussion prior to implementation. Additional savings are seen in
Salaries and Benefits ($16K) as the result of utilizing some Airport staff for other DOT billable work primarily in drainage
ZOB’s, and designations of Fund Balance was reduced ($204K), along with a reduction related to professional service
contracts tied to Airport capital improvements. Revenue reductions are seen through Federal revenue ($154K) due to
the timing of Airport capital projects, and a reduced General Fund contribution for the delayed Placerville Airport waterline
project and less use of fund balance ($106K).
Fleet Services manages the planning, acquisition, and replacement of County vehicles, as well as the sale or disposal of
surplus vehicles and manages the fleet pool. Additionally, this unit provides auto maintenance and repair services for
County vehicles. Fleet Services receives funding primarily from charges to County departments to recover costs of maintaining,
operating, and replacement of the fleet.
The Recommended Budget represents an increase of $284,948 or 16.3% in revenues and appropriations when compared
to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. This budget includes an appropriation for the purchase of 56 replacement
vehicles (9 carried over from FY 2015-16), of which 19 are for the Sheriff’s Department, for a total cost of $1,774,000.
These vehicles are anticipated to exceed the replacement target mileage by December 2015. Increased revenue from
the Air Quality Management District to fund the incremental cost of upgrading 17 vehicles from gasoline powered to
hybrid technology is recognized ($119K) along with increased charges for services related to faster depreciation of vehicles
due to increased mileage driven ($163K). There is a like increase in appropriations for vehicle depreciation, along
with increased OMB A-87 charges ($40k) and increased appropriations for contingency ($92K).
Staffing Changes
Overall, the Transportation Division had a net zero change to FTE’s (static at 160.4). However there were several
“add/deletes” where one position was removed and another added to better meet the operational needs and budget of
the Division. The revisions are as follows: Add 1.0 Sr. Engineering Technician - Delete 1.0 Assistant in Civil Engineering,
Add 1.0 Highway Maintenance Worker I/II/III – Delete 1.0 Highway Maintenance Worker IV. Staff is looking at opportunities
to address budgetary restrictions at the Airports on an ongoing basis. For FY 2015-16, 0.2 FTE for each of the three
allocations in Airports (1.0 Airport Operations Supervisor, 2.0 Airport Technicians) will be funded through work done on
drainage ZOB’s, although the entire FTE’s reside within the Airport unit.

The Recommended Budget for FY 2015-16 for the Development Services Division includes numerous programs that are
organized within three subgroups. These subgroups include; Development Services (including building services, planning
services, commercial grading and the planning commission), Long Range Planning (LRP), and Administration
(including the CDA Director’s office, overall CDA Administration, and Code Enforcement). The budgets for these programs
are included in the Development Services Division budget.
The Recommended Budget for Development Services represents an overall increase of $1,521,268 or 15.1% in revenues
and an increase of $945,452 or 6.8% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result,
the Net County Cost has decreased $575,816 or 14.9%.
Increases to revenues are primarily related to operating transfers in the Agency Administration group from the CSA #10
Solid Waste fund, for the purchase of the new permit processing system (replacing LMIS) that will include an electronic
plan check component ($1.1M). Additional revenue increases are tied to increases in charges to developers for staff and
consultant work on environmental impact reports ($498K) and from the Missouri Flat Master Circulation and Funding
Plan (MC&FP) account for phase 2 of the project ($299K). Partially offsetting these revenue increases are decreases related
to less funding from developers tied to specific plan funding agreements ($328K) and reduced revenue from decreased
development permit fee projections ($92K).
Expenditures are increasing primarily related to the purchase of the permit processing system replacement as noted in
the revenue section above ($1.1M), salary and benefit increases ($279K) tied to the 5% salary increases per labor MOU’s
partially offset with salary savings, along with reductions in professional services for contracts associated with Long
Range Planning activities ($655K) due to a shift in workload and completion of several major projects.
The Recommended Budget includes fixed assets totaling $100,704, an increase of $3,079, for the purchase of; one document
scanner for agency wide use, one document scanner for the building file room, replacement of 16 desktop computers
as part of the replacement lifecycle, replace 3 aging laptop computers, 3 new tablets for the Environmental Management
Division for field use to track treatment sites, 5 new tablets for use by field inspectors in Development Services,
and replace two police radios for the Code Enforcement unit.
Service level impacts associated with the recent budget reductions are expected. These impacts are expected to include
increased wait times when applying for permits, delays in plan checking, delayed project inspections and delayed and/or
reduced availability for code enforcement responses.
Staffing Changes
The Department is requesting several staffing changes. Administration would like to add 1.0 Department Analyst, Development
Services would add 1.0 Assistant/Associate Planner and delete 2.0 Senior Planners (one as an add/delete), and
Long Range Planning would remain static. Overall allocations would remain at 105.4 after all requested revisions.

General Fund programs include: Administration, Environmental Health, and Hazardous Materials—CUPA. The Recommended
Budget represents an overall decrease of $444,969 or 23.6% in revenues and $117,401 or 6.2% in appropriations
when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. The Net County Cost increased from zero to $327,568.
The General Fund programs within the Environmental Management Division have historically been funded in part with
solid waste franchise fees. These fees are estimated at $941,000 for FY 2015-16, are discretionary and can be utilized to
fund any County costs. The FY 2014-15 budget included $275,000 of these fees in Department 15 to fund countywide
programs with the remaining $710,000 funding Environmental Management programs (split between Fund Type 10 and
12). Due to the discretionary nature of this revenue stream, all estimated solid waste franchise fees are being recognized
in Department 15 for FY 2015-16 to help fund countywide programs, including Environmental Management. Because
these funds are now recognized in Department 15, Environmental Management now has a Net County Cost (funded
with Franchise Fees). The Division will continue to identify cost savings measures to reduce Net County Costs and increase
operational efficiencies.
Decreases in revenue are attributable to not recognizing franchise fee revenue ($500K), reduced federal revenue from
the removal of a one-time grant ($78K), with partial offsetting increases in permit revenue ($53K) due to increased activity,
and operating transfers ($57K) tied to realignment fund revenue transferred from the Health and Human Services
special revenue fund.
Reductions in appropriations are primarily in salary and benefits ($150K) due to salary savings, and various small decreases
in services and supplies (total $30K).
CSA #10 & CSA #3 – Fund Type 12
The non-general fund programs within Environmental Management include South Lake Tahoe Vector Control/Snow Removal
(CSA #3), Household Hazardous Waste/Incident Response (CSA #10), Solid Waste (CSA #10), and Liquid Waste
(CSA #10).
There is no Net County Cost associated with these programs; however as noted in the Fund Type 10 discussion above,
the Division has traditionally received solid waste franchise fees. These fees are now being recognized in Department 15
for countywide programs as they are discretionary. Revenues and appropriations have increased $557,672. This increase
in revenue is primarily associated with an increased use of fund balance ($674K). Appropriations are increased
primarily due to increased salaries and benefits due to the redistribution of Divisions staff and 5% salary increases
($347K), along with significant reductions in professional services ($1.1M) due primarily to reductions in contracts for
the Liquid Waste program based on actual appropriations from the 5 prior years. Additionally, operating transfers increased
significantly ($1.3M) primarily due to a one time transfer to the CDA Administration and Finance group for the
purchase of a replacement for the County’s aging Land Management Information System (LMIS - $1.1M). CSA 10 has a
very large fund balance (approximately $11M). A large portion of this fund balance is attributable to discretionary franchise
fees that have accumulated over several years. The purchase of the Land Management Information System is being
funded with a portion of this fund balance.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $3,740 in revenues and
appropriations. There is no Net County Cost for the Fish and Game Commission.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $20,541 or 29% in revenues and a decrease of $316,917 or
19% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased
by $337,458 or 21% .
The increase in revenue is entirely related to charges for map check fees and parcel map inspections due to an increase
in projected development activity, as well as an assumed 5% fee increase during the fiscal year. The Surveyor will be
reviewing the current service related fees as most fees have not been updated for over a decade.
Overall appropriations are decreasing by $316,917. Salaries and benefits are decreasing by $243,305. This decrease relates
to the elimination of two GIS Analyst positions, along with transferring out one Sr. GIS Analyst position, whose primary
work duty is managing the Land Management Information System (LMIS) for the County. The deletion of the two
GIS Analyst positions will result in a Reduction in Force (RIF) process as these are currently filled positions. Options for
re-locating the LMIS supporting GIS analyst position are being explored at this time. The bulk of the work performed by
this positions is directly related to the Community Development Agency. By re-locating the position either within CDA or
within Information Technologies, time spent on CDA activities will be billed to funding sources other than the General
Fund resulting in Net County Cost savings. For FY 2015-16, the budget continues to include $10,000 for extra help to
address seasonal map checking work and to assist GIS staff with data entry work associated with General Plan Implementation
efforts. Services and supplies are decreasing by $47,869 primarily related to reduced GIS related licenses
($10,300) and outside surveyor contract reductions ($9,750) along with other small reductions. Intrafund transfer appropriations
are decreasing by $25,742 primarily due to the removal of cost applied charges for Information Technology
Program Services ($26,000).
The Surveyor has requested one fixed asset, a laptop computer (end of life replacement), totaling $1,761.
Service Level Impacts
Service level impacts are expected as a result of budget reductions in the Surveyor’s office. These impacts are primarily
focused on reduced or unsupported GIS related services to County departments, residents and others needing GIS related
services. The outward looking GIS program available to the public, GotNet, will no longer be supported. Likewise,
departments that utilize the GotNet system will see a decrease in usage for the system when it becomes outdated and
unreliable (such as Building Services, Planning and Transportation as part of the permit intake process).

The Department of Child Support Services is 100% funded through the State Department of Child Support Services
(DCSS). The funding source is 66% Federal funds and 34% State funds. The Child Support budget is separated into
Administration and EDP/MNO (Electronic Data Processing – Maintenance and Operations) categories and funded as
such. Administration funding is intended to support all Child Support operations, such as salaries, benefits, vehicles,
rent and utilities, supplies, and contracts. EDP/MNO funding is provided to support the Child Support Automation Program,
IT staff, network costs and other automation related expenses. The Department’s revenues are a reimbursement
for authorized expenditures by the State DCSS. Expense claims are submitted on a quarterly basis. The DCSS
does not cost the El Dorado County General Fund any operation dollars. DCSS is zero county cost.
DCSS also has the responsibility of managing the County Revenue Recovery Division. The Revenue Recovery Division is
revenue-producing and is mainly funded by the courts and other El Dorado County departments. The permanent FTE
count in Revenue Recovery will remain at 9 FTEs. However, several Child Support staff members spend a portion of
their time providing support and oversight of the division in various capacities. Staff completes detailed time studies
and any costs incurred for Revenue Recovery activity will be transferred accordingly.
The Recommended Budget for Child Support Services and Revenue Recovery represents an overall increase of
$132,083 or 2% in revenues and appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. All costs are
offset by revenues – there is no Net County Cost for the department.
Increased revenues are from federal and state allocations for Child Support programs ($104,026) and charges for service
related to revenue recovery services to county departments and other agencies ($28,057).
Several increased costs are affecting the department’s spending plan including lease expenses, salaries, workers compensation,
and the department’s allocation of OMB A-87 costs. In order to mitigate these increases, the department
has reduced expenses where possible and included an estimated 3.5% salary savings based on historical vacancy rates
for existing employees and savings from three specific positions that will be held vacant. Due to the transferring of our
inbound call center call volume to another Local Child Support Agency (LCSA) in 2014, coupled with more efficient case
processing, the Child Support Administrative area plans to keep one Child Support Specialist, one Legal Clerk, and one
Accounting Technician position vacant and utilize that salary savings, as well as an anticipated 3.5% salary savings for
existing employees, to cover increases in costs. The department and the Chief Administrative Office will carefully monitor
salary and benefit expenses during the fiscal year to ensure they remain within budget.

The total Recommended Budget for the Public Health Division of the Health and Human Services Agency is $47,129,926
with a Net County Cost of $1,470,296 for Animal Services and a General Fund contribution $4,677,278 for other programs.
The General Fund contribution is approximately $81,700 lower when compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
Animal Services – General Fund
The Recommended Budget for Animal Services represents a decrease of $130,927 or 9.5% in revenues and an increase
of $33,039 or 1% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 Approved Budget. As a result, the Net County
Cost increased by $163,966 or 12.5%.
The decrease in revenues is primarily due to a reduction in revenue from the City of South Lake Tahoe based on prior
year actuals and work performance indicators. El Dorado County has a contract with the City of South Lake Tahoe to
provide animal services.
Appropriations primarily increased due to personnel costs (salaries, retirement, etc.) with the cost of living adjustment.
Public Health Fund Type 11
The Recommended Budget for Public Health programs has decreased by $385,147 or 1.6%. This decrease is primarily
due to a reduction in the use of Tobacco Settlement Program funds. In Fiscal Year 2014-15 those funds were used for
one-time costs in Mental Health and Public Health, including moving expenses. In addition, Marshall Medical Treatment
Center received a one-time contribution of $480,000 in Tobacco Settlement Program funds for its Cancer Treatment
Center. However, the fund type saw some costs rise like indirect costs and salaries and benefits due to the cost of living
increase. The division plans to use approximately $815,000 in fund balance, of its total $5,972,000, to help pay for the
increases. The budget includes a $4,677,278 General Fund contribution for various programs.
Since the FY 2014-2015 Adopted Budget, the Public Health Division added the Multipurpose Senior Services Program
(MSSP) from the Community Services Division. After analyzing the program’s current duties, it was decided that more
collaborative opportunities could be found within the Public Health Division. For example, the MSSP provides services
that prevent premature institutionalization by offering comprehensive physical and psychosocial assessments and provides
ongoing case management services. These services align with many of the programs within Public Health.
National Public Health Department Accreditation
On March 3, 2015, the Board of Supervisors approved the concept of pursuing Public Health Accreditation, as well as
authorized HHSA to negotiate a contract with a consultant to complete the community health assessment, a required
component of Public Health Accreditation. Public Health budgeted the use of fund balance of $425,000 in Fiscal Year
2015-16 to cover expenditures related to pursuing the accreditation.
The Public Health Division is developing a plan for the use of fund balance based on outcomes from the community
health assessment. These funds could be utilized to pilot projects that would help serve targeted populations and help
Public Health fulfill unmet community needs. However, these funds could be jeopardized long term due to Public Health
Realignment being used for non-mandated Public Health functions. For example, approximately $704,000 in Public
Health Realignment funds are used to cover the costs of the California Forensic Medical Group contract that provides
medical care in the jails and juvenile halls. Medical care to inmates/wards in jails and juvenile halls is not a State mandate
of Public Health.

Recommended Staffing Changes
The Public Health Division is requesting 3.95 additional FTEs compared to the FY 2014-15 Approved Budget. Of the 3.95
FTEs, 2.5 FTEs are related to the transfer of the MSSP program to Public Health. HHSA is also allocating .45 FTE of an
assistant director of health services to the Public Health division due to time study results. The division is requesting the
addition of a supervising public health nurse position that will provide leadership and oversight to the Agency nursing
staff. With the inclusion of MSSP into Public Health, the Agency is moving toward an agency wide nursing division model
that will encompass all nursing personnel. An additional supervisor position will enable the Agency to provide nursing
specific supervision and training to all nursing personnel. Currently, some existing nursing positions do not have any clinical
oversight. The supervising public health nurse position will cost a total of approximately $136,500 (this figure includes
all budgeted salary and benefit costs).
CSA #3, CSA #7 and Ambulance Billing – Fund Type 12
The Recommended Budget for the CSA programs has decreased by $303,784 or 1.4%. Revenues for CSA #3 and CSA #7
pre-hospital medical services and ambulance billing programs include charges for services (primarily ambulance services),
assessments and taxes, and contract payments from the Miwok Tribe. The decrease in revenue is primarily due to
reduced fund balance of approximately $423,800 offset with reduced appropriations. Property tax revenues are estimated
to remain the same compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. Revenues from ambulance service charges are
expected to remain unchanged from the FY 2014-15 budget.


The total Recommended Budget for the Mental Health programs is $35,107,370, an increase of $770,481 or 2% when
compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. There is a General Fund contribution of $16,510 for County match requirements.
Traditional Mental Health Programs
The Recommended Budget for Traditional Mental Health Programs is $12,327,116 and represents an overall increase of
approximately $194,200 or 1.6% when compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. The increase is primarily due to
higher charges for services (e.g. inpatient long-term placements or hospitalizations). The Traditional Programs plan to
use approximately $331,000 of its approximately $1,670,000 fund balance to pay for inpatient long-term placements or
hospitalizations.
Recommended Staffing Changes:
The County’s psychiatric health facility (PHF) was contracted out to Telecare Corporation last fiscal year. This was done
to increase staffing levels to create a safer environment for clients and staff, while preventing the budget for the PHF
from increasing substantially. During this transition, County PHF staff were given the opportunity to transition into other
positions in the Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA). Due mostly to the contracting out the PHF and transferring
personnel to other agency programs the Traditional Mental Health Programs saw a decrease in personnel of approximately
20 FTEs since the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget. Financially the costs of this program shifted out of salaries
and benefits and into services and supplies for the contracted services with Telecare.
Future Challenges
HHSA continues to explore new methods to provide services to Traditional Mental Health clients to improve outcomes
and ensure funds are available to continue to provide services into the future. However, state/realignment funding for
Traditional Programs will not be sufficient if mandated services continue to increase. The following are issues facing the
Traditional Mental Health Programs:
Inpatient Placements
The programs have seen a significant increase in expensive inpatient out-of-county placements for clients, a trend that is
occurring throughout the state. The programs are evaluating options to transition clients to lower level of care placements
in MHSA programs, and implement cost effective ways to provide clients with the necessary treatment and care
levels.
State Hospital Beds
The Mental Health Division has significant exposure from the cost of State Hospital beds. Proposition 47 allows certain
felony crimes to be reclassified as misdemeanors resulting in the county being responsible for additional state hospital
placements. El Dorado County was responsible for one case in Fiscal Year 2014-15 costing $80,000 for approximately a
four month stay. One state hospital bed is approximately $292,000 per year.
Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) Program
The Recommended Budget for MHSA Programs is $18,066,365 and represents an overall increase of approximately
$666,500 or 4% when compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. MHSA programs are funded primarily by MHSA
funds, but also include federal revenues for MHSA clients who are eligible under Medi-Cal programs. The MHSA program
is planning to use approximately $3,909,800 of its approximately $8,853,900 of fund balance to fund programs in
the MHSA plan. Now that yearly MHSA plans are being adopted near the beginning of the fiscal year more funds are
needed than in the past. In the past, plans were adopted late in the fiscal year, which caused unused funds to drop to
fund balance at the end of the fiscal year. Now that plans are being adopted earlier in the fiscal year the MHSA program
is catching up on its past planned spending.
The MHSA programs are reviewed on an annual basis to determine which programs are successful (many of the programs
are in the early stages of implementation) in meeting program outcomes. The Mental Health Division has been
reassessing MHSA services and reviewing outcomes to ensure sufficient appropriations are available for future years to
continue with the current staffing levels and contract expenditures.
MHSA Plan
The MHSA plan is approved annually by the Board of Supervisors. The FY 2014-15 MHSA Plan continued the array of
programs from the FY 2013-14 MHSA Plan, serving eligible individuals of all ages within the County. The budget includes
appropriations for the continued implementation of the FY 2014-15 Plan. The MHSA Plan focuses on wellness, recovery
and resiliency for those with a serious mental illness. Services for adults include treatment and psycho-educational
groups at the Wellness Centers in Diamond Springs and South Lake Tahoe, and full implementation of the Intensive Case
Management (ICM) Team to provide services to individuals with the highest mental health needs. Additionally, transitional
housing continues to remain a focus of the MHSA Plan. Services for children are provided primarily through contracted
providers, and include services such as Intensive Care Coordination (ICC) and Intensive Home-Based Services
(IHBS).
Alcohol and Drug Programs
The Recommended Budget for the Alcohol and Drug Programs is approximately $4,713,900 and represents an overall
decrease of approximately $90,200 or 2% when compared to the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. The decrease is primarily
due to a reduction in Federal Block Grant revenue. The programs are budgeting all of their fund balance, or approximately
$1,126,700, due to the risk of reversion of grant funds .
Alcohol and Drug Programs implement strategies designed to address alcohol and other drug related issues affecting
communities, criminal justice and child welfare systems, and schools. Activities include education, raising public awareness
of issues, promoting drug?free alternatives for youth and adults, drug?free workplace programs, activities to reunite
families, where appropriate, and related services. Also included are drug court activities. The amount budgeted for
extra help is for assistance with grant activities and state reporting requirements. Revenues in these programs include
State and Federal funding, Local Realignment, miscellaneous revenues and court fines. The Local realignment
(historically was State General Fund Discretionary), is used for Drug Medi-Cal services and Drug Court Program. These
programs were transferred from the Public Health Division in FY 2014-15.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $161,574 or .3% in revenues and an increase of $70,378
or .1% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost decreased
by $91,196 or 5%.
The decrease in Net County Cost is primarily due to the Public Guardian Program cutting a vacant Program Assistant position
which will save the program approximately $85,000.
Realignment Concerns
The Social Services Division receives a large amount of its funding from 1991 and 2011 Realignment, which is comprised
of State Sales Tax and Vehicle License Fees. These revenues are directly related to the health of the economy and inversely
related to the needs of the community (e.g. sales tax and Vehicles License Fees revenue decrease when the
economy slows while the need for social services programs increases).
The State of California has fully realigned the funding for Foster Care and Adoptions Assistance, which is now supported
only with Federal and Realignment funds. This shifts the risk to counties. Should another economic downtown occur
resulting in decreases in Sales Tax and Vehicle License Fee revenue, this revenue may fall below the cost of the client
assistance payments. The cost of Foster Care and Adoptions Assistance continues to rise at a rate of 10 to 15 percent per
year while funding has leveled out. The increased costs and stagnant revenues are preventing HHSA from setting aside a
prudent reserve to fund programs during a downturn in the economy.
The Social Services 1991 Realignment no longer receives growth as determined by AB85 passed in 2013. Between FY
2012-13 and FY 2014-15, Foster Care and Adoption Assistance costs have increased over $2.5 million. If this trend continues,
in FY 2015-16 it will increase an additional $1.3 million. Traditionally, these Foster Care and Adoption Assistance
costs have been funded by Realignment Growth.
CalFresh Administrative Match Waiver
The unprecedented and unanticipated CalFresh caseload growth associated with the economic decline beginning in
2008 created substantial fiscal pressures on counties. To provide fiscal relief, a CalFresh Administrative Match Waiver
was implemented relieving counties of their 15 percent share of administrative costs, as long as the County fully meets
its required CalWorks/CalFresh maintenance of effort (MOE) in the CalFresh program. El Dorado County’s MOE is approxmately
$583,000, which is funded with 1991 realignment. The match waiver was originally enacted for two years
beginning in FY 2010-11 and due to the high demand for benefits and the slow recovery of the economy, it was extended
through FY 2014-15. The CalFresh Match Waiver will phase in with an increase of approximately $225,000 each year
through FY 2017-18. The impact to the County is the increased use of 1991 realignment.
In-Home Supportive Services Maintenance of Effort
The County’s maintenance of effort (MOE) for In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) has been increasing by 3.5 percent
per year, beginning in FY 2014-15, estimated at approximately $140,000 annually. Locally negotiated increases in IHSS
provider wages and health benefits would also increase the county’s MOE by the same amount. Any increase to the
MOE is funded with 1991 realignment, which is a flat revenue source and would impact the ability to fund essential services
in child welfare. Locally negotiated salary increases become a Net County Cost.
Recommended Staffing Changes
The Social Services Division is requesting the deletion of an Eligibility Worker position. The position was a short-term
allocation from Mental Health while there was a need in Social Services for help.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $3,158,386 or 31% in revenues and appropriations when
compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. This change in funds can primarily be attributed to four different factors.
One, the Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MMSP) was moved from Community Services to the Public Health Division.
Two, the division saw federal funding for the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) and Workforce
Investment Act (WIA) go down by approximately $1,049,800. Three, due to a proposed restructuring in the Senior
Day Care program, the program’s revenues are decreased by approximately $623,600 (please see the section named,
The County Discontinuing Providing Senior Day Care Services for more information on the proposed restructuring). Four,
the General Fund Contribution to the Community Services programs was reduced.
The General Fund Contribution request has an overall decrease of approximately $696,900 from the level of General
Fund support included in the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. These decreases are related to the proposed 6.25% cut instruction
by the Board of Supervisors for General Fund programs. The Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA) has
very few programs that receive General Fund support. A large majority of these programs are located in the Community
Services Division.
To meet the instruction by the Board of Supervisors, HHSA had to look closely at alternative methods of providing services
in the Community Services Division. In order to meet the required budget reductions, the Senior Safety Net Programs
had to reduce budget operating expenditures by approximately $1.1 million. These reductions, if approved, will
be completed in a manner that does not jeopardize the agency’s Area on Aging Federal revenue estimated at approximately
$952,000 in FY 2015-16.
HHSA identified approximately $180,000 in savings by reducing services such as the availability of telephone coverage
for the Ombudsman program from eight hours per day to six hours per day, reducing the number of community outreach
education events, and reducing expenditures in staff training to work with vulnerable populations, and not filling
program vacancies. However, in order to achieve additional savings, HHSA will be required to significantly reduce and
eliminate services in its Senior Nutrition, Senior Day Care program, and the transitional housing program at Perks Court.
HHSA used one-time General Fund savings from other programs to cover an additional $267,000 shortfall. The General
Fund contributions request in future years will need to be increased by a similar amount for the programs that are not
being recommended for cuts to continue to operate.
While there are a variety of options that can be implemented to achieve the required savings, based on discussions with
subject matter experts, input from members on the Commission on Aging, and an analysis of the impact each program
has on the citizens, HHSA is recommending the following:
The County Discontinuing Providing Senior Day Care Services
HHSA is exploring the feasibility of outsourcing the Senior Day Care Services program to a private organization that
would be permitted to provide the services in the El Dorado Hills Senior Center and Placerville Senior Center.
El Dorado County is the only county in the State that staffs its senior day care model with County employees. In researching
local options of private providers, the agency found providers charging rates comparable to El Dorado County,
but also providing longer service hours. If HHSA is successful in identifying a private provider in each facility, the community
impact will be minimal. Approval of this recommendation would result in a reduction in 10.65 full time equivalent
positions (FTEs), totaling 13 full and part-time staff. The reduction would save the County approximately $440,000 in
General Fund dollars. At this time, the program has been budgeted for two months in FY 2015-16. Additional General
Fund dollars will be needed to continue the operation beyond two months.

Discontinue to Provide Congregate Meal Dining in Diamond Springs, Pollack Pines, Greenwood, Pioneer Park, and El Dorado
Hills
In February 2014, the Commission on Aging issued a report concluding that despite the growing senior population, congregate
dining is down and while the existing senior nutrition program appears to be a model of efficiency, the decline in
congregate dining participation cannot be ignored. The Commission also inquired as to whether there is a better, more
cost effective way to provide senior nutrition programs.
While an important service, the Commission on Aging has confirmed a declining attendance (since Fiscal Year 2011-12,
attendance at the congregate meal sites has decreased by approximately 14%). In addition, the seniors who participate
in the program are more mobile with greater access to transportation than other seniors who require services from
HHSA. Prepared meals at grocery stores are very popular and since this population is more mobile, alternatives are available.
The most significant impact by eliminating these congregate programs is the reduction in opportunities for the
seniors to socialize and establish relationships with others.

It is important to note that in order to participate in the Meals-on Wheels nutrition program the client is required to
meet specific mobility restrictions. As a result, it is unlikely that any of the clients participating in the congregate meals
program will be able to participate in the Meals-on-Wheels program.
In order to continue receiving Area on Aging Agency funds, the County is required to provide at least one congregate
meal site. This proposal fulfills that requirement by continuing the Placerville congregate site, which is the only county
owned kitchen large enough to prepare meals for the Meals-on-Wheels program on the West Slope. This proposal also
continues the congregate meal site in South Lake Tahoe so that the Meals-on-Wheels program can continue on the East
Slope.
Approval of this recommendation would result in a reduction in 4.36 FTEs, totaling 5 full and part-time staff. The reduction
would save the County approximately $210,000 in General Fund dollars.
Discontinue County Funding for Perks Court Transitional Housing
The Perks Court Transitional Housing program was funded using a portion of the $95,000 in General Fund that was onetime
dollars allocated to HHSA by former Supervisor Ron Briggs to conduct outreach and education for a Caregiver Permit
Program. The Caregiver Permit Program was delayed and as a result the Board of Supervisors approved using approximately
$1,100 per month to fund a transitional housing program at Perks Court.
The Perks Court Transitional housing facility has six beds and it is designed to help families obtain employment, permanent
housing and self-sufficiency, while preventing homelessness. If this program is discontinued, it will reduce services
to the homeless or soon to be homeless population.
Since this new program was funded by one-time General Fund dollars and considering that the Community Development
Agency is recommending selling the property, even though the program has demonstrated success, HHSA is recommending
discontinuing these services effective June 30, 2015.
Approval of this recommendation would result in no County staff losing positions. The facility is staffed by a local community-
based non-profit organization. The reduction would save the County approximately $13,200 in General Fund
dollars as well as on going maintenance cost for the building.
Future Issue – LIHEAP and Weatherization Programs
LIHEAP and Weatherization programs expect further funding reductions in future years. A decrease in funding will result
in a decrease in services and reduction of current staffing levels.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $139,582 or 3% in revenues and appropriations when
compared to the FY 2013-14 Approved Budget. There is no Net County Cost/General Fund Contribution in this program.
The decreased revenues are primarily related to Federal and State funding and have been offset with decreased appropriations.
Public Housing Authority Fund Balance
The Public Housing Authority fund balance designated for administration will be exhausted in FY 2015-16, resulting in
sustainability issues and cash flow challenges in future years. The program will likely require a General Fund Contribution
in FY 2016-17. HHSA is currently reviewing the community impact of this program and working with the State to
determine possible program options, including a feasibility of merging El Dorado County’s Public Housing Authority with
another county.

The Health and Human Services Agency Administration Division was created in July 2013 to provide efficiencies in administrative
and fiscal support to all the various programs across the agency. The division passes these fiscal and administrative
costs to programs within the agency based on direct program salaries. All Administrative Division costs are
funded from State, Federal, realignment, donations/fees, and General Fund (e.g. General Fund dollars are approximately
6 percent of revenue for the division).
The Recommended Budget represents a decrease in revenues of $452,185 or 10% and a decrease of $255,418 or 6% in
appropriations compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. There is a net county cost surplus of $113,329 for FY
2015-16 due to an issue during the first year of charging agency programs in FY 2013-14. The net county surplus is going
to pay back the General Fund for dollars that it lent it during its first year.
During the first year, the Health and Human Services Agency Administration, with assistance of the Chief Administrative
Office and the Auditor-Controller’s Office, created an indirect cost model on budgeted salaries instead of direct salaries
expensed. Due to vacant positions in the programs, there were fewer charges than the budgeted model. Largely due to
this reason, the division needed a cash advance from the General Fund in FY 2013-14. These funds will be paid back in
total to the General Fund with the net county cost surplus during FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16. This issue should not occur
again, at the same level.
Staffing Changes
The Division requested 4.9 FTEs less than it had received during the FY 2014-15 Approved Budget. The division would
like to delete two permanent vacant administration positions, while also deleting a time limited management position.
The division is also requesting to transfer 1.9 FTEs to other divisions in HHSA. The division is able to reduce its FTEs by
4.9 due to efficiencies obtained over the last two years since its creation. The division will continue to seek methods to
obtain more efficiencies as to charge less administrative support costs to the other divisions within HHSA.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $148,745 or 8% in revenues and an increase of $46,855 or
1.3% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased
$101,890 or 6%.
Revenues are increasing by $148,745 due to increased grant funding from First 5 El Dorado ($24,000), projected increases
in charges for services ($4,275) and most notably from the use of additional revenue from fund balance in the various
library zones an (increase of $162,220 from FY 2014-15 for a total of $335,000 in FY 2015-16). There is also a projected
decrease in revenues from donations from the Friends of the Library and other donations ($46,600). As donations are
received, they will be brought to the Board for acceptance and added to the budget at that time.
Expenditures remain relatively flat at $3,649,063. Salaries and benefits are increasing by $114,332; services and supplies
are reduced by $63,866; and fixed assets are reduced by $13,500 to $0. Expenditure reductions are primarily in the area of
library materials, including books, audio and video materials, and subscriptions.
Grant funding from First 5 El Dorado is included in the department’s Recommended Budget at $236,500. These grant funds
are used to support early literacy programs, including 2.8 FTE Early Childhood Literacy Specialist positions.
The Recommended Budget includes the deletion of 0.2 FTE Office Assistant I/II and the addition of 0.2 FTE Fiscal Assistant I/
II to true up the department’s personnel allocation for a previously authorized overfill at the Fiscal Assistant level.
Impact of Budget Reductions:
In order to meet targeted budget reductions, the department has reduced appropriations for library materials by $73,866
and increased the use of library fund balance in an effort to minimize service level impacts and maintain current hours of
operation at all library branches. In FY 2015-16, the budgeted use of library fund balance is over 43% of their total available
fund balance. This is not sustainable and unless long-term solutions can be found, library hours will be reduced in future
years.

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $14,809 or 33% in revenues and a decrease of $26,046 or
5% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2014-15 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased
by $11,237 or 2%.
The decrease in revenue is primarily due to the Veteran license plate special revenues being lowered. The department
has not budgeted Veteran license plate special revenue at this time.
The decrease in appropriations is primarily related to health insurance costs that went down due to employees’ health
care selections.
The Recorder-Clerk/Registrar of Voters continues to act as the department head for Veteran Affairs.