The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $24,619 or 60% in revenues and
an increase of $12,557 or 1% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased $12,062 or 0.8%.
The change in revenues is due to a one-time increase in interfund revenues, reflecting a grant
award from the Air Quality Management District for the purchase of video conferencing
equipment. The change in appropriations is mainly driven by an increase in salaries and
benefits due to an increase in health insurance premiums. The increase is offset to some
degree by reductions in the Board Clerk’s budget.
The budget for the Board of Supervisors reflects separate allocations for each district and for
the Clerk of the Board. The budget for each Supervisorial District has been prepared in
accordance with Board of Supervisors Policy D-5 - Board of Supervisors Departmental Budget
and Expense Reimbursement, which provides for an equal budget allocation for each District.


The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $834,758 or 40% in revenues and
an increase of $5,037,531 or 125% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12
approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is increased by $4,202,773 or 224%.
Budget & Operations
There are several functions currently being performed within this core unit of the Chief
Administrative Office. Some of these functions include;
 Budget development and monitoring
 Development of county-wide financial standards and practices in coordination with the
Auditor-Controller
 Implementation of Investment Strategy
 Management of Investment teams (Human Resources, Risk Management, Facilities and
Real Property, Department Culture and Accountability, Economic Development, and
Information Technologies)
 Coordination of Human Resource and Management Action teams
 Legislative monitoring
 Policy development
 Public Outreach and overall project management for the Targeted General Plan
Amendment
 Coordination with local agencies on county-wide issues (ie. Fire, LAFCO, CSD, etc.)
 Acting Director of Information Technologies
 Acting Director of Department of Transportation
 Acting Clerk of the Board
 Economic Development
 Parks coordination and attendance at commission meetings
 “Rails to trails” coordination and attendance at committee meetings
Rubicon Trail
 Development of the new centralized fiscal and administrative unit
 Process review and development in the new facilities unit
 Oversight of Risk Management and Human Resources
 Executive Management coordination and development
Currently the budget and operations function within the Chief Administrative Office is short
staffed. The decision was made to move one Principal Administrative Analyst full-time into the
Procurement function as well as one Sr. Department Analyst that was originally programmed for
the Central Fiscal/Admin unit. Resources have been added to the Procurement function in an
effort to strengthen and stream line internal services functions to departments. The budget and
operations unit also has one Principal Administrative Analyst that is currently serving as the
Acting Director of Information Technologies. Therefore work that was previously done by five
Principal Administrative Analyst’s and the Internal Auditor is now being done by three Principal
Administrative Analysts and the Chief Budget Officer, essentially a reduction of two FTE’s. The
Assistant Chief Administrative Officer is also deployed as the Acting Director of Transportation
as well as providing oversight to Risk Management and Economic Development.
The Recommended Budget for this unit represents an overall increase of $18,162 or 12% in
revenues and a decrease of $243,742 or 15% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-
12 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased by $261,904 or 17%.
Changes in revenues are primarily related to payments from DOT for the Assistant Chief
Administrative Officer. The decrease in appropriations is related to the shift of one Principal
Administrative Analyst into the Purchasing division as well as 50% of another Principal
Administrative Analyst budgeted in the Information Technologies budget.
Procurement
The Recommended Budget for this unit represents an overall increase of $6,333 in revenues
and an increase of $238,540 in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is increased by $244,873 (offset with savings in
budget and operations). The increases in the Procurement division are related to salaries and
benefits due to the shift of a Principal Administrative Analyst and the addition of a Sr.
Department Analyst to help streamline and strengthen these internal services.
Rubicon Trail
The Recommended Budget for this unit represents an overall increase of $29,960 in revenues
and appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved budget. There is no net county
cost associated with this program as all costs are funded through grant revenues.
Central Fiscal/Administrative
This is a new unit within the Chief Administrative Office. This division currently provides fiscal
and administrative services for the Chief Administrative Office, Facilities, Information
Technologies, Human Resources, Risk Management, Surveyor, Public Defender and Indigent
Defense. As this unit gets up and running there may be future opportunities to provide these
services for other small departments creating more efficiency and consistency and furthering the
investment strategy of limiting government and enhancing services.

The Recommended Budget for this unit includes $87,889 in revenues and $470,049 in
appropriations resulting in a Net County Cost of $382,160.
Facilities
The Facilities unit is a new unit within the Chief Administrative Office. This unit includes building
maintenance, grounds, custodial, real property and facility capital projects. Maintenance,
grounds and custodial staff are being transferred from the Department of Transportation (31
FTE’s). Additionally in FY 2011-12, a Facilities Manager and two Facilities Project Managers
were added to the Chief Administrative Office to handle management of the unit, capital
projects, real property, move coordination and space planning.
The Recommended Budget for this unit includes $765,000 in revenues and $4,602,644 in
appropriations resulting in a Net County Cost of $3,857,644. When compared to the FY 2011-
12 Department of Transportation Net County Cost approved budget for facilities of $4,773,270,
this results in Net County Cost savings of $915,626.
This is a very conservative budget for this unit and as the unit gets up and running we may need
to re-evaluate staffing and return to the Board with recommended changes. The plan is to
return to the Board in August with a more detailed facility work-plan to receive Board direction
on priorities for deferred maintenance and facilities capital projects. At that time any
recommended staffing and budget changes will be discussed.
AUDITOR - CONTROLLER

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $15,987 or 3.4% in revenues and
an increase of $148,939 or 5% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has increased $164,926 or 6%.
The reduction in revenues is due to a reduction in interfund revenue. This is a result of the fact
that the department has not filled the Cost Accountant position that will provide increased
accounting and audit services to the Health and Human Services Agency, and does not
anticipate being able to do so before the start of the fiscal year.
The change in appropriations is primarily related to an increase in salaries and benefits of
$160,058. During the FY 2011-12 addenda process, three positions were added to the
department. At that time, appropriations were increased to fund the positions for approximately
six months. The FY 2012-13 budget includes full funding for these positions, as well as one
FTE Accounting Systems Administrator that was added in April 2012 to plan for and assist with
conversion to a new financial/human resources/payroll system. Reductions in services and
supplies and fixed assets were largely offset by a decrease in intrafund abatements due to the
vacancy of the cost accountant position, as described above.

TREASURER/TAX COLLECTOR

The Recommended Budget
represents an overall decrease
of $148,379 or 9% in revenues
and a decrease of $71,974 or 3% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12
approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has increased $76,405 or 7%.
The main reductions in revenues are in charges for services ($118,450). $50,000 of this is due
to the redirection of the Treasury Quantitative Specialist to the county-wide credit card
implementation program which is not eligible for reimbursement from the Treasury pool.
Operating transfers in are reduced due to a decrease in secured abstracts and more mortgage
companies requiring impound accounts, driving down revenue from collecting delinquent taxes.
Appropriations in every class are declining, except for salaries and benefits, which is increasing
by $22,477. This reflects a reduction in extra help and an increase in permanent employee
salary due to the addition of one FTE Sr. Fiscal Assistant. After reviewing the department’s use
of extra help, it was determined that the addition of one FTE was appropriate to meet the
department’s routine workload needs.
The department requested an increase in its share of the Transient Occupancy Tax, from 10%
to 13%, as well as an additional FTE to enforce the tax and the business license ordinance. We
have not recommended the change in revenue or the additional position at this time, feeling that
the increase in revenues and the question of additional enforcement are policy issues for the
Board to consider in the context of the whole budget.

ASSESSOR

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $30,590 or 26% in revenues and
a decrease of $49,798 or 1.5% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased $19,208 or 0.6%.
The change in revenues is primarily attributable to the reduced value of the supplemental
property tax roll. The department receives a share of 5% of the roll value to cover the costs of
administration of the roll. The value of the supplemental roll has dropped to due housing market
conditions, reducing the department’s revenue by $48,000. This reduction is offset by an
increase in revenues from administration of timeshares and an increase in operating transfers in
of $17,410. The department plans bring in $20,600 in special revenue funds to replace obsolete
computers and other equipment and to purchase new aerial photos of the County.
The change in appropriations is primarily related to reductions in salaries and benefits due to
reductions resulting from the early retirement incentive (ERI) in FY 2011-12. The ERI resulted
in a net reduction of 2.8 FTEs as well as other changes to the department’s personnel allocation
that reduced costs. The Assistant Assessor will again remain vacant and unfunded for FY
2012-13. The department is requesting that three allocations that were reduced to part time
(80%) two years ago be restored to full time in order to better keep up with the department’s
current workload and reduce reliance on extra help staff. The department has also requested
that the Executive Secretary allocation be replaced with an Administrative Technician to reflect
the shift of the fiscal and administrative workload for the department from the Assessment Office
Manager who retired last fiscal year. These changes to the personnel allocation can be
accommodated while keeping the department within its budget target.

COUNTY COUNSEL

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $3,500 or 1% in revenues and a
decrease of $6,598 or less than 1% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12
approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased $10,098 or less than 1%.
The change in revenues is due to a slight increase in anticipated revenues from departments for
legal services. The change in appropriations is the result of offsetting increases in salary and
benefits and reductions in services and supplies. Salary and benefits are increasing due to
projected increases in health insurance premiums, movement on the salary step scale, and
projected pay-outs for vacation and management leave. Services and supplies are reduced in
outside legal services and staff development.
County Counsel’s budget request included 1 additional Deputy County Counsel and 0.75 FTE
Legal Secretary primarily to help with the workload generated by Public Guardian and Mental
Health, which has increased substantially according to the department. County Counsel has
indicated that if the workload continues at its current level without additional staff, the office will
be required to reduce the level of service it provides to the Public Guardian and Mental Health,
or as an alternative, the office’s ability to render general legal services in a timely manner will be
compromised. We have not included the requested staff because at the time of budget
preparation, discussions between Health and Human Services, County Counsel, and the CAO
regarding the best way to staff and fund this function had not concluded. Discussions will
continue and recommendations will be brought back to the Board for consideration.

HUMAN RESOURCES

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $419,295 or 1.1% in revenues
and an increase of $590,663 or 1.6% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12
approved budget. The Net County Cost has increased $171,368 or 23%.
The Human Resources Division receives no revenues. Revenues for the Risk Management
internal service fund are increasing slightly to offset minor increases in program costs. Funding
for the Liability and Worker’s Compensation programs is based on actuarial analysis and
recommendations of Bickmore Risk Services and Consulting. Both programs had previously
been funded above the 85% confidence level. Based on previous Board direction, the funding
for these programs has now been set at a 70% confidence level. This results in a reduction in
cost applied charges to departments and a use of Risk fund balance to eliminate prior year
surpluses and bring the actual funding in these programs down to the 70% confidence level.
Appropriation increases of $590,662 are associated primarily with salaries and benefits costs in
Human Resources and Risk Management. The CAO has been working closely with the
Assistant CAO and the Interim Human Resources Director to develop a strategy and
organizational structure that will provide appropriate resources and stability to the County's core
functions of Human Resources, Risk Management, and Labor Relations. That strategy was
reviewed and approved by the Board in December 2011 and the positions of Human Resources
Manager and Risk Manager were added. Both positions have recently been filled. The
Recommended Budget for FY 2012-13 includes the addition of 1.0 FTE Principal Personnel
Analyst and 1.0 FTE Personnel Technician to address critical needs identified by the CAO,
county departments and the Board of Supervisors. It is imperative that Human Resources
function be adequately staffed with skilled employees if the County's overall Strategic
Investment Plan is to be successful. The CAO recommends retaining the allocation for the
Director of Human Resources (vacant and unfunded) to allow time to further analyze the
organizational structure of Human Resources and Risk Management. Other appropriation
increases include $34,950 for annual licensing costs NeoGov, the countywide applicant tracking
system, subscription to Governmentjobs.com website, and performance evaluation tool.
The budget for the Health Benefits program includes health insurance costs for current
employees and retiree health insurance. Health insurance costs are based on projections by
Alliant Insurance Services, the County’s health benefits consultant. The Board approved
membership in the EIA Health program through CSAC-EIA, which is calculated based upon a
calendar year. Any possible rate changes effective January 1, 2013, will not be known until this
fall; the budget is based on a 5.0% placeholder increase for the budget year. The budget will be
revised as necessary once the rates have been negotiated with the insurance carriers and new
rates are known. Funding for the County’s contribution for retiree health insurance is on a “pay
as you go” basis, as in the previous two fiscal years. The Retiree Health Contribution Plan
Document caps the amount to be spent on this benefit at 1.2% of Total Payroll. The calculated
cap for FY 2012-13 is $1,642,068. This amount will be paid through cost-applied charges to the
departments.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES
107

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $5,298 or less than 1% in
revenues and an increase of $275,113 or 8.4% in appropriations when compared to the FY
2011-12 approved budget. Overall, Net County Cost is increasing by $280,411 or 15%.
Sources of revenue in Information Technologies are found in two different areas within the
budget. Revenue for this department is a combination of Charges for Services (Class 13) and
Intrafund Abatements (Class 73 shown in the appropriations section). Revenue in the Charges
for Services area is budgeted at approximately the same level as FY 2011-12. In the Intrafund
Abatements area, revenue is projected to be approximately $86,000 lower than FY 2011-12.
This is primarily in the areas of telephone, programming and print shop. The Department has
been performing a full audit of all phone components, including lines and circuits. This audit
could result in changes during the addenda process. Cost applied charges for the mainframe
and network must also be reviewed. Any changes in these areas will be adjusted in the
addenda prior to final budget approval.
As of this writing, the County is looking at potential replacements to older mainframe based
systems. A Request for Proposal (RFP) is currently open to find out what options are available
to replace old, outdated technology. Appropriations in the IT Department budget reflect needed
staffing and various hardware and software changes that will be needed to position the County
for the replacement of critical Countywide systems infrastructure.
Salaries and benefits for the Information Technologies Department include several reorganizational
staffing changes due to retirements and staff leaving the Department to go to
other positions in the County. In the area of staffing the Department is challenged to meet
current operational needs for old mainframe based systems, while at the same time, trying to
adjust for various skill sets that will be required to meet new technology needs. The IT
recommended budget includes the following organizational changes:
? Delete 1.0 FTE IT Manager position – The deletion of this position comes as the result of
reviewing the organizational and business needs of the Department as well as the
business needs of the County. This position was an extra layer of management
between three division supervisors and the Assistant Director and Director of Information
Technologies. In addition, the position provided management oversight of IT staff in the
Health Services Division (Mental & Public Health) of the Health and Human Services
Agency (HHSA). The HHSA funded a portion of the IT Manager position; however, due
to organizational changes in the HHSA, the use of this management oversight was
discontinued along with the revenue offset. During FY2011-12, the extra layer of
management was removed between the IT Director and the three division supervisors
because it was not needed. At that time, the IT Manager was working on the RFP
project as well as some special projects, but over the past six months a full time
workload has not been present which resulted in the decision to eliminate this position.
 Delete 1.0 FTE IT Analyst I/II - Networking / Add 1.0 FTE Telecommunications Technician –
There is currently only one permanent Telecommunications person in this mission critical
area. In order to provide the needed level of staffing, the IT Department has utilized extra
help for over a year. In order to properly staff this area it is recommended that a position
that is coming available at the beginning of the fiscal year be converted from an IT Analyst –
Network, to a Telecommunications Technician I/II. This change will result in a cost savings
and also provide an appropriate level of service in the Telecommunications division.
 Delete 2.0 FTE IT Analyst I/II – Programming / Add 1.0 FTE System Support Specialist
I/II, and 1.0 FTE Network Administrator
 One 1.0 FTE IT Analyst – Programming position will be replaced with a lower
level System Support Specialist. This position will be responsible for Countywide
training of desktop applications, Google Apps, Adobe products and future new
software applications. There is a significant need in the County for training on
desktop applications such as Word, Excel, and Powerpoint in both the 2003
versions and the newer 2010 versions. It is most efficient to provide this training
in-house to all County Departments rather than sending staff to expensive off-site
training. IT provides the training at no cost to Departments.
 One 1.0 FTE IT Analyst – Programming position will be replaced with a Network
Administrator. For many years there has been only one permanent staff person
assigned to Networking to cover all areas of the County. As the County
continues to deploy Voice over IP (VoIP) technology in the telecommunications
area and as the County moves towards newer technology the demand for
Network improvements will become more critical. This position will provide
essential back up in the Networking area, and allow the County to be properly
positioned for newer technology.
 Delete 1.0 FTE IT I/II Analyst – Networking / Add 1.0 FTE Sr. IT Analyst – Networking –
As noted above, organizational changes are needed in the Networking area to
incorporate the evolution of VoIP as well as essential changes to the County network.
This position will be a lead over the Network Administrator and the Telecommunications
Technician and will report to the Assistant Director of Information Technologies. As new
technology is deployed in the County, this position will be in integral part of the evolution.
Services and supplies are increasing overall by $99,586. The budget includes funding to
replace some end of life parts in the Network area and also in the Server area. These items
account for $17,000 of the increase. Funding is also included to replace end of life Server
equipment that is needed for mission critical applications.
The budget also includes funding in the amount of $35,000 towards an Enterprise Adobe
Acrobat Pro upgrade. This Enterprise solution will put the County on one consistent Adobe
platform. The software is used extensively around the County, but is not managed centrally so
there are a variety of versions of the software around the County. In some cases the older
versions do not provide the features that are needed for applications such as Legistar or
integration with Internet Explorer 9 and Windows 7 Operating System.
Fixed assets have been budgeted at $281,000 which includes funding of $100,000 to look at a
replacement for the current voicemail system which is 10 years past end of life. It also includes
$65,000 for a Blue Coat Anti-virus appliance. This request has been presented by IT in the past
but was refused due to the cost during budget reductions. IT has tried other lower cost
solutions; however, none have provided the level of security that is needed to ensure the safety
of the network. This anti-virus appliance will help ensure network security and is needed to
position the County for new technology. There is also a variety of network and server fixed
assets that are needed to replace end of life equipment and to improve network management
efficiency.
The budget does not include any funding for PC refresh. If funding becomes available
Information Technologies recommends the Board approve $100,000 for PC refresh computers.
This will allow the County to replace approximately 100 end of life or under performing
machines. It will also assist in bringing the County current with newer technology, specifically
Windows 2007 and Office 2010 products. As the County moves forward with newer
applications and software, the older machines do not have the ability to run the newer
developed software.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

The County Economic Development program (formerly known as County Promotions) was
established to fulfill General Plan Policy 10.1.6.4 within the Economic Development Element,
which states, “The majority of transient occupancy tax (TOT) generated revenue shall be
directed toward the promotion of tourism, entertainment, business, and leisure travel in El
Dorado County. “
All of the activities related to Economic Development support the purpose stated in the above
policy and are therefore appropriately funded through this revenue source. The level of support
for County Economic Development is a discretionary decision for the Board. The Economic
Development Advisory Committee along with Supervisor Santiago, Supervisor Knight and the
Chief Administrative Office are working on a definition for the Economic Development program,
job description and implementation plan for future economic development. The FY 2012-13
budget assumes major support from the Assistant Chief Administrative Officer as well as
finance and administrative support from the Chief Administrative Office for FY 2012-13.

RECORDER-CLERK / REGISTRAR OF VOTERS

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $13,781 or less than 1% in
revenues and a decrease of $170,775 or 5% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-
12 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased $184,556 or 14%.
The change in revenues is the result of several factors. Operating transfers in from the
Recorder’s special revenue funds are increasing by $61,000, due to higher than budgeted
revenues into those funds, creating small fund balances. Intergovernmental revenue is
increasing by $39,000 in HAVA funding in the Elections Division. These increases are offset
somewhat by reductions in recording fees and clerk fees which are expected to decline slightly
based on activity in FY 2011-12. Elections services fees are also declining due to the fact that
there will only be one election in FY 2012-13. FY 2011-12 included revenues for three
elections.
The change in appropriations is primarily related to the Elections Division, and reductions in
services and supplies due to the fact that there will be one election in FY 2012-13, while the
budget for FY 2011-12 included funding for three elections.
The budget for the Recorder-Clerk/Registrar of Voters is recommended at a base level, and fully
funds all existing allocations.

SUPERIOR COURT MOE

The Recommended Budget for the Court Maintenance of Effort represents a decrease in
revenue of $35,150 or 2% and a decrease in appropriations of $474,283 or 16% from the FY
2011-12 approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased $439,133 or 34%.
The Court facilities budget with Department 20 continues to reflect the full year funding for the
County Facility Payment (CFP) as required by AB1491. In addition, the budget has been
adjusted to reflect revenue from the State for costs incurred by the County for buildings where
the County and the Courts share space, but the County manages the buildings. This revenue is
estimated at $65,000 for the year.
The appropriation for the conflict panel includes funding for ten attorneys, seven on the west
slope and three in Lake Tahoe. Of the seven on the west slope, two are newer attorney’s that
are funded as entry level. These are full-fledged attorneys, but they are only assigned
misdemeanor and low level felony cases. These two attorneys’ are compensated at a lower
level in an effort to diversify the panel as well as manage the cost.
In addition to contract attorney expense the budget includes approximately $500,000 in funding
for the defense of indigent defense cases. This amount has remained stable over the past year
or so. No increase is proposed in this budget. However, this budget does include $10,000 to
cover the cost of any criminal grand jury expenses should a panel be called during the year.

DISTRICT ATTORNEY
176

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $162,382 or 7.4% in revenues
and a decrease of $64,537 or less than 1% in appropriations when compared to the FY2011-12
approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is increased by $97,845 or 2%.
Revenue in the District Attorney budget is declining overall by $162,382. Revenue from
Proposition 172 – Public Safety Sales Tax is budgeted with no growth at $759,207. This
revenue stream is monitored closely since it provides significant revenue for the Law & Justice
Departments.
The Department has budgeted Operating Transfers at $729,741 a decrease of $212,470 from
FY 2011-12. This funding primarily comes from grants the District Attorney receives annually.
Notable changes in Operating Transfers include reductions to the Automobile Insurance Fraud
grant and Worker’s Compensation Insurance Fraud grant of $105,359 combined. The budget
also includes a revenue increase of $122,000 which is coming from a grant from the
Foreclosure Crisis Recovery Fund.
Appropriations have been reduced in a number of areas for a total reduction of $64,537.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1.0) FTE Victim Witness Program
Specialist. This position is a conversion from the use of extra help to permanent due to the
need for ongoing use of this position. It has been determined that this position is needed to
adequately provide the proper level of service to victims of crimes. In addition, funding for extra
help has been reduced by $13,357. No other significant changes to salaries and benefits are
proposed.
The Departments requested services and supplies budget grew by approximately $10,000,
however, a large reduction in insurance premium cost applied charges resulted in an overall
reduction of $26,821. While numerous line items were adjusted, the requested increase is
needed to properly investigate and prosecute cases.
Intra-fund transfers remain stable. In addition, the budget includes $200,000 from Human
Services for Welfare Fraud Investigation.

PUBLIC DEFENDER
187

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $37,898 or 12% in revenues and
a decrease of $44,738 or 13% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased by $6,840 or 0.2%.
Revenue remains fairly consistent compared to FY 2011-12. The budget continues to include a
contract with Alpine County wherein the Public Defender provides services and the Department
receives $50,000 per year. Proposition 172 – Public Safety Sales Tax is projected to remain
steady at the FY 2011-12 levels.
The Recommended Budget maintains the same staffing level as FY 2011-12 with a total
allocation of 19.0. The Public Defender requested one change to delete one (1.0) FTE Legal
Secretary and add one (1.0) FTE Sr. Legal Secretary, which has been included in the budget.
The Department is managing the investigative workload with the use of permanent staff, extra
help and contract assistance. Support services are provided by the Chief Administrative office
in the newly formed Central Fiscal Admin unit. These services include fiscal accounting,
budgeting, contracts and other clerical related work.
Overall salaries and benefits are increasing by $38,060 which includes growth in retirement and
health insurance as well as some promotional opportunities the Public Defender chose to move
forward with in FY 2011-12. Services and supplies have been reduced overall by $82,770
mainly in professional services, psychiatric medical and special department expense. Intrafund
transfers are only changing by $28. There are no fixed assets included in the budget.

SHERIFF
204

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $614,908 or 5.2% in revenues
and a decrease of $1,126,629 or 2.1% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12
approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased by $511,721 or 1.3%.
The Sheriff has submitted a budget that meets the Net County Cost target. The Sheriff notes
three primary areas of concern in his budget letter:
 Sufficient funding for unanticipated emergencies.
 AB109 funding. At the time the budget was prepared and submitted the County had not
been informed of how much funding will be received from the State. The AB109
Realignment has a significant impact on jail capacity and associated costs. The County
will be continuing to review and address this challenge in the coming months.
 Need for a new Sheriff’s facility. The Sheriff spends approximately $340,000 annually
related to leased facilities. Staff being assigned to multiple locations creates inefficiency
and added cost.
The Sheriff anticipates returning approximately $1M in FY 2011-12 savings to the General
Fund. The Sheriff has requested that a portion of these savings be set aside in the Sheriff
budget as a contingency for unanticipated emergencies. The Recommended FY 2012-13
budget includes $300,000 in contingency in the Sheriff’s budget. The General Fund
contingency budgeted in Department 15 will be reduced by this amount so that the combined
contingency of the Sheriff’s department and Department 15 equate to 3% of total General Fund
adjusted appropriations.
Revenue in the Sheriff’s budget is declining overall by $614,909. Revenue from Proposition 172
– Public Safety Sales Tax continues to be the largest revenue source for the Sheriff. This
revenue has been increasing slowly over the past two years. It will be reviewed and adjusted in
the addenda if necessary.
The Sheriff notes a couple of areas were revenue is either declining or will no longer be
available. The first is a reduction of $120,000 related to prisoner holds. As a result of AB109,
this revenue is no longer provided as a separate allocation to the County by the state but
instead has been shifted to AB109 funding. In the current year AB109 funding was not provided
to the Sheriff’s Office to offset this loss of revenue. This will be reviewed in future AB109
funding, but is not included in the Recommended Budget.
Changes to revenue also include a reduction in State Criminal Alien Assistance Program
(SCAAP) funds in the amount of $47,000 as well as the loss of Timber Tax Revenue to offset
search and rescue costs. Timber tax revenue has been decreasing from a budgeted high of
$78,000 to no anticipated revenue in FY 2012-13. Funding from the livescan trust is budgeted
at a lower amount than in previous years. The FY 2011-12 budget included $318,000, whereas
the FY 2012-13 includes $110,000, a reduction of $208,000.
Overall salaries and benefits are increasing by $403,544. The budget includes a slight
decrease in overtime cost of $66,519 or a total overtime budget of $2,010,025. This amount
represents the lowest overtime budget since FY 2005-06. Overtime hit a high in FY 2006-07
with actual expenditures of $4,095,143. In more recent years, due to budget reductions,
overtime has been reduced. Current year expenditures as of this writing are $1,686,042
indicating that the use of overtime is being managed by Sheriff’s management.
The Sheriff is requesting the following changes in staffing, all of which will be implemented
within the Net County Cost allocation:
 Delete 1.5 FTE vacant Sheriff Sergeants / Add 1.0 FTE Deputy Sheriff I/II and 1.0
Sheriff’s Technician.
 The Deputy Sheriff will be assigned to patrol
 The Sheriff’s Technician will be assigned to the Jails to assist with increased
population.
 Delete 1.0 FTE Community Services Officer / Add 1.0 FTE Sheriff’s Technician.
 The Sheriff’s Technician will be assigned to the reception area which has been
staffed with the use of extra help. There is an on-going need so a permanent
position is recommended.
 Delete 1.0 FTE Sheriff’s Technician / Add 1.0 FTE Personnel Technician
 The Sheriff’s Office is responsible for most of the recruitment and testing
processes for new hires in addition to promotional testing; therefore the Sheriff
requests this change in classification.
Services and supplies are decreasing overall by $1,261,364. The budget includes numerous
increases and decreases. The most notable increase is fuel at $115,000. Notable decreases
include minor equipment of $465,733 and telephone and radio equipment of $303,673 Other
decreases are in the areas of household expense, refuse disposal, equipment maintenance,
special department expense, software license, transportation and travel, rents and leases of
vehicles to name a few.
In the area of food cost for the jails, Sheriff’s office staff has made significant improvements
relative to managing food costs resulting in a projected savings of $76,400. It should be noted
that savings would be higher; however, additional funds are being budgeted due to anticipated
increases in the jail population as a result of AB109 as well as anticipated increases in overall
food prices primarily as a result of the impact of higher fuel prices.
Other charges are increasing overall by $75,322. This is related to transactions with non-county
governmental agencies. Fixed Assets are decreasing overall by $642,875 due to fewer
anticipated fixed asset purchase from Homeland Security Grants. Intrafund Transfers are
decreasing overall by $51,256 based on budgeted transfers between departments.
In his budget letter, the Sheriff notes that his staff has identified approximately $463,000 in
unmet needs, most of which relate to equipment and fixed assets which cannot be purchased
within the net county cost target.
Jail Commissary (non General Fund): The Jail Commissary budget is projected at a total of
$441,057. This budget is completely offset by revenue from the Inmate Welfare Trust account.
There is no Net County Cost associated with this program.

PROBATION

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $458,321 or 11% in revenues and
an increase of $365,273 or 3% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased by $93,048 or less than 1%.
Fiscal year 2012-13 will represent the first full year of the AB109 Justice Realignment Plan
which went into effect in October 2011. The Recommended Budget includes estimated funding
of $740,000 in revenue and appropriations. Appropriations are in the areas of salaries and
benefits $665,000, Electronic Monitoring Program (EMP) $50,000 and Transitional Housing
$25,000. The Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) voting committee will meet prior to the
Adopted Budget to adopt the full FY 2012-13 AB109 budget. The County will get the FY 2012-
13 budget appropriation from the State in the next few weeks. Once that number is known the
Chief Probation Officer will meet with the Sheriff’s Department and Health Services to develop
the full AB109 budget. AB109 changes will be included in the addenda process.

Revenue from Proposition 172 – Public Safety Sales Tax includes no growth from FY 2011-12
at $940,769. This revenue stream is monitored closely since it provides significant revenue for
the Law & Justice Departments.
In appropriations the Probation department Recommended Budget includes the following
staffing changes resulting in a 1.5 FTE overall reduction in staff:
 Delete two (2) FTE Deputy Probation Officer allocations from Field Services
Divisions. This will result in a reduction of two general fund officers from the CART
Program. This will leave five officers remaining in the CART Program, four on the
West Slope and one at South Lake Tahoe as well as one supervisor. The Chief
Probation Officer believes this change will continue to meet the needs of local high
schools.
 The Recommended Budget includes a management reorganization:
The Chief Probation Officer proposes to utilize current manager allocations and
the changes noted below to achieve better countywide oversight of Field
Services and Detention Facility operations to increase consistency in standards,
compliance and accountability.
 Add two (2.0) FTE Assistant Superintendent allocations, one in the Juvenile
Hall and one in the JTC in South Lake Tahoe.
 Delete one (1.0) FTE vacant Supervising Deputy Probation Officer –
Institutions
 Delete one (1.0) FTE vacant Deputy Probation Officer - Institutions
The budget includes a change in fiscal management and operations. The
Administrative Services Officer became vacant during FY 2011-12 due to a
retirement. This position was filled with a Department Analyst which is a lower
level, non-management position. The change from a Fiscal Administrative
Manager to a Chief Fiscal Officer will make the fiscal manager third in command
in the Probation Department providing a higher level of authority. The Chief
Fiscal Officer is responsible for increased County oversight of Justice
Realignment, involving a number of justice and service related agencies
including the Sheriff’s Department, Health Services and local Police
Departments.
 Delete one (1.0) Fiscal Administrative Manager
 Delete one (1.0) Administrative Services Officer
 Add one (1.0) Chief Fiscal Officer
 Add one (1.0) Department Analyst
To fully achieve Juvenile Detention Center Mental Health mandates, the
Probation Department requests the following changes:
 Delete one (1.0) FTE vacant Deputy Probation Officer – Institutions
 Add one (1.0) FTE Mental Health Program Coordinator II, licensed clinician
The budget includes the addition of a half (0.5) FTE Legal Office Assistant I/II.
This is a conversion from extra help to permanent due to on-going nature of the
position.
Services and supplies are increasing overall by $138,257. Included in this area is funding from
SB678 revenue to fund a Kiosk for each Probation Office. Also included is a shift in Electronic
Monitoring from sworn staff to private company vendors. The private vendors will complete
non-enforcement tasks, while all enforcement duties will remain with sworn officers. The private
/ public combination will save money while continuing to provide a high level of public safety for
alternatives to incarceration.
Other Charges is decreasing overall by $50,125. The majority of this decrease is in care and
support of persons in the amount of $45,000. The budget continues to provide $50,000 for
Mental Health Services which has been added to the budget to pay the Mental Health
Department for services in both the Juvenile Hall in Placerville and the Juvenile Treatment
Center in South Lake Tahoe. The combination of services from Mental Health Services,
contract services for drug and alcohol counseling and the addition of a Mental Health Clinician
will provide the Probation Department with a full range of services with which to meet its
mandates.
Fixed Assets are going down by $16,000. This is due to no new vehicles being purchased in FY
2012-13. Intrafund Transfers are also going down by $11,299, primarily in the areas of
telephone charges, pc support and store support.

SURVEYOR

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $16,600 or 1% in revenues and a
decrease of $65,243 or 1% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased by $48,643 or 1% compared to the FY
2011-12 approved budget.
The Surveyor has reviewed each revenue source and recommended adjustments based on
current trends and information coming from the development community. It is believed that
these are realistic revenue projections for FY 2012-13.
The Recommended Budget includes the reduction of one (1.0) FTE GIS Analyst due to a
retirement. The budget also includes the addition of one (1.0) FTE GIS Technician. The
Surveyor believes that this lower level position will be able to absorb many of the lower level
tasks in the GIS area and also offers a cost savings.
The budget includes $20,000 in funding for extra help. Currently, there is a backlog of parcels
that need further review and Certificates of Compliance issued before permits can be issued.
This work is part of the General Plan Implementation. This project exceeded 10,000 parcels a
couple of years ago and the work have primarily been performed by extra help. The Surveyor
will continue this effort.
The Surveyor will be receiving clerical services from the Centralized Fiscal Admin group formed
by the Chief Administrative Office during FY 2011-12. The budget includes $5,000 as an
estimated cost for this service.
The Surveyor has included a fixed asset request in the budget of $13,038. This funding will be
used to replace an end of life server and two high end computers for the GIS system.

AGRICULTURAL COMMISSIONER
256

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $179,268 or 17% in revenues
and an decrease of $205,502 or 14% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12
approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased by $26,234 or 5%.
The change in revenue reflects decreases to federal funding due to the expiration of ARRA
funding for the noxious weed eradication program ($103,607) as well as reductions in State
revenue ($47,076) in the Glassy-winged Sharpshooter, High Risk and European Grapevine
Moth programs.
Appropriations have been decreased primarily in salaries and benefits ($109,977) and in
services and supplies ($96,162). The reductions in salaries and benefits is due to the deletion
of a 0.50 FTE Administrative secretary (vacant) and 1FTE Ag Biologist (vacant). The reduction
in services and supplies is primarily related to decreased professional services related to the
loss of the ARRA funding.
The Department‘s largest source of dedicated revenue outside of the County’s general fund is
unclaimed gas tax (UGT). Each year county agriculture departments receive UGT revenue
through the CDFA and the California Department of Pesticide Regulations (DPR) as partial
reimbursement for mandated agricultural program costs. Food and Agricultural Code § 224
requires a maintenance of effort in general fund support be sustained by the county for
agricultural commissioner services. The allocation formula is based on the size of the available
pool of funds and each county’s previous year’s net county cost directly associated with the
statutory identified agricultural programs. In general, counties with a higher net county cost
receive a larger share of the available funds. CDFA distributes these funds early in the fourth
quarter of the fiscal year. Due to the timing of these disbursements, it is difficult to accurately
forecast how much the county will actually receive.

DEVELOPMENT SERVICES

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $108,328 or 4% in revenues and
a decrease of $221,820 or 4% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased $330,148 or 11%.
The change in revenues is primarily comprised of a projected increase in building permit activity
offset with decreased planning time and material activity. The change in appropriations is
primarily related to decreased professional services. In FY 2011-12 the department included
appropriations of $250,000 for one-time costs related to the potential Phase II Integrated Natural
Resource Management Plan (INRMP). These funds were not expended in FY 2011-12 and
$100,000 is included in the General Fund – Other Operations FY 2012-13 budget as an
estimate for FY 2012-13 costs related to INRMP.
The department is requesting staffing changes in the Recommended Budget. These changes
include the deletion of a vacant Executive Secretary, the addition of one Development
Technician I/II for the Placerville office and the addition of one Development Aide I/II for the
Tahoe office resulting in a net increase of one (1) FTE and increased salary and benefit costs of
$75,509. These increased costs are offset with increased revenues due to building permit
activity. The increase in activity is driving the need for additional staff.

TRANSPORTATION
288

General Fund – Fund Type 10
Within the General Fund programs in the Department of Transportation (DOT), the
Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $789,216 or 47% in revenues and an
decrease of $5,526,233 or 78% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is decreased by $4,737,017 or 88%.
The decrease in revenues and appropriations is primarily related to the shifting of all facilities
functions out of DOT and into the Chief Administrative Office.
County Engineer (includes National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES))
The Department’s recommended budget for County Engineer includes an increase in
appropriations of $200,505 and an increase in revenues of $157,730 resulting in an increase in
Net County Cost of $42,775. Total Net County Cost for this program is $576,397. The increase
is related to changes in the NPDES program which includes additional professional services
costs required for updating the storm water management plan.
Within the General Fund, Public Utility Franchise Fees are utilized to fund half of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program. It is important to note that the Public
Utility Franchise Fees are a discretionary source of revenue and can be spent on any County
function. These funds used to be part of a Maintenance of Effort (MOE) related to our Prop 42
funds. However with the recent tax swap the new Highway Users Tax Account (HUTA) funds
do not require the MOE. The department anticipates $1,010,000 annually in Public Utility
Franchise Fees. The table below summarizes the department’s recommendation for use of
these funds in FY 2012-13.
Cemetery Operations
The Department’s recommended budget for Cemetery operations includes a decrease in
appropriations of $5,522 and an increase in revenues of $1,000 resulting in a Net County Cost
decrease of $6,522. Total Net County Cost for this program is $65,619.
Special Revenue Fund – Fund Type 11
The Recommended Budget represents an increase of $8,031,063 or 11% in revenue and
appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved budget. The budget includes a
General Fund contribution of $500,000 for the chip seal program and $13,378 for General Plan
Implementation.
The Special Revenue Fund budget is comprised of Road Fund Operations, Road Capital
Improvement Program, Road District Taxes, Erosion Control, Placerville Union Cemetery, and
Special Aviation. The chart below details the total revenues, appropriations and use of fund
balance included in the Recommended Budget for FY 2012-13.

Road Fund Operations
Road Fund Operations includes the Maintenance division, Transportation Planning and Land
Development, Engineering and Administration. The Recommended Budget includes a
decrease of $3,906,339 or 16% in total revenues and appropriations when compared to the FY
2011-12 approved budget.
The decrease in revenue is primarily due to the following; decreased state revenues of
approximately $1M related to an anticipated decrease in Highway Users Tax/Gas Tax and less
Regional Surface Transportation Planning (RSTP) funding; charges for service decrease of
approximately $1M primarily due to the reduction in reimbursement of staff time billings to other
funds and the elimination of overhead charges to the facilities functions transferred to the Chief
Administrative Office; and $4.9M decrease in use of fund balance, offset with an increase in
other financing sources of $3.1M related to the use of Road District Tax Fund balance.
In FY 2011-12 the budget included a $4.9M use of fund balance. The FY 2012-13
Recommended Budget does not include any use of road fund balance for Road Fund
Operations. However, fund balance from the Road District Tax Fund of approximately $3.1M is
included in the Road Fund Operations budget as an operating transfer in. It should be noted
that this is a one-time revenue source and the department will need to continue to find
sustainable savings to fund operations.
In an effort to reduce costs the department is proposing to leave fourteen (14) vacant positions
unfunded. The department wishes to retain the allocations at this time to allow management
time to analyze the structure of the road crews and to allow for future hiring if revenue
increases. The department is proposing to delete 1 Department Analyst allocation from the
Maintenance Division’s Administrative Unit and 1 Information Technology Department
Coordinator allocation. The deletion of the Information Technology Department Coordinator will
result in a reduction in force. The department is requesting the addition of a 0.8 Administrative
Technician for the administration of the County’s cemeteries function. This work was previously
performed by an extra help employee. The work is consistent and requires the addition of
permanent staff. Finally the department in conjunction with the Chief Administrative Office is
proposing an add/delete of 31 FTE’s associated with the facilities functions. These FTE’s will
be deleted from DOT and added to the Chief Administrative Office under the direction of the
Facilities Manager.
Road Fund Capital Improvement Program (CIP)
The Road Fund Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Recommended Budget represents an
increase of $8,302,564 or 20% in revenues and appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-
12 approved budget. This budget fluctuates depending on the Board approved CIP. Funding
and appropriations are consistent with the Proposed 2012 CIP and is based on a per project
basis. The FY 2012-13 budget does anticipate using $914,155 in road fund balance for the
Capital Improvement Program.
Special Districts – Fund Type 12
The Recommended Budget represents an increase of $27,796 or 1% in revenue and
appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved budget. This increase is primarily
due to increased use of fund balance to cover increased services and supplies.
Airports /South Lake Tahoe Transit – Fund Type 31
The Airports and South Lake Tahoe Transit are included in what is referred to as an Enterprise
Fund. In governmental accounting an Enterprise Fund is defined as a fund that provides goods
or services to the public for a fee that makes the entity self-supporting. Currently there is no
budget for South Lake Tahoe Transit as this fund is supposed to be closed in FY2011-12.
Both the Placerville and Georgetown Airports are operating at a loss. Staff are exploring
alternatives to reaching sustainable operations. These alternatives possibly include fee
increases (fees were increased two years ago but the rates are still lower than similar facilities
in the area), capital improvements to provide additional hangers, and alternative staffing
patterns.
The Recommended Budget represents an increase of $714,179 or 43% in revenues and
appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved budget. This change is primarily
related to increased fixed assets for anticipated capital projects primarily funded with federal
revenue.
Fleet – Fund Type 32
The Recommended Budget represents a decrease of $119,443 or 6% in revenues and
appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved budget. This change is primarily
related to decreases in depreciation expense and decreases in Road Fund Operations staff
charges. This budget includes an appropriation for the purchase of 43 replacement vehicles, of
which 25 are for the Sheriff’s department for a total cost of $1,200,000. These vehicles are
anticipated to exceed the replacement target mileage by December 2012.

ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
319

The General Fund programs include: Administration, Environmental Health, Hazardous
Materials—CUPA, River Management and Park Operations. The Recommended Budget
represents an overall increase of $45,299 or 2% in revenues and an increase of $6,635 or less
than 1% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2010-11 approved budget. As a result, the
Net County Cost has decreased by $38,664 or 23%.
The General Fund programs within Environmental Management are funded in part with garbage
franchise fees. These fees are estimated at $848,243 for FY 2012-13. These fees are
discretionary and can be utilized to fund any County costs. The FY 2012-13 budget includes
$275,000 of these fees in Department 15 to fund countywide Net County Cost with the
remaining $573,243 funding Environmental Management programs. Currently franchise fees
fund the following programs within Environmental Management:
The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes a total revenue increase of $45K. This
increase is primarily increased franchise fees. Appropriations have remained relatively flat with
a slight increase of $6,635.
The Department is not proposing any changes to current staffing levels.
CSA #10 & CSA #3 – Fund Type 12
The non-general fund programs within Environmental Management include South Lake Tahoe
Vector Control/Snow Removal (CSA #3), Household Hazardous Waste/Incident Response
(CSA #10), Solid Waste, and Liquid Waste. There is no Net County Cost associated with these
programs. Revenues and appropriations have decreased $1,075,192. Changes are primarily
due to the decreased use of fund balance and decreased appropriations associated with the
completion of the plant upgrades at the Union Mine Wastewater Treatment Plant.
The Department is not proposing any changes to current staffing levels.

FISH AND GAME
The Fish and Game Commission is appointed by the Board of Supervisors for the purpose of
advising the Board on matters related to the conservation of fish and game and overseeing the
expenditure of the fish and game funds received from fines collected by the Courts.

The Fish and Game Commission has the following goals for FY 2012-13:
 Continue to support the Department of Fish & Game in restoring fish stocking in El
Dorado County waters currently restricted by the order imposed as a result of the lawsuit
filed by the Pacific Rivers Council and the Center for Biological Diversity.
 Expand a local sportsman education program on problems caused by invasive species.
 Develop local K-9 Sponsorship and support for the California Fish & Game detection dog
program.
 Play an active role in the restoration of the fishery at Finnon Lake.
 Continue to work on the development and expansion of the Central Sierra Fish & Game
Commissions Association. This group is fostering improved communication and problem
solving on a regional level.
 Obtain increases in hatchery fish allocation and funding made available by AB 7
(Codgill).
 Continue to develop partnerships and support for the youth fishing project at Sawmill
Pond and advocate for expanded fishing opportunities in the Tahoe basin.

HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES AGENCY
The Recommended Budget for the Health & Human Services Agency is $116,824,863 with a
Net County Cost of $3,261,545 and a General Fund contribution of $5,766,234, an overall
decrease of $143,168 from the level of General Fund support included in the adopted
FY 2011-12 budget.
The total Recommended Budget for the Agency is decreasing by approximately $18 million or
13% when compared to FY 2011-12 primarily due to a change in budget methodology and also
due to decreasing revenues from state and federal sources. In previous years, the Adopted
Budget included all available fund balance in the Agency’s special revenue funds, with offsetting
appropriations in special department expense, special projects and contingency. In FY 2012-
13, the Agency is only including the fund balance necessary for current year program
expenditures resulting in a decreased use of approximately $13.5 million in fund balance. Other
significant decreases in the Agency’s budget are related to decreases of approximately $2.5
million in state and federal revenues for Client Assistance programs, Preparedness programs
and Alcohol Drug programs. Program revenues and appropriations are also decreasing by
approximately $1.8 within the Housing, Community and Economic Development Program
primarily related to the completion of the Mercy Housing and the EDBG Micro-enterprise
Facade projects in FY 2011-12.
Recommended Staffing Changes:
The Health & Human Services Agency is requesting a number of personnel allocation changes
that are better aligned with current funding, administrative and programmatic requirements. The
proposed changes result in a net increase of 8.2 FTE and a management/supervisory/line staff
ratio of 7.45% managers, 10.12% supervisors, and 82.43% line staff. There are no anticipated
reductions in force (RIF) associated with the proposed deletions to the personnel allocations.
Changes are detailed in the Personnel Allocation table and include a net increase of 1.4 FTE for
Mental Health programs, 2.0 FTE for Health Services fiscal unit, and 4.8 FTE to provide clerical
and program support for Health Services, Child Welfare, Eligibility, Aging and Sr. Day Care
programs. Funding for the allocation changes comes primarily from state, federal and
realignment funds.
Animal Services – General Fund
The Recommended Budget for Animal Services reflects a decrease of $68,080 or 6% in
revenues and an increase of $70,095 or 1% in appropriations when compared to the
FY 2011-12 budget. As a result, the Net County Cost is increasing by $109,272 or 10%. This
increase in Net County Cost is offset by a decrease in the General Fund Contribution for other
programs in Health Services. There is no net increase in the General Fund support for Public
Health.
Animal Services revenues are projected below FY 2011-12 budgeted levels based on actual
receipts to date. The decrease in Animal Services revenues is primarily related to lower than
anticipated revenue in licenses, adoptions and impounds due to the current economy. The
trend for licensing is to purchase 1 year at $20 instead of 3 years at $50. Department fiscal and
program staff are closely monitoring revenues through the final quarter of FY 2011-12 and will
make any necessary adjustments in the Addenda process. Additionally, the department
anticipates implementing the acceptance of credit card payments for Animal Services charges in
FY 2012-13 which may increase revenue collections.
Appropriations are increasing $31,213 primarily due to filling positions that have been vacant in
prior years. The Recommended Budget includes the deletion of 1.0 FTE Supervising Animal
Control Officer (vacant) and the addition of 1.0 FTE Animal Control Operations Manager in
order to provide the appropriate level of support for Animal Services programs and to act as
back up for the Chief Animal Control Officer. A part-time Sr. Office Assistant is also
recommended to focus on improved revenue collection efforts and to relieve field staff of
dispatching and office related tasks. Other staffing changes include contracting for part-time
veterinary services rather than using extra help.
West Slope Animal Services operations continue to be impacted by the need for a new shelter
facility. Currently staff operates out of multiple West Slope locations and is impacted by the
layout and physical limitations of the interim shelter. Staff will continue to coordinate with the
CAO to support the shelter project activities as may be approved by the Board.
Public Health– Fund Type 11
The Recommended Budget for Public Health programs is $19,215,154 with a General Fund
contribution of $4,081,550.
Revenues and appropriations are decreasing by $5,308,207 or 22% when compared to the FY
2011-12 adopted budget. The decrease in revenues and appropriations is primarily due to the
change in budget methodology noted above. The Recommended Budget no longer includes
the unanticipated use of fund balance that was previously budgeted which decreases revenues
and appropriations by approximately $3.5 million. Other revenue decreases include reductions
in state and federal funding Alcohol Drug programs ($400K), no planned use of Medi-Cal
Administrative Activities (MAA) fund balance ($267K), and reductions associated with the
completion of a number of grant funded activities in FY 2011-12. The budget includes a
General Fund contribution of $4,081,550 for various programs (see detail in Source of Funds
section above).
Revenues for CSA #3 and CSA #7 pre-hospital medical services and ambulance billing
programs include charges for services (primarily ambulance services), assessments and taxes;
and contract payments from the Miwok Tribe. The decrease in revenue in FY 2012-13 is
primarily due to the change in budget methodology noted above. The Health Services budget
no longer includes the unanticipated use of fund balance that was previously budgeted which
decreases revenues and appropriations by approximately $4 million. Property tax revenues are
estimated to increase by $54,926 and are consistent with countywide property tax projections
that reflect a half percent decrease from projected current year actuals. Other revenue
decreases include $225,534 in ambulance service charges based on current year projected
collections. Appropriations no longer include a contribution of $593,244 to local Fire Districts
that was included at Board direction in FY 2010-11 and FY 2011-12.
Health Services has developed a multi-year forecasting tool for use by the West Slope and
Cal-Tahoe JPAs and staff work collaboratively in developing and maintaining an annual
balanced operational budget for the CSAs. The forecasting tool enables staff and the JPAs to
incorporate assumptions about revenues and expenditures to clearly show the amount of any
fund balance required in each year and the longer term impact of the use of such fund balance.
For CSA 7, the five year forecast indicates a required use (depletion) of fund balance in the
current and future fiscal years. Projected expenditures exceed projected revenues by
approximately $1 million per year when one-time revenues and expenditures are excluded. If
the current revenue and expenditure trends continue, fund balance will be used each year and
ultimately depleted in FY 2016-17. The contract between the County and the West Slope JPA
requires that a minimum fund balance of $3,000,000 be maintained in CSA #7 unless a reduced
amount is approved by the County Board of Supervisors. This amount is included in the
forecast with no reductions. The department will be working closely with the Chief
Administrative Office and the Board of Supervisors to identify options to close the forecasted
budget gap.

The decrease in revenues and appropriations is primarily due to the change in budget
methodology noted above. The Recommended Budget no longer includes the unanticipated
use of fund balance that was previously budgeted which decreases revenues and
appropriations by approximately $5 million.
Traditional Mental Health Programs
The Recommended Budget for Traditional Mental Health Programs is $9,988,656 and
represents an overall increase of $641,925 or 6.87% when compared to the FY 2011-12
adopted budget. Traditional Mental Health programs are primarily funded by federal and state
revenues ($5,558,968), realignment revenues ($3,515,919) and charges for services to other
counties and private payers ($813,769). The Division is budgeting to spend $100,000 from fund
balance to cover one time anticipated moving costs associated with the Health and Human
Services Agency merge.
The Division has continued to focus on mandated and contractually obligated services, set
service priorities to fit within available revenues, and transition services from a
medical/institutional model to a wellness and recovery-oriented model in its MHSA programs.
As a result, the Recommended Budget for Traditional Mental Health programs is structurally
balanced. The budget does include the use of $100,000 from fund balance to cover potential
one-time relocation costs should a more appropriate and affordable leased space become
available. The department will be working closely with the CAO analyze actual fund blance
at the end of FY 2011-12 to identify potential opportunity to return prior year General Fund
advances back to the General Fund.
Inpatient Services – The Division has experienced an increase in the number of clients requiring
inpatient services and expects to see that trend continue in FY 2012-13. The 10-bed PHF
facility is regularly full, which then requires the use of contracted facilities in which to place our
County’s clients. The FY 2012-13 budget assumes an appropriation increase of $400K for
inpatient services compared to the FY 2011-12 adopted budget. Some of these costs will be
offset by Medi-Cal revenue; however, the majority of these costs will be funded with realignment
dollars. With more realignment dollars needed for inpatient services, the budget for outpatient
services is being reduced by $150K when compared to the FY 2011-12 adopted budget.
Services to the Juvenile Hall and the Juvenile Treatment Center (JTC) – The Juvenile Hall is
currently assigned a 0.75 FTE Mental Health Clinician to serve minors in the facility. The JTC is
currently allocated a 0.4 FTE Mental Health Clinician and has additional outside contract
services for drug and alcohol counseling. The Division also provides limited mental health
psychiatric services to minors in both facilities. Mental health services are funded by a
combination of State funds, grant funds and General Fund support passed through the
Probation Department. The Probation Department has included $50,000 in their FY 2012-13
budget to partially fund the current level of mental health services; however, a funding gap of
approximately $140K still remains. Mental Health is currently using mental health realignment
funds to cover this gap. Probation and Mental Health will be reviewing the current MOU to
determine applicable staffing needed for required service levels in FY 2012-13. Should
additional fund balance become available from the General Fund, the department is requesting
that funding be appropriated in the Addenda process to allow Probation sufficient time to
evaluate future mental health services requirements while maintaining the existing service levels
provided by Mental Health.
Ancillary Medical Costs – A potential issue for Health Services in FY 2012-13 is the payment of
ancillary mental health and medical services received by patients within Institutions for Mental
Diseases (IMDs). In FY 2009-10 the California Department of Health Care Services (DHCS)
and the DMH issued written documentation announcing a shift in financial responsibility for
those ancillary services from the State to the counties. These ancillary services may include the
cost of prescribed medications, off-site x-rays, lab, or hospital services, etc. The State is
indicating its intent to bill the counties for any such services that may have been provided and
billed to Medi-Cal. Counties do not yet have information relative to the amounts in question.
Some counties have filed a petition to the State Office of Administrative Law requesting a
determination that the DHCS and DMH communication be declared as invalid, underground
regulations. The Division continues to monitor this situation and will provide further information
to County Counsel relative to legal and fiscal impacts as it becomes available.
New Legislation – AB 1297 goes into effect on July 1, 2012. The most significant change from
this bill is the elimination of the Statewide Maximum Allowable (SMA) cost rate for Medi-Cal and
Healthy Families services. Due to the historically high cost of the PHF, the Division’s cost rate
for the past few years has exceeded the SMA cost rate. This resulted in Medi-Cal and Healthy
Families invoices to the State that were capped at less than actual cost. With the
implementation of AB 1297 in FY 2012-13, the Division will be able to bill at its actual cost rate,
which will result in a per unit increase in revenue for Medi-Cal and Healthy Families services.
Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) Programs
The Recommended Budget for MHSA Programs is $7,291,763 and represents an overall
decrease of $5,572,493 or 43% when compared to the FY 2011-12 adopted budget. This is
primarily due to the change in budget methodology noted above. In recent years, all available
Mental Health fund balance was budgeted in revenues with a corresponding amount budgeted
in special departmental expense for projects yet to be determined or not planned in the current
fiscal year. In FY 2012-13, Mental Health is only budgeting the portion of fund balance in each
program that is projected to be spent in the current year. MHSA programs are funded primarily

by MHSA funds ($4.4M) but also include federal revenues ($1.6M) for MHSA clients who are
eligible under the Medi-Cal and Healthy Families programs. The budget includes the use of
approximately $1.3M from available MHSA Fund Balance to fund programs in the Workforce
Education and Training (WET), Innovation and Capital Facilities and Technological Needs
(CFTN) programs in FY 2012-13.
Human Services
The total Recommended Budget for Human Services is $60,345,617 with a net County Cost of
$2,070,611 for its General Fund programs (Public Guardian and Social Services) and a General
Fund contribution of $1,668,174 for Community Services programs (Aging, HCED and
Community Assistance). Total General Fund support for the Human Services is $3,738,785 or
6% of total appropriations across all programs.
The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $3,588,571 or 6% in revenues
and a decrease of $3,959,241 or 6% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12
adopted budget. The General Fund contribution to Community Services programs is increasing
by $256,568; however, this increase is offset by a reduction in Net County Cost for Human
Services General Fund programs. As a result, General Fund support to Human Services
programs is decreasing by $114,102 when compared to the FY 2011-12 adopted budget.
Human Services – Fund Type 10
The Recommended Budget for Social Services and Public Guardian programs is $41,326,914
and reflects a decrease in revenue of 2% and a decrease in expenditures of 3% compared to
the FY 2011-12 adopted budget.
The decrease in revenues is primarily from reductions in state and federal direct client
assistance for the CalWorks and Foster Care programs and is offset by a corresponding
decrease in client assistance expenditures. There is an estimated increase of $594,230 in 1991
realignment revenues for Social Services based on current year projected actuals. The State
has not yet released any information about the 2011 Realignment revenue which could result in
unforeseen changes to the Social Services budget. Human Services will continue to monitor all
Realignment resources throughout FY 2011-12 and will make necessary adjustments to such
revenue estimates during the FY 2012-13 Addenda process.
Human Services – Fund Type 11
Community Services (Human Services Fund Type 11) includes the primary program areas of
Low Income Family Services, Workforce Investment, Aging Programs, and Housing, Community
and Economic Development Programs (HCED). The Recommended Budget for Community
Services is $14,451,102 and reflects a decrease of $2,225,645 or 13% from the FY 2011-12
adopted budget.
The decrease in Community Services is due to significant changes in available grants and
projects within HCED programs, including the completion of the Mercy Housing and the EDBG
Micro-enterprise Facade project, totaling approximately $1,800,000 in both revenues and
appropriations. Other appropriation decreases include decreases in salaries and benefits due
to minor staffing adjustments ($44,925), fixed assets ($50,425), and an Interfund Transfer
abatement that will result in a reimbursement of $150,000 to the Senior Nutrition Program for
the preparation of meals for Mental Health Psychiatric Health Facility. As noted above, the
General Fund contribution to Community Services programs is increasing by $256,568;
however, this increase is offset by a reduction in Net County Cost for Human Services General
Fund programs. As a result, General Fund support to Human Services programs is decreasing
by $114,102 when compared to the FY 2011-12 adopted budget.
Human Services – Fund Type 12
The Recommended Budget for the IHSS Public Authority and the Public Housing Authority is
$4,567,601 and reflects a decrease of $426,042 or 9% from the FY 2011-12 adopted budget.
There is no change in the General Fund contribution to the IHSS Public Authority.
The decrease in revenues and appropriations is primarily associated with the negotiation of a
new Memorandum of Understanding with the United Domestic Workers of America (UDWA) to
establish a trust for IHSS Public Authority provider health benefits that results in a reduction of
$390,000 in budgeted health benefits compared to prior years.

VETERANS AFFAIRS
413

The Recommended Budget represents an overall increase of $3,300 or 4% in revenues and an
increase of $56,682 or 16% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12 approved
budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has increased $53,382 or 2%.
The change in revenues is due to increased use of the Veteran license plate special revenue
fund. The change in appropriations is related to increases in salaries and benefits due to the
addition of one FTE Veterans Service Representative, which will be split between two half-time
employees. The department has been relying on extra help to meet its basic workload needs.
After discussion with Human Resources, it was determined necessary to add permanent staff.
Other appropriations are remaining flat.
The Recorder-Clerk/Registrar of Voters will continue to act as the department head through this
fiscal year.

LIBRARY
425

The Recommended Budget represents an overall decrease of $11,696 or 0.63% in revenues
and a decrease of $20,234 or 0.6% in appropriations when compared to the FY 2011-12
approved budget. As a result, the Net County Cost has decreased $8,538 or 0.57%.
Revenues remain flat at $1,845,445 with approximately $1.4 million from special taxes and
benefit assessments from the various library zones; $212,500 from First 5 El Dorado grant
funds; and the remainder from charges for services and donations. First 5 funding has
decreased by $42,500 in FY 2012-13 due to reductions from State budget actions. Additional
revenue from Library taxes and fund balance has been included to offset the loss of grant
funding and maintain service levels in the current year. The Library is working closely with the
Chief Administrative Office to develop an appropriate long term strategy for ongoing Library
funding.
Expenditures are also flat at $3,334,010. Increases of $38,634 in salaries and benefits costs
are primarily related to a requested change in the department’s personnel allocation and
increases in health insurance costs. This increase is offset by reductions in extra help staff
(primarily associated with First 5 funding) and a number of services and supplies line items
including books, computer equipment and subscription databases.
The Department is requesting the deletion of 1.0 Librarian I/II and the addition of a Supervising
Librarian for the South Lake Tahoe Branch. This change is requested to provide consistency of
staffing levels at each branch.
CHILD SUPPORT SERVICES

The department’s State funding allocation for FY 2012-13 Child Support Administration activities
remains at $4,747,119 and consists of a base allocation of $4,578,589 and revenue stabilization
augmentation funds of $168,530 dedicated to programs that maximize the probability of success
in Child Support collections. The augmentation funding is part of the local assistance base
budget and is not a one time augmentation. These funds are directed to an “early intervention”
program within the Department. Early intervention has been proven to be effective in both
increasing collections and improving performance measures. The State allocation for the
Electronic Data Processing Maintenance and Operations (EDP/MO) program is anticipated to
be $185,678, approximately the same level as FY 2011-12.
The Recommended Budget represents and overall decrease in revenues and appropriations
of $81,314 or 15%. There is no Net County Cost for Child Support Services.
Salaries and benefits are decreasing by $48,675. This reduction is primarily due to the
elimination of extra help that was used in FY 2011-12 the implementation of a statewide backfile
indexing project in support of a paperless processing system (-$113,932) which is partially
offset by an increase in permanent employee salaries associated with lower vacancy rates
experienced by the department.
Services and supplies are increasing by $43,002 primarily for facilities related activities. The
department plans to relocate staff in South Lake Tahoe from current leased space into County
owned space within the El Dorado Center. This relocation is anticipated to require
approximately $25,000 in one-time remodel and move costs but would eliminate rent and utility
costs in the current and future years. The department’s share of costs for the County-owned
facility costs will be billed to them in the future through the County A-87 Cost Allocation Plan.
The Recommended Budget includes funding for the potential relocation of the Placerville Child
Support office into an alternative leased facility. This relocation would allow the Health and
Human Services Agency to consolidate and co-locate its functions by using the space vacated
by Child Support Services, and it would provide more efficient and appropriate space for Child
Support activities and clients. The department is working with the Chief Administrative Office
to evaluate facility options and anticipates bringing a recommendation to the Board in June
2012. Increases in services and supplies for anticipated facility related costs is offset by
reductions in a number of other line items (special department expense, staff development and
software licenses) as well as reductions in Intrafund transfer line items including County A-87
charges and IT/telephone charges.
Although the department’s budget is fully funded by a combination of Federal and State Child
Support allocations, and charges to courts and County departments for Revenue Recovery
Services, overall increases in operational costs such as salaries, health insurance, planned
facility costs and fuel purchases require the department to reduce its annual budget to remain
within allocated funding sources. To accomplish this, the department plans to hold 4 positions
vacant until final confirmation of Child Support funding is obtained. The Chief Administrative
Office is monitoring proposed Federal and State budget proposals for any potential impact to
local Child Support funding and will provide an update to the Board along with recommended
budget adjustments should there be any changes to the current funding allocations.
El Dorado County Child Support Services was identified by the State as a top performing
county, rated #4 out of the 58 California Counties for Federal Fiscal Year 2011 with total
collections of $12.6 million. Additionally, the Revenue Recovery Division anticipates collecting
approximately $3 million in revenues in FY 2012-13 for the agencies and departments they
serve. Of that $3 million, collections for County departments are projected at $109,000 and
offset costs in those departments. A portion of those collections is retained to offset direct
program costs allowing for a zero Net County Cost budget.