 Continue to engage with LADWP over water management during the ongoing drought, and monitor the
effects.
 Meet the requirements of SGMA by forming a groundwater sustainability agency for Owens Valley.
 Seek Standing Committee approval of Green Book revisions for Owens Valley vegetation monitoring.
 Complete work on the grant for the Tecopa water vending machine with additional funding from the Water
Projects Fund.
 Continue work to obtain LORP Water Trails grant Continue to treat and monitor saltcedar in the Owens Valley
 Work with Cal Fire to burn saltcedar slash piles.
 Continue Coordination for transportation to and from VA medical appointments, outreach efforts;
Collaborating with other county/government agencies; Continuing Education and meeting VA Requirements
for continued VA access
 To reimburse the local Sheriff and other law enforcement agencies including Probation for the collection of
DNA specimens, samples and print impressions; for expenditures/administration costs incurred to comply
with Penal Code Section 298(b)(5).
 Purchase 1 new LiveScan machine for the Bishop Police Department
 Purchase 2 new body cameras for the District Attorney's office
 Purchase 1 new mobile fingerprint device for the Probation Department
 Maintain the maintenance agreements for 3 LiveScan machines located at the Jail Facility and the Bishop
Police Department
 Reimburse the Probation Department and the Bishop Police Department for the CLETS line.
 Conduct a tax-defaulted land auction which will result in clearing delinquencies from the tax rolls.
 Expect to implement the PTMS software system resulting in increased efficiencies in the processing of the
property tax rolls and collections.
 Issue an RFP for credit card vendors to interface with the new property tax system expanding on available
services for EFT payments.
 Increase focus on delinquent unsecured property taxes. Implement the collection tools available by law to
increase our collection averages.
 Continue to upgrade equipment (car cameras, personal cameras, emergency equipment), maintain and
monitor the Sheriff's Office website, maintain, test, educate and familiarize the public with the Code Red
emergency notification system, stay connected to State Vine Program (Victim Information Notification
Everyday) and continue to coordinate the multi-agency Unified Command meetings.
 The Sheriff's Office has combined the Narcotics task force with the Investigations Division into MINT
(Major Investigations & Narcotics Team). Continue the joint task force approach to investigations. Certify
more investigators in the Forensic Children Interview techniques.
 Staff OES and Homeland Security positions to meet the increasing demands by the State and Federal
Government grants. Train other agencies/Departments in Emergency Services and Interoperability
Communications. Maintain, test, educate and familiarize the public with the Code Red emergency
notification system.
 Increase the level of community support we continue to enjoy by providing the public services within our
scope of responsibility and availability, maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and
other County entities that allow for better public services through cooperation. Continue the program to
make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County and provide assistance elsewhere
when requested through improved equipment, training and volunteer recruitment.
 Train and certify a narcotics K-9 and handler and make available for local and interagency use.
 Maintain a supportive affiliation with the local rescue and support groups and assist their efforts with off-site
adoption events.
 Ensure rabies vaccination compliance with an emphasis on license enforcement.
 Promote the Department and the Shelter as being a part of the Inyo County Sheriff's Office. Publicize the
Inyo County Sheriff's Animal Shelter through media contacts and promote the services that are provided by
the Shelter.
 Continue with our efforts to ensure that the public is served as promptly and as efficiently as possible.
 Provide continuing education for Animal Officers and shelter staff.
 Fill all existing vacancies in the correctional officer ranks.
 Meet annually STC training requirements with little to no outside training
 Increase number of inmate programs provided.
 Increase collaboration with Re-entry Coordinator
 Implement 4019.4 policy to provide program credits.
 Continue the maintenance and service of the system with Sun Ridge Systems.
 Further expand inmate programs in the jail.
 Implement tablet/internet based inmate programming
 Continue to train our staff in-house to minimize costs.
 Additional training for correctional staff to augment inmate programs.
 Continue maintenance and service contract with American Security Systems.
 Expand recording capabilities and add additional cameras
 Our goal is to meet or exceed all regulatory mandates by STC and receive notification of compliance
 Attain full staffing levels
 Achieve 100 percent compliance with STC training requirements this fiscal year
 Operate within the budget.
 Reduce overtime where possible.
 Continue to provide Title 15 requirements for adult and juvenile facilities.
 Look for cost savings without compromising quality and nutrition.
 Maintain all equipment in good working order.
 Maintaining staffing level up to allocated strength. Emphasis on training for Deputies as experienced
Deputies have been replaced by entry level or minimally experienced personnel. Continue to look for grant
funding for additional personnel, training and equipment.
 Maintain the grant funded OHV program to monitor and patrol the new Adventure Trails system.
 Continue to analyze staffing allocations to provide more efficiency, better supervision and more cost
effectiveness. Finalize the narcotics detection K-9 program.
 Continue the level of community support we enjoy by providing the public services within our scope of
responsibility and availability. Maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other
County entities that allow for better public services through cooperation.
 Continue to make the Search and Rescue program available to meet any rescue need in the County, and
assistance elsewhere when requested, through improved equipment and training.
 Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution, and availability of methamphetamine locally.
 Reduction in methamphetamine related offenses
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites and physical property damage associated with methamphetamine
manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with methamphetamine abuse
 Support the MINT daily operations including but not limited to, office expenses and training.
 Locate and eradicate marijuana cultivation sites throughout the County
 Identify and apprehend all persons responsible for the cultivation sites
 Reduce marijuana production and distribution
 Reduce the hazardous waste associated with marijuana cultivation
 Maintain grant funding for the operation of the INET Task Force
 Continue off road patrol
 Provide ongoing training to patrol staff
 Provide ongoing maintenance to all OHV equipment and to purchase additional needed patrol equipment
 Provide public education and awareness for public activities
 Plan for department adjustments as existing employees retire
 Identify mechanisms to maintain a financially sustainable Road Department
 Complete agreement with Forest Service for Joint Maintenance Activities
 Work with Forest Service to perfect County Rights-of-Ways through Forest lands
 Complete Gullywasher storm damage repairs
 Complete construction of Ed Powers Road Bicycle Lane Project
 Complete construction of West Bishop Resurfacing Project
 Complete Design of Carroll, Oak Creek, and Walker Bridges
 Complete Design and Construction of Striping and Rumble Strip H.S.I.P.
 Continue work on Bridge Maintenance Program
 Complete Construction of Upper and Lower Trona Wildrose Emergency Projects
 Complete Construction of Dehy Park
 Complete Construction of Ed Powers Bike Lane
 Complete Construction of Bishop and Independence Airport Crack Seal Projects
 Provide engineering support for various enterprise functions and other County departments
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained
 Replace lights as needed
 Continue to operate and maintain airport facilities
 Continue to prepare projects for Terminal area and other minor improvements
 Continue to attempt to secure funding for future AIP projects
 Complete construction of Airfield Crack Repair and Terminal Fencing Project
 Continue seeking FAA funding for improvement to the Bishop Airport
 Provide financial relief to the Bishop Airport Operating Budget
 Develop Cooperative Building Plancheck and Inspection Agreement with the City of Bishop
 Operate and Maintain Collection System
 Independence Mechanical Evaluation
 Jail Repair and Replacement Evaluation
 Various Roof Projects
 Additional HVAC Replacements
 ADA Compliant Store Fronts
 Complete Construction
 Project Closeout
Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including weed abatement, (spraying) and runway edge
lighting
 Provide resources and other support for Airport Improvement Projects
 Completed Construction of the Independence Crack Repair Project
Provide financial relief to Independence Operating Budget
 Administer district and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained
 Replace lights as needed
 Complete Transmission Main Replacement
 Perform Rate Analysis
 Provide Funding to Repair Transmission Main
 Provide Funding to Replace Chlorine Analyzer
 Repair of Pressure Tank
 Refine airport operations
 Increase fuel revenues
 Increase preventative maintenance and landscaping activities
 Complete design and construction of Lone Pine Lighting Project
 Complete Airport Layout Plan and Narrative
 Continue financial assistance for the Lone Pine Airport operating budget
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained
 Replace lights as needed
 Continue to refine maintenance and repair costs and procedures
 Perform Rate Analysis
 Continue to provide the highest level of support and service as possible
 Utilize CAMS data to schedule repairs and maintenance activities
 Evaluate all mechanical systems
 Evaluate County Jail short and long term replacement and repair needs
 Continue to pay County leases and utility accounts.
 Design and Construction
 Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including keeping all navigation aids in serviceable
condition and keeping the runway free of weeds and debris.
 Development and submittal of grant applications
 Complete a Stormwater Master Plan for the City of Bishop
 Completion of Triennial Performance Audits of the LTC, ESTA, and ESAAA
 Work to enter into right of way agreements with the Inyo National Forest for roads that are part of the
County maintained mileage system
 Develop Project Study Report equivalents for City and County transportation projects
 Complete the Property Tax System conversion
 Complete the appraisals as a result of change in corporate control for Altice (Suddenlink), AB Acquisitions,
LLC (Albertsons/Vons)
 Resolve the American Perlite appeal
 Inventory and value the development of the Arbors project in Bishop, the new Crystal Geyser bottling plant,
and the improvements and equipment related to the remodel at Shoshone.
 To reestablish the property tax audit program
 Get the Ag Economic Study completed and out to the public. Begin applying this data to local issues to find
solutions.
 Provide excellent customer service to the citizens of Inyo/Mono Counties.
 Respond quickly and effectively to issues and/or complaints.
 Maintain our 100% rate of inspection for all weighing and measuring devices within Inyo and Mono.
 Begin testing of retail LPG meters in-house.
 Continue to ensure program viability by aggressively pursuing short and long-term funding opportunities
through grant applications, outside agreements, legislation, and other contracts.
 Continue to improve mapping methods and invasive plant database.
 When resources permit, continue invasive plant management in all areas where ESWMA had previously
conducted this work.
 Finish ESMWA MOU and Strategic plan update.
 Continue public outreach activities. Foster communication between multiple agencies to minimize
management hurdles created by jurisdictional boundaries.
 Improve disease and emerging and invasive mosquito detection by using innovative traps and detection
equipment.
 Continue to work with local agencies to reduce mosquito breeding sources.
 Continue to contribute to the contingency fund that will insure service during unexpected adult mosquito
outbreaks.
 Fulfill 5 year contract as full service provider for Mammoth Lakes Mosquito Abatement District.
 Work with the Inyo County Superior Court to gain access to the court's electronic new OneSolution case
system to be viewable by child support officers to assist in locating parents, and establishing and/or enforcing
child support orders. This interface is available to other child support agencies and their local courts
throughout the state. It will assist us with improving our location of absent parents.
 Focus on improved communication of services to customers, and community partners through the
development of a public service announcement, increased communication tools to persons owing support,
and installing a monitor in our lobby to explain our services and answer questions as customers wait to meet
with their caseworker.
 Continue to meet all State and Federal guidelines and continue to align our procedures with State Department
of Child Support Services policies.
 Maintain excellent customer service.
 Increase collections for the wellbeing of families.
 Increase Fees received to offset request for a part-time Deputy position
 Present to the Board of Supervisors the need for a Deputy to assure Legal Compliance to California Probate
Code
 Complete the case management system upgrade project - 6 months
 Continue work on policy and procedure manual - review quarterly
 Explore the implementation of a reentry court and supervision model
 Expand the use of pre-trial and electronic monitoring program - outcome measure by number of inmates in
the jail
 Increase services to adults through a collaborative service delivery plan - outcome measured by number and
type of service
 Implement a weekend commit program to address the declining number of juveniles detained at ICJC - 6
months
 Provide expanded juvenile services using existing highly trained staff in a collaborative service delivery
model
 Expand the use of electronic monitoring program as an alternative to detention
 Collaborate with education partners to support a non-secure court school
 Effectively utilize out-of-county facilities to detain juvenile offenders in a manner that ensures the safety of
the community and the well-being of the youth.
 During the transition of the Juvenile Hall to a Special Purpose Facility (aka Weekend-Only Juvenile Hall)
ensure that expenditures for out of county placements are properly tracked and accounted for, and carefully
monitored.
 Address mental health issues within the jail - additional qualified staff needed.
 Explore the implementation and support of a reentry court - dedicated personnel needed.
 Support an Area Resource Center targeted at felony probationers and their families.
 Integrate case management systems of the Court, DA, Probation, and Sheriff's Office to provide outcome
data.
 Provide expanded adult services including out-of-custody MRT groups for the entire County.
 To maintain a high level of customer service in an efficient and effective manner to successfully implement
the County's planning programs, including the following: continue work on the North Sierra Highway
Corridor & Specific Plan, and focused planning in SE Inyo County, participate in development of a
comprehensive response to the evolving State marijuana regulations, and complete and implement the
County's Tribal Consultation Policy;
 Participate in and influence the Inyo National Forest Plan Update/Revision; continue/maintain efforts and
coordination in the DRECP, RETI 2.0, Natural Resources Advisory Committee (NRAC), Desert Protection
Act, Saline Valley Plan, Owens Lake Master Plan/Project;
 Continue to implement the Crystal Geyser/Roxane Bottling Plant and Coso Geothermal projects; continue the
General Plan and Zoning Code update and environmental review; continue to assist the Public Works
Department with the Mixed Use Roads Project; continue to monitor proposals to list and designate critical
habitat for three Sierra amphibians pursuant to the FESA, as well as other USFWS and California
Department of Fish and Wildlife proposals, and; continue to assist other departments and agencies in CEQA
compliance;
 To meet all requirements relating to Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (SMARA) and the
County's mining regulations;
 To maintain current information on the website, as mandated by Government Code section 56150, process
land use and planning projects that require Planning Commission review, and continue to staff the YMRAO
and Inyo LAFCO.
 Maintain a contract with counsel in the event licensing proceedings unexpectedly recommence.
 Continue working with the AULGs to monitor DOE activities related to the License Application review
process, advocate for additional funding as appropriate.
 Review and provide input regarding the final SEIS, as necessary.
 Participate in federal oversight of past expenditures, as necessary.
 Continue to monitor groundwater in Southeast Inyo County with the USGS and other interested agencies.
 Continue to provide quality health care to minors in the correctional system as needed and increase
coordination of health services for children in foster care.
 Assure public health preparedness, response priorities, policies, and plans are in place in preparation of a
disaster.
 Continue to fulfill Public Health mandates including communicable disease investigation and reporting, TB
control, pregnancy testing, and immunization services.
 Continue to monitor the availability of health and dental services throughout the community, and assess gaps
in health care access in light of the changing healthcare environment under the Affordable Care Act.
 Encourage individuals and families to establish a health home with community healthcare providers, while
continuing to provide or find a safety net of services to ensure those who are left without affordable health
insurance have access to basic health care services.
 Provide additional medical case management training to at least one nurse in the Public Health department.
 Continue to increase knowledge of HIV/AIDS disease process among Public Health staff by taking
advantage of available webinars and conferences.
 Continue to assist HIV-infected individuals with accessing culturally appropriate, confidential medical care
by maintaining relationships with referral sources within the county and with HIV specialists outside the
county.
 Maintain CCS case management services for the current caseload by training a new nurse case manager and
providing cross training to existing nurse staff.
 Continue to collaborate with outside agencies that provide services to the target population to ensure that
client medical and transportation needs are met.
 Ensure coordination and effective links to Medi-Cal Managed Care plans in order to increase insurance
coverage for families and children.
 Continue to coordinate MTP services to meet the needs of the eligible children of Inyo County.
 Increase collaboration with other county services and outside agencies that provide services to MTP clients to
ensure that children who need special equipment and/or therapy continue to receive services in an efficient
and effective manner.
 Continue to cross train nursing staff to ensure continuity of case management in this program.
 Continue to assist families with case management needs and referrals based on findings from CHDP exams.
 Work with medical providers to understand and properly document CHDP preventive exams in order to
ensure that accurate diagnosis and referral information is captured.
 Collaborate with local health care providers to assist with appropriate referrals for various needs, such as
obesity prevention, as identified in CHDP exams.
 Provide foster care nurse case management training to new Public Health nursing staff in order to ensure that
the health needs of the children in placement and those children preparing to transition into independent
living as adults are monitored and effectively addressed.
 Continue disaster preparedness efforts and develop contingency plans in the event that the community is
isolated by a disaster, including the community potluck event that support the community's maintenance of a
food bank that ensures families have adequate access to food in the event of a crisis or other emergency.
 Continue outreach to high-risk children and families to provide information and resources to strengthen the
families' abilities to prevent child abuse or out of home placement, drug and alcohol abuse, domestic
violence, as well as addressing mental health issues.
 Coordinate quarterly meetings of the HHS Coalition in Southeastern Inyo with the HHS Director and/or her
designee's attendance, including outreach to community partners such as the Death Valley School District.
Continue to utilize the videoconferencing equipment in the Tecopa Community Center to access remote
services as appropriate and provide assistance in accessing services, including, but not limited to CalFresh,
Medi-Cal, Behavioral Health Services, cash assistance and other supportive services as identified.
 Implement the Kingsview/Cerner electronic billing and health record product to increase efficiency in work
flow, quality assurance, monitoring of outcomes and trend analysis. We will use the system in conjunction
with Kingsview as a telemedicine provider to increase capacity and billing of telemedicine/telecare.
 Increase capacity for effective home-based/field-based services for youth and families as part of the larger
foster care Continuum of Care reform/local Area Resource Services Re-Design, in conjunction with other
HHS divisions, Probation and other agency/community partners.
 Implement expanded offerings at the new Bishop Wellness Center site to effectively engage transition-aged
youth as well as adults with unstable living environments; develop peer supporters to assist with care at both
sites; target integrated health through the scheduled presence of Behavioral Health nurses at the Wellness
Center sites.
 Continue a focus on effective intervention with criminal justice-involved population, increasing capacity
where appropriate.
 Increase number of staff trained and experienced in crisis intervention as part of the crisis response services.
 Continue to comply with State program requirements, ensuring a cost neutral program.
 Continue to employ current addiction treatment and education strategies for use in groups and share effective
treatment strategies across addiction services programs to enhance offerings.
 Utilize ongoing satisfaction questionnaires in order to provide feedback to group facilitators.
 Ensure the well-being of seniors served through ESAAA, by coordinating with other HHS programs and
community partners, ensuring the broadest safety net possible.
 Continue to evaluate and assess options to reduce costs while maintaining the highest level of services to
seniors, including, but not limited to recruiting, training and supporting at least one additional volunteer in
the Ombudsman program.
 Continue to implement and manage data within the new California Aging Reporting System (CARS) data
management system, which is required by the California Department of Aging in a manner that allows us to
be able to gather and compile data for reporting purposes for policy makers, the community and the State, to
ensure decision-making is based on most accurate information available.
 Evaluate management, supervision, monitoring and service provision procedures for contracted services
(Mono County and CA Indian Legal Services) and conduct monitoring visits and technical assistance in
accordance with Title XXII, as well as the provisions of the Older Americans Act.
 Continue to strengthen families through parenting education in the community and at the county jail, as well
as through parent coaching programs focused on early language acquisition and developmental play.
 Continue to work closely with WIC, MCAH, Prevention, and other HHS programs to create coordinated
access for the families we serve- including low-income families with young children who receive services
through the proposed Area Resource Center- to critical aids like diapers, safe sleep or play resources, donated
books & toys, plus referrals to WIC, Medi-Cal, Cal Fresh, or employment resources.
 Expand on the Inyo Triple P and Inyo Ages & Stages Networks we established in 2015-16 with newly
concentrated training efforts in Inyo that allow for local capacity building at a reduced cost to our partner
agencies. This is the next step in developing an integrated system of evidence-based parenting resources that
local health, education, and social service providers share with families in a united manner.
 Participate in First 5 Association evaluation indicators project, helping set the stage for statewide selection of
unified indicators that will tell the story of how children are impacted by our services and programs.
 Work with regional QRIS/IMPACT partners at the Inyo Superintendent of Schools, as well as Mono and
Alpine counties to establish local efficiencies and build local capacities to uphold quality child care and early
education site improvements after initial funding for these programs is expended.
 Increase capacity to meet the treatment needs of children and youth who are involved in the dependency
and/or behavioral health systems helping to prevent out of home placements as well as diverting potential
involvement in probation.
 As the State continues to move forward to full implementation of the Continuum of Care Reform (CCR),
transitioning group homes to Short Term Residential Treatment Programs (STRTP), which will be charged
with ensuring that children/youth receive intensive therapeutic services and returned to their own
communities at the earliest possible point, FIRST hopes to increase the capacity to provide wraparound
programming to youth and their families or resource families who are being diverted from STRTP's or are
transitioning back from STRTP's.
 Increase the capacity to meet the needs of youth who would otherwise be detained at the juvenile facility, as
well as their families.
 Continue to demonstrate an increase in protective capacity scores of children and youth who have
participated in the program as a result of being at risk of involvement in child welfare/probation, at risk of
placement in out of home care or at risk of STRTP.
 Implement and stay current with all new program requirements mandated by the State and Federal
governments, ensuring federal linkage to funding to the fullest extent possible.
 Divert or reduce the length of time people are receiving cash assistance by assisting clients in developing the
skills needed to enter or re-enter the workforce, including involving the General Relief clients in the
enhanced training provided by our Employment unit, as Subsidized Employment is implemented in our
CalWORKs/Welfare to Work program.
 Reduce the length of time individuals are accessing General Relief and recover General Relief money by
assisting clients in applying for Social Security and helping them through the appeals process as needed.
 Continue to provide case management services and interventions necessary in maintaining a small caseload
while continuing to support the indigent residents of our county.
Ensure a broad-based safety net of services is available for our most vulnerable, isolated seniors, connecting
them to alternative resources as appropriate.
 Evaluate effectiveness of the IC-GOLD services and continue to identify ways to reduce the County General
Fund costs by coordinating with other resources and adjusting program services as appropriate.
 Actively conduct volunteer recruitment efforts throughout the county with a goal of increasing volunteer
hours at each site, as well as establishing opportunities to sponsor seniors with financial support.
 Improve awareness of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) prevention through public information
outreach and participation in community events.
 Continue to support means of access to dental care for children and pregnant women.
 Maintain an active and dynamic focus on childhood obesity promotional and prevention activities.
 Continue participation in the Inyo County Car Seat Program for injury prevention.
 Provide prevention outreach and education to juvenile hall participants and other high-risk young people.
 Enhance supportive services available through Employment and Eligibility by strengthening our employment
services through continued implementation of comprehensive Employment Readiness workshops;
implementation of Subsidized Employment services; enhancing support services to employers who accept
job placements; and, providing high quality, respectful customer service to individuals and families who are
accessing public assistance.
 Ensure the safety and well-being of children by providing high quality child welfare services to children and
their families, including connecting families to supportive services, including their own external support
networks.
 Ensure the safety and well-being of seniors and dependent adults by effectively assessing needs, identifying
appropriate interventions and connecting to appropriate resources to help maintain the highest level of
independence safely.
 Conduct proactive recruitment activities to increase the number of resource families available to provide out
of home care for foster youth placed by both the child welfare and probation systems; increase the available
training for resource families, ensuring that caregivers are able to manage caring for children and youth with
more challenging behaviors; and increase the in home supports available to caregivers.
 Continue working across HHS Department divisions to coordinate and enhance available prevention,
intervention and treatment services to better support clients served through Social Services and other
departmental programs, as well as remain emergency-ready, prepared to respond to disasters as needed.
 Increase effectiveness and capacity for Substance Use Disorder treatment with those in the criminal-justice
(including the jail facility) or dependency populations through the use of employees trained in addiction
counseling and through enhanced MRT and Trauma MRT offerings.
 Increase treatment offerings to youth and families in their homes and communities as part of the area
resource service development as a response, in part, to transforming juvenile services, as well as in response
to the statewide implementation of the Continuum of Care Reform.
 Provide practicum oversite for employees trained through the University of the Pacific Addiction Counseling
Certification program.
 Continue to provide accurate and timely benefits to eligible families, following the federal and state laws and
regulations.
 Continue anti-fraud monitoring activities regularly involving cross system managers.
 Provide tobacco prevention outreach and education to juvenile hall participants and other high-risk young
people.
 Conduct 24 one-hour Youth Coalition lunchtime meetings at 2 high schools to continue to promote healthy
lifestyles among youth and foster youth leadership.
 Involve Youth Coalition members in supporting community norm change and cessation by conducting 3
radio and print ad campaigns in English and Spanish.
 Recruit new members and foster a vibrant adult coalition to continue work on community education and
tobacco prevention initiatives.
 Continue to coordinate and collaborate with other Health and Human Services programs to provide a
continuum of prevention services for the public.
 Continue active participation in Team Inyo for Healthy Kids workgroup. Continue participation in outreach
events representing Team Inyo for Healthy Kids.
 Continue to provide local WIC vendors (Vons, and Smart & Final) in Inyo County with a Local Vendor
Liaison to communicate WIC program updates, policies , quarterly technical assistant visits and follow-up to
ensure successful completion launch of new authorized approved foods and provide excellent customer
service to WIC participants. Additionally, continue collaboration with other service providers to promote
and enhance increased utilization of Farmers Market vouchers along with continuance of Farmers Market
Program for Inyo WIC participants and ESAAA senior program.
 Continue collaboration with the Toiyabe WIC program, and the Inyo County First 5, MCAH and Prevention
Services specifically in the area of breastfeeding promotion, breastfeeding supplies and support to teen and
at-risk, low-income parents in preparation of the 9th annual Breastfeeding Awareness celebrations in Bishop
and Lone Pine.
 Collaborate with Inyo County Public Health, First 5 and HHS Prevention Services to participate in annual
2016 Earth Day Sierra Celebration to continue to promote "Re-Think Your Drink" campaign to combat
childhood obesity.
 Complete process of cross-training our Prevention Specialists as Certified WIC Nutrition Assistants to
enhance services to shared participants among co-located WIC, First 5 and Prevention Services programs.
 Continue active participation in Team Inyo for Healthy Kids workgroup. Continue participation in outreach
events representing Team Inyo for Healthy Kids.
 Continue to provide local WIC vendors (Vons, and Smart & Final) in Inyo County with a Local Vendor
Liaison to communicate WIC program updates, policies , quarterly technical assistant visits and follow-up to
ensure successful completion launch of new authorized approved foods and provide excellent customer
service to WIC participants. Additionally, continue collaboration with other service providers to promote
and enhance increased utilization of Farmers Market vouchers along with continuance of Farmers Market
Program for Inyo WIC participants and ESAAA senior program.
 Continue collaboration with the Toiyabe WIC program, and the Inyo County First 5, MCAH and Prevention
Services specifically in the area of breastfeeding promotion, breastfeeding supplies and support to teen and
at-risk, low-income parents in preparation of the 9th annual Breastfeeding Awareness celebrations in Bishop
and Lone Pine.
 Collaborate with Inyo County Public Health, First 5 and HHS Prevention Services to participate in annual
2016 Earth Day Sierra Celebration to continue to promote "Re-Think Your Drink" campaign to combat
childhood obesity.
 Complete process of cross-training our Prevention Specialists as Certified WIC Nutrition Assistants to
enhance services to shared participants among co-located WIC, First 5 and Prevention Services programs.
 Market the available employment registration services to residents throughout the community, with an
emphasis on clients served by county programs, including, but not limited to, Employment and Eligibility,
Probation, Behavioral Health.
 Stay current on program regulations to ensure compliance with State and Federal regulations.
 Conduct public workshops on food preservation in all communities in Inyo and Mono counties, in
collaboration with our tribes.
 Plan and host a training for new Master Gardener Volunteers
 Take advantage of upcoming personnel changes in the department to devise a more cost-effective staffing
solution moving forward and update the UC - Inyo County Memorandum of Understanding
 To advise and to work with the Tri-County Fair to increase community participation through premium book
updates, collaborative efforts, and educational events for the public.
 Expand nutrition awareness in Inyo County schools and adults by partnering with Kern County to host a
nutrition program representative
 Follow-up on any outstanding projects
 Hold at least one meeting for all lessees
 Coordinate with Board Clerk to advertise and fill vacant board positions.
 Follow-up on any outstanding projects
 Hold at least one meeting for all lessees
 Coordinate with Board Clerk to advertise and fill vacant board positions
 Continue to work with CalRecycle, the Lahontan RWQCB and the LADWP to get our landfills permits
revised and issued
 Commit more hours to the drinking water program in order to address program deficiencies noted by State
 Incorporate lodging facilities that serve food into the retail food program
 Maintaining public peace and security in Inyo County.
 Continue to work towards improving collaborative relationships with allied law enforcement agencies.
 Continue to work to improve the administration of justice in the criminal courts by minimizing
inconvenience to the public and victims of crime.
 Consistent and fair administration of justice.
 Full implementation of an intergrated case management system.
 Maintain full time staffing of Criminal Investigators.
 Present accurate and timely investigations to support prosecutorial decisions to ensure public trust in the
District Attorney's Office.
 Provide optimal level of professional law enforcement and investigative support services for our community
and the citizens of Inyo County.
 Increase collaborative efforts with local law enforcement agencies to support effective responses to major
crimes or problems which impair the safety of quality of life for the citizens of Inyo County.
 Continue to provide excellent levels of service to those victimized or witnessing crime.
 Continue to leverage grant funds to ensure maximum training opportunities for our Victim Witness Assistant.
 Maximize coordination and elimination of duplication of efforts between the District Attorney Victim
Services and other Non-Governmental Organization and service Providers.
 As mentioned above under "major accomplishments," the County Counsel's Office primarily supports and
assists other departments in accomplishing their projects. Thus, our "goals and objectives" are not
exclusively our own department's projects, but rather are other department's projects with respect to which
we expect to play a significant role.
 Continue to provide a high level of support, assistance, and representation to Board of Supervisors, County
departments, commissions, boards, officers and other local entities where authorized
 Assist with lease for consolidated office building and preparation of bid documents, RFPs, RFQs and
contracts for public facilities projects
 Participate in ongoing MOU negotiations with bargaining units
 Assist CAO, Water Department, and others in various water-related and/or LADWP matters
 Provide training for 700 Form to local filing officers and increase use of the online E-Disclosure services.
 Continue to expand the Civil Ceremony services as appropriate.
 Bring forward an Ordinance to Increase, Decrease and Establish fees for the Clerk-Recorders Department.
 Conduct the November 8, 2016 Presidential General Election. This election will include the office of
President, US Senate, 8th Congressional, 26th Assembly, all statewide measures, City Council, school
boards, hospital boards and Inyo-Mono Resource Conservation District.
 Bring forward an Ordinance to Increase, Decrease and Establish fees for the Elections Department.
 Purchase a new vote tabulation system.
 The Map Preservation Project.
 Purchase and install a new Vital Records and Official Records scanning station.
 Complete the Birth Certificate Social Security Redaction Project.
 Continue to provide an efficiently run Coroner's Office at a minimal charge to the County
 Adopt a balanced budget that meets the needs of the County and its citizens commensurate with available
funding.
 Continue to identify and support opportunities to improve County services and ensure the efficient use of
County fiscal and staff resources.
 Adopt and implement a Tribal Consultation Policy.
 Effectively and consistently convey the County's position on pending legislation that will impact the
economy, public safety, and the environment in Inyo County.
 Continue to engage and respond to the needs of constituents and the County as a whole.
 Develop and implement a purchasing card program.
 Implementation of a new property tax system.
 Begin a major upgrade for the County's fiancial system.
 Continue to provide service and training to other departments and the public.
 Continue to use this fund in accordance with County Policy by using it to make loans to other funds and to
use for unexpected decreases in revenue and/or increases in expenditures that cannot be absorbed within
existing budgets. This reserve is to be used before using General Reserves and requires a 4/5th vote of the
Board of Supervisors.
 Continue to accrue interest and leave reserves intact.
 Start a major software upgrade for the County's financial system (IFAS).
 Prepare and administer the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 County Budget, including Mid-Year and Third Quarter
Financial Reviews.
 Work with County departments in continuing to pursue and implement opportunities to improve the County's
fiscal footing through service redesign and other measures.
 Further major economic development and infrastructure initiatives including the 21st Century Obsidian
Project; Bishop Airport improvements; acquisition of the Historic Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery; and
consolidated office space for County services in the Bishop area.
 Continue to serve your Board, County departments, and the public by providing a level of service and
satisfaction that exceeds the County's fiscal and staffing capacities.
 Conclude lease negotiations for Consolidated Office Building project, and present lease to the Board of
Supervisors for consideration along with alternatives for meeting County office space needs in the Bishop
area.
 Continue to make land available for construction of a new courthouse in Independence.
 Identify funding to begin constructing 21st Century Obsidian Project.
 Engage the community in developing an economic reuse plan for the Historic Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery
upon transfer of the facility from the State of California to the County.
 Continue to support airport improvement projects, and evaluate opportunities to support other County capital
project needs.
 Execute a funding agreement with the Carson & Colorado Railroad to transmit funds to complete the project,
and process reimbursement requests in an expedited manner.
 Provide appropriate non-financial assistance as needed to complete the locomotive barn project.
 Work with the Carson Colorado Railroad to install an appropriate fixture in Dehy Park to replace the
relocated engine.
 Upgrade approximately 25% of core servers
 Upgrade approximately 25% of core network switches
 Upgrade approximately 25% of end-user computers
 Manage claims against the County.
 Coordinate with outside counsel.
 Sit on the Board of Directors and Underwriting Committee for the CSAC EIA.
 Work with Departments to minimize risk to the County.
 Complete the conversion of the Bishop Library collection and implement automated circulation in the Bishop
Branch.
 Begin microfilming local newspapers.
 Expand and improve the Central Library when adjacent space becomes available.
 Continue the ongoing preservation of special collections.
 Improve access to Law Library materials.
 Continue working with the Council of California County Law Librarians to locate new sources of revenue.
 Assist Law Library Board of Trustees in activating West print and online subscription.
 Develop and fill an Emergency Services Manager position partially funded with a 2016 Emergency
Management Performance Grant (EMPG), and implement the scope of work in the EMPG application;
primarily updating emergency response training for staff and officials, and development of a Training and
Exercise Plan (TEP) for Inyo County staff and partnering agencies.
 Analyze and make recommendations to identify Non-General Fund sources of funding, to reduce the amount
of General Fund money required to provide matching funds for future EMPG grants.
 Staff will continue to provide grant management and administrative support for the Homeland Security
Grants and will seek new grant opportunities to fund the costs of emergency equipment and supplies, training
and exercise development. Additionally, staff will work with the Planning and Public Works staff by
providing grant management and administrative support in the continued development of the Inyo County
Multi-Jurisdictional Local Hazard Mitigation Plan.
 Staff will review and coordinate the response to any recommendations in the DWR report on fluctuating
hydrologic conditions in West Bishop.
 Staff will continue to manage the three active emergency proclamations in Inyo County, including
participating in the bi-weekly CalOES Drought Task Force conference calls, and updating the Web EOC
with new documentation, photos, etc.
 Commercial Air Service: With Public Works: complete Phase II of the Passenger Study for commercial air
service at the Bishop Airport; engage regional partners in pursuit of a letter of intent from a airline to provide
commercial passenger service at the Bishop Airport; evaluate options and initiate construction of a passenger
terminal at the Bishop Airport; and, continue to evaluate regional opportunities for the Bishop Airport in
supporting reliable, expanded, and diversified commercial air service to the Eastern Sierra.
 Historic Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery: Continue to engage California Department of Fish & Wildlife
officials, the County's brownfields consultants, and community partners in efforts to transfer the Historic
Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery property to the County for community benefit.
 21st Century Obsidian Project: Perfect and execute design/build/operate contract for 21st Century Obsidian
Project; complete speed tests analysis for South Inyo Broadband Project to establish its eligibility for CPUC
funding; pursue additional project funding sources.
 Engage a firm to assist the County in securing additional federal funding for public infrastructure projects
such as the 21st Century Obsidian Project, Bishop Airport improvements, Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery
rehabilitation, etc.
 Identify and pursue new initiatives to enhance and diversify the Inyo County economy as opportunities arise
and resources permit.
 Continue to utilize the fine funds to enhance and protect the fishing and wildlife resources.
 Work with the Advisory Commission to monitor revenues to ensure funds are available to enhance project
opportunities.
 Work with the Advisory Commission to protect fishing and wildlife resources during the drought.
 Remain a source of temporary emergency funding, if needed, to assist in the response to natural and
man-made disasters that may occur in the County.
 Complete the Board of Supervisors Meeting Webcast project in Independence.
 Complete the Big Pine Veterans Path project, or alternative.
 Develop and advertise a bid for the purchase of new handheld mobile radios to replace obsolete models
currently being used by the Sheriff's Office. Upgrading these radios will strengthen information sharing and
collaboration capabilities for all law enforcement and emergency response teams.
 Renew the reverse 911 (Code Red) data base lease to update and strengthen the alert warning system and
enhance communications between the Sheriff's dispatch and residents during an emergency.
 Complete implementation of the new enterprise Property Tax management system; complete upgrade of
enterprise financial system.
 Implement new agenda management process; Recruit a Deputy Information Services Director.
 Create new conference center in Bishop; Create new conference center in Independence.
 Implement new system security model; Implement email archive system; Implement employee change
management system.
 Initiate project to implement alternative telecommunications solution; Achieve as yet unspecified area
Broadband deployment goals.
 Develop quality assurance policies and protocols.
 Arrange and attend appropriate training.
 Work with Privacy Officer and outside consultant to complete update to policies.
 Manage medical malpractice exposure and claims. Develop quality assurance policies and protocols.
 Arrange and attend appropriate training.
 Work with Privacy Officer and outside consultant to complete update to policies.
 Manage medical malpractice exposure and claims.
 Enter into a contract to allow for the systematic acquisition of patrol vehicles.
 Continue to systematically retire aging vehicles by replacing a minimum of 16 regular and nine patrol
vehicles.
 Improve service to departments.
 Continue to maintain a solvent funding source to assure that departments' vehicle needs are met.
 Replace 10 patrol vehicles in the Sheriff's Department.
 Work with the Carson & Colorado group and other county departments to facilitate construction of the Slim
Princess Locomotive Building and promote this new exhibit and attraction.
 Complete the Jane Bright Memorial Rock Garden. The exhibit, located on the Museum Grounds, will
showcase the area's geology, and is being constructed with donated funds and the help of the Friends of the
Eastern California Museum.
 Upgrade the Museum's website to include more photos, updated text about Museum Exhibits, an online,
digital audio and video archive, and a template for an online document archive. Also revamp and redesign the
Virtual Transportation Museum webpage so it is compatible to the Museum site.
 Explore the feasibility of creating a small, online Museum Store that would offer hard-to-find titles of local
and regional interest, and customized merchandise -- hats, shirts, and cards with the ECM logo.
 Continue to provide a welcoming, informative and educational experience to the Museum's visitors and work
to increase visitation by hosting book signings, guest speakers, field trips and other events and programs.
 Support Planning department and Board of Supervisors in examining legislative initiatives pertaining to
public lands.
 Continue to support implementation of the County's Renewable Energy Development Ordinance and General
Plan Amendment, including renewable energy facility locations and transmission corridors.
 Ensure that the impacts of any renewable energy projects on the County are fully mitigated and the potential
benefits from such projects are fully realized.
 Examine other initiatives that could be supported by this budget unit, including funding staff to facilitate
natural resource development issues.
 Enhance the reservation system by participating in the ReserveAmerica online system.
 Complete rehabilitation at Diaz Lake.
 Through grant funding, bring new boat launching capabilities to locations to assist disabled users.
 Implement upgrade to the IFAS system
 Successfully negotiate 4 new contracts with 4 bargaining units
 Continue to administer the Affordable Care Act
 Continue to aggressively recruit for all vacant positions
 The finalized draft LHMP will be presented to the Board of Supervisors and the City of Bishop Council
members during the first week of July, 2016.
 July 12, 2016 will begin a 30 day public comment period on the draft LHMP.
 At the closing of the public comment period, the consultant and team will review all comments and
suggestions and will incorporate changes accordingly.
 The FINAL draft is anticipated to be completed by the end of August, and then will be sent to FEMA and
CalOES for their review and approval.
 Upon FEMA and CalOES' approval, the LHMP will be published and distributed throughout Inyo County.
 Complete implementiaton of the system
 Continue the provision of mandated legal defense services.
 Negotiate extension to current public defender contracts.
 Work with County Counsel on legal issues regarding retention and destruction of old case files with the goal
 Develop means to assess the assignment of public defenders and recover costs when appropriate
 Analyze caseload data and assess the viability of continuing to use the County's public defenders to support
the Court's obligation to provide dependency counsel.
 Continue to achieve the most favorable prices available for the purchases of essential general office supplies
 Implement franchise agreements with all local haulers.
 Continue to expand recycling and diversion opportunities for County residents and businesses.
 Further development of medical protocols in corrections.
 Continue to assist Departments in policy development.
 Continue to develop and assign safety and other mandated training for employees.
 Continue to manage liability and workers' compensation claims.
 Resolve outstanding issues with contractor and evaluate any additional repairs that may be necessary.
 Manage claims in a cost effective manner.
 Arrange training for County employees.
 Develop policies to assist in preventing workplace injuries.
 Work with outside attorney on litigated claims.
 Implement revised Community Project Sponsorship Program including a fishing promotion/community
fishing derby component ($35,000), line item funding for perennial grant recipients ($39,016 - perennial
fishing derby grant recipients are funded through the Fishing Promotion Component), and a single,
year-round grant cycle ($20,984).
 Continue to create attractive, effective print and online advertisements and refine the mix of print and digital
ad campaigns (within the $35,000 budgeted for Advertising) to create a consistent marketing message seen
by targeted groups of potential visitors. Continue to enhance and expand theotherside web page, and continue
to utilize the county's marketing Facebook Page to provide regular updates and information to the county's
"friends."
 Enhance ongoing programs by: coordinating with the Bishop Chamber of Commerce Marketing Committee
to ensure the Chamber's expanded marketing campaign does not unnecessarily duplicate the County's
marketing efforts; and, facilitate submissions by local photographers and businesses to the California Fall
Colors website, and provide Inyo County content for the site.
 Review and make recommendations for the County's exhibits at the State Fair and State Capital.
 Continue to fund contracts with the Inyo County Film Commissioner, the Interagency Visitor Center, the
Tri-County Fairgrounds/California High School Rodeo.
 Continue to try to identify a level of funding, commensurate with the County's fiscal means, to continue
supporting the County's long-term GIS partners.
 Maintain funding at the same levels provided in the Board-Approved Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget:
Community Connection for Child Care - $9,500; Inyo Arts Council - $37,173; Laws Railroad Museum -
$24,516; Wild Iris - $14,121; California Indian Legal Services - $7,600; Eastern Sierra Avalanche Society -
$4,750; and, Mt. Whitney Fish Hatchery - $9,500
