LADWP water management. This year's pumping management will be managed according to the
existing Green Book. Key goals for FY 2013-2014 will be to complete dispute resolution procedures regarding an
alleged vegetation impact in the Black Rock area, accelerate development of revised pumping management and
monitoring for adoption into the Green Book, evaluate LADWP's Owens Lake project, and to continue to monitor
and assess impacts ofLADWP water management.
Green book modifications. Department staff will continue the effort to develop new methods of
groundwater management, vegetation monitoring, surface water and groundwater monitoring. Primary
concerns/obstacles to be addressed during FY 2013-2014 are resolution of the Technical Group's role in
implementing Water Agreeement provisions, agreement on how to achieve Water Agreement environmental goals,
and development of an improved vegetation monitoring program for assessing vegetation conditions with respect to
Water Agreement goals. We will restart this effort with the assistance of a facilitator and the Ecological Society of
America.
Monitoring Programs. The Department will continue its ongoing program of monitoring soil moisture,
vegetation conditions, and groundwater levels. This ongoing program is related to managing groundwater pumping
and assessing the effectiveness of that management. Additionally, Water Department staff will conduct habitat
indicator species, large and small scale vegetation mapping, and rapid assessment survey monitoring associated with
the Lower Owens River Project. The Water Department will continue planning, implementation, monitoring, and
evaluation of over fifty mitigation projects associated with the Long-Term Water Agreement.
Caso/Hay Ranch. The Department will continue to monitor the project, implement the modifications to
the mitigation plan that were adopted in FY 20I0-2011. This year, with the assistance of a consultant we will
evaluate the project's pumping to date and make findings concerning the continuation of pumping. '
Integrated Regional Water Management Planning. During FY 2013-2014, the Department will
continue to participate in the Regional Water Management Group, acting as fiscal agent should any Proposition 84
Round 2 Implementation Funding be awarded.
Statewide Groundwater Elevation Monitoring Program. During FY 2013-2014, in order to
comply with state requirements for groundwater monitoring, the Department will implement groundwater elevation
monitoring and reporting plans for numerous groundwater basins in the County and submit these results to
California Department of Water Resources. We will also seek to develop plans for the remaining unmonitored
basins in the County.
Lower Owens River Project. FY 2013-2014 marks the sixth year ofLORP implementation. Our goal
is to fulfill the County's responsibility for joint funding, management, and implementation of the LORP in
conjuction with Parks & Recreation. The Department will finalize and seek funding sources to implement the
Recreational Use Plan. The Department will work with and oversee the LORP consultant, provide adaptive
management recommendations for the LORP, work with LADWP to monitor the LORP to assure that project goals
are attained, develop the annual workplans and reports, and explore funding opportunities for the project.
The Saltcedar Control Program will continue to treat and monitor saltcedar populations throughout the
Owens Valley but will focus primarily on control in the area of the Lower Owens River Project.
The WCB portion of the Saltcedar Control Program will continue to treat and monitor saltcedar populations
throughout the Owens Valley but will focus primarily on control in the area of the Lower Owens River Project,
although significantly reduced from FY 2012-2013.
Continue providing excellent service and pursue furthering office achievements
 Continue partaking of the wonderful partnership this community possesses at both government and private
sector levels
 Uphold outreach achievements and persevere with same efforts
 Maintain professional and friendly relationship while working collaboratively with CDV A and the
Department of Veterans Affairs staff in order to assist our clients accordingly
To reimburse local Sheriff and other law enforcement agencies including probation for collection of DNA
specimens, samples and print impressions; for expenditures/administration costs incurred to comply with Penal Code
section 298(b)(5).
To purchase the following for the District Attorney's office:
 (I) Laptop computers and carrying cases, not to exceed $2,000
 (I) Desk top computer, not to exceed $1,500
 (3) IP AD notebooks, not to exceed $1, 700
 (3) Flashlights, not to exceed $470
 (I) Digital camera, not to exceed $830.
To purchase the following for the Probation Department:
 (4) In-car cameras, not to exceed $6,860.
 Invoice RAN quarterly for CLETS Line, not to exceed $6,000.
To purchase the following for the Bishop Police Department:
 Invoice RAN for CLETS Line, not to exceed $7,08I.
To purchase the following for the Sheriff's Department:
 (3) Livescan maintenance agreements, notto exceed $15,800.
 Evidence Technician equipment, not to exceed $2,281.
 (I) Fire proof storage cabinet, not to exceed $900.
 Misc. Expenses not to exceed $2,378.
Continue to provide leadership and support to all of the affected departments and agencies during the
Property Tax Management System conversion project. (PTMS)
 Continue to offer online payments to any interested department.
Continue to provide leadership and support to all of the affected departments and agencies during the
Property Tax Management System conversion project. (PTMS)
 The anticipated completion date for the project is December 2014.
 Continue to upgrade equipment (car cameras, emergency equipment)
 Increase investigation needs for gang enforcement
 Continue training investigators in investigation of Missing and Exploited Children using available
Federal Funds
 Staff OES and Homeland Security positions to meet the increasing demands by the State and Federal
Government Grants
 Increase the level of community support we continue to enjoy by providing the public services within
our scope ofresponsibility and availability
 Maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other County entities that allow
for better public services through cooperation
 Stay connected to State Vine Program (Victim Information Notification Everyday)
 Continue to apply for grants for hiring, equipment, and programs
 Increase training for Department Personnel as Training Instructors
 Continue the program to make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County, and
assistance elsewhere when requested, through improved equipment and training.
 Train other agencies in Emergency Services and Inoperable Communications
 Maintain, test, educate and familiarize the public with the CodeRED emergency notification system.
 Continue to coordinate the multi-agency Unified Command meetings
 Remain FCC compliant with radio frequency narrow banding
 Continue maintenance and certification for our Explosive Detection K-9 program
 Upgrade the Sheriff's Office web site
Through our own use of the media continue to promote animal adoptions at the Shelter.
 Maintain a supportive affiliation with the local rescue and support groups and assist their efforts with offsite
adoption events.
 Promote the Department and the Shelter as being a part of the Inyo County Sheritrs Department. Publicize
the Inyo County Sheritrs Animal Shelter through media contacts and promote the services available and
that are provided by the Shelter.
 Ensure rabies vaccination compliance with an emphasis on license enforcement.
 Continue with our efforts to ensure that the public is served as promptly and as efficiently as possible.
 Through an aggressive media campaign solicit and collect sufficient funding to construct a new Animal
Shelter.
 Start construction on the new Animal Shelter
Complete & implement the new Lexipol Custody Manual
 Repair and maintain aging jail facility infrastructure
 Continue to refine the jail management system software
 Dedicate more inmate work crew man hours to community projects
 Train more Correctional Officers as training instructors
 Provide more specialty training to custody staff in the field of courtroom and transportation security
 Continue to refine the 2012 -20 13 Court Security MOU and provide adequate security services to the
court and public
 Continue to meet all training requirements pursuant to STC and POST mandates
 Continue the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other county entities that allow for
better public services through cooperation
Continue the maintenance and service contract with Sun Ridge Systems
Continue the Work Release Alternative Program to maintain the inmate population at manageable levels
 Continue to refine the "In Custody" jail management software to realize its full potential
 Continue to work with the courts to find ways to manage manpower resources to mutual benefit and
efficiency
 Maintain the excellent relationship between the Board and other county agencies that allow for effective
public service through cooperation
 Complete and implement the Sheriff's employee recognition - awards program
 Continue to explore innovative programs and procedures to retain our deputy sheriff and correctional
officer personnel in order to provide adequate levels of public safety and minimize the time and monies
used to recruit and train personnel
 Continue effective communications between patrol and custody division supervisors/managers to best
manage existing manpower and training concerns
 Continue maintenance and service contract with American Security Systems.
Our goal is to meet or exceed all regulatory mandates by STC and receive notification of compliance.
 Complete project including signage and landscaping
 Upgrade facilities (Substations) for Patrol personnel which, includes finishing the final stages of the
Lone Pine Substation.
 Maintain staffing level up to allocated strength
 Emphasis on training for Deputies as experienced Deputies have retired and replaced by entry level or
minimum experienced personnel
 Maintain the grant funded OHV program in preparation for the new "Adventure Trail" off road
program, which is being developed by the local advocates group, "AAPL."
 Continue the level of community support we continue to enjoy by providing the public services within
our scope ofresponsibility and availability
 Maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other County entities that allow
for better public services through cooperation
 Continue to look for grant funding for additional personnel, training, and equipment
 Continue the program to make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County, and
assistance elsewhere when requested, through improved equipment and training
 Continue to reorganize Sheriff's Department Administration to provide more efficiency, better
supervision and more cost effectiveness
 Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability ofmethamphetamine locally.
 Reduction in methamphetamine related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in physical property damage associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with methamphetamine abuse.
 Support !NET Legal Secretary III and office expenses.
 Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability of methamphetamine locally.
 Reduction in methamphetamine related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in physical property damage associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with methamphetamine abuse.
 Support the position of the !NET Legal Secretary III and office expenses.
 Locate and eradicate marijuana cultivation sites throughout the county (one site confirmed, three others
suspected).
 Identify and apprehend all persons responsible for the cultivation sites.
 Obtain intelligence information through surveillance, fight operations, and public input.
 Reduce marijuana production and distribution.
 Reduce the availability of marijuana locally.
 Reduce illegal drug related crimes and offenses.
 Reduce the hazardous waste associated with marijuana cultivation.
 Maintain grant fimding for operation of the !NET Task Force.
Goals for FY 2013-20I4 include maintaining and enhancing existing OHV patrol trucks and all- terrain
vehicles (ATVs), supplementing the OHV Enforcement Detail with additional patrol equipment, and providing
reimbursement for overtime and patrol hours.
 Continue maintenance of county roads as funding allows
 Continue to employ asphalt maintenance strategies on select roads
 Maintain and improve utilization of the cost accounting system
 Continue the collection of delinquent accounts in Accounts Receivable, including an audit of all STIP
projects, as requested by the State Auditor
 Continue implementation ofBACT Plan provisions for on-road diesel retrofits
 Continue implementation of plan for CARB compliance of off-road diesel equipment
 Perform a fleet audit and equipment utilization review.
 Complete construction of the Sabrina Bridge Replacement Project and close-out;
 Complete construction and close-out the Independence Town Rehabilitation Project;
 Complete the NEPA process, request engineering funding, and begin engineering for the Sunland
Drive Bicycle Lanes/South Bishop Resurfacing Projects;
 Complete the NEPA process, request engineering funding, and begin engineering for the Ed Powers
Road Bicycle Lanes Project;
 Complete engineering for the West Bishop Resurfacing Project;
 Complete the preliminary studies for three new bridge projects (L.A. Aqueduct at Carroll Creek and
Walker Creek, and Oak Creek at Bell Access), and request full funding from the Highway Bridge
Program to proceed with final engineering;
 Complete feasibility studies for the See Vee Lane Extension Project and hold a public meeting to
discuss alternatives with Highlands residents;
 Keep project billings current.
Obtaining funding (authorization to proceed) is contingent upon adoption of the state budget and
availability of funds.
 Continue development of improvements for County Airports.
 Continue construction and development of State Funded Road projects.
 Continue to assist with construction and development of parks projects.
 Provide administrative activities for town water systems, including oversight of O&M contractor and
transition to lease.
 Continue development of TE Projects.
 Continue support for Deferred Maintenance projects.
 Continue with development and support of bridge projects.
 Complete the Photovoltaic project.
 Continue work on consolidated office space needs.
 Continue administration of Local Transportation Commission.
 Continue to provide development review assistance.
 Continue to administer the County Surveyor contract.
 Continue to provide administrative support to other departments.
 Complete the Lone Pine Sheriff's substation expansion.
 Update the County Building Code Ordinance.
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
 Continue to provide inspections and plan reviews in a timely manner
 Continue to provide safety inspections, when required
 Continue to inspect properties for safety hazards and issue abatement notices, when required
 Complete revision to the Building & Safety handouts to reflect the building code requirements
 Revisit cost analysis of building permit fees upon completion of findings report and request changes
through Board of Supervisors
 Implement the "Construction Waste Management Plan" with the Integrated Waste Department to bring
the County facilities into compliance with the "California Green Building Standards Code"
 Continue to provide administrative support for district
 Administer O&M contract for preventive maintenance
 Continue capital improvement fund
 Obtain agreement with the Forest Service for sewer plant fees
 Receive Bids for Phase I of sewer main rehabilitation Construct Phase I of sewer main rehabilitation work
 Continue to seek grant funding for continued system improvements
 Purchase and install flow meter to better monitor system demands and to assist in waste usage calculations.
 Continue to utilize best practices to minimize expense on a system with aging infrastructure.
 Continue to contribute funds to the capital improvement fund.
 Identify capital improvements that may be required.
 Initiate environmental and preliminary engineering studies for sewer main replacement.
 Provide 25% matching funds for $400,000 IR WMP grant
 Update Deferred Maintenance priority list.
 Continue to investigate and implement opportunities to improve energy efficiencies in all County
facilities, especially building envelopes.
 Research potential security issues in County facilities and provide recommendations for improvement.
With Board concurrence, complete the following projects:
 Complete the Photovoltaic system installations (Annex parking lot, Juvenile Hall, Jail)
 Complete fire suppression repair projects in several County facilities.
 Complete the repair/replace Drivit expansion joints at Jail facility.
 Statham Hall HY AC replacement.
 Continue the Update ADA Transition Plan (State and Federal project funding may become contingent
upon this).
 Complete the Water Department HVAC Upgrade (funded through the Water Department)
 Complete Big Pine Town Hall Heater Replacement & Independence Town Hall Heater Replacement.
 Independence Hall rehab phase I.
 Big Pine Town Hall rehab phase I.
 Window treatment for Annex building and Courthouse.
 Repair Annex elevator.
 Replace Courthouse Carpet in Auditor and Treasurer Offices
 Replace Independence Jail steamer.
 Tecopa Hot Springs rehab Phase I.
 Conduct public meeting to inform Independence residents and other interested parties about
alternatives for the project
 Proceed with archeological data recovery activities and engineering for Phase 2 of the park
improvements.
 Secure new fuel contract.
 Continue to operate and maintain airport facilities.
 Continue to prepare projects for Terminal Area and other minor improvements.
 Continue to attempt to secure funding for future AIP projects.
 Continue to develop and implement airport ground leases.
 Develop Fire Suppression Well testing procedure and implement.
 Pursue obtaining custody of National Weather Service building.
 Ensure perimeter fence remains in good repair.
 Provide resources and other support for Airport Improvement Projects.
 Cut all trees penetrating 20: I and 34: I approach surfaces on runways 07, 12 and 16.
 Complete the Electrical Vault Project.
 Apply for the FAA grant for the Design & Construction of Runway 16/34 Overlay Project.
 Complete the Airport Layout Plan Update (ALP) and Narrative.
 Apply for the FAA Lighting, Signing & Visual Aid Project
 Continued payment of the Fire & Casualty Insurance
 Purchase ofreplacement bulbs for runway and taxiway lighting
 Develop test procedure for Fire Suppression Well
 Repair cracks on runway 16/34
 Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including weed abatement and runway edge lighting.
 Investigate options and resolve the hangar door issue.
 Provide resources and other support for Airport Improvement Projects.
 Repair cracks in runway.
 Trim trees on South end of runway.
 Complete segmented circle and close out project.
 Apply for FAA grant for the Airport Layout Plan (ALP) Update.
 Repair asphalt patch near hangars
 Repair cracks on runway 16/34
Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
 Continue with the purchase and installation of 20 additional meters, and meter boxes as needed. The 0 &
M contractor provides the installation of the meters.
 Continue with the purchase and installation of additional meters, and meter boxes as needed.
 Work cooperatively with the FBO for the continued maintenance and operation of the airport.
 Acquire and install Super A WOS system
 Develop a new FBO contract for bid and execution.
 Trim trees on Ease side of airport.
 Complete the terminal design for the terminal building replacement.
 Complete the Airport Layout Plan (ALP) Update project.
 Continue financial assistance for the Lone Pine Airport Operating Budget
 Make repairs to perimeter fencing as required
 Repair cracks in Runway/taxiway
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
 Continue with the purchase and installation of additional meters, and meter boxes as needed. The O & M
contractor will provide the installation.
 Continue to provide level of service and support to county facilities as identified for prior year and improve
level of service and support wherever possible.
 Continue replacement program of inefficient HV AC equipment in all County facilities as funding allows.
 Review County Energy Conservation Measures and identify ways to reduce utility costs for all County
facilities.
 Assist with developing cost applied billing program for tracking Building & Grounds activities in order to
improve County Cost Plan charges.
 Coordination of back flow device testing/repairs for some 30 backflow devices for the County of Inyo.
 Coordination/supervision of termite services for the County maintained Buildings County wide.
 Implementing the cost savings of 60% partial reduction for FY 2013-2014 in electrical costs for the Solar
City project. Electrical cost savings for FY 2014-2015 is projected to be $77,000.
 Initiate and complete work on the project, no later than December 31, 2014.
 Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including keeping all navigation aids in serviceable
condition and keeping the runway free of weeds and debris.
 Repair runway lighting.
 Eradicate Salt Cedar trees on north end of runway.
Continue with SB45 Project Planning, Programming and Monitoring;
Continue administration of the Inyo County Local Transportation Commission;
Continue to perform work .elements listed in the Overall Work Plan, including completing the 2012-
2013 OWP, and 1mplementmg the 2013-2014 OWP, and developing the 2014-2015 OWP;
Continued to coordinate with Caltrans on US 395 four-laning projects;
Complete required update of the Regional Transportation Plan;
Complete required update of the Inyo County General Bikeways Plan;
Implementation of the 2012 STIP;
Continue to perform administrative activities;
Development of the 2014 RTIP and STIP;
Continue administration and coordination of transit and the TDA;
Continued involvement with Rural Counties Task Force;
Continued involvement with the Eastern California Transportation Planning Partnership;
Continued inventory activities and implementation oflnyo County Pavement Management Program;
Hold unmet transit needs hearings;
Continue to update the Inyo L TC website;
Update and expand survey of area roadways using Geographical Information Systems;
Update to the Road Department Standard Specifications;
Update to the Inyo County Pedestrian Inventory;
Complete project initiation documents;
Grant submittals;
Complete required Triennial Performance Audit of the Eastern Sierra Transit Authority;
Fund update to Human Services Coordinated Transit Plan;
Fund City of Bishop completion ofStormwater Master Plan;
Fund environmental analysis of Eastern Sierra Adventure Trails program .
 Secure lease agreement for operations and maintenance of town water system consisting of a I year O&M
agreement prior to a long term lease of 15 to 20 years.
 Provide necessary assistance to operator preparatory to lease operations.
 Initiate and complete all water system operations transfer to lessee.
 Administer the upgrade budget.
 If awarded funding, initiate and carry out projects funded by IR WMP program.
 Commence SCAD A project, completion by December 2014.
 Secure lease agreement for operations and maintenance of town water system consisting of a I year O&M
agreement prior to a long term lease of 15 to 20 years.
 Provide necessary assistance to operator preparatory to lease operations.
 Administer the upgrade budget
 Initiate and complete all water system operations transfer to lessee
 If awarded funding, initiate and carry out projects funded by IR WMP program.
 Commence SCADA project, completion by December 2014.
 If awarded funding for meters project, secure contract with the fiscal agent and commence project
activities.
 Secure lease agreement for operations and maintenance of town water system consisting of a I year O&M
agreement prior to a long term lease of 15 to 20 years.
 Provide necessary assistance to operator preparatory to lease operations. Complete installation of surge
hardware.
 Initiate and complete all water system operations transfer to lessee.
 lf awarded funding, initiate and carry out projects funded by IR WMP program.
 Administer the upgrade budget.
 Commence SCADA project, completion by December2014.
 If awarded funding for meters project, secure contract with the fiscal agent and commence project
activities.
 Review all eligible properties for a decline in value due to economic conditions.
 Continue making online assessor data, available to other departments and public.
 Convert our current property tax management system (PTMS) to the new cohesive, standardized, and
integrated PTMS to be completed in 2014.
We will continue to strive to:
 Provide excellent customer service to the citizens of Inyo/Mono Counties
 Respond quickly and effectively to issues and/or complaints
 Maintain our I 00% rate of inspection for all weighing and measuring devices within Inyo and Mono
Counties to ensure equity for all transactions
 To enforce laws and regulations under our jurisdiction to the best of our ability
We will maximize resources by:
 We will continue lobbying through the California Agricultural Commissioners' Association to gain state
and federal dollars through legislation and regulations
 We will continue to investigate both contracting with other agencies as well as grant opportunities to
maintain a viable noxious weed control program
 We will explore options to provide flexibility within our program staff and department structure that have
potential to reduce costs and increase our level of service to Inyo and Mono County residents.
 Continue to pursue long and short term funding opportunities through grant applications, outside
agreements, legislation, and program contracts
 Continue limited work on high-priority sites within LAD WP lands, such as the LORP area
 Achieve treatment ofnon-LADWP invasive plant sites cataloged in the ESWMA GIS database
 Continue invasive plant population reductions
 Continue public outreach and cooperative weed control activities
The consequences of this invasive plant management program ending are extensive:
 Ceasing work for even one year negates all previous year's work and expended resources.
 It is a near certainty, if this program were to cease, that Lepidium latifolium populations will grow out
of control, threatening both the local agricultural and outdoor tourism industries, and also local natural
resources.
 Seed banks resulting from lack of treatment can last decades, and cost millions of dollars to manage at
a later time.
We continue to strive for:
 Providing the public with a high level of mosquito control.
 Expanding our public education program.
 Participating in the State's encephalitis surveillance program.
 Providing an efficient auditing and tracking system to keep the assessment to OVMAP area residents
correct and up to date.
 Maintain a vigilant posture concerning other vector borne diseases such as encephalitis and dengue fever.
 Continued use of our adult mosquito surveillance system with compressed C02 gas baited mosquito traps.
Funding priority goals:
 Explore other funding opportunities such as contracts and grants to augment the mosquito control program.
 Continue to work with other local agencies to reduce mosquito breeding sources.
 Continue to implement the "Make Our Work Count" program for ongoing case performance and
increased positive outcomes for families.
 Continue to monitor and implement Departmental "Best Practices" to improve productivity and
uniformity of work practices for both Inyo and Mono County office locations.
 Increase positive community contact with the implementation of additional outreach activities.
 Continue to meet all State and Federal guidelines.
 Ensure office staff complete fraud training as needed.
 Enhance Information Security by completing the electronic case file project. for all open and closed
regional cases.
 Maintain excellent customer service.
The expected outcome of the following goals is to effect final disposition of each task. Direct measurement
of each plan's outcome will be, in some cases, in the collection of fees. Some estates will not generate fees, due
to the indigent nature of the estate, however fewer indigent burials will occur and bills to local businesses shall
be paid.
 Complete to final disposition, six (6) Summary or small estates with total value of less than $30,000.
Collect fees for services;
 Deposit unclaimed funds of six (6) estates to County Treasury and upon anniversary of3 years, effect
transfer to Inyo County General Fund;
 Complete four (4) Annual Accountings of conservatee's estates and collect fees for services;
 Petition for a formal Probate of Estate of conservatee that died intestate and receive fees for services;
 Maintain compliance with California Probate codes §§7605 & 2923 with respect to continuing
education requirements for Public Administrator Guardian Conservator and Deputy Public
Administrator Guardian Conservator;
o Investigate and if merited, petition Inyo County Superior Court, all referenced cases to Public
Administrator Guardian;
 Continue exceptional care ofConsrvatees' Person and Estates and Decedents' Estates effectively
saving direct and indirect costs to the County of Inyo and Individuals within the County;
 Update Inyo County Public Guardian Fee Schedule to increase fees set in 2001
Continue providing outstanding service and protection to the citizens oflnyo County .
Complete the strategic plan for the Probation Department
Use evidenced based practices to reduce the number of prison commits .
Continue collaboration effort in the Community Correction Partnership in compliance with PC1230 and
AB109.
Continue revisions/additions to policy and procedure manual.
Continue to utilize local training to further reduce general fund contribution for training .
Continue to upgrade departmental information technology .
Enhanced revenue opportunities through work w/CPOC and legislative advocates and grant opportunities .
Develop complete Pre-Trial Services program to help reduce the potential of jail overcrowding due to the
passage of AB 109.
Design and implement a department website .
Some of the goals for FY 2013-2014 include:
 Continue providing outstanding service and protection to the citizens of Inyo County.
 Continue developing an updated strategic plan for the Juvenile Division.
 With the extension of the BPAI funding, complete all phases of the BPAI project.
 Implement a fully automated, Title IV-E/Division 31 compliant case planning tool.
 Concentrate on field training for DPOs.
 Implement an upgraded case management system for the entire department.
 Continue revisions/additions to policy and procedure manual.
 Implement a Future Farmers of America program.
 Add to the upgraded security system.
 Implement a basic carpentry program and a cooking program.
 Implement an assessment tool for our Interactive Journaling Program to individualize treatment through the
criminogenic needs of the minors.
 Install a security fence/Sally Port around the west parking area to heighten security and increase programs
for all Minors in the Juvenile Center.
I. Use evidenced based practices to reduce the number of prison commits.
2. Continue collaboration effort in the Community Correction Partnership in compliance with PCl230 and
ABI09.
3. Implement phase JI of the Pre-Trial Services program to help reduce the potential of jail overcrowding due
to the passage of AB109.
4. Provide a comprehensive case management system in an effort to measure outcomes. Such a system would
integrate the Court, Probation Department, HHS, DA, and possibly other treatment providers.
5. Provide an addiction specialist/l l 70(h) case manager to work in the County Jail to provide re-entry
assistance to inmates.
 To maintain a high level of customer service in an efficient and effective manner
 Continue the General Plan and Zone Code update and environmental review
 Update the Housing Element of the General Plan
 To continue work on the Renewable Energy General Plan Amendment and hire a consultant for the EIR
 Participate in and influence the Inyo National Forest Plan Update/Revision
 To serve as the lead agency in preparing the Northland Independence Solar Project EIR
 To meet all requirements relating to SMARA and the County's mining regulations
 Continue/Maintain efforts and coordination in the Desert Renewable Energy Plan, Renewable Energy
Transmission Initiative, CTPG, Natural Resource Advisory Committee, Desert Protection Act, Death
Valley National Park Backcountry Wilderness Plan, Saline Valley Plan, Solar PEIS, Owens Lake Master
Plan, Forest Service Planning Rule
 Assist Public Works with the Adventure Trails
 To maintain current information on the website; as mandated by Government Code section 56150
 To continue to manage and coordinate the Southern California Edison Energy Action Plan
 Continue to monitor and participate in the DWP Owens Valley Solar Ranch
 Create an energy efficiency fund to finance energy efficient projects for County facilities.
 To continue to implement the Crystal Geyser Roxane bottling plant
 To continue work on the Coso Geothermal MMRP
 Process land use and planning projects that require Planning Commission review
 Process Renewable Energy projects
 Continue to staff the Yucca Mountain Repository Assessment Office
 Continue to staff the Inyo LAFCO
 Continue to assist other departments and agencies in CEQA compliance
 Hire an Associate Planner
 Process and consider applications for special district formations, annexations, and out-of-area service
agreements in compliance with the provisions of the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government
Reorganization Act
 Enter into a contract with the Inyo County Planning Department to provide staff and legal services to the
Commission
 Work with Mono County in development of a MOU for exchange on principal county status for spheres of
influence changes
 Address liability issues to allow other public agency employees to accompany County personnel in County
vehicles
 Maintain Inyo LAFCO membership and participation in CALAFCO
 Replace any vacant seats on LAFCO as necessary to keep LAFCO active
 Continue to establish written policies and procedures that encourage and provide planned, well-ordered,
efficient development patterns with appropriate consideration of preserving open-space lands within those
patterns as required by Government Code section 56300(a)
 Continue to maintain the Inyo LAFCO website in compliance with Government Code
Section 5666 l
 Continue to provide customer service and agency coordination, and update and maintain information on
Special Districts located in Inyo County
 Complete "mothballing" the Yucca Mountain Office, but also be ready to revive if necessary.
 Maintain a contract with Greg James in the event licensing proceedings unexpectedly recommence.
 Continue to participate in federal oversight of past expenditures.
 Assist with continued groundwater monitoring in southeast Inyo County.
 Continue monitoring program developments within the Department of Energy, Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
 Continue working with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, its working groups, and AULGs to monitor
DOE activities related to the License Application review process.
 Continue to monitor federal legislation for amendments to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act via the web and its
network with the other AULGs.
 Enter into an MOU for groundwater monitoring for the Armargosa well network.
 Attend Devils Hole Workshop.
 Increase access to medical and dental services for all populations.
 Assure public health preparedness and response for disasters.
 Monitor discussions about health care reform to inform policy & possible re-structuring discussions.
 Monitor changing inmate costs as it relates to new legislative mandates and implications for health care in the
facility.
 Continue managing the Medical Marijuana program, and monitor usage.
 Continue to sustain provider systems to meet the needs of the eligible children of Inyo County for CCS.
 Develop mechanisms to share the availability of limited local skilled medical professionals to maximize
services to CCS eligible children.
 Continue to strengthen the relationships with families, by including parent participation in ongoing CCS
program evaluation activities, planning measures and staff training.
 Continue to strengthen the relationships between CCS staff and the schools by cross training and expanding
opportunities for collaboration.
 Maintain current case management services for caseload of children with training and retention of a FullTime
Nurse Case Manager 8 hours per week, with benefits.
 Continue to increase collaboration with outside agencies providing services to target population.
 Prevent loss of paneled providers who are challenged by the State's Medi-Cal claiming system and may be
at a loss to resolve authorization and claiming issues without local representative of Medi-Cal.
 Anticipate the need for navigation of families and providers into the county's Medi-Cal Managed Care
system and address budget implications of Health Care Reform Act.
 Recruit more providers practicing in Nevada to participate in Inyo's Managed Medi-Cal plan and in
California's CCS paneling process, in order expand access for our local residents to fill the need for
specialty care.
 Ensure that the program addresses the needs of emerging communities and populations, including women,
infants, children and minority populations.
 Increase linkages to culturally appropriate medical care for HIV-infected individuals. This will include
establishing referral sources within the county and with HIV specialists in other areas.
 Ensure that HIV services are available to all HIV-affected individuals in the geographic area.
 Decrease barriers to primary medical care and other supportive services.
 Continue to assist families with their understanding of the transition of Healthy Families program into
Medi-Cal and impact on health insurance for their children.
 Expand enrollment assistance to facilitate CHDP Gateway program.
 Continue to work with medical providers to understand and implement the CHDP program as a "gateway"
to Medi-Cal.
 Continue contact with each child accessing CHDP Gateway requesting health coverage access.
 Through the facilitation of the Inyo County Childhood Obesity Work Group, Team Inyo for Kids, maintain
an active and dynamic focus on the problem and develop and promote strategies in addressing the
prevention and treatment of obesity among Inyo's children.
 Further development of foster care nurse roles and responsibilities to address the needs of the children in
placement and those children preparing to transition into independent living as adults.
 Continue disaster preparedness efforts and develop contingency plans in the event that the community is
isolated by a disaster.
 Continue outreach to high-risk children and families to provide information and resources to strengthen the
families' abilities to prevent child abuse or out of home placement, drug and alcohol abuse, domestic
violence, as " ell as addressing mental health issues.
 Continue to meet with the Death Valley School Superintendent, Sheriff's Office and key community
members to assess and provide services to the community.
 Coordinate quarterly meetings of the HHS Coalition in Southeastern Inyo with the HHS Director and/or her
designee's attendance.
 Continue to utilize the video-conferencing equipment in the Tecopa Community Center to access remote
services as appropriate.
Mental Health-General
 Increase use of trends data for decision-making with increased capability to monitor program use, capacity
and outcomes as well as other quality measures. Identify variables that improve or maintain positive
outcomes. Monitor Share Care system and support, making course correction as needed to ensure optimal
use of electronic healthcare record capability.
 Continue to evaluate most efficient/effective staffing strategy to meet community needs in a changing
health care reform environment.
 As part of our Health and Human Services Department, devise evidence based behavioral health strategies
to meet the challenges and opportunities in such areas as healthcare reform, AB 109, Education Related
Mental Health Services and resulting in further integration with substance use disorder services into
primary health care.
 Implement an integrated MHSA plan incorporating Innovations, Workforce Education and Training, and
Community Services and Supports to most effectively and efficiently meet the behavioral health needs of
our consumers and community
 Continue involvement in statewide prevention/intervention strategies to result in improved outcomes.
 Provide Mental Health First Aid Training, adding the Youth version, in at least three additional community
settings
 Assist in the development and participation in strategies to increase employee health and wellness.
Child and Family Mental Health Services
 Provide continued coordinated services as part of a system of care to best meet the needs of youth and
families within our community. Continue active involvement in the Wraparound strategy and other
interventions in this endeavor.
 Increase the provision of family therapy services by at least I 0% over this fiscal year.
 Provide current level of weekly mental health services to Inyo County Juvenile Center, including training
to staff to ensure continuity of care and positive transitions into the community.
 Provide weekly access to mental health counseling to Tecopa area families using videoconferencing and
contracted counseling services.
 Provide case management services to 6 different school sites throughout the county each week.
Adult Mental Health Services: Clinic. Progress House and Wellness Centers
 Evaluate the most appropriate settings for a Health Home and Integrated Care.
 Assist consumers to navigate of the provisions of the ACA and MediCal Expansion.
 Continue endeavor to identify a permanent wellness center site & identify ways to enhance integrated care.
 Evaluate/ monitor adult system of care programs to maximize the use of resources and avoid duplication.
 Develop and implement monthly or bi-monthly consumer community involvement projects.
 Coordinate and collaborate with community organizations such as Methodist Social Services and Salvation
Anny to identify strategies to increase natural community supports and identify gaps.
 Implement at least one additional evidenced-based practice for adults.
 Comply with State program requirements.
 Maintain a cost neutral program.
 Continue to employ current addiction treatment and education strategies for use in groups and share
effective treatment strategies across addiction services programs to enhance offerings.
 Continue to offer after hour group times to accommodate and support schedules of those who are
employed.
 Utilize ongoing satisfaction questionnaires in order to provide feedback to group facilitators.
 Track sobriety in our Multiple Offender program.
 Identify ways to ensure the highest level of service, within the budgetary constraints, using needs
assessment infonnation and utilization trends.
 Develop a volunteer plan that identifies a wide range of volunteer opportunities, including, but not limited
to assisting at the congregate sites, providing emergency backup meal delivery, and other supportive
services that enhance the services available to seniors in the community. This would include volunteers for
Healthy IDEAS, which is hoped to be in place during the next fiscal year.
 Recruit, train and support an additional 3 volunteers in the Ombudsman program, as well as an additional
10 volunteers to serve in various capacities.
 Continue to implement and manage data within the new California Aging Reporting System (CARS) data
management system, which is required by the California Department of Aging in a manner that allows us to
be able to gather and compile data for reporting purposes for policy makers, the community and the State,
to ensure decision making is based on most accurate information available.
 Evaluate management, supervision, monitoring and service provision procedures for contracted services
and conduct monitoring in accordance with Title XXII, as well as the provisions of the Older Americans
Act.
 Registered Dietitian to provide Farmers Market program for Inyo Seniors in Summer 2013, to promote
adherence to USDA guidelines of 5-9 servings of fruit and vegetables per day for better health.
 Carry out the community assessment, analysis, & update of First 5 lnyo's 5-Year Strategic Plan
 Fulfill YEAR 1 of First 5 lnyo's 2013-2018 Media Plan goals, including increased attention on library
resources, fatherhood engagement, and local family testimonials of program benefits.
 Print a 5-year countywide report that examines First 5 Inyo's 2009-2014 delivery of services, goals, and
community benefits. Disseminate this at an evening community event that features testimonials, pictures,
and brief accomplishment recaps for attendees to peruse.
 Partner with ICSOS to increase the quality of early childhood materials and experiences in our county
libraries.
 Partner with HHS Family Prevention to start small social swap groups among parenting class clients in
Tecopa and Bishop as pilots of a larger more complex service that may be organized in the future
 Partner with llHS Family Prevention to expand A) Fatherhood Engagement and B) Communication &
Resiliency Family Playgroups for families with children from 0 to 12 who have CPS, justice & probation, or
recovery issues to overcome.
 Implement and stay current with all new program requirements mandated by the State and Federal
governments.
 Maintain timely payments to care providers of foster children.
 Continue to review active cases to insure that all efforts to link eligibility to Federal regulations are applied.
 Continue to divert placement of children in group home settings out of the area by providing Wraparound.
 Continue to assist clients in developing the skills needed to enter or re-enter the workforce.
 Continue to assist clients in applying for Social Security and helping them through the appeals process.
 Continue to provide case management services and interventions necessary in maintaining a small caseload
while continuing to support the indigent residents of our county.
 Identify ways to ensure the highest level of service, within the budgetary constraints, using needs
assessment information and utilization trends.
 Develop a volunteer plan that identifies a wide range of volunteer opportunities, including, but not limited
to assisting at the congregate sites, providing emergency backup meal delivery, and other supportive
services that enhance the services available to seniors in the community. This would include volunteers for
Healthy IDEAS, which is hoped to be in place during the next fiscal year.
 Recruit, train and support 10 volunteers to serve in various capacities to support services to seniors.
 Conduct outreach to service groups in an effort to solicit sponsorships for services to local seniors, e.g.
sponsoring Lifeline services for a year for the purpose of reducing the funding impact to the County,
 Continue to implement and manage data within the new California Aging Reporting System (CARS) data
management system in order to ensure decision making is based on most accurate information available.
 Increase access to dental care for children and pregnant women.
 Maintain an active and dynamic focus on childhood obesity and develop and promote strategies in
addressing the prevention and treatment ofobesity among lnyo's children.
 Develop an understanding of the ongoing problem of women in Inyo County entering delayed prenatal care
which can result in poor pregnancy outcomes.
 Establish, maintain and recruit participation in the Inyo County Car Seat Program.
 Coordinate with Social Services staff to ease the transition of Healthy Families children into Medi-Cal
during the planned statewide transition.
Public Assistance, Emplovment and Training
 Continue Medi-Cal and Food Stamp outreach, to identify families in need.
 Increase rate for federally-required client participation in work-related activities.
 Continue to identify needs & assist clients in developing the skills necessary in obtaining & retaining
employment.
 Expand case management and supportive services to obtain successful engagement of our hard-to-serve
CalWORKs population.
 Maintain compliance with State and Federal regulations.
 Continue work with local employers to identify barriers to workforce recruitment and retention.
 Refine our restructured business processes to enhance customer service, efficiency and accuracy in
processing casework to promote teamwork and allow flexibility of staff assignments to meet departmental
needs.
 Refine our systems' fiscal and program controls to ensure prevention and early detection of fraud.
 Implement new requirements of federal Affordable Care Act in our Medi-Cal eligibility services.
 Implement the transition of all former Healthy Families children into our Medi-Cal eligibility services.
Children's Services:
 Continue to provide quality child welfare services in order to ensure the health, well-being and safety of
children while striving to maintain the family unit by meeting the State & Federal requirements.
 Provide on-going support/problem-solving to caregivers with children placed in their homes in an effort to
promote stability for foster children.
 Continue to enhance the services available to foster children and former foster children through the
Independent Living Skills Program, as well as the THP-Plus program.
 Continue to provide a high level of placement services to CPS, Probation and Behavioral Health.
 Continue the Wraparound Program to reduce our group home placements for Child Welfare & Probation.
Licensing:
 Maintain or increase the capacity & quality of care provided in both foster family homes & family
childcare homes. Conduct recruitment activities in coordination with other agencies.
 Continue to provide training and support directly or fund training for foster parents to provide a higher
professional level of care for our foster children as well as to meet Title 22 Regulations of mandated
training requirements.
Child Abuse Prevention. Intervention and Treatment CCAPITI
 Ensure a continuum of parenting education courses are available to our families mandated to participate, as
well as to the county at large.
Adult Services
 Safely maintain at least four at-risk adults within their home community.
 Integrate services with ESAAA & other partners & identify options for cost efficiencies, as well as
increased outreach to homebound elders with complex issues of co-existing medical and mental health or
substance abuse.
 Work closely with the IHSS Registry to link clients to compatible providers to improve quality of services.
 Enhance the quality of Adult services by ensuring that all staff attend & complete all phases of the State
regulated IHSS training, as well as other available training on at-risk elderly and dependent adults.
Disaster Services
 Continue preparedness activities and trainings and ensure staff readiness for quick response in a disaster.
 Respond to emergency incidents under the provisions of the County Disaster Plan.
As part o(Behaviora/ Health treatment/ intervention services:
 Provide a full array of addiction treatment to all ages to include assessment, group treatment, intensive case
management, psycho-education, and outreach as resources allow.
 Evidence increased integration of physical health, mental health and addiction treatment by the provision of
addiction treatment in a healthcare setting and the collection and monitoring of health data by counselors.
 As an active partner in AB109, provide treatment services to persons within the community or jail settings.
Monitor outcomes, service utilization and cost. Implement one additional evidence based strategy to meet
the specific treatment needs of this population.
 Participate in the provision of at least two additional Aggression Replacement Training groups with at least
one in a correctional setting.
 As a Drug-Medi-Cal provider, appropriately bill for services to meet Medi-Cal standards.
 As a result of participation in the perinatal program services at least 7 additional women will remain sober
for 6 months and provide the necessary support services through case management and referral sources to
assist clients to maintain sobriety and recovery during this period.
 Implement an electronic healthcare record that meets security and privacy standards.
 Continue integration of SUD and mental health programs and funding to maximize use of resources and
efficiency of systems.
As part ofprevention services:
 Continue work with BPD, ICSO, and the Tri- County Fair on changes in alcohol policy at Fairgrounds.
 Continue education and recruitment of parents and other community members regarding underage drinking
issues and support for underage drinking prevention, and for social norm change in the areas of ATOD.
 Gather local information and data and conduct key agency/leaders focus groups in order to draft a SUD
Community Needs Assessment and a new Strategic Prevention Framework (SPF) for FY 2013-2017. SPF
will follow the guidelines given to Inyo County by the CA Department of Health Services, Alcohol and
Other Drug Programs. Goals and objectives for the SPF will be determined by utilizing the data and focus
group information contained in the SUD Community Needs Assessment.
 Continued collaboration with Inyo County Superintendent of Schools office to provide technical assistance
to ICSOS to create prevention programs in schools that compliment HHS Prevention programs.
 Continue monthly creation/publication of prevention articles for monthly newspaper column.
 Facilitate better collaboration between local law enforcement, schools, courts, and probation to create
uniform practices when dealing with underage drinking, partying, driving, and other AOD issues.
 Incorporate the Mentoring Program under the part-time coordinator of volunteers for HHS in order to
ensure program is able to grow and thrive with a more targeted volunteer focus.
Continue to provide accurate and timely benefits to eligible families, following the federal and state laws
and regulations.
Fiscal year 2013-2014 represents the first year of a 4-year contract period covering 2013-2017. However, the
California Department of Public Health, Tobacco Control Program (CTCP) required a first phase or 'Bridge Year'
plan to be written and to stand as a distinct, first year only plan within the 4-year contract period. This 'Bridge Year'
plan had to be submitted with its own scope of work and budget, a minimum of three objectives, and plan for final
evaluation reports. All of the departmental goals for FY 2013-2014 were written in the 'Bridge Year' July 1, 2013-
June 30, 2014 Scope of Work approved by the California Department of Public Health, Tobacco Control Program.
 Conduct a detailed assessment of the Inyo County Retail Environment per the California Department of
Public Health, California Tobacco Control Program mandate and guidelines.
 Conduct recruitment presentations for at least five groups throughout Inyo County to recruit people to
volunteer as data collectors in the Retail Environment Campaign
 Participate in regional press event to education the public on the Retail Environment Campaign local data
collection results.
 Conduct local spokesperson training to volunteer data collectors to prepare for regional press conference.
 Conduct public intercept survey to collect baseline data of knowledge, attitudes, and perception regarding
the retail environment.
 Collaborate with HHS administration to complete final evaluation reports for all three objectives in the
'Bridge Year' plan.
 Recruit new members from a wide variety of community organizations, groups, and ethnic populations to
join the Inyo County Tobacco Prevention Coalition.
 Conduct presentation to local community groups, Chambers of Commerce, and outdoor area organizers to
educate on the dangers of second-hand smoke in an outdoor environment. If interested, conduct trainings to
organizers of outdoor areas regarding no-smoking policy for their outdoor venues.
 Create and place radio and print media pieces to educate the general public on the dangers of secondhand
smoke outdoors and possible incoming policies.
 Continue to conduct evaluation activities related to objectives in the tobacco control plan, including final
evaluation reports.
 Continue coordination and collaboration with other agencies to promote prevention issues related to
ATOD.
 Work with organization, agencies, groups, and the community at large for social norm change in the areas
of ATOD.
 Coordinate and collaborate with other prevention programs to facilitate joint prevention efforts for targeted
populations and groups.
 Continue active participation in Team Inyo for Healthy Kids workgroup. Continue participation in outreach
events representing Team Inyo for Healthy Kids.
 Continue to provide local WIC vendors (Vons, J & M Mini Market, Smart n Final, Carroll's Market) in
Inyo County with a local vendor liaison to communicate WIC program updates and policies to provide
excellent customer service to WIC participants and provide quarterly technical assistant visits and support.
 Development of collaboration with other service providers to promote and enhance increase utilization of
Farmers Market vouchers.
 Continued collaboration with Toiyabe WIC program, specifically in the area of breastfeeding promotion.
 Provide outreach efforts to generate interest and follow through of potential WIC participants in
Southeastern Inyo County.
 Continue to pcerform outreach and expand services and involvement in southern Inyo County.
 Continue to maintain established involvement with the Employment Collaboration Group.
 Continue to dcevelop new work experience sites throughout the County and support existing ones.
 Stay current on program regulations to ensure compliance with State and Federal regulations.
 Continue to monitor the needs of the program, the participants and the community in order to make
appropriate adjustments as needed.
 Coordinate with our Social Service programs, Probation, Child Support and other interested parties in our
efforts to ensure ongoing employment ski !ls and training are available for our residents.
 Research and develop recommended practices for raising horticultural crops in the Eastern Sierra.
 Provide workshops and one-on-one consultations to educate local residents and growers of best
management practices in agriculture, gardening, and landscapes.
 Support current and potential small-scale growers to improve local access to affordable, fresh food and to
develop resiliency in our local food supply.
 Promote 4-H activities that focus on science, engineering and technology; healthy living; and citizenship.
 Recruit new volunteers into 4-H and expand offerings of non-traditional projects to increase membership.
 Promote Cooperative Extension's programs through local collaborations, advocacy, and public workshops.
 Provide instruction on safe food preservation practices to be conducted by UC-trained Master Food
Preservers.
 Update and expand online information available at Master Gardeners' website and through social media.
 Continue outreach efforts and continue to provide services listed under accomplishments.
Follow-up on any outstanding projects
 Hold at least one meeting for all lessees
 Coordinate with Board Clerk to advertise and fill vacant board positions.
To implement and enforce new Environmental Health regulations, including the Aboveground Petroleum
Storage Act, the Groundwater Rule, the Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Regulations, swimming pool antientrapment
regulations, the landfill gas monitoring regulations, the trans-fat ban, the menu labeling requirements,
food handler certification regulations, graywater regulations, hazardous material businesses electronic reporting
regulations, the new onsite septic regulations (AB 885), ADA requirements for public pools & spas, the Cottage
Food Act and the Safe Body Art Act
To work with Inyo County Solid Waste Department, the LADWP and the BLM in an effort to complete the
revisions of landfill permits for our five active solid waste facilities (Bishop-Sunland, Independence, Lone Pine,
Shoshone and Tecopa).
To continue the monitoring and regulatory activities of our existing programs. The resultant goal is a form of
consumer protection that can only be measured by the quality of living in Inyo County, i.e. the lack of hazards,
disease, and discomfort and the corresponding level of health and safety of the community.
To maintain good relationships with our county's residents, business owners and visitors by providing our
services in a thorough, timely and courteous manner and to make the best efforts in providing technical and
regulatory assistance as requested by our constituents. We will continue to use education as our primary
enforcement tool regarding regulatory issues.
The District Attorney's office currently has obtained authorization for a temporary Deputy District
Attorney III with experience for a six (6) month period. The District Attorney's office is requesting to
increase their authorized staff by one (1) FTE Deputy District Attorney I-IV starting after the six (6) month
temporary position ends. With another experienced Deputy District Attorney our office can proactively
address all criminal cases we prosecute. Because the office has faced severe staffing shortages, we have
not always been able to attend all criminal calendars. While this situation has not yet resulted in any cases
being dismissed or reduced public safety, it has led to a greater number of hearings on the court's calendar
and slower resolution of existing cases. Adding a Deputy District Attorney will improve our ability quickly
to review law enforcement reports and investigations, charge criminals, engage in settlement negotiations,
comprehensively respond to all motions and, hopefully, avoid setting jury trials for cases where an early
settlement is appropriate. We expect to continue to have an exceptional record of success in the cases that
do end up going to jury trial.
Continue to deal with the changes in case management caused by the passage of the criminal realignment
plan by the California State Legislature. The new law has drastically changed sentencing for criminals
convicted of felonies and has resulted in a major increase in the number of defendants spending their prison
time at the Inyo County Jail. There have also been substantial changes to the sentencing options available
for misdemeanor offenders as well. We will continue to work with law enforcement and the court to ensure
that criminals are held accountable for their deeds and sentenced in a manner that ensures a just result.
As ~!ways, we will_ continue to work with our partners in criminal justice at the law enforcement agencies
and m the commumty to ensure that Inyo County remains a safe place to work, live and raise a family.
 Maintain full time staffing of Criminal Investigators
Present accurate and timely investigations to support prosecutorial decisions to ensure public trust in the
District Attorney's Office
Provide optimal level of professional law enforcement and investigative support services for our
community and the citizens of Inyo County
Continue collaborative efforts with local law enforcement agencies to support effective responses to major
crimes or problems which impair the safety of quality of life for the citizens of Inyo County
 Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability of illegal drugs locally.
 Reduction in illegal drugs related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with illegal drug abuse.
 Maintain grant funding for operation of the !NET Task Force.
 Provide training to California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo County Health & Human
Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo Hospital, and Wild Iris.
 Continue to be involved in the Inyo County Task Force subcommittee.
 Attend the Fall 2013 Domestic Violence Symposium.
 Services provision goals: 700 new victim clients and 1,350 continuing victims, 25 new witnesses, 6
presentations, and 6 trainings.
 Expand services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in the outlining areas and most
rural areas of Inyo County, including Tribes in the outer County.
 Continuing to expand services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in the outlining areas
and most rural areas of Inyo County.
 Continued training  California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo County Health & Human
Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo Hospital, and Wild Iris.
 Participate in the planning and implementation of the 20I3 and 20I4 Domestic Violence Symposium.
 Services provision goals to 75 new victim clients and 200 continuing victims, 5 new witnesses, 6
presentations and 6 trainings.
 Continued involvement in the Death Valley Chamber of Commerce.
 Participate in many of the Underserved populations outings and community functions.
 Continue to advocate for the Unserved/Underserved populations.
Continue to expand services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in the outlining areas and
most rural areas of Inyo County.
 Continued training to California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo County Health & Human
Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo Hospital, and Wild Iris.
 Participate in the planning and implementation of the 2014 Domestic Violence Symposium.
 Services provision goals to 75 new victim clients and 200 continuing victims, 5 new witnesses, 6
presentations and 6 trainings.
 Continued involvement in the Chamber of Commerce Death Valley.
 Participate in all of the Underserved populations outings and community functions.
 Continue to advocate for the Unserved/Underserved populations.
The Office of County Counsel continues and will continue to provide high quality legal services and
representation to the County, its officers and employees in a timely and cost efficient manner. We continue to obtain
the best resolution possible for the County in litigation in which it is involved.
 To implement the new fee schedule to establish, increase and decrease fees to more accurately reflect the
actual costs associated with certain services, contingent upon Board approval.
 To implement a program to perform civil marriage ceremonies by the County Clerk.
 To continue to serve as co-chairperson of the Legislative Committee of the County Recorders Association
of California (CRAC). This committee studies pending legislation, meets with members of the California
legislature regarding bills of interest and reports on the status of all legislation to the members of tbe
association.
 To conduct the November 5, 2013 Uniform District Election. This election includes all Community
Services District, Fire Protection Districts and Sanitary Districts in Inyo County.
 To conduct the June 6, 2012 Direct Primary Election. This election includes Voter-Nominated Offices, all
state constitutional offices, Supervisorial, County Board of Education, and all countywide elected officials.
 To utilize and purchase DisclosureDocs and E-Disclosure to continue to provide electronic management
and tracking of the 499 Inyo County Residents that are required to file the Conflict oflnterest Form 700 per
the Political Reform Act.
 To coordinate with the Fair Political Practices Commission to provide the ability for all Inyo County
Residents to file their Conflict of Interest Forms 700 electronically.
 To retrofit the historically used polling places in Inyo County for accessibility, utilizing grant funds
previously approved by the Board of Supervisors.
 To complete the Official Records Preservation Project 2 which includes restoration, preservation, microfilming and
digitally scanning of certified copies of Death Certificates Volume 1-9 dating from 1902-1932.
 To audit the Redaction/Truncation program as required by statute.
Continue to provide an efficiently run Coroner's Office at a minimal charge to the County.
 Adopt a balanced budget within the constraints of funding reductions as a result of the State Budget.
 Continue the maintain core services at current levels.
 Manage the County's budget to maintain existing service levels.
 Hire a new County Counsel.
 Hire a new Agricultural Commissioner.
 Maintain senior services in light of large funding cuts proposed by the State.
 Move the concept of a new County Animal Shelter forward.
 Continue to support the Adventure Trails Pilot Project.
 Continue to find a method to secure funding for the continuation of PIL T and Secured Rural Schools.
 Support the development of renewable energy projects in the County.
 Resolve the Blackrock 94 Dispute.
 Continue involvement in the Forest Plan Update/Revision and to assert the County's right for formal
coordination with federal agencies.
 Continue to support and strengthen the IR WMP process.
 Remain active in protecting local land use authority and limiting any further restrictions on public access to
public lands.
 Continue to participate in the Desert Renewable Energy conservation Plan (DRECP).
 Continue to work with the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding ownership of the Mt. Whitney Fish
Hatchery.
 Continue with the implementation of AB 109 to restructure local incarceration requirements.
 Continue efforts to evaluate the replacement of existing leased office space in the Bishop area with a
County owned facility through an innovative public/private lease/buyout partnership.
 Conclude the Board of Equalization appeal hearings on the Coso Property Tax Applications.
 Remain involved at the executive level with CSAC and RCRC on those issues that affect our County and
State.
 Continue to participate in NACo, Quad State Local Government Authority and Western Counties Alliance.
Continue to meet all State, Federal and other reporting and financial deadlines.
 Complete the process of updating the Property Tax software in conjunction with the Treasurer/Tax
Collector, the Assessor and Information Services.
 Continue to provide service and training to other departments and the public.
Continue to use this fund in accordance with County Policy by using it to make loans to other funds and to
use for unexpected decreases in revenue and/or increases in expenditures that cannot be absorbed within existing
budgets. This reserve is to be used before using General Reserves and requires a 415"' vote of the Board of
Supervisors.
To continue to have this fund accrue interest.
 Continue to serve your Board, County departments, and the public by providing a level of service
and satisfaction that exceeds the County's fiscal and staffing capacities.
 Continue to monitor the County Budget, and make recommendations to ensure ongoing fiscal
solvency in the face of increasing fiscal challenges.
 Respond promptly and appropriately to any challenge, opportunity, or issue that may arise but is
not identified at present.
 Examine departmental organization and staffing opportunities, with the objective of improving the
delivery of services and improving efficiencies while achieving long-term savings, personnel cost
neutrality.
 Support your Board of Supervisors in reaching a decision regarding whether or not to proceed
with the Consolidated Office Building project, and implement that decision.
 Support efforts to construct a new Animal Shelter and warehouse for Agricultural Commissioner
programs and services.
 Implement the results of the employee Classification and Compensation Equity project.
 Complete labor contract negotiations with the Inyo County Employees Association (ICEA) Law
Enforcement Administrators Association (LEAA), Elected Official Assistants Association
(EOAA), Inyo County Probation Peace Officers Association (ICPPOA), and Inyo County
Correctional Officers Association (ICCOA).
 Support expansion of the Employee Wellness program.
 Refine and advance the paid student-intern program developed last year to support the
Superintendent of Schools' ROP accounting program, as well as other opportunities to provide
local high school and college students with work experience while benefitting County
departments.
 Reinstate an employee recognition program.
 Support your Board successfully recruiting and appointing a new County Counsel and
Agricultural Commissioner - Sealer of Weights and Measures, and appointing a person to fulfill
the unexpired term of District Attorney.
 Reinstitute structure and predictability to the Board of Supervisors meeting agenda preparation
process.
 Continue to work with the Assistant Clerk of the Board and Information Services, as well as
County Counsel and the Auditor-Controller in transitioning to an automated agenda process for
Board of Supervisors meetings, including reviewing and revamping the agenda request submittal
and approval process to extend timelines, improve the quality communication of information to
the Board of Supervisors and the public, and foster greater collaboration between departments.
 Continue to work with County Counsel and the Water Department Director to advise and
represent your Board of Supervisors on water-related issues and opportunities.
 Initiate negotiations with LADWP for a new Eastern Sierra Regional Airport lease complimentary
to the County's new airport easement.
 Complete mutually-desired modifications to the MOU between County of Inyo and Inyo County
Superior Court.
 Amend the Inyo County Film Permit Ordinance to establish a countywide film permit and
associated fee schedule.
 Further implement the County's Real Property Management Policy, beginning with a request from
the Big Pine Fire Department for the County to sell it the former Big Pine Library site and making
County-owned land in Independence available to the AOC for a new Independence courthouse.
Explore other opportunities to productively use County-owned land.
 Continue to monitor and advise the Board of Supervisors and work with County departments, on
budget, policy and implementation issues related to Criminal Justice Realignment.
 Continue to monitor, represent, and advocate County interests relative to mounting renewable
energy facility development pressures.
 Continue to assist Health and Human Services and your Board of Supervisors in serving the
County's seniors through the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging (ESAAA) and Inyo County
Growing Older Living with Dignity (IC GOLD) programs.
 Identify and pursue economic development enhancements as resources permit or opportunities
present themselves
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, the California Department of
Fish and Wildlife, and the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding issues associated with the longterm
disposition and development of the hatchery.
 Identify and pursue opportunities to fund the LORP River Center Project in Independence.
 Work with Public Works department staff to further evaluate the feasibility and interest in
establishing limited commercial air service at the Eastern Sierra Regional Airport, and/or
providing inclement weather landing options for the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport.
 As time and resources permit, explore opportunities for inter-agency and regional partnerships to
maintain or enhance County services, including economic development and waste management.
 Realize goals identified in other budget narratives overseen by this Office; other opportunities
forgotten; or, that may arise.
 With Public Works, facilitate funding completion of the photovoltaic electric systems being
installed at County offices in Independence.
 Conduct community meetings to solicit input regarding the proposed consolidated Office Building
project.
 With assistance from the County's real estate economist and County Counsel, continue to work
with the developers, department heads, and your Board to finalize the non-binding Design Review
and update the non-binding Term Sheet for the Consolidated Office Building project. If the nonbinding
Design Review and updated, non-binding Term Sheet are approved by your Board of
Supervisors, negotiate final project documents for consideration by your Board of Supervisors.
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, the California Department of
Fish and Wildlife and Sierra Nevada Conservancy - engaging the County's real estate economist
as necessary - to implement an action plan to evaluate the transition of the Mount Whitney Fish
Hatchery from California Department of Fish and Game ownership to the Sierra Nevada
Conservancy and, ultimately, to a third party such as the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish
Hatchery, Inyo County, or another private or non-profit entity.
 Pursue requests from the Big Pine Fire District and Administrative Office of the Courts for the
County to divest itselfofproperty, in favor of these entities, in Big Pine and Independence.
 Identify and appropriate available County funding for a new Animal Shelter and appropriate and
identify opportunities to increase the amount of funding available to construct the facility.
 Through Public Works, continue to refine options and costs for a new Animal Shelter
commensurate with the available funding.
 Based on funding projections and Public Works input, develop a realistic timeline for completing
the project.
 Complete a technical refresh of 25% of the computing infrastructure including: end-user computers,
application servers, storage servers, data backup systems and network switching equipment
 Continue to meet core needs of patrons in a challenging fiscal environment.
 Implement resource sharing, utilizing an affordable model.
 Improve website for more appeal.
 Continue to encourage library staff to access courses in library science.
 Expand public awareness of library services.
 Expand and improve the Central Library if adjacent space becomes available.
 Complete details of "Library Refresh" Phase I improvements in the Bishop and Lone Pine Libraries
 Implement "Library Refresh" Phase II of the Lone Pine Library expansion.
 Complete the majority of the system-wide inventory and retrospective conversion of the Library's records.
 Continue to evaluate branch library collections by subject area for improvement, and add new materials.
 Continue digitization ofunique and fragile items for preservation and a future digital library.
 Emphasize preservation and care of materials, both to maintain the collection and for cost savings.
 Celebrate the Centennial of the Inyo County Free Library.
 Revitalize the Law Library Board of Trustees.
 Restore online and print access to legal materials.
 Continue working with the Council of California County Law Librarians to locate new sources of revenue.
 Work with the local Court and legal community to coordinate public legal reference and assistance.
 Continue to make emergency management enhancements a focal point for the County's emerging
Integrated Geographic Information System.
 Work with Information Services to finalize the EOC enhancements funded through Congressman
McKeon's federal appropriation.
 Continue to partner with Health and Human Services and other agencies to create and conduct
multi-agency emergency exercises requiring interoperability between agencies using "real time"
direct communications.
 Coordinate exercises with volunteer groups that will be utilized in emergencies (e.g. Hamm Radio
Club, Search and Rescue, Fire Departments, Salvation Army, etc.).
 Continue to seek grant opportunities to fund the costs of emergency equipment and supplies,
training, and exercise development.
 Increase coordination of effort between CAO and Sheriff's Office staff with respect to program
administration between emergencies.
 Continue to conduct quarterly Unified Command meetings to strengthen multi-agency information
sharing and collaboration.
 Continue to assist the Public Works department in completing the installation of the NOAA
Weather Transmitter, and provide administrative support in closing out the USDA-Rural
Development Grant.
 Continue to send Inyo County management personnel to the CalEMA's C
 Maintain a reasonable level of service commensurate with the County's fiscal and staff
constraints.
 Continue to pursue and maximize economic development opportunities associated with renewable
energy projects while ensuring such projects do not negatively impact County services and
programs.
 To the extent adequate funding exists, develop and sponsor community-specific, downtown revitalization
and economic development programs for Independence, Lone Pine, Big Pine and,
possibly, North Bishop.
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, the California Department of
Fish and Wildlife, and the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding issues associated with the longterm
disposition and development of the hatchery.
 Identify and pursue opportunities to fund the LORP River Center Project in Independence.
 Work with Public Works department staff and interested parties to further evaluate the feasibility
and interest in establishing limited commercial air service at the Eastern Sierra Regional Airport,
and/or providing inclement weather landing options for the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport.
 Continue to support the Digital 395 project, and identify opportunities to leverage the project for
long-term economic development.
 Revise the County's Film Ordinance to create a film permit and associated fee schedule.
 As time permits, develop Request For Proposals for specific manufacturing uses on County-owned
land consistent with the County's Real Property Management Policy.
 As time permits, explore the possible creation ofregional economic development frameworks and
initiatives.
 Continue to maintain strategic partnerships and alliances with key organizations and individuals,
and undertake projects to foster economic development opportunities in Inyo County.
Avoid being visited by events requiring expenditure from this budget unit, or contributing
additional revenue to this fund.
Continue to utilize these funds to enhance and protect the fishing and wildlife resources that are so very
vital to Inyo County. Additionally work with the Advisory Commission to monitor the revenues in this budget in
order to maintain its availability provide funds to enhance project opportunities.
 Continue to extend the GJS resources and tools developed over the past two years by procuring
essential GJS enhancements. The balance of the 2010 HSGP funds will be used to train staff on
the GJS equipment to fully maximize the GJS capabilities by empowering Emergency Response
personnel with the knowledge necessary to utilize the GIS system.
 The Sheriffs Office will send another staff member to Terrorism Liaison Officer (TLO) training.
 Funds will be combined with the 20 I 0 and 2012 Homeland Security Grants towards the purchase
of another Enterprise License Agreement with ESRI to provide a three-year Geographic
Information System (GIS) use license that will help to continue the enhancement and development
of the Inyo County Integrated GJS Project.
The County has used HSGP funds to make great strides towards improving the GIS capabilities
and technical compatibility with other local emergency response agencies. Unfortunately, with the
reduction of revenue from the State (see narrative below), the County will be limited in purchasing any
additional GIS equipment.
 A large portion of the 2012 HSGP funds will be used to continue the enhancement and
maintenance of the current GIS database by renewing the ESRI software license agreement. This
will enable local agencies to continue to utilize the geodatabase for individual mapping purposes.
The current software license agreement will be expiring in March 2014, so a portion of the 2012
HSGP funds are going to be set aside to fund a portion of the cost (it is anticipated that the 2013
HSGP funds will pay for the remaining balance) of renewing of the license agreement for another
three-year term, through 2017.
 Funds will also be used to purchase the annual Reverse 911 Emergency Response System
database lease.
 The grant will continue to support GIS training by sending County staff to the annual ESRI GIS
User Conference and the ESRJ Homeland Security GIS Security Summit.
 Improve service to lnfonnation Services customers .
 Continue focus on high quality effort and consistent approaches to solutions
 Education/training on new technologies employed at the County
 Establish and publish fonnal policies and procedures
 Evaluate organizational structure of the division
 Complete or further the following technology related projects:
 Expand capability of enterprise Geographical lnfonnation System
 Implement new Email system
 Continued evaluation, modification and stabilization of!F AS
 Re-design and implement new County Inter/Intranet web site
 Evaluate and implement recommended updates to County voice communications system
 Continue analysis of computing environment security and continue implementation of security measures
 Issue and evaluate proposals for Countywide photocopying solutions
 Participate in and facilitate Property Tax Management System replacement project
 Participated in Criminal Justice System replacement project
 Pursue improvements for broadband and telecommunications access throughout the county .
 Continue support of Digital 395 Initiative
 Document capabilities and needs throughout the county
 Work with telecommunication vendors to fulfill needs identified
 Complete the Sheriff's Gun Range Project which entails environmental cleanup of the site to remove
spent shells.
 Attempt to get all or some portion of the additional environmental work at the gun range covered by the
State.
 Once the Sheriff's Gun Range project is completed work with Ca!EMA to close the Inyo Complex Fire
Emergency.
To continue to coordinate with third party administrator, outside legal counsel, and outside investigators on
workers' compensation claims, to conduct training for employees, and to sit on the Underwriting Committee and
Board of Directors of the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority.
 Continue aggressive recruitment for all vacant positions.
 Provide employee supervision and perfonnance evaluation training to all supervisory
employees.
 Complete new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Inyo County Probation
Officers Association, Inyo County Correctional Officers Association and Inyo County
Employees Association (ICEA)
 Continue to provide a high level of services to employees and the public, and examine
opportunities to enhance efficiencies and expand services.
 Work with Infonnation Services to streamline recruitment processes and make
department infonnation available to employees and the public via the intranet and
internet.
 Training to employees on County Personnel Rules and Procedures and Policies.
 Continue to provide a high level of services to employees and the public.
 Implement the Countywide equity adjustments for affected positions.
 Implement the Affordable Health Care Act
Motor Pool plans to replace approximately thirteen (13) vehicles for FY 2013-2014, all meet the replacement
criteria including having high mileage.
 Research fleet software and motor pool automation tools to increase the efficiency of the overall motor
pool program. lncluding staff attending motor pool best practices training.
 Increase fuel efficiency by purchasing the most fuel-efficient vehicles meeting County specifications.
 Continue to surplus vehicles and equipment that have high mileage and meet the replacement criteria and
offer the vehicles and equipment to the public through the sealed bid and public auction process.
 Encourage County employees to utilize CFN fuel stations located in the unincorporated areas of the County
whenever possible for tax revenue purposes.
 Motor Pool will inspect each Motor Pool vehicle returned and will encourage the maintenance of vehicles
by County staff.
 Evaluate maintenance and fee schedule for realistic replacement costs.
Motor Pool plans to replace thirteen (13) vehicles for FY 2013-2014 per the attached Motor Pool replacement
schedule at an estimated cost of $399, 954.
 Increase fuel efficiency by purchasing the most fuel-efficient vehicles that meet County specifications.
 Continue to surplus vehicles and equipment that have high mileage and meet the replacement criteria and
offer the vehicles and equipment through the sealed bid and public auction process.
 Maintain the highest possible level of service for visitors and researchers, commensurate with the County's
fiscal constraints.
 Create video and other digital exhibit materials for public viewing on the large, flat-screen TV purchased
and donated to the Museum by the Friends of the Eastern California Museum.
 Design two Museum signs along U.S. 395 on both ends of Independence. Obtain leases from the Los
Angeles Department of Water and Power for the land where the signs will be located. Work with the Public
Works Department to craft a bid proposal for construction and installation of the highway "monument"
signs, using the $50,400 Caltrans provided the County for the signs.
 Expedite the eventual transfer of the double-wide trailer on the Museum grounds from the County to the
Friends of the Eastern California Museum. The Friends would repair and renovate the structure so it could
be used for storage for the Museum, the Friends, and other community groups.
 Begin the process of renewing the Museum's land lease with the Los Angeles Department of Water and
Power. Meet with Museum supporters, other County departments, and the community to detennine if
additional land for Museum operations and programs should be included in the new lease, which would be
for 20 years, and possibly up to 30 years. The current lease expires in 2016.
 Promote "Historic Independence" by working with the Friends of the Eastern California Museum, the
Independence Civic Club, and the community to improve the recently completed brochure, "Discover
Independence: Historic Walking Tour of Green and Historic Independence." Create programs and events
highlighting the community's history.
 Continue initial discussions with representatives of the Fort Independence Paiute Tribe regarding the
proposed Fort Independence Resort. If the development proceeds, work with the Tribe to create a Paiute
cultural display and exhibit in the new resort, and other information about the region's history. The
cooperative effort would enhance the resort, educate and inform visitors, and promote the Eastern
California Museum.
 Work with the Inyo County Parks Department to create programs, activities, and events in County parks
and other facilities that appeal to a broad cross-section of county residents and visitors.
 Install a computer that the public can use to view the Virtual Transportation Museum site, the Museum's
website, and the Museum's digital photo galleries (the computer would not provide access to the Internet).
 Create a Volunteer Program, based on current Inyo County volunteer guidelines, forms and policies, that
allows enthusiastic and knowledgeable volunteers to play a larger role in the operation of the Museum,
creation of exhibits, maintenance of structures, and documenting collections and artifacts.
 Complete the Jane Bright Memorial Rock and Mineral Garden on the Museum grounds.
 Continue to refine the "Anna and OK Kelley Gallery of Native American Life," which holds the Museum's
renowned exhibit of more than 400 Paiute-Shoshone baskets and other artifacts.
 Continue to expand the Museum's educational programs and presentations with guest speakers, slide
shows, and field trips throughout the year.
 Develop and sell a 2014 Eastern California Museum Calendar.
 Continue to support implementation of the County's Renewable Energy Development Ordinance,
including current efforts to update the General Plan's treatment ofrenewable energy facilities.
 Ensure that the impacts of renewable energy projects on the County are fully mitigated and the
potential benefits from such projects are fully realized.
 Examine other initiatives that could be supported by this budget unit, including funding staff to
facilitate natural resource development issues, including: federal land use coordination, renewable
energy facility siting, and other resource-driven economic opportunities.
 Participate as a sponsor of the Southern California Energy Summit 2013. The summit will focus
on renewable energy opportunities and issues throughout the State, and provide an opportunity to
develop partnerships to address these issues and opportunities with other local government
representatives while engaging State and Federal leaders on policy issues.
 Major refurbishing of the Millpond Recreation Park restroom
 Repair the entrance restroom at Pleasant Valley
 Place site markers at campgrounds
 Prepare campgrounds for Pay Stations
 Millpond beach refurbishing with fishing dock
 Replenish woodchips at various play areas in the parks
 Refurbish the Gazebo at Mendenhall Park
 Repair existing lighting at Mendenhall Park
 Research solar pumps for the campgrounds
 Research the possibility of full hookups at the campgrounds
 Research best way to resurface Millpond Tennis Courts
 Research Frisbee Golf courses for Millpond Recreation Area
 Tree Trimming at Dehy Park, Taboose Campground, Tinnemaha Campground, Baker Creek , Mendenhall
Park, Izaak Walton Park
 Refurbish the Gazebo at Lone Pine Park
 Increase programming in the Parks
 Complete additional repairs as needed.
 Continue the provision of mandated legal defense services.
 Continue to explore ways to minimize the County's public defender costs.
 Complete negotiations with the Superior Court regarding the County's provision of juvenile
dependency counsel services on behalf of the Court.
 Successfully recruit a fifth, part-time contract attorney to improve functionality and reduce out-ofcontract
appointments.
 Continue the County's never-ending recruitment of contract public defenders to best position the
County to facilitate filling expected and unexpected contract vacancies.
 Continue efforts to work with judicial system partners - District Attorney, Courts, Public
Defenders, Probation, and the Sheriffs Office - to identify ways to reduce costs, enhance
efficiencies, and improve the administration of justice in Inyo County.
 Explore means to recover public defender costs from the less-than-indigent clientele that avail
themselves to these 'free' services.
Continue to provide loss prevention and loss control activities; work with departments to comply with
Federal and State statutes and regulations; coordinate and provide training for employees; work with departments in
policy development and implementation; continue to manage workers compensation and liability claims; and
administer insurance programs.
To continue to conduct investigations, analyze exposures, administer Claims against the County, work with
department heads and employees to minimize exposure to the County, and coordinate with outside legal counsel in
litigation against the County.
Continue to coordinate with Behavioral Health, Public Health, Sheriff and Probation staff on correctional
care Risk Management issues and quality assurance.
 Begin Phase One of the Corrective Action Plan at the Bishop-Sunland Landfill, this includes the
construction of two (2) large gas extraction wells, a vacuumed-gas cleaning system, replacing a poorly
constructed landfill groundwater monitoring well.
 Purchase truck scale for Bishop-Sunland Landfill to more accurately characterize the waste coming
into landfill.
 Work with CalRecycle JPCU staff on Inyo County Independent Review process.
 Develop and implement a Waste Origin Program for better accountability and tracking of solid waste.
 Revise Waste Management and Waste Hauling Ordinances in accordance with direction given through
waste workshops conducted with Board of Supervisors.
 Revise construction and demolition ordinances to better meet California Building Code Requirements.
 Install litter fences to reduce wind-blown litter at landfills.
 Modify rate structure at landfills and transfer station to cover program costs and to encourage
recycling.
 Work with waste haulers to increase curbside recycling in Inyo County.
 Perfonn two (2) tire amnesty days at each manned IWM facility using CalRecycle grant monies
through RCRC/ESJPA, one in September 2013 and the second in April 2014.
 Conduct Rural County Representatives of California ESJPA Household Hazardous Waste employee
training.
 Provide Management of Landfill Operations (MOLO) training to two (2) IWM employees.
 Attend five RCRCIESJPA solid waste Board of Directors meetings in Sacramento.
 Continue reducing consultant contract costs by perfonning more tasks utilizing existing IWM staff.
 Purchase Dust Suppressant using residual Great Basin APCD Block Grant funds of$10,910.
 Continue the diesel particulate filter installation program for the On & Off-Road equipment.
 Purchase new or used forklift to continue Electronic Waste Recycling operations.
 Provide power to the Big Pine Transfer Station.
 Attend 4lh annual Earth Day event to continue recycling education.
 Increase education and outreach programs for recycling and diversion in Inyo County.
 Continue providing Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) collection events on a quarterly basis at each
landfill and the Big Pine transfer station, sixteen (16) HHW events planned for FY 2013-2014.
 Augment recycling and diversion programs that are appropriate for Inyo County.
 Solicit applications for two rounds of grants for the FY 2013-2014 Community Sponsorship Grant
Program. The first round will fund fall activities and events occurring through November, 2013, and the
second round will fund events and activities during the rest of the fiscal year. Applications for both rounds
will be reviewed and ranked by a citizen review panel, and a funding recommendation provided to your
Board.
 Administer all FY 2013-2014 CPSP grant agreements, and process initial and final payment requests.
 Execute and administer a short-term contract with Poimiroo and Partners for the Fall Color Publicity
Campaign and continue to work with chambers of commerce and local businesses to identify publicity and
public relations opportunities.
 Staff will continue to respond to CTTC requests for information for press releases, story queries, photos,
and other publicity related to Inyo County, Death Valley and the Eastern Sierra.
 Amend the County's Film Ordinance to create a countywide film permit and associated fee schedule.
 Conduct a $35,000 marketing campaign using media targeting the demographic and user groups most likely
to visit Inyo County.
 Continue the refinement of the County's print advertisements to create a uniform look and feel to
effectively convey the County's marketing message.
 Continue to represent Inyo County on the National Geographic Sierra Nevada Geotourism Project and help
the project and program grow, reach more potential visitors and become financially self-sustaining.
 Evaluate opportunities for collaboration on regional marketing or promotional efforts with the County's
chambers of commerce, Mono County and other promotional groups.
 Continue to maintain and upgrade theothersideofcalifomiacom website and respond to information
requests from potential visitors.
 Continue to provide funding to support social, cultural, recreational and performing arts
organizations, as well as area services agencies, all of which make significant
contributions to Inyo County.
 Efficiently prepare and administer County contracts with GIS recipients consistent with
County requirements that include verification of insurance coverage and being current on
all tax assessments.
