LADWP water management. This year’s pumping management will be managed according to the
existing Green Book. Key goals for FY 2014-2015 will be to implement the terms of the Blackrock 94 resolution,
accelerate development of revised vegetation monitoring and pumping management adoption into the Green Book,
evaluate LADWP’s Owens Lake project, and to continue to monitor and assess impacts of LADWP water
management.
Green book modifications. With the settlement of the Blackrock 94 dispute, Department staff will
renew the effort to develop new methods of vegetation monitoring, groundwater management, surface water and
groundwater monitoring. With the resolution of the Blackrock 94 dispute, this effort will be renewed with the
assistance of a facilitator and the Ecological Society of America.
Monitoring Programs. The Department will continue its ongoing program of monitoring soil moisture,
vegetation conditions, and groundwater levels. This ongoing program is related to managing groundwater pumping
and assessing the effectiveness of that management. Additionally, the Water Department will seek a contract to
have a set of 713 air photos of the Owens Valley in 1981. These air photos document the conditions that are the
Long-Term Water Agreements baseline for irrigated LADWP lands. The scanned photos will be imported into the
County GIS system and allow the Department to evaluate compliance with Water Agreement requirements for
irrigated land.
Coso/Hay Ranch. The Department will continue to monitor the project. As planned at the outset of the
project, the Department will management the project according to environmental standards described in the project’s
EIR, and make adaptive management decisions according to the EIR’s groundwater management plan..
Integrated Regional Water Management Planning. During FY 2014-2015, the Department will
continue to participate in the Inyo/Mono Regional Water Management Group.
Statewide Groundwater Elevation Monitoring Program. During FY 2014-2015, in order to
comply with state requirements for groundwater monitoring, the Department will implement groundwater elevation
monitoring and reporting plans for numerous groundwater basins in the County and submit these results to
California Department of Water Resources. We will also seek to develop plans for the remaining unmonitored
basins in the County.
Lower Owens River Project. FY 2014-2015 marks the eighth year of LORP implementation. Our
goal is to fulfill the County’s responsibility for joint funding, management, and implementation of the LORP.
LADWP claims that their operations and maintenance costs have been under budgeted in the past due to their having
overlooked a number of tasks that were omitted from past LORP budgets. The Department will work with LADWP
to agree on an equitable funding level for LORP operations and maintenance. The Department, LADWP, MOU
parties, the MOU consultant, and lessees affected by the LORP will participate in a “LORP Summit” to discuss the
future of the project and how LORP goals can best be achieved. The Department will finalize and seek funding
sources to implement the Recreational Use Plan.
The Saltcedar Control Program will continue to treat and monitor saltcedar populations throughout the
Owens Valley but will focus primarily on control in the area of the Lower Owens River Project.
The WCB portion of the Saltcedar Control Program will continue to treat and monitor saltcedar populations
throughout the Owens Valley but will focus primarily on control in the area of the Lower Owens River Project,
although significantly reduced from FY 2013-2014.
 Continue providing services and participations listed under accomplishments
 Continue having a close working relationship with other county/government agencies
 Continue outreach efforts

 Continue working collaboratively with CDVA Local Interagency Network Coordinator
 Outreach for Veteran ID Cards at Town Halls, Senior Centers, and Community Centers, etc.
To reimburse local Sheriff and other law enforcement agencies including probation for collection of DNA
specimens, samples and print impressions; for expenditures/administration costs incurred to comply with Penal Code
section 298(b)(5).
To purchase the following for the District Attorney’s office:
 (1) Laptop computers and carrying cases, not to exceed $2,000
 (1) large color printer, not to exceed $1,200
 (3) IPAD notebooks, not to exceed $1,700
 (2) b&w printers, not to exceed $600
 (1) All in one fax, printer, copier, not to exceed $1,000
 Ink cartridges, not to exceed $1,000
To purchase the following for the Probation Department:
 (1) Single band radio, not to exceed $2,000.
 (8) IPad notebooks, not to exceed $4,800
 Invoice RAN quarterly for CLETS Line, not to exceed $6,000.
To purchase the following for the Bishop Police Department:
 Invoice RAN for CLETS Line, not to exceed $7,081.
 (3) CVU Cop Vu cameras, not to exceed $2,385

To purchase the following for the Sheriff’s Department:
 (3) Livescan maintenance agreements, not to exceed $16,000.
 Evidence Technician equipment, not to exceed $2,000
 (1) Fire proof storage cabinet, not to exceed $700.
 (2) corner shelves, not to exceed $385
 (4) chrome wire shelves, not to exceed $763
 (2) file cabinets for fingerprint cards, not to exceed $706
 (6) digital cameras, not to exceed $793
 Continue to provide leadership and support to all of the affected departments and agencies during
the Property Tax Management System conversion project. (PTMS)
 Continue to offer online payments to any interested department. We are currently in progress on
projects for the Parks and Recreation Department as well as Solid Waste. Environmental Health
Department had a successful implementation in the 2013/14 year.
 Continue to work with County Counsel on the review and update of the Transient Occupancy Tax
Ordinance and bring before the Board with recommendations and request for possible action.
 Continue to provide leadership and support to all of the affected departments and agencies during
the Property Tax Management System conversion project. (PTMS)
 The anticipated completion date for the project is September 2015.
 Continue to upgrade equipment (car cameras, personal cameras, emergency equipment)
 Increase investigation needs for gang enforcement
 Continue training investigators in investigation of Missing and Exploited Children using available
Federal Funds
 Staff OES and Homeland Security positions to meet the increasing demands by the State and Federal
Government Grants.
 Increase the level of community support we continue to enjoy by providing the public services within
our scope of responsibility and availability.
 Maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other County entities that allow
for better public services through cooperation.
 Stay connected to State Vine Program (Victim Information Notification Everyday)
 Continue to apply for grants for hiring, equipment, and programs
 Increase training for Department Personnel as Training Instructors (which will include jail staff
instructors)

 Continue the program to make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County, and
assistance elsewhere when requested, through improved equipment and training and volunteer
recruitment.
 Train other agencies / Departments in Emergency Services and Inoperable Communications
 Maintain, test, educate and familiarize the public with the CODE-RED emergency notification system.
 Continue to coordinate the multi-agency Unified Command meetings
 Continue maintenance and certification for our Explosive Detection K-9 program
 Maintain and monitor the Sheriff’s Office web site.
 Through our own use of the media continue to promote animal adoptions at the Shelter.
 Maintain a supportive affiliation with the local rescue and support groups and assist their efforts with offsite
adoption events.

 Promote the Department and the Shelter as being a part of the Inyo County Sheriff’s Department. Publicize
the Inyo County Sheriff’s Animal Shelter through media contacts and promote the services available and
that are provided by the Shelter.
 Ensure rabies vaccination compliance with an emphasis on license enforcement.
 Continue with our efforts to ensure that the public is served as promptly and as efficiently as possible.
 Through an aggressive media campaign solicit and collect sufficient funding to construct a new Animal
Shelter.
 Complete construction on the new Animal Shelter
 Complete & implement the new Lexipol Custody Manual
 Repair and maintain aging jail facility infrastructure
 Continue to refine the jail management system software
 Dedicate more inmate work crew man hours to community projects
 Train more Correctional Officers as training instructors
 Provide more specialty training to custody staff in the field of courtroom and transportation security
 Continue to refine the Court Security MOU and provide adequate security services to the court and public
 Continue to meet all training requirements pursuant to STC and POST mandates
 Continue the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other county entities that allow for
better public services through cooperation
Continue the maintenance and service contract with Sun Ridge Systems
 Continue to expand the Work Release Alternative Program to maintain the inmate population at
manageable levels
 Continue to refine the “In Custody” jail management software to realize its full potential
 Continue to work with the courts to find ways to manage manpower resources to mutual benefit and
efficiency

 Maintain the excellent relationship between the Board and other county agencies that allow for effective
public service through cooperation
 Further expand inmate programs in the jail and incentivize the programs with CPC 4019.4 credits to reduce
the jail population.
 Continue to explore innovative programs and procedures to retain our deputy sheriff and correctional
officer personnel in order to provide adequate levels of public safety and minimize the time and monies
used to recruit and train personnel
 Continue effective communications between patrol and custody division supervisors/managers to best
manage existing manpower and training concerns
Continue maintenance and service contract with American Security Systems.
Our goal is to meet or exceed all regulatory mandates by STC and receive notification of compliance.
 Complete communication installation so offices can be occupied
 Complete signage
 Complete landscaping
 Complete exterior painting of building.
 Upgrade facilities (Substations) for Patrol personnel, which include finishing the final stages of the
Lone Pine Substation.
 Maintain staffing level up to allocated strength
 Emphasis on training for Deputies as experienced Deputies have retired and replaced by entry level or
minimum experienced personnel
 Maintain the grant funded OHV program in preparation for the new “Adventure Trail” off road
program, which is being developed by the local advocates group, “AAPL.”
 Continue the level of community support we continue to enjoy by providing the public services within
our scope of responsibility and availability
 Maintain the outstanding relationships developed with the Board and other County entities that allow
for better public services through cooperation
 Continue to look for grant funding for additional personnel, training, and equipment
 Continue the program to make Search and Rescue available to meet any rescue need in the County, and
assistance elsewhere when requested, through improved equipment and training
 Continue to reorganize Sheriff’s Department Administration to provide more efficiency, better
supervision and more cost effectiveness
 Start and maintain narcotic detection / tracking K-9 program
 Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability of methamphetamine locally.
 Reduction in methamphetamine related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in physical property damage associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with methamphetamine abuse.
 Support the position of the INET Legal Secretary III and office expenses, and training.
 Locate and eradicate marijuana cultivation sites throughout the county (one site confirmed, two others
suspected).
 Identify and apprehend all persons responsible for the cultivation sites.
 Obtain intelligence information through surveillance, fight operations, and public input.
 Reduce marijuana production and distribution.
 Reduce the availability of marijuana locally.
 Reduce illegal drug related crimes and offenses.
 Reduce the hazardous waste associated with marijuana cultivation.
 Maintain grant funding for operation of the INET Task Force.
 Goals for fiscal year 2014-2015 include maintaining OHV equipment, and providing overtime
reimbursement for OHV patrol.
 Provide OHV patrol to all areas of the County.
 Provide public education and awareness for public activities.
 Enforce laws, rules, and regulations as related to off highway vehicles.
 Work closely with community groups to identify potential areas of non-compliance to laws, rules, and
regulations.
 Work cooperatively with Federal, State, local governments, and OHV organized activity groups.
 Continue maintenance of County roads as funding allows
 Continue to employ asphalt maintenance strategies on select roads
 Overlay Tu Su Lane and the remainder of Diaz Lane
 Maintain and improve utilization of the cost accounting system
 Continue implementation of BACT Plan provisions for on-road diesel retrofits
 Continue implementation of plan for CARB compliance of off-road diesel equipment
 Perform a fleet audit and equipment utilization review
 Evaluate efficiency and effectiveness of Road Department operations.
 Prepare and submit the final report and invoice for the Sabrina Road Bridge Replacement Project, and
obtain full reimbursement from the State for all costs for engineering and construction
 Prepare and submit the final report and invoice for the Independence Town Roads Rehabilitation
Project, and obtain full reimbursement from the State for all costs for engineering and construction
 Complete environmental studies, fifty to seventy-five complete plans, and begin right-of-way
acquisition for the three new bridge projects (L.A. Aqueduct at Carroll Creek and Walker Creek, and
Oak Creek at Bell Access Road)
 Complete the plans and specifications and advertise for bids for the Sunland Drive Bicycle
Lanes/South Bishop Resurfacing Projects
 Complete the plans and specifications and advertise for bids for the West Bishop Resurfacing Project
 Complete the plans and specifications for the Ed Powers Road Bicycle Lanes Project
 Assess the results of community input for the See Vee Lane Extension Project and request direction
from the Board as to how to proceed with the project
 Keep project billings current
 Continue development of improvements for County Airports.
 Continue construction and development of State Funded Road projects.
 Provide administrative activities for town water systems, including oversight and transition to new
Contractor and scope of work.
 Continue support for Deferred Maintenance projects.
 Continue with development and support of bridge projects.
 Continue work on consolidated office space needs.
 Continue administration of Local Transportation Commission.
 Continue to provide development review assistance.
 Provide County Surveyor service “in-house”
 Continue to provide administrative support to other departments.
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
 Secure new fuel contract.
 Continue to operate and maintain airport facilities.
 Continue to prepare projects for Terminal area and other minor improvements.
 Continue to attempt to secure funding for future AIP projects.
 Continue to develop and implement airport ground leases.
 Develop fire suppression well testing procedure and implement.
 Pursue obtaining custody of National Weather Service building.
 Ensure perimeter fence remains in good repair.
 Provide resources and other support for Airport Improvement Projects.
 Complete the updated Airport Layout Plan with narrative.
 Complete the design phase of Airport Lighting and Signage project.
 Complete the design phase of the 16-34 Runway Construction project.
 Complete construction of the Airport Lighting and Signage project
 Submit a grant application for the 16-34 Runway Construction project.
 Continued payment of the Fire & Casualty Insurance
 Contract with Agricultural Commissioner’s Office for weed spraying.
 Purchase of replacement bulbs for runway and taxiway lighting.
 Continue to provide inspections and plan reviews in a timely manner
 Continue to provide safety inspections, when required
 Continue to inspect properties for safety hazards and issue abatement notices, when required
 Update Building & Safety handouts to reflect the new building code requirements
 Revisit cost analysis of building permit fees; report and request changes through Board of Supervisors
 Continue implementation of the “Construction Waste Management Plan” with the Integrated Waste
Department to bring the County facilities into compliance with the “California Green Building Standards
Code”.
 Continue to provide administrative support for district
 Administer O&M contract for preventive maintenance
 Obtain agreement with the Forest Service for sewer plant fees
 Continue to seek grant funding for continued system improvements
 Purchase and install flow meter to better monitor system demands and to assist in waste usage calculations.
 Continue to utilize best practices to minimize expense on a system with aging infrastructure.
Identify capital improvements that may be required.
 Provide matching funds for IRWMP grant
 Update the Deferred Maintenance priority list.
 Continue to investigate and implement opportunities to improve energy efficiencies in all County facilities,
especially building envelopes.
 Investigate alternative funding sources for future deferred maintenance projects
 Prepare Phase III Recovery Report and submit to Caltrans
 Begin engineering, plan and specification preparation
 Construction anticipated in 2016 or early 2017.
 Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including weed abatement (spraying) and runway edge
lighting
 Provide resources and other support for Airport Improvement Projects
 Trim trees on South end of runway.
In 2013-2014 the Public Works Department was informed by the FAA that the Independence Airport was
no longer eligible for annual entitlements of $150,000. It is the intent of the Department to appeal this decision but,
as a contingency, during the 2014-2015 fiscal year, Public Works staff will develop strategies to best utilize
remaining entitlements.
Repair cracks on runway 16/34
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
Develop a prioritized list of necessary repairs/improvements
 Develop Standard maintenance and operation procedures for the airport
 Acquire and install an AWOS system
 Repaint center line on runway
Design and install new AWOS system for the Lone Pine Airport. This is a critical piece of equipment for
the safe operation of the airport. The current AWOS has deteriorated over the years and is no longer functional.
This has been identified as a high priority in our grant requests to the FAA. The goal is to have the AWOS installed
and functioning by late fall of 2014.
Continue financial assistance for the Lone Pine Airport Operating Budget
 Administer District and ensure that lighting fixtures are maintained.
 Replace lights as needed.
Develop a prioritized list of necessary repairs/improvements
 Continue to provide the highest level of service possible.
 Continue replacement program of inefficient HVAC equipment in all County facilities as funding allows.
 Assist with the development of a cost applied billing system for tracking Building & Grounds activities in
order to improve County Cost Plan charges.
 Coordination of backflow device testing/repairs for some 30 backflow devices for the County of Inyo.
 Coordination/supervision of termite services for the County maintained buildings County wide.
Initiate and complete work on the project, no later than December 31, 2014.
 Continue to maintain the airport at its current level including keeping all navigation aids in serviceable
condition and keeping the runway free of weeds and debris.
 Continue with SB45 Project Planning, Programming and Monitoring.
 Continue administration of the Inyo County Local Transportation Commission.
 Continue to perform work elements listed in the Overall Work Plan (OWP), including completing the
2013-2014 OWP, and implementing the 2014-2015 OWP, and developing the 2015-2016 OWP.
 Continued to coordinate with Caltrans on US 395 four-laning projects.
 Complete required update of the Regional Transportation Plan.
 Creation of an Active Transportation Program.
 Implementation of the 2014 STIP
 Continue to perform administrative activities
 Continue administration and coordination of transit and the TDA
 Continued involvement with Rural Counties Task Force
 Continued involvement with the Eastern California Transportation Planning Partnership
 Continued inventory activities and implementation of Inyo County Pavement Management Program
 Hold unmet transit needs hearings
 Continue to update the Inyo LTC website
 Update and expand survey of area roadways using Geographical Information Systems.
 Complete update to the Road Department Standard Specifications
 Update to the Inyo County Pedestrian Inventory
 Complete project initiation documents
 Grant submittals
 Complete required Triennial Performance Audit of the Eastern Sierra Transit Authority
 Fund City of Bishop completion of Stormwater Master Plan
 Fund environmental analysis and implementation of Eastern Sierra Adventure Trails program
 Coordinate with Contractor for implementation of new Operations and Maintenance Contract
 Develop and compile complete and accurate financial and operational data in order to make rational long
term decisions regarding the operations and maintenance of the system.
 Update and/or develop comprehensive Operational Manual and Standard Operating Procedures.
 Implementation of a new Operations and Maintenance Contract
 Develop and compile complete and accurate financial and operational data in order to make rational long
term decisions regarding the operations and maintenance of the system
 Update and/or develop comprehensive Operational Manual and Standard Operating Procedures.
 Implementation of new Operations and Maintenance Contract
 Develop and compile complete and accurate financial and operational data in order to make rational long
term decisions regarding the operations and maintenance of the system.
 Update and/or develop comprehensive Operational Manual and Standard Operating Procedures.
 Review all eligible properties for a decline in value due to economic conditions.
 Continue making online assessor data available to other departments and public.
 Continue conversion of our current property tax management system (PTMS) to the new cohesive,
standardized and integrated PTMS to be completed in 2015.
We will continue to strive to:
 Provide excellent customer service to the citizens of Inyo/Mono Counties
 Respond quickly and effectively to issues and/or complaints
 Maintain our 100% rate of inspection for all weighing and measuring devices within Inyo and Mono
Counties to ensure equity for all transactions
 To enforce laws and regulations under our jurisdiction to the best of our ability
We will maximize resources by:
 We will continue lobbying through the California Agricultural Commissioners’ Association to gain state
and federal dollars through legislation and regulations
 We will continue to investigate both contracting with other agencies as well as grant opportunities to
maintain a viable noxious weed control program
 We will explore options to provide flexibility within our program staff and department structure that have
potential to reduce costs and increase our level of service to Inyo and Mono County residents.
 Review cost recovery on our various programs and bring forward suggestions to the Board of Supervisors
on changes to these fees as necessary.
 Complete construction of the maintenance facility by December 31, 2014.
 Continue to pursue long and short term funding opportunities through grant applications, outside
agreements, legislation, and program contracts
 Continue limited work on high-priority sites within LADWP lands, such as the LORP area
 Achieve treatment of non-LADWP invasive plant sites cataloged in the ESWMA GIS database
 Continue invasive plant population reductions
 Continue public outreach and cooperative weed control activities
The consequences of this invasive plant management program ending are extensive:
 Ceasing work for even one year negates all previous year’s work and expended resources.
 It is a near certainty, if this program were to cease, that Lepidium latifolium populations will grow out
of control, threatening both the local agricultural and outdoor tourism industries, and also local natural
resources.
 Seed banks resulting from lack of treatment can last decades, and cost millions of dollars to manage at
a later time.
We continue to strive for:
 Providing the public with a high level of mosquito control.
 Expanding our public education program.
 Participating in the State’s encephalitis surveillance program.
 Providing an efficient auditing and tracking system to keep the assessment to OVMAP area residents
correct and up to date.
 Maintain a vigilant posture concerning other vector borne diseases such as encephalitis and dengue fever.
 Continued use of our adult mosquito surveillance system with compressed CO2 gas baited mosquito traps.
Funding priority goals:
 Explore other funding opportunities such as contracts and grants to augment the mosquito control program.
 Continue to work with other local agencies to reduce mosquito breeding sources.
 Initiated Internal Service Fund to manage ATV replacement and service.
 Subscribed to the County of Inyo’s computer refresh program to regulate technology cost.
 Continue to implement the “Make Our Work Count” program for ongoing case performance and
increased positive outcomes for families.
 Continue to monitor and implement Departmental “Best Practices” to improve productivity and
uniformity of work practices for both Inyo and Mono County office locations.
 Increase positive community contact with the implementation of additional outreach activities.
 Continue to meet all State and Federal guidelines.
 Maintain excellent customer service.
 Increase collections for the wellbeing of families.
The expected outcome of the following goals is to effect final disposition of each task. Direct measurement of
each plan’s outcome will be, in some cases, in the collection of fees. Some estates will not generate fees, due to
the indigent nature of the estate, however fewer indigent burials will occur and bills to local businesses shall be
paid.
 Complete to final disposition, six (6) Summary or small estates with total value of less than $30,000.
Collect fees for services;
 Deposit unclaimed funds of six (6) estates to County Treasury and upon anniversary of 3 years, effect
transfer to Inyo County General Fund;
 Complete five (5) Annual Accountings of conservatee’s estates and collect fees for services;
 Bring to final disposition thirteen (13) conservatee decedent estates, filing Final Account and Reports and
distribute property.
 Bring to final disposition a Formal Probate and collect fees for PAPG office and County Counsel of
$22,806.
 Maintain compliance with California Probate codes §§7605 & 2923 with respect to continuing education
requirements for Public Administrator Guardian Conservator and Deputy Public Administrator Guardian
Conservator;
 Investigate and if merited, petition Inyo County Superior Court, all referenced cases to Public
Administrator Guardian;
 Continue exceptional care of Consrvatees’ Person and Estates and Decedents’ Estates effectively saving
direct and indirect costs to the County of Inyo and Individuals within the County;
 Update Inyo County Public Guardian Fee Schedule to increase fees set in 2001.
 Continue providing outstanding service and protection to the citizens of Inyo County.
 Use evidenced based practices to reduce the number of prison commits.
 Continue to upgrade departmental information technology by adding a new case management system.
 Create a new AB109 assignment to work collaboratively with HHS to provide re-entry services to
mandatory supervision offenders as well as provide supervision and protection to the community.
 Continue collaboration effort in the Community Correction Partnership in compliance with PC1230 and
AB109.
 Continue revisions/additions to policy and procedure manual.
 Continue to utilize local training to further reduce general fund contribution for training.
 Enhanced revenue opportunities through work w/CPOC and legislative advocates and grant opportunities.
Some of the goals for FY 2014-2015 include:
 Continue providing outstanding service and protection to the citizens of Inyo County.
 Maintain the low numbers of juveniles placed out-of-county.
 Concentrate on field training for DPOs.
 Implement an upgraded case management system for the entire department.
 Add to the Juvenile Center’s upgraded security system.
 Implement a basic carpentry program at the Juvenile Center.
 Implement a long term Commitment/Camp Program at the Juvenile Center.
 Add to the assessment tool for our Interactive Journaling Program to individualize treatment through the
criminogenic needs of the minors for minors out of custody.
 Install a security fence/Sally Port around the west parking area to heighten security and increase programs
for all Minors in the Juvenile Center.
 Sustain alternative sentencing programs, treatment programs and offender supervision to keep the jail
population under 99.
 Reduce recidivism rates in Inyo County to less than the State CDCR parole average rate of 70%.
 Implement a case management system that will allow for the creation of baseline data and the creation of
benchmarks for success.
 100% of PC 1170(h) inmates will be released from jail with an evidence based case plan and a supervision
plan.
 Enhance Inmate Work Program
 To maintain a high level of customer service in an efficient and effective manner.
 Continue the General Plan and Zone Code update and environmental review.
 To complete work on the REGPA.
 To begin work on the Phase 2 REPG.
 Participate in and influence the Inyo National Forest Plan Update/Revision.
 To meet all requirements relating to SMARA and the County’s mining regulations.
 Continue/maintain efforts and coordination in the DRECP, CTPG, WEC, NRAC, Desert Protection Act,
Saline Valley Plan, Owens Lake Master Plan/Project, and Forest Service Planning Rule.
 Continue assist Public Works with the Adventure Trails project.
 Continue to monitor the proposal to list and designate critical habitat for three Sierra amphibians pursuant
to the FESA, as well as other USFWS proposals.
 To maintain current information on the website, as mandated by Government Code section 56150.
 To continue to manage and coordinate the SCE Energy Action Plan.
 Create an REELV to finance energy efficient projects for County facilities.
 Continue to monitor and participate in the DWP Owens Valley Solar Ranch.
 Investigate potential funding opportunities for the North Sierra Highway Specific Plan.
 To continue to implement the Crystal Geyser Roxane bottling plant.
 To continue work on the Coso Geothermal project.
 To continue work on the Northland Solar Independence project.
 Process land use and planning projects that require Planning Commission review.
 Continue to staff the YMRAO.
 Continue to staff the Inyo LAFCO.
 Continue to assist other departments and agencies in CEQA compliance.
 Hire a Project Coordinator.
 Process and consider applications for special district formations, annexations, and out-of-area service
agreements in compliance with the provisions of the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government
Reorganization Act.
 Enter into a contract with the Inyo County Planning Department to provide staff and legal services to the
Commission.
 Work with Mono County in development of a MOU for exchange on principal county status for spheres of
influence changes.
 Address liability issues to allow other public agency employees to accompany County personnel in County
vehicles.
 Maintain Inyo LAFCO membership and participation in CALAFCO.
 Replace any vacant seats on LAFCO as necessary to keep LAFCO active.
 Continue to establish written policies and procedures that encourage and provide planned, well-ordered,
efficient development patterns with appropriate consideration of preserving open-space lands within those
patterns as required by Government Code section 56300(a).
 Continue to maintain the Inyo LAFCO website in compliance with Government Code
Section 56661.
 Continue to provide customer service and agency coordination, and update and maintain information on
Special Districts located in Inyo County.
 Maintain a contract with counsel in the event licensing proceedings unexpectedly recommence.
 Evaluate and respond to the SEIS regarding potential groundwater impacts, as necessary.
 Acquire a new plotter.
 Participate in federal oversight of past expenditures, as necessary.
 Assist with continued groundwater monitoring in southeast Inyo County.
 Continue monitoring program developments within the DOE and NRC.
 Continue working with the AULGs to monitor DOE activities related to the License Application review
process and advocate for additional funding as appropriate.
 Continue to monitor federal legislation for amendments to the Nuclear Waste Policy Act with the other
AULGs.
 Continue to monitor groundwater with the USGS and other interested agencies.
 Attend Devils Hole Workshop.
 Continue to fulfill mandates to provide quality health care to inmates and minors in the correctional system.
 Assure public health preparedness & response priorities, policies & plans are in place in preparation of a
disaster.
 Continue to fulfill Public Health mandates including communicable disease investigation and reporting, TB
control, pregnancy testing, and immunization services.
 Monitor community access to health and dental services, in light of health care reform.
 Maintain quality services in the Public Health clinic to ensure access to the low income community without
health insurance.
 Train a second staff member as an ADAP enrollment worker.
 Ensure that the program addresses the case management needs of all eligible clients.
 Increase linkages to culturally appropriate medical care for HIV-infected individuals. This will include
establishing referral sources within the county and with HIV specialists outside the county.
 Maintain CCS case management services for the current and growing caseload.
 Continue to increase collaboration with outside agencies providing services to target population.
 Prevent loss of paneled providers who are challenged by the State’s Medi-Cal claiming and authorization
systems.
 Recruit more providers to participate in Inyo’s Managed Medi-Cal plan and in California’s CCS paneling
process, in order expand access for local residents for specialty care.
 Ensure coordination and effective links to the new Medi-Cal Managed Care plans for eligible children.
 Continue to sustain the MTP services to meet the needs of the eligible children of Inyo County for CCS.
 Establish resources to provide MTCs more regularly with local specialized medical staff.
 Continue to strengthen the relationships with families, by including parent participation in ongoing CCS
program evaluation activities, planning measures and staff training.
 Continue to strengthen the relationships between CCS staff and the schools by cross training and expanding
opportunities for collaboration.
 Assist families with case management needs based on findings from CHDP exams.
 Continue to work with medical providers to understand and implement eligibility for CHDP preventive
exams under the Medi-Cal program.
 Collaborate with county service programs to assist with appropriate referrals for various needs, such as
obesity prevention, as identified in CHDP exams.
 Further develop the foster care nurse roles and responsibilities to address the needs of the children in
placement and those children preparing to transition into independent living as adults.
 Continue disaster preparedness efforts and develop contingency plans in the event that the community is
isolated by a disaster. This includes continued coordination with Public Works to purchase a generator to ensure a water supply in the Community Center during power outages, an upgrade to the electrical system
and upgrades to freezers for increased food storage capacity and reliability.
 Continue outreach to high-risk children and families to provide information and resources to strengthen the
families’ abilities to prevent child abuse or out of home placement, drug and alcohol abuse, domestic
violence, as well as addressing mental health issues.
 Continue to meet, at least quarterly, with the Death Valley School Superintendent, Sheriff’s Office and key
community members to assess and provide services to the community.
 Coordinate quarterly meetings of the HHS Coalition in Southeastern Inyo with the HHS Director and/or her
designee’s attendance.
 Continue to utilize the videoconferencing equipment in the Tecopa Community Center to access remote
services as appropriate.
Mental Health-General
-As part of HHS, evaluate the most cost efficient/effective staffing and service delivery strategies by using trend and
outcome data for decision-making, monitoring program use and capacity as well as other quality measures. Identify
variables that improve or maintain positive outcomes.
-Monitor Share Care electronic system to ensure optimal use of electronic healthcare record capability.
-Implement an integrated Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) 3 year-plan to most effectively and efficiently meet
the behavioral health needs of our consumers and community.
-Ensure consistent access to mental health counseling to SE Inyo using videoconferencing, contracted counseling
services and outreach and support to elders.
-Continue involvement in statewide prevention/intervention strategies to result in improved service outcomes.
-Increase community capacity to support individuals with mental illness, continuing to use evidence-based
programs.
-Continue to assist in the development and participation in strategies to increase employee health and wellness.
Child and Family Mental Health Services
-Provide continued coordinated services as part of a system of care with Child Welfare, Juvenile Probation and
schools, to best meet the needs of youth and families within our community.
-Provide bi-lingual (Spanish) Parent Child Interaction Therapy as part of the array of services for young children
with behavioral problems.
-Provide current level of weekly mental health services to Inyo County Juvenile Center, including training to staff to
ensure continuity of care and positive transitions into the community.
-Provide mental health rehabilitation services to admitted children and youth clients at their various school sites
throughout the county each week.
-Provide trauma-informed group services to children impacted by addiction, child abuse or other trauma.
-Work collaboratively with Child Protective Services to fully implement the “Katie A. Core Practice Model” for
youth in the foster care system, consistent with State requirements.
Adult and Older Adult Mental Health Services
-Continue endeavor to identify a permanent Wellness Center site in Bishop.
-Evaluate/ monitor adult system of care programs to maximize the use of resources and avoid duplication.
-Continue to implement monthly or bi-monthly consumer community involvement projects.
-Improve elder outreach with the addition of the Healthy IDEAs program strategy to result in at least 10 referrals to
the program.
-Partner in the development and expansion of the Coordinated Care Collaborative to improve patient’s health
outcomes and “bend” the health cost curve. Implement self –management strategies such as smoking cessation
groups, education on nutrition, participation in fitness and mindfulness groups, and by monitoring and giving
feedback around health status.
-As part of HHS, continue to develop and implement a plan to provide the most cost effective strategies to meet the
needs of the criminal-justice population and decrease recidivism.
 Comply with State program requirements.
 Maintain a cost neutral program.
 Continue to employ current addiction treatment and education strategies for use in groups and share
effective treatment strategies across addiction services programs to enhance offerings.
 Continue to offer after hour group times to accommodate and support schedules of those who are
employed.
 Utilize ongoing satisfaction questionnaires in order to provide feedback to group facilitators.
 Track sobriety in our Multiple Offender program.
 Identify ways to ensure the highest level of service, within the budgetary constraints, using needs
assessment information and utilization trends, as well as the guidelines established by the Older Americans
Act, which directs AAA’s to target the most isolated and of highest socio-economic need.
 Continue to implement a volunteer plan that identifies a wide range of volunteer opportunities, including,
but not limited to assisting at the congregate sites, providing emergency backup meal delivery, and other
supportive services that enhance the services available to seniors in the community. This would include
volunteers for Ombudsman, Healthy IDEAS, and senior sites.
 Recruit, train and support an additional 2 volunteers in the Ombudsman program, as well as an additional
10 volunteers to serve in various capacities.
 Continue to implement and manage data within the new California Aging Reporting System (CARS) data
management system, which is required by the California Department of Aging in a manner that allows us to
be able to gather and compile data for reporting purposes for policy makers, the community and the State,
to ensure decision-making is based on most accurate information available.
 Evaluate management, supervision, monitoring and service provision procedures for contracted services
and conduct monitoring in accordance with Title XXII, as well as the provisions of the Older Americans
Act.
 Provide, through our Registered Dietitian in the summer of 2014, the Farmers Market program for Inyo
Seniors to promote adherence to USDA guidelines of 5-9 servings of fruit and vegetables per day for better
health.
1. Increase community resources through low-cost, volunteer outreach – Schedule seasonal Fall & Spring
Swapportunity events for exchanging used clothes and toys for children ages 0 to 18; Skill Swap/Bartering
Mixer; Diaper Drive; Pay it Forward family food bank volunteer opportunities; etc.
2. Strengthen parenting supports – Increase parent access to discussion groups, books, and DVDs to help
with common development issues and to build hope and resiliency. Hoping to start a monthly parenting
book club that meets while kids are involved in Read & Romps, or another development activity.
3. Improve data collection systems– There is a need to update our Family Intake Forms, and there are
unacknowledged barriers related to ethnicity that keep families separated from available supports and
services. This year a goal is to survey clients to find out what levels of historic or current trauma families 0
to 5 are trying to cope with.
4. Strengthen internal organization & tracking systems – After a year without support staff, looking
forward to having help from new HHS Specialist to create more efficiency.
5. Collaborate with school systems on early literacy goals – Identified a need to translate community
interest in literacy into a streamlined support system that promotes family literacy habits from birth to third
grade. Countywide third grade reading scores indicate that 1 in every 3 Inyo students cannot read
proficiently.
6. Execute media plan – There are some new e-newsletter and evaluation communications that are needed to
be established in this 2nd year of our 5-year media plan.
 Implement and stay current with all new program requirements mandated by the State and Federal
governments.
 Maintain timely payments to care providers of foster children.
 Continue to review active cases to insure that all efforts to link eligibility to Federal regulations are applied.
 Continue to divert placement of children in group home settings out of the area.
 Conduct a review of the local Wraparound services to ensure it is structured and staffed in a manner that
promotes the best outcomes possible for families, as well as utilizes resources in the most efficient manner.
 Continue to assist clients in developing the skills needed to enter or re-enter the workforce, including
involving the General Relief clients in the enhanced training provided by our Employment unit, as
Subsidized Employment is implemented in our CalWORKs/Welfare to Work program.
 Continue to assist clients in applying for Social Security and helping them through the appeals process.
 Continue to provide case management services and interventions necessary in maintaining a small caseload
while continuing to support the indigent residents of our county.
 Continue to identify ways to ensure the highest level of service to vulnerable seniors throughout the County
within the budgetary constraints and continue identifying ways to reduce costs to the I.C. GOLD program.
 Continue to implement a volunteer plan that identifies a wide range of volunteer opportunities, including,
but not limited to assisting at the congregate sites, providing emergency backup meal delivery, and other
supportive services that enhance the services available to seniors in the community.
 Recruit, train and support an additional ten (10) volunteers to serve in various capacities.
 Continue to implement and manage data within the California Aging Reporting System (CARS) data
management system, to track services provided through I.C. GOLD.
 Conduct an MCAH needs assessment to set new goals and strategies for the upcoming 5 years.
 Continue to support means of access to dental care for children and pregnant women.
 Maintain an active and dynamic focus on childhood obesity promotional and prevention activities.
 Continue participation in the Inyo County Car Seat Program for injury prevention.
Public Assistance, Employment and Training
-Regularly review internal audit procedures to ensure the Department is maintaining the highest level of separation
of duties and oversight.
-Continue Medi-Cal and Food Stamp outreach to identify families and adults in need.
-Implement a Subsidized Employment Program in an effort to enhance employment resources for our CalWORKs
clients and increase our Welfare to Work participation rates, as well as reduce the number of clients in a nonparticipation
sanction.
-Develop and implement a comprehensive job skills/employment preparation class that will be accessible to not only
CalWORKs, but also to Probation, Behavioral Health, and General Relief clients.
-Implement a Family Stabilization program in order to divert from or reduce the time on public assistance.
-Maintain compliance with State and Federal regulations.
-Increase the number of local employers willing to hire or place our program participants in training slots.
-Refine our systems’ fiscal and program controls to ensure prevention and early detection of fraud.
-Continue to implement regulatory changes as directed.
Children’s Services:
-Continue to provide quality child welfare services in order to ensure the health, well-being and safety of children
while striving to maintain the family unit by meeting the State & Federal requirements.
-Recruit an additional 2 foster homes and retain existing homes by offering support as needed to caregivers.
-Continue to enhance the services available to foster children and former foster children through the Independent
Living Skills Program, as well as the THP-Plus program.
-Continue to provide a high level of placement services to CPS, Probation and Behavioral Health.
Licensing:
-Maintain or increase the capacity & quality of care provided in both foster family homes & family childcare homes.
-Conduct recruitment activities in coordination with other agencies.
-Continue to provide training and support directly or fund training for foster parents to provide a higher professional
level of care for our foster children.
Child Abuse Prevention, Intervention and Treatment (CAPIT)
-Ensure a continuum of parenting education courses are available to our families mandated to participate, as well as
to the county at large.
Adult Services
-Safely maintain at least four at-risk adults within their home community.
-Continue to integrate services with ESAAA & other partners & identify options for cost efficiencies, plus increase
outreach to homebound elders with complex issues of co-existing medical and mental health or substance use issues.
-Work closely with the IHSS Registry to link clients to compatible providers to improve quality of services.
-Enhance the quality of Adult services by ensuring that all staff attend & complete all phases of the State regulated
IHSS training, as well as other available training on at-risk elderly and dependent adults.
Disaster Services
-Continue preparedness activities and trainings and ensure staff readiness for quick response in a disaster.
-Respond to emergency incidents under the provisions of the County Disaster Plan, and as requested by the County
Emergency Operations Commander.
As part of Behavioral Health treatment/ intervention services:
 Assumed the treatment portion of Drug Court services with goal to provide integrated services to this
population.
 Provide a full array of addiction treatment to all ages to include assessment, group treatment, intensive case
management, psycho-education, and outreach as resources allow.
 Evidence increased integration of physical health, mental health and addiction treatment by the provision of
addiction treatment in a healthcare setting and the collection and monitoring of health data by counselors.
 As an active partner in AB109, provide treatment services to people within the community or in Jail.
Monitor outcomes, service utilization and cost. Implement one additional evidence based strategy to meet
the specific treatment needs of this population.
 Participate in the provision of at least two additional Aggression Replacement Training groups with at least
one in a correctional setting.
 As a Drug-Medi-Cal provider, appropriately bill for services to meet Medi-Cal standards. Continue as a
CMSP provider, with appropriate billing for services.
 As a result of participation in the perinatal program services at least 7 additional women will remain sober
for 6 months and provide the necessary support services through case management and referral sources to
assist clients to maintain sobriety and recovery during this period.
 Implement an electronic healthcare record that meets security and privacy standards.
 Continue integration of SUD and mental health programs and funding to maximize use of resources and
efficiency of systems.
As part of prevention services:
 Work with the Local Native American Community to find volunteers to work with Native American Youth
requesting Native American Mentors.
 Continue monthly creation/publication of prevention articles for monthly newspaper column.
 Continue monthly creation of display at the bus kiosk to emphasize national prevention initiatives.
 Facilitate better collaboration between local law enforcement, schools, courts, and probation to create
uniform practices when dealing with underage drinking, partying, driving, and other AOD issues.
 Work with Youth Coalition to brainstorm and coordinate peer-led, school-based, drug-free projects or
programs.
 Expand to form a second Coalition in southern part of the county.
 Engage young adults through social media campaign at local community college, job sites, and tribal
centers to address perception of harm among young adults and adults that give alcohol to minors.
 Collaborate with schools and tribes in educating youth on the dangers of alcohol and drug use & implement
curriculum with high-risk youth that takes a life skills approach in at least 3 settings throughout Inyo
County.
 Work to build capacity and sustainability among agencies in the county by institutionalizing prevention
goals regarding high-risk alcohol use in their missions.
 Work to recruit mentors and mentees through presentations to schools and community groups and through
media messages.
 Educate and train interested mentors regarding policies and procedures of mentoring program.
 Hold regular mentor technical assistance sessions to keep mentors updated on current best practices.
 Determine selective targeted population criteria with the help of stakeholders and obtain referrals of parents
of high-risk students.
 Advertise parenting classes with cultural competence to the general community and to specific populations.
 Implement evidence-based curriculum for parents of school-aged children and teenagers throughout Inyo
County.
 Build a parent network to begin to foster sustainability in parent support and to encourage social connection
among parents, which promotes protective factors.
Continue to provide accurate and timely benefits to eligible families, following the federal and state laws
and regulations.
Fiscal year 2014-2015 represents the second year of a 4-year contract period covering 2013-2017. The
California Department of Public Health/Tobacco Control Program (CTCP) required ‘Bridge Year’ plan for 2013-
2014 and a separate 2014-2017 plan. The comprehensive 3-year plan for 2014-2017 was due December 2013 with a
scope of work and budget, a policy objective, a required Healthy Stores for a Healthy Community Retail objective,
and a plan for final evaluation reports.
Youth Activities
 Compile a list of all youth-serving organizations for outreach and recruitment of youth coalition members.
 Collaborate with statewide programs to identify resources and materials.
 Contact 3-5 Local Lead Agencies to request information on youth coalition functioning and recruitment
and how they sustain their coalition.
 Coordinate with health teachers at 2-3 high schools to schedule yearly youth recruitment presentations.
 Conduct 16 one-hour Youth Coalition meetings and 1 optional celebratory meeting annually at 1-2 high
schools in Inyo County.
 Create and maintain a list of Youth Coalition members with contact information.
 Participate in at least 1 drug prevention initiative for youth per year, such as an event that educates high
school or middle school students about teen health and safety issues.
 Conduct 2-4 Youth Coalition education and outreach activities per year such as displays, booths, and photo
voice project.
 Revise Youth Coalition flyer or invitation, customized for the high schools, and distribute at the beginning
of each school year.
 Provide Behavior Modification Materials such as gift cards, snacks, and gift certificates to youth that
conduct community education and evaluation activities each year. Conduct 3-6 1-hour trainings and 2-3 15-
minute informal trainings for youth for activities such as educational presentations each year. Conduct 2-5
10-15 minute recruitment presentations to high school health classes at 2-3 high schools each year.
 Conduct 4-8 15-minute tobacco prevention presentations to groups of students annually.
Smoke-Free Casino Objective
 Conduct 1 2-hour strategic planning session with 5-10 representatives of interested groups.
 Conduct a tribe-wide poll to learn whether or not tribal members support a smoke-free casino policy.
 Coordinate 1-3 Inyo County Tobacco Prevention Coalition meetings per year and train a diverse coalition
to educate the Bishop Paiute Tribe on the effects of secondhand smoke on employees.
 Participate in 1-2 California Clean Air Project smoke-free casino advisory committee meetings annually.
 Train and prepare 1-3 spokespersons to represent the project to tribal council and attend council meetings.
 Collaborate with at least 1 tribal government representative of the Bishop Paiute Tribe.
 Provide 1-3 30-40 minute presentations to casino management and tribal members on data on revenue, air
quality, and effects of secondhand smoke on employees.
 Provide 20-40 hours of technical assistance annually to spokespersons, casino staff, and tribal council to
help in the development of a policy.
Healthy Stores for a Healthy Community Objective
 Conduct 1 3-hour strategic planning session with 6-8 representatives of interested groups.
 Collaborate with Team Inyo for Healthy Kids on policy objectives.
 Through visits to schools, parent meetings, organizational meetings, and service club meetings, provide 5-
10 15-30 minute educational presentations on the nature of the retail environment and tobacco-promoting
influences such as flavors and packaging.
 Create or purchase informational brochures/fact sheets regarding alternative tobacco.
 With youth involvement, support community norm change by printing and airing locally created print and
radio ads as an informational campaign related to tobacco control objectives. Ads will appear twice a
month in 2-3 newspapers and weekly on 1-2 radio stations. In addition, write 2-4 letters to the editor or
press releases to be placed in local papers and conduct 1-2 radio interviews.
 Continue active participation in Team Inyo for Healthy Kids workgroup. Continue participation in outreach
events representing Team Inyo for Healthy Kids.
 Continue to provide local WIC vendors (Vons, J & M Mini Market and Smart n Final) in Inyo County with
a local vendor liaison to communicate WIC program updates and policies to provide excellent customer
service to WIC participants and provide quarterly technical assistant visits and support.
 Continued development of collaboration with other service providers to promote and enhance increase
utilization of Farmers Market vouchers. Continue to provide Farmers Market Program for Inyo WIC
participants and ESAAA senior program.
 Continued collaboration with Toiyabe WIC program and Inyo County First 5, specifically in the area of
breastfeeding promotion for preparation of 8th annual Breastfeeding Awareness walk in both Bishop and
Lone Pine.
 Collaborate with Inyo County Public Health, First 5, Prevention Services and Snap Ed to participate in 1st
annual Northern Inyo Hospital (NIH) Health Fair at 2014 Jamboree Ole to continue to promote “Re-Think
Your Drink” campaign to combat against childhood obesity.
 Continue to perform outreach and expand services and involvement throughout Inyo County.
 Continue to maintain established involvement with the Employment Collaboration Group.
 Continue to develop new work experience sites throughout the County and support existing ones.
 Stay current on program regulations to ensure compliance with State and Federal regulations.
 Continue to monitor the needs of the program, the participants and the community in order to make
appropriate adjustments as needed.
 Coordinate with our Health and Human Services programs, Probation, Child Support and other interested
parties in our efforts to ensure ongoing employment skills and training are available for our residents.
Reduce internal copy charges by moving newsletters to electronic versions and expanding
materials available online when possible
 Implement County Cost Plan to account for all expenses to Inyo County in office operation.
 Research and develop recommended practices for raising horticultural crops in the Eastern
Sierra and to support local food producers.
 Provide workshops and one-on-one consultations to educate local residents and growers of
best management practices in agriculture, gardening, and landscapes.
 Train new class of Master Gardener volunteers
 Conduct multi-county youth biosecurity research project to investigate risk mitigation of
disease transmission at livestock activity venues
 Extend research-based food preservation knowledge to cottage food operators, gardeners, and
other interested parties though Master Food Preserver program
 Initiate new 4-H activities that focus on natural resources, fishing and citizenship.
 Recruit new volunteers into 4-H and expand offerings of non-traditional projects to increase
membership, particularly to younger members.
 Update and expand online information available at Master Gardeners’ website, blog and
through social media.
Follow-up on any outstanding projects
 Hold at least one meeting for all lessees
 Coordinate with Board Clerk to advertise and fill vacant board positions.
 To continue to work with Inyo County Solid Waste Department, the LADWP and the BLM in an effort to
complete the revisions of landfill permits for our five active solid waste facilities .
 Amend fee ordinance, provide public workshop, and implement plan to add lodging complimentary
breakfast facilities to the retail food permit inventory, which will close a gap in our food safety program.
 To maintain good relationships with our county’s residents, business owners and visitors by providing our
services in a thorough, timely and courteous manner and to make the best efforts in providing technical
and regulatory assistance as requested by our constituents. We will continue to use education as our
primary enforcement tool regarding regulatory issues.
 Consistent with goals of criminal justice realignment, we are committed to implementing a digital case
management system that can integrate with the systems of our criminal justice partner agencies. A major
frustration continues to be the inability to collect and analyze case data. Many management decisions are
necessarily based on anecdotal information and what appear to be broad trends in our communities. A case
management system will allow us to effectively analyze criminal justice information so our resources can
be devoted to cases having the most significant impacts. A case management system could be funded with
non-general fund AB 109 monies. The Executive Committee of the Community Corrections Partnership
has indicated that this would be an appropriate use of such monies and an important need if we are to
adequately manage and report criminal court realignment successes.
 We will seek to continue the tradition of high quality legal work and commitment to the just enforcement
of the criminal laws of the State of California and the County of Inyo.
 We will continue to work with our partners in criminal justice at the law enforcement agencies and in the
community to ensure that Inyo County remains a safe place to work, live and raise a family.
 Maintain full time staffing of Criminal Investigators
 Present accurate and timely investigations to support prosecutorial decisions to ensure public trust in the
District Attorney’s Office
 Provide optimal level of professional law enforcement and investigative support services for our
community and the citizens of Inyo County
 Continue collaborative efforts with local law enforcement agencies to support effective responses to major
crimes or problems which impair the safety of quality of life for the citizens of Inyo County
 Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability of illegal drugs locally.
 Reduction in illegal drug related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with illegal drug abuse.
 Maintain grant funding for operation of the INET Task Force.
 Reduction in methamphetamine production and distribution.
 Reduction in the availability of illegal drugs locally.
 Reduction in illegal drug related offenses.
 Reduction in hazardous waste sites associated with methamphetamine manufacturing.
 Reduction in medical responses associated with illegal drug abuse.
 Maintain grant funding for operation of the INET Task Force.
 Continue to provide training to California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo County Health &
Human Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo Hospital, and Wild
Iris.
 Continued involvement in the Inyo County Task Force subcommittee.
 Participate in the planning and attending of the fall 2015 Domestic Violence Symposium.
 Services provision goals: 600 new victim clients and 1,200 continuing victims, 25 new witnesses, 6
presentations, and 6 trainings.
 Continued expansion of Direct Services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in the outlying
areas and most rural areas of Inyo County, including Tribes in the outer County.
 Victim Witness will continue to expand services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in
the outlying areas and most rural areas of Inyo County.
 Victim Witness will continue training to California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo
County Health & Human Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo
Hospital, and Wild Iris.
 Continued participation in the planning and implementation of the 2015 Domestic Violence Symposium.
 Services provision goals: 600 new victim clients and 1,200 continuing victims, 25 new witnesses, 6
presentations, and 6 trainings.
 Continued involvement with the Death Valley Chamber of Commerce.
 Participation will continue in all of the Underserved populations outings and community functions.
 Victim Witness will continue to advocate for the Unserved/Underserved populations.
 Victim Witness will continue to expand services to the Unserved/Underserved Victims and Witnesses in
the outlying areas and most rural areas of Inyo County.
 Victim Witness will continue training to California Highway Patrol, Bishop Police Department, Inyo
County Health & Human Services Department, Inyo County Probation, Inyo County Sheriff, Northern Inyo
Hospital, and Wild Iris.
 Continued participation in the planning and implementation of the 2015 Domestic Violence Symposium.
 Services provision goals: 600 new victim clients and 1,200 continuing victims, 25 new witnesses, 6
presentations, and 6 trainings.
 Continued involvement with the Death Valley Chamber of Commerce.
 Participation will continue in all of the Underserved populations outings and community functions.
 Victim Witness will continue to advocate for the Unserved/Underserved populations.
The Office continues and will continue to provide high quality legal services and representation to the
County, its officers and employees in a timely and cost efficient manner. The Office’s goal is to provide quality
legal counseling grounded in solid research and careful analysis.
 To continue to serve as co-chairperson of the Legislative Committee of the County Recorders Association
of California (CRAC). This committee studies pending legislation, meets with members of the California
legislature regarding bills of interest and reports on the status of all legislation to the members of the
association.
 Re-organize, modernize and streamline the office to maximize efficiencies utilizing Modernization funds
collected specifically for this purpose. Although this goal will be funding through 023401, this budget will
also benefit from the streamlining process.
 To conduct the November 4, 2014 Gubernatorial General Election. This election includes the top-two vote
getters for all Voter-Nominated Offices, City of Bishop Council members, School Districts, Hospital
Districts and Inyo-Mono Resource Conservation District.
 To participate in a pilot project to design a user friendly elections website through ELECTricity, a program
of the New Organizing Institute, in collaboration with TurboVote, the Sunlight Foundation and the Center
for Civic Design, with funding from the Democracy Fund. Because the project is funded by a non-profit, it
will be free to the county.
 To assist the Secretary of State in migrating to a statewide voter registration database through the VoteCal
Statewide Voter Registration System Project, utilizing grant monies.
 To utilize the Inyo County Elections Worker Program as a part of the Creative Budget Solutions process to
reduce the cost of hiring outside temporary election workers.
 Ongoing redaction of documents continues
 To reorganize, modernize and streamline the office to maximize efficiencies utilizing
Modernization funds collected specifically for this purpose
 To implement E-Recording for Government to Government transactions
Continue to provide an efficiently run Coroner’s Office at a minimal charge to the County.
 Adopt a balanced budget within the constraints of funding reductions as a result of the State Budget.
 Continue to maintain core services at current levels.
 Manage the County’s budget to maintain existing service levels.
 Maintain senior services despite continued cuts to program funding by the State and Federal Governments.
 Move the concept of a new County Animal Shelter forward.
 Continue to support the Adventure Trails Pilot Project.
 Continue to find a method to secure funding for the continuation of PILT and Secured Rural Schools.
 Resolve the Blackrock 94 Dispute.
 Continue involvement in the Forest Plan Update/Revision under the recently approved MOU for
consultation.
 Continue to actively participate in water bond legislation efforts.
 Remain active in protecting local land use authority and limiting any further restrictions on public access to
public lands.
 Continue to participate in the Desert Renewable Energy Conservation Plan (DRECP).
 Continue to work with the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding ownership of the Mt. Whitney Fish
Hatchery.
 Continue to support resolution of issues with CalRecycle requirements.
 Continue to evaluate the Southern Owens Valley Solar Ranch Project.
 Continue to work on the Renewable Energy General Plan Amendment and the Zoning Code Update.
 Continue with the implementation of AB 109 to restructure local incarceration requirements.
 Continue efforts to evaluate the replacement of existing leased office space in the Bishop area with a
County owned facility through an innovative public/private lease/buyout partnership.
 Remain involved at the executive level with CSAC and RCRC on those issues that affect our County and
State.
 Continue to participate in NaCo, Quad State Local Government Authority and Western Counties Alliance.
 Continue to meet all State, Federal and other reporting and financial deadlines.
 Update the Cash Handling Policy.
 Complete the process of updating the Property Tax software in conjunction with the Treasurer/Tax
Collector, the Assessor and Information Services.
 Provide the County’s fiscal staff with Single Audit Training.
 Continue to provide service and training to other departments and the public.
Continue to use this fund in accordance with County Policy by using it to make loans to other funds and to
use for unexpected decreases in revenue and/or increases in expenditures that cannot be absorbed within existing
budgets. This reserve is to be used before using General Reserves and requires a 4/5th vote of the Board of
Supervisors.
Continue to have this fund accrue interest.
 Continue to serve your Board, County departments, and the public by providing a level of service
and satisfaction that exceeds the County’s fiscal and staffing capacities.
 Continue to monitor the County Budget, and make recommendations to ensure ongoing fiscal
solvency in the face of increasing fiscal challenges.
 Continue implementing Service Redesign and other initiatives, analyses and review measures to
address projected continuing increases in the structural deficit in the County’s General Fund.
 Respond promptly and appropriately to any challenge, opportunity, or issue that may arise but is
not identified at present.
 Examine departmental organization and staffing opportunities, with the objective of improving the
delivery of services and improving efficiencies while achieving long-term savings, personnel cost
neutrality.
 Support your Board of Supervisors in reaching a decision regarding whether or not to proceed
with the Consolidated Office Building project, and implement that decision.
 Complete labor contract negotiations with the Elected Official Assistants Association (EOAA),
Inyo County Probation Peace Officers Association (ICPPOA), and Inyo County Correctional
Officers Association (ICCOA).
 Support expansion of the Employee Wellness Program.
 Develop and implement paid student-intern program developed last year to support the
Superintendent of Schools’ ROP accounting program, as well as other opportunities to provide
local high school and college students with work experience while benefitting County
departments.
 Reinstate an employee recognition program.
 Reinstitute structure and predictability to the Board of Supervisors meeting agenda preparation
process.
 Continue to work with the Assistant Clerk of the Board and Information Services, as well as
County Counsel and the Auditor-Controller in transitioning to an automated agenda process for
Board of Supervisors meetings, including reviewing and revamping the agenda request submittal
and approval process to extend timelines, improve the quality communication of information to
the Board of Supervisors and the public, and foster greater collaboration between departments.
 Continue to work with County Counsel and the Water Department Director to advise and
represent your Board of Supervisors on water-related issues and opportunities.
 Initiate negotiations with LADWP for a new Eastern Sierra Regional Airport lease complimentary
to the County’s new airport easement.
 Evaluate and modify or eliminate the MOU between County of Inyo and Inyo County Superior
Court.
 Amend the Inyo County Film Permit Ordinance to establish a countywide film permit and
associated fee schedule.
 Further implement the County’s Real Property Management Policy, including opportunities to
develop ground leases with private enterprise for strategic parcels.
 Complete lease negotiations with the Judicial Council of California for County-owned land in
Independence for a new Independence courthouse.
 Continue to monitor and advise the Board of Supervisors and work with County departments, on
budget, policy and implementation issues related to Criminal Justice Realignment.
 Continue to monitor, represent, and advocate County interests relative to mounting renewable
energy facility development pressures.
 Continue to assist Health and Human Services and your Board of Supervisors in serving the
County’s seniors through the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging (ESAAA) and Inyo County
Growing Older Living with Dignity (IC GOLD) programs.
 Identify and pursue economic development enhancements as resources permit or opportunities
present themselves
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, the California Department of
Fish and Wildlife, and the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding issues associated with the longterm
disposition and development of the hatchery.
 Identify and pursue opportunities to fund the LORP River Center Project in Independence.
 Work with Public Works department staff to further evaluate the feasibility and interest in
establishing limited commercial air service at the Eastern Sierra Regional Airport, and/or
providing inclement weather landing options for the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport.
 As time and resources permit, explore opportunities for inter-agency and regional partnerships to
maintain or enhance County services, including economic development and waste management.
 Realize goals identified in other budget narratives overseen by this Office; other opportunities
forgotten; or, that may arise.
 Conclude negotiations to develop final project documents for the proposed Consolidated County
Office Building Project.
 Work directly with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife to address department concerns
with moving forward with its divesture of the Mt. Whitney Fish Hatchery.
 Continue to monitor and make recommendations for improving County office conditions to
improve efficiencies and reduce costs.
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, the California Department of
Fish and Wildlife and Sierra Nevada Conservancy – engaging the County’s real estate economist
as necessary – to implement an action plan to evaluate the transition of the Mount Whitney Fish
Hatchery from California Department of Fish and Game ownership to the Sierra Nevada
Conservancy and, ultimately, to a third party such as the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish
Hatchery, Inyo County, or another private or non-profit entity.
 Provide matching funds as necessary for Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) grants to make
improvements to Inyo County airports.
 Work with the Public Works department to develop new Airport Layout Plan for the Bishop
Airport and secure funding for identified improvements from the FAA.
 Complete lease negotiations with the Judicial Council of California for developing a new Superior
Court Courthouse on County-owned property in Independence.
 Negotiate changes in, or termination of the Joint Occupancy Agreement between the County and
State relative to the Historic Courthouse in Independence to provide for the County’s -reacquiring
the State’s 34% interest in the building depending on the outcome of lease negotiations to provide
the State with land on which to develop a new courthouse in Independence.
 As time permits, continue implementing the County’s Real Property Management Policy,
including recommending ground leases for undeveloped County-owned parcels.
 Provide additional funding that may be necessary to complete the County Animal Shelter Project.
 Support Public Works in completing construction of the facility, and open the new County Animal
Shelter.
Deploy the hardware acquired for the 2013-14 technology refresh program
Acquire and deploy hardware for the 2014-15 technology refresh program
Upgrade software for nine core servers
 Continue to meet core needs of patrons.
 Implement resource sharing, utilizing an affordable model.
 Improve website.
 Continue to encourage library staff to access online courses in library science.
 Expand public awareness of library services.
 Expand and improve the Central Library if adjacent space becomes available.
 Implement “Library Refresh” Phase II of the Lone Pine Library expansion.
 Complete the majority of the retrospective conversion of the Library’s records.
 Continue to evaluate branch library collections by subject area for improvement, and add new materials.
 Continue digitization of unique and fragile items for preservation and a future digital library.
 Emphasize preservation and care of materials, both to maintain the collection and for cost savings.
 Work with support groups to enhance funding and volunteer opportunities.
 Work with the State Library to utilize CENIC broadband access to potentially reduce costs and improve
service.
 Revitalize the Law Library Board of Trustees.
 Restore online and print access to legal materials.
 Continue working with the Council of California County Law Librarians to locate new sources of revenue.
 Work with the local Court and legal community to coordinate public legal reference and assistance.
 Send four (4) County staff to advanced intensive emergency management training at CSTI.
 Continue to make emergency management enhancements a focal point for the County’s emerging
Integrated Geographic Information System.
 Continue to partner with Health and Human Services and other agencies to create and conduct
multi-agency emergency exercises requiring interoperability between agencies using “real time”
direct communications.
 Coordinate exercises with volunteer groups that will be utilized in emergencies (e.g. Hamm Radio
Club, Search and Rescue, Fire Departments, Salvation Army, CERT teams, etc.).
 Continue to seek grant opportunities to fund the costs of emergency equipment and supplies,
training, and exercise development.
 Increase coordination of effort between CAO and Sheriff’s Office staff with respect to program
administration between emergencies.
 Continue to conduct quarterly Unified Command meetings to strengthen multi-agency information
sharing and collaboration.
 Continue to work with the Public Works department to complete the installation of the NOAA
Weather Transmitter, and administer closing-out the USDA-Rural Development Grant.
 Continue to support the Public Works department in moving forward with development of a
Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan.
 Continue to provide fiscal and administrative support for the Homeland Security Grants.
 Assist in preparation of a Request For Proposals for updating the County Emergency Operations
Plan (EOP).
 Work with the contractor to prepare the EOP for publishing and distribution.
 Work collaboratively with the Sheriff and department heads to update the County’s organizational
depth chart for personnel response during and after an emergency.
 Continue to provide accurate detailed information, assistance and support to the public regarding
pre-disaster preparation and recovery both during and after an event.
 Continue to work with CalOES & CSTI to bring trainings to Inyo County staff and first
responders.
 Continue to participate in weekly regional Drought Task Force conference calls with the
California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services.
 Continue to participate in monthly conference calls with the “Capstone Exercise” development
team.
 Maintain a reasonable level of service commensurate with the County’s fiscal and staff
constraints.
 Identify opportunities to leverage the Digital 395 project for long-term economic development.
 Develop a plan to provide 1 GB “final mile” high speed internet access to all properties within
Lone Pine, Independence, Big Pine and unincorporated Bishop.
 Continue to work with the Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery, the California Department of
Fish and Wildlife, and the Sierra Nevada Conservancy regarding issues associated with the longterm
disposition and development of the hatchery.
 Work with the Parks & Recreation program, and Water department and Los Angeles Department
of Water and Power to procure grant funds for developing non-motorized boat launches on the
Lower Owens River Project and at Millpond and Diaz Lake recreation areas.
 To the extent adequate staff, funding, and resources exist, develop and sponsor communityspecific,
downtown re-vitalization and economic development programs for Independence, Lone
Pine, Big Pine and, possibly, North Bishop.
 Identify and pursue opportunities to fund the LORP River Center Project in Independence.
 Work with Public Works department staff and interested parties to further evaluate the feasibility
and interest in establishing limited commercial air service at the Eastern Sierra Regional Airport,
and/or providing inclement weather landing options for the Mammoth-Yosemite Airport.
 Revise the County’s Film Ordinance to create a film permit and associated fee schedule.
 As time permits, develop ground leases, or Request For Proposals for specific manufacturing uses
on County-owned land consistent with the County’s Real Property Management Policy.
 As time permits, explore the possible creation of regional economic development frameworks and
initiatives.
 Continue to maintain strategic partnerships and alliances with key organizations and individuals,
and undertake projects to foster economic development opportunities in Inyo County.
Continue to utilize these funds to enhance and protect the fishing and wildlife resources that are so very
vital to Inyo County. Additionally work with the Advisory Commission to monitor the revenues in this budget in
order to maintain its availability to provide funds to enhance project opportunities.
 Avoid being visited by events requiring expenditure from this budget unit, or contributing
additional revenue to this fund.
 If necessary, provide a portion of the matching funds ($10,000) for completing the Multi-
Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan
 Develop potential projects for consideration and approval by the Inyo County Board of
Supervisors
 Transmit projects approved by the Inyo County board of Supervisors to the Great Basin Unified
Air Pollution Control District Board of directors for funding approval.
 Work with applicable departments to implement the projects.
 The County has used HSGP funds to make great strides towards improving its Geographic
Information System capabilities and technical compatibility with other local emergency response
agencies. $17,540 will be used to purchase customized computer “dashboards” which will help to
continue to enhance the GIS system for Emergency Operations.
 $10,000 in funds will also be used to fund the annual Reverse 911 Emergency Response System
database lease.
 $6,000 of the 2013 HSGP funds will be used to enhance medical and public health preparedness
by sending individuals interested in becoming an EMS/EMT responder to Tactical Medicine
Training. This training is mandatory for EMS certification.
* Improve service to Information Services customers:
 Continue focus on high quality effort and consistent approaches to solutions
 Education/training on new technologies employed at the County
 Establish and publish formal policies and procedures
 Evaluate organizational structure of the division
 Evaluate operational processes in effort to reduce operating costs through service redesign
* Complete or further the following technology related projects:
 Participate in and facilitate Property Tax Management System replacement project
 Participate in Criminal Justice System replacement project
 Continued evaluation, modification and stabilization of IFAS
 Acquisition and deployment of technology refresh equipment
 Expand usefulness of enterprise Geographical Information System
 Re-design and implement new County Inter/Intranet web site and functionality
 Continue analysis of computing environment security and continue implementation of security measures
* Pursue improvements for broadband and telecommunications access throughout the county.
 Continue support of Digital 395 Initiative
 Document capabilities and needs throughout the county
 Work with telecommunication vendors to fulfill needs identified
 Finalize all audits and settlements required and close the Emergency with the State
To continue to coordinate with third party administrator, outside legal counsel, and outside investigators on
workers’ compensation claims, to conduct training for employees, and to sit on the Underwriting Committee and
Board of Directors of the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority.
 Implement a new County employee service awards
 Implementation of County-wide Intern Program
 Implementation of Target Solution Training Program
 Implementation of County-wide web based Personnel Evaluation Process
 Evaluation of providing in-house administration of dental and vision insurance programs.
 Complete negotiations with outstanding bargaining units.
Motor Pool plans to replace approximately thirteen (13) vehicles for FY 2014-2015, all meet the replacement
criteria including having high mileage.
 Research fleet software and motor pool automation tools to increase the efficiency of the overall motor
pool program. Including staff attending motor pool best practices training.
 Increase fuel efficiency by purchasing the most fuel-efficient vehicles meeting County specifications.
 Continue to surplus vehicles and equipment that have high mileage and meet the replacement criteria and
offer the vehicles and equipment to the public through the sealed bid and public auction process.
 Encourage County employees to utilize CFN fuel stations located in the unincorporated areas of the County
whenever possible for tax revenue purposes.
 Motor Pool will inspect each Motor Pool vehicle returned and will encourage the maintenance of vehicles
by County staff.
 Evaluate maintenance and fee schedule for realistic replacement costs.
Motor Pool plans to replace thirteen (13) vehicles for FY 2013-2014 per the attached Motor Pool replacement
schedule at an estimated cost of $399,954.
 Increase fuel efficiency by purchasing the most fuel-efficient vehicles that meet County specifications.
 Continue to surplus vehicles and equipment that have high mileage and meet the replacement criteria and
offer the vehicles and equipment through the sealed bid and public auction process.
 Work with County Administration and the Library System to successfully implement Service Redesign
Options as directed by the Board of Supervisors, or devised by staff during the year.
 Maintain the highest possible level of service for visitors and researchers, commensurate with the County’s
fiscal constraints.
 Expedite the eventual transfer of the double-wide trailer on the Museum grounds from the County to the
Friends of the Eastern California Museum. The Friends would repair and renovate the structure so it could
be used for storage for the Museum, the Friends, and other community groups.
 Work with the non-profit Carson and Colorado group on their proposal to place Engine 18 at the Museum
grounds, and construct a new building to house the locomotive and attendant equipment.
 Work with the Friends of the Eastern California Museum and the Branson Foundation and the County
Administrator to facilitate the sale by Los Angeles Department of Water and Power of the historic
Commanders House and Edwards House which will ultimately result in the Friends taking ownership of
those two important historic structures. The Museum currently leases both buildings.
 Cooperate with the U.S. Park Service and Manzanar National Historic Site regarding a federal, Park
Service grant for $75,000 that will be used to restore, reclaim and preserve 10 pieces of historically
significant art owned by the Eastern California Museum. The art, including a 24-foot long mural, was
painted by Manzanar Internees and is currently part of the Eastern California Museum collection.
 Work with the non-profit 3 Corner Round Pack Outfit to facilitate the group’s $15,000 pledge to upgrade
and maintain the Museum’s basket collection with a focus on obtaining an updated appraisal of the
collection and adjustments to insurance coverage, of necessary.
 Begin the process of renewing the Museum’s land lease with the Los Angeles Department of Water and
Power, which would be for 20 years, and possibly up to 30 years. The current lease expires in 2016.
 Continue “Building Bill’s Ditch: The Los Angeles Aqueduct, 1913—2013” through the end of 2014, and
possibly longer depending on staff resources. This popular exhibit was installed in the Spring of 2013 and
features more than 100 photos from the Museum’s collection depicting all aspects of the construction of the
Los Angeles Aqueduct. Museum staff curated the exhibit, wrote the text, and installed the exhibit. The
Friends of the Eastern California Museum funded the photo reproduction and enlargement expenses for the
exhibit, at a cost of about $4,000.
 Install a computer that the public can use to view the Virtual Transportation Museum site, the Museum’s
website, and the Museum’s digital photo galleries (the computer would not provide access to the Internet).
 Expand the current Volunteer Program, based on current Inyo County volunteer guidelines, forms and
policies, so more enthusiastic and knowledgeable volunteers to play a larger role in the operation of the
Museum, creation of exhibits, maintenance of structures, and documenting collections and artifacts.
Currently, four/five regular volunteers perform such tasks as updating the Subject History File, photo
digitization, inventory of specific collections and artifacts, and data entry.
 Complete the Jane Bright Memorial Rock and Mineral Garden on the Museum grounds.
 Continue to refine the “Anna and OK Kelley Gallery of Native American Life,” which holds the Museum’s
renowned exhibit of more than 400 Paiute-Shoshone baskets and other artifacts.
 Continue to expand the Museum’s educational programs and presentations with guest speakers, slide
shows, and field trips throughout the year.
 Develop and sell a 2015 Eastern California Museum Calendar.
 Continue to support implementation of the County’s Renewable Energy Development Ordinance,
including current efforts to update the General Plan’s treatment of renewable energy facilitity
locations and transmission corridors.
 Ensure that the impacts of renewable energy projects on the County are fully mitigated and the
potential benefits from such projects are fully realized.
 Examine other initiatives that could be supported by this budget unit, including funding staff to
facilitate natural resource development issues.
 Major refurbishing of the Millpond Recreation Park restroom
 Purchase accessories for the new tractor for grounds keeping
 Repair the entrance restroom at Pleasant Valley
 Replenish woodchips at various play areas in the parks
 Repair existing lighting at Mendenhall Park
 Research the possibility of full hookups at the campgrounds
 Research best way to resurface Millpond Tennis Courts
 Implement a Frisbee Golf course for Millpond Recreation Area
 Tree Trimming at Dehy Park, Taboose Campground, Tinnemaha Campground, Baker Creek , Mendenhall
Park, Izaak Walton Park
 Refurbish the Gazebo at Lone Pine Park
 Increase programming in the Parks
 Issue RFP for operations at Tecopa Hot Springs and Pools and/or evaluate options for on-going operations
 Resolve outstanding issues with contractor and evaluate any additional repairs that may be
necessary.
 Continue the provision of mandated legal defense services.
 Continue to explore ways to minimize the County’s public defender costs.
 Continue the County’s seemingly never-ending recruitment of contract public defenders to best
position the County to facilitate filling expected and unexpected contract vacancies.
 Continue efforts to work with judicial system partners – District Attorney, Courts, Public
Defenders, Probation, and the Sheriff’s Office – to identify ways to reduce costs, enhance
efficiencies, and improve the administration of justice in Inyo County.
 Provide for a new “felony appointments” public defender contract when the current contract
expires, and include new reporting requirements in the
 Develop means to recover public defender costs from the less-than-indigent clientele that avail
themselves to these ‘free’ services.
 Work with County Counsel on legal issues regarding retention and destruction of old case files.
 Research high out-of-contract professional services charges and payments ordered by the Court,
and identify cost-containment strategies.
Continue to achieve the most favourable prices available for the purchases of essential general
office supplies.
Continue to provide loss prevention and loss control activities; work with departments to comply with
Federal and State statutes and regulations; coordinate and provide training for employees; work with departments in
policy development and implementation; continue to manage workers compensation and liability claims; and
administer insurance programs.
To continue to conduct investigations, analyze exposures, administer Claims against the County, work with
department heads and employees to minimize exposure to the County, and coordinate with outside legal counsel in
litigation against the County.
Continue to coordinate with Behavioral Health, Public Health, Sheriff and Probation staff on correctional
care Risk Management issues and quality assurance.
 Scale test study on waste tonnages/fees received to ensure that fees are consistent with volume to
tonnage conversion.
 Begin Phase One of the Corrective Action Plan at the Bishop-Sunland Landfill, this includes the
construction of two (2) large gas extraction wells, a vacuumed-gas cleaning system, replacing a poorly
constructed landfill groundwater monitoring well.
 Work with CalRecycle JPCU staff on completion of Inyo County Independent Review process.
 Implement a Waste Origin Program for better accountability and tracking of solid waste and to ensure
that all waste brought to Inyo County Landfills are assigned proper waste origin.
 Continue monitoring and updating construction and demolition ordinances to better meet California
Building Code Requirements.
 Install litter fences to reduce wind-blown litter at landfills.
 Modify rate structure at landfills and transfer station to cover program costs and to encourage
recycling.
 Replace obsolete Trash Compactor and Front End Loader that will meet CARB Off-road Diesel
requirements.
 Work with waste haulers to increase curbside recycling in Inyo County.
 Investigate and possibly develop compost processes that work in arid climate.
 Perform two (2) tire amnesty days at each manned RWM facility using CalRecycle grant monies
through RCRC/ESJPA, one in September 2014 and the second in April 2015.
 Provide 24 Hour HAZWOPER training to employees to meet Household Hazardous Waste Program
Requirements.
 Continue reducing consultant contract costs by performing more tasks utilizing existing RWM staff.
 Continue the diesel particulate filter installation program for the On & Off-Road equipment.
 Purchase new or used forklift or skid steer loader to continue free to the public Electronic Waste
Recycling operations.
 Attend 5th annual Earth Day event to continue Inyo County recycling and diversion education.
 Increase education and outreach programs for recycling and diversion in Inyo County.
 Continue providing Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) collection events on a quarterly basis at each
landfill and the Big Pine transfer station, sixteen (16) HHW events planned for FY 2014-2015, free to
Inyo County Residents.
 Continue increasing recycling and diversion opportunities that are appropriate for Inyo County.
Due to the fiscal challenges confronting the County during the preparation of the Fiscal Year 2014-2015
Budget, the Department Requested Budget does not include funding for the Community Project Sponsorship Grant
Program. Staff may recommend changes to the requested funding level as the County’s fiscal outlook stabilizes with
the adoption of the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget in September.
 Identify a level of funding, commensurate with the County’s fiscal means, to continue supporting the
County’s Advertising County Resources initiatives.
 If funding is made available through an improved fiscal outlook, solicit applications for grants from the
2014-15 Community Sponsorship Grant Program. Applications for will be reviewed and ranked by a
citizen review panel, and a funding recommendation provided to your Board. Administer and manage all
FY 2014-15 grant agreements and process initial and final payment requests.
 Execute and administer a short-term contract with Poimiroo and Partners for the Fall Color Publicity
Campaign, and continue to work with chambers of commerce and local businesses to identify publicity and
public relations opportunities.
 Staff will transition to electronic responses for visitor information. Those responses will include an email
letter with links to local chambers and government websites that provide visitor services and information.
Email addresses will be compiled into a data base and regular “e-newsletters” will be created and sent to
those on the list. Email addresses from past years’ information requests will also be added to the e-mail list.
 Continue to respond to CTTC requests for information for press releases, story queries, photos, and other
publicity related to Inyo County, Death Valley and the Eastern Sierra.
 Work with the Film Commissioner, County Counsel and your Board to amend the County’s Film
Ordinance to create a film fee schedule.
 Conduct a $35,000 marketing campaign using media targeting the demographic and user groups most likely
to visit Inyo County.
 Continue to represent Inyo County on the National Geographic Sierra Nevada Geotourism Project, to help
the project and program grow, reach more potential visitors, and become financially self-sustaining.
 Evaluate opportunities for collaboration on regional marketing or promotional efforts with the County’s
chambers of commerce, Mono County and other promotional groups.
 Continue to maintain and upgrade theothersideofcalifornia.com website and respond to information
requests from potential visitors.
Identify a level of funding, commensurate with the County’s fiscal means, to continue supporting
the County’s long-term GIS partners.
Due to the fiscal challenges confronting the County during the preparation of the Fiscal Year
2014-2015 Budget, the Department Requested Budget seeks only 50% of the funding provided to last
year’s Grant-In-Support Program grant recipients. Staff may recommend changes to the requested funding
level as the County’s fiscal outlook stabilizes with the adoption of the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget in
September.
