The Board meets each Tuesday, taking action on public
and departmental requests and other matters presented on
the agenda. The Board meets one Monday a month at
Kern Medical Center to specifically address the issues
impacting the County hospital. The Board also sits as the
Board of Directors of the County sanitation districts on
the first Tuesday of each month. Other Board member
activities include committee and commission meetings,
and participation in organizations at the local, regional,
State, and federal levels.
The recommended budget requires that one position be
held vacant and unfunded. The recommended budget
provides adequate resources to assist the Supervisor in
performing the various duties and functions required of
the governing body.
The recommended budget for the County Administrative
Office provides for the addition of three positions to
provide additional resources to the operations of the
department: Director of Budget and Finance, Director of
Policy Analysis, and County Compliance and
Accountability Officer. Over the past few years, the
department has experience declining of staff, while
experiencing increasing workload. The department has
also faced high turnover in the remaining staff, often due
to promotional opportunities outside the office becoming
available. The department has reviewed the organizational
structure and has determined that in order to provide the
quality review and timely analysis that is essential to the
Board’s objective of governmental transparency and
accountability, additional positions and a higher level of
review is necessary.
The department has identified the need to achieve
improvements in several areas: budget and finance,
economic development, and compliance and
accountability. The two director positions will act as
division chiefs over their respective areas of expertise.
The Compliance Officer will be tasked with spearheading
this function and providing on-going ethics training,
completion of a Code of Conduct for the County, and
perform operational reviews of high risk departments to
assist with remediation.
The increase in the recommended budget from FY 2011-
12 in the salaries and benefits object is primarily due to
the recommended addition of three positions and
increased costs for retirement, health benefits, and
unemployment insurance. The services and supplies
object is increased in the FY 2012-13 recommended
budget due to an anticipated increase in the costs
associated with economic development activities, as
discussed below.
In 1999, the County adopted a Kern County Economic
Development Strategy and designated the KEDC as the
lead agency for economic development activities to assist
the County in implementing this Strategy. In January
2010, your Board designated the County Administrative
Office as the County department responsible for
administering economic development activities and
coordinating with KEDC. Annually, KEDC requests
financial support to carry out this mission. In FY 2011-
12, this cost was moved from the Special Services budget
unit 1040 to this budget unit. For FY 2012-13, it is
anticipated that this cost will be slightly higher due to
KEDC performing increased activities related to
promoting economic development in Kern County.
The department’s General Fund cost is offset with
reimbursements for staff costs related to administering the
employees’ health benefits programs, debt program,
indigent defense program, and Trial Court Funding
program. The department will also use a portion of its
earned Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits,
approximately $174,000, to offset increased costs.
The department will continue its efforts to ensure
responsible and efficient government by providing proper
fiscal planning that meets the needs of the public and
County departments. The department will strive to meet
its established performance measures and to provide
quality, responsive services.

The recommended budget includes the addition of three
positions and holding one position vacant and unfunded in
FY 2012-13. The recommended additions are one
Director of Budget and Finance position at an annual cost
of $201,000, one Director of Policy Analysis position at
an annual cost of $201,000, and one County Compliance
and Accountability Officer position at an annual cost of
$169,000. One Administrative Analyst position will be
held vacant and unfunded for an annual savings of
$89,000.
The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors prepares the Board
of Supervisors’ agendas, attends Board meetings, records
official Board actions, and prepares the Board meeting
minutes. The department maintains historical records and
indexes, and the Clerk of the Board is the filing officer for
conflict of interest codes and statements of economic
interests. The department also records the actions of the
Assessment Appeals Board and special districts governed
by the Board of Supervisors.
A high number of property owners are continuing to
appeal the assessed value of their properties. This
assessment appeals process is managed by the
department. The increase in appeals continues to require
the dedication of staff resources in excess of prior years.
Although staffing levels were decreased in prior years, the
department strives to meet the mandated timeframes for
assessment appeal hearings.
The recommended budget includes an increase to salaries
and benefits appropriations of $43,000 over the FY 2011-
12 adopted budget in order to allow the department to
maintain its staffing level. The department has exhausted
all of its Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits to avoid
additional reductions in staffing levels and the department
has reduced costs in a number of areas. Services and
supplies expenditures have remained relatively flat.
Revenue is also estimated to remain flat compared to the
prior year.

There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded.
This budget unit contains appropriations for a variety of
services and programs, including Assessment Appeals
Board expenses, the contribution for the employee group
life insurance premium, expenses for special studies and
projects, consulting and professional services expenses,
and Board of Supervisors’ general and discretionary
expenses not allocated to individual supervisorial
districts. The County’s contributions to private non-profit
agencies, the Local Agency Formation Commission
(LAFCo), and the Kern Council of Governments
(KernCOG) are also included in this budget unit. The
County Administrative Office administers this budget
unit.
Assessment Appeals Board
Funding to support the activities of the Assessment
Appeals Board (AAB) is included in the Special Services
budget. Anticipated costs associated with AAB activities
include professional and specialized services agreements
to assist in the preparation and defense of major
assessment appeal cases related to the valuation of oil and
gas properties, per diem payments for meeting attendance
and travel expenses for AAB members, reimbursement of
County Counsel’s staff costs related to handling AAB
matters, office expenses, and postage. Supplemental roll
assessment fees and property tax administration charges
offset a portion of these expenses. Based on the number
of appeals being filed, costs for assessment appeals are
anticipated to remain at the approximate level as FY
2011-12.
Contributions to Other Agencies
The Special Services budget contains recommended
contributions to various private non-profit agencies for
performance of cultural or humanitarian services
benefiting the public. The following contributions are
included in the recommended budget.
 Arts Council of Kern: $65,000
 Bakersfield Museum of Art: $30,000
 Bakersfield Symphony: $100,000
 Community Action Partnership of Kern County
(CAP): $100,000
 Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA):
$100,000
 Edwards Community Alliance: $10,000
 Southwest Defense Alliance: $50,000
 Valley Fever Vaccine Project: $50,000
 Volunteer Center of Kern County: $10,000
Kern County Museum
Effective July 1, 2011, the Kern County Museum’s
operational responsibilities were transitioned from the
Kern County Museum Authority to the County Parks and
Recreation Department. The recommended budget
includes $150,000 to ensure resources are available to
assist the department in the operations of the Museum.
This is the same level of funding provided in FY 2011-12.
Shafter Research Center
The San Joaquin Valley Quality Cotton Growers
Association has requested a contribution from the County
to support the operation of the Shafter Research Station.
The recommended budget includes $200,000 to be used
for infrastructure maintenance and improvement of the
facility.
Small Business Development Center (SBDC)
The recommended budget includes $60,000 for the Small
Business Development Center at California State
University Bakersfield to provide a local match for its
program for small business services, which includes
counseling, access to small business loans, and other
professional services.
Travel and Tourism Promotion
In FY 2000-01, a program was initiated to nurture the
promotion of travel and tourism by local groups. The
Board of Trade was designated to administer this
program, with the funding appropriated in Special
Services. The funds are distributed to local chambers of
commerce and promotional organizations on a
competitive basis for the purpose of promoting their
particular unincorporated locale. It is recommended that
$100,000 be allocated for this discretionary program.
Board of Supervisors Expenses
The Special Services budget includes general expenses
for the Board of Supervisors. The costs anticipated for
FY 2011-12 include the County’s memberships in the
National Association of Counties (NACo), California
State Association of Counties (CSAC), Quadstate County
Government Coalition, and Southern California Water
Association, phone line costs for the Board Chambers and
ancillary areas, district specific projects, and travel costs
associated with countywide issues. The recommended
budget contains the accumulated carry forward of the
Board members’ discretionary funds for district specific
projects and an additional allocation of $50,000 for each
district for FY 2012-13.
Roads-related Projects
The Special Services budget contains funding to offset
expenses incurred by the Roads Department for projects
that do not specifically qualify for the use of Road funds.
These types of projects include cattle guard maintenance,
County facilities minor parking lot maintenance, and the
installation of special signage. For FY 2012-13, $50,000
is recommended for this purpose.
The recommended funding level will enable the
department to accomplish its assigned functions of
department audits, property tax accounting, accounts
payable, cash receipts, payroll, preparing State required
reports such as Countywide Cost Allocation Plan, and
preparing financial reports for the County and all special
districts under the control of the Board of Supervisors.
The recommended budget will require the department to
use the majority of its Budget Savings Incentive (BSI)
credits. The department will also continue the reduction
or elimination of paid overtime, travel and transportation
expenditures. The recommended budget provides
sufficient funding to maintain key functions such as
maintenance of the County’s general ledger, timely
processing of payroll, financial reporting, and the
calculation and allocation of property tax revenue, and
departmental audits.
The increase in the salaries and benefits object is mainly
due to increased retirement costs and the addition of three
positions dedicated to the development of new
programming activities. Funding these positions will
allow the department to continue Countywide
implementation of the new time entry/cost system, with
the anticipation that nearly all departments will be
successfully migrated to this new system by the end of the
fiscal year. The recommended budget will also allow the
department to resume maintenance and development of its
internal systems, which have been neglected in previous
years in order to create new systems that have
Countywide benefits.

The department will continue to leave one Assistant
Auditor-Controller position vacant and unfunded, at an
annual savings of $151,000. Due to the necessary
redistribution of duties and responsibilities, the
department is adding one Technology Services Supervisor
position, and deleting mid-year one Information Systems
Specialist position, for a net cost of $70,000. The
recommended budget also adds two Programmer/Analyst
positions and one Fiscal Support Technician position, at
an annual cost of $257,000. The department will continue
to loan one Accountant to another department, and will
not backfill that position when it becomes vacant. The
recommended budget also includes one vacant and
unfunded Fiscal Support Technician position.
The elective office of the Treasurer-Tax Collector
receives, safeguards, invests, and disburses funds for the
County, school districts, special districts, special trust
funds, and the County deferred compensation plan. The
department also collects real and personal property taxes
and other local taxes for all local government agencies
and conducts tax-defaulted land sales.
The recommended funding level for the Treasurer-Tax
Collector’s Office allows the department to maintain
current staffing levels and fill a vacant Programmer
position. The department will continue the delivery of
services to the public and its customers and provide for
the collection and processing in excess of $1 billion of
taxes levied on behalf of the County, cities, schools, and
special districts.
The recommended budget will support the department’s
administration of the deferred compensation program, as
well as oversight of the investment of the more than $2.3
billion in funds held in the Treasurer’s investment pool.
The recommended funding level will allow the
department to maintain its technology and automation
programs and begin upgrading its proprietary systems.
The department plans to implement needed improvements
throughout the year to numerous tracking and interface
systems. The department is also addressing a critical
security concern by funding a lobby security upgrade
project with the use of its Budget Savings Incentive (BSI)
credits.

The recommended budget includes the deletion of one
Tax Collector’s Investigator position and one Fiscal
Support Supervisor position, for an annual savings of
$193,000. There will be no impact to service levels as
these positions have been held vacant in previous years,
and job duties have been absorbed within the department.
The department is also deleting one vacant Fiscal Support
Assistant position and replacing it with a Fiscal Support
Technician position in order to standardize the
department’s fiscal support staff, at an annual
increase of $5,000. Additionally, the department will
fill its Programmer/Systems Analyst position, which
was held vacant in FY 2011-12, allowing the department
to begin needed upgrades and improvements to
proprietary systems used throughout the department.
The department is responsible for appraising the majority of
land and improvements within the County, including
valuation of all land and mineral content values, water
rights, wind energy facilities, and business personal
property. The department is also responsible for the
creation of new parcels from deeds, tract maps, parcel
maps, records of survey, and parcel map waivers.
In addition to ensuring that the values placed on all
taxable property are computed accurately, fairly, and in accordance with State appraisal guidelines, the department
is responsible for tracking property ownership changes and
responding to requests for title information. With the
downturn in the housing market, the values of residential
properties have declined significantly increasing the
departments’ workload to meet its responsibility to address
Proposition 8 reviews for decline in value.
The recommended budget will allow the department to
meet all mandated functions and maintain current levels of
service.

The recommended budget for the Assessor includes the
addition of three Senior Appraiser positions and the
deletion of four Appraiser I/II/III positions, at an annual
savings of $87,000. The department has budgeted the
use of all of its current Budget Savings Incentive (BSI)
credit balance of $151,286 towards salaries.
 Information Technology Services (ITS) will continue its
support of the major automation systems for its customer
departments and ensure that the County’s technology
infrastructure needs are met. Major enterprise systems
supported by the department include the Kern Integrated
Property System (KIPS), Criminal Justice Information
System (CJIS), County’s payroll system, Financial
Management System (FMS), Job Applicant Tracking
System, Trust Fund System, and Database
Administration.
Other major systems supported by ITS that facilitate
interactive communications strategies and the use of available technologies include the Wide Area Network,
email, Internet connectivity, CountyNet, the County web
site, County storage area network (SAN), centralized
virtual server farm, and anti-virus applications. ITS will
continue to provide desktop support and assistance to
departments upon request, and maintain the County’s
telephone system and upgrade the phone and data
communications systems as customer departments’ needs
and budgets dictate.
The increase in the recommended net General Fund
contribution is primarily due to the rising costs of salaries
and benefits, including expected retirement payouts. The
additional appropriations for this budget unit will allow
the department to provide support for the development of
a replacement payroll system, as well as internal cross
training and sharing of institutional knowledge to new
staff members. ITS will also be using a substantial
portion of their Budget Savings Incentive credits to
replace key components of the Enterprise Server
environment.
The recommended budget will allow ITS to provide the
current level of service to its customer departments.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Information Security Officer position that will be
responsible for countywide electronic security
management, with a specific focus on ensuring County
departments are in compliance with all applicable State
and federal laws including the Patient Safety and Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Acts. The
estimated annual expense of this position is $157,000,
with 60% of the cost paid by Kern Medical Center. The
recommended budget also provides funding for one
Technology Services Supervisor position, which was
vacant and unfunded the previous fiscal year. These
positions will allow ITS to provide necessary support for
the replacement payroll system. The recommended
budget also allows ITS to backfill vacant positions due to
retirements. Four positions are held vacant and unfunded.
County Counsel is the civil attorney for the County and
represents the County in all civil court actions. County
Counsel is also the legal advisor to the Board of
Supervisors, County departments, elected and appointed
County employees, and all boards and commissions that
do not separately contract for legal services. County
Counsel also advises and represents the Kern County
Employees’ Retirement Association and Kern Health
Systems under contract with those agencies.
The recommended budget includes sufficient resources to
provide the legal support required to implement Board
policy, protect the interests of the County, and
represent County departments concerning any legal issues related to the operation and management of the County.
In FY 2012-13, accounting of costs for “uninsured
litigation,” or legal matters requiring litigation not
covered under the County’s General Liability or Workers’
Compensation self-insurance programs, has been
reassigned from Risk Management budget unit 1910 to
County Counsel budget unit 1210. Historically, the
uninsured litigation costs in Risk Management have
included payments for contracted services such as expert
witnesses and outside legal counsel, settlement payments
such as opposing attorneys’ fees, as well as the billing of
time and expenses by County Counsel attorneys working
on uninsured matters. Total actual expenses for uninsured
litigation in FY 2011-12 were $1.52 million.
For FY 2012-13, $1.2 million is budgeted under the
account “Uninsured Litigation” in Other Charges as an
isolated, contingency-type account to cover any necessary
payments for expert and legal services and settlements. In
FY 2011-12 these expenditures totaled $748,000. An
addition of $600,000 in General Fund contribution was
also provided to offset the loss of expenditure
reimbursements previously charged to budget 1910 for
the cost of County Counsel attorneys working on
uninsured matters. The net effect on the County Counsel
budget for FY 2012-13 is an increased General Fund
contribution of $1.8 million to help consolidate expenses
related to uninsured litigation and provide sufficient
resources to appropriately represent and defend the
County in these legal matters.
Salaries and benefits costs have increased by $696,000 for
FY 2012-13 primarily due to filling vacant positions,
although this amount also includes the use of $631,000 in
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits, for a net increase
of only $65,000. Budgeted services and supplies have
remained relatively flat compared to the prior year,
although careful management of budgetary resources
produced a savings of $220,000 for FY 2011-12.
Revenues are budgeted $317,000 lower than the previous
budget as the department expects reductions in billable
hours due to Kern County Employees’ Retirement
Association hiring an independent legal counsel and
County Counsel’s outsourcing of Kern Medical Center
malpractice litigation.
In FY 2011-12, the department had planned to use
$362,000 of its accumulated BSI credits to maintain
service levels. However, due to the combined effect of
excess revenue collection, under-spending of services and
supplies appropriations, and budgeted positions being
held vacant, no BSI credits were needed in FY 2011-12.
In FY 2012-13, the department plans to use
approximately $631,000 of accumulated BSI credits to fill
additional positions and cover expected one-time
retirement pay-outs.

The recommended budget includes partial-year funding
for one (1) Assistant County Counsel and one (1) Deputy
County Counsel I position that will be held vacant for half
of the year to achieve additional savings of approximately
$275,000 in FY 2012-13. The total annual cost of these
two positions is approximately $550,000. The department
also plans to fill one (1) vacant Legal Secretary position
for an additional annual cost of $77,000.
The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions.
The recommended budget provides funding for the
Personnel Department to meet its mission of providing
personnel services and support to County departments.
During the last year, workload was at levels similar to FY
2005-06 and 2006-07 when the department had eight
additional full-time employees. While this reduction in
staff has impacted the service response times for hiring,
reclassification studies, and creation of eligible lists, the
department continues to find new efficiencies in order to
minimize the impacts to internal and external clients. The
department will be addressing these challenges with the
implementation of the new Applicant Tracking System
and the addition of an extra-help clerical staff position.
The department exhausted all its Budget Savings
Incentive credits in FY 2011-12.
The recommended budget will allow the department to
implement a new Applicant Tracking System, replacing
the existing system. This upgrade will improve
responsiveness for recruitment, testing and selection, and
reduce the County’s current exposure to potential
significant delays that exist under the current system.
The Personnel Department will continue to enforce Civil
Service Rules, aid departments in important personnel
matters including processing changes in employee status,
and manage the County’s Equal Employment Opportunity
program.
The salaries and benefits object is increased due to
approved salary increases, as well as retirement and
benefits increases. The department continues to trim
expenses in services and supplies, eliminating any nonessential
expenses within the department. The department
will continue to allocate the cost of publications, legal
notices, and meals and lodging for oral boards to
departments.

There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded.
The Auditor-Controller-County Clerk Elections Division
conducts general and special elections for all levels of
government. The Auditor-Controller-County Clerk is the
Registrar of Voters and maintains election-related
documents such as the voter index, affidavits of
registration, and precinct records. State and federal
election laws mandate the services performed by this
division.
The recommended budget provides adequate resources for
full compliance with all current legal requirements for
conducting elections. The recommended budget includes
sufficient resources to enable the Elections Division to
plan, conduct, and certify the 2012 Presidential General
Election and to cover additional costs, equal to half the
cost of a Countywide election, to cover special elections
during the fiscal year.
The increase in salaries and benefits is mainly due to rises
in retirement, benefits, and unemployment insurance
costs, as well as extra-help positions needed for the
national election in November. The division will
continue to apply for grants to help offset General Fund
costs.

The recommended budget includes the filling of a
previously unfunded and vacant Legal Process Technician
position, an annual cost of $66,000. It also includes the
deletion of one vacant Accountant position and replacing
it with a Fiscal Support Technician position. The Fiscal
Support Technician position is more appropriate due to
advances in automation and system upgrades within the
department, resulting in annual savings of $41,000.
The County Administrative Office General Services
Division manages the Construction Services, Major
Maintenance Projects, Capital Projects, Garage, and
Utility Payments budget units. The division provides
operational support to County departments, including
routine and preventive maintenance for all County-owned
buildings; custodial services in more than 70 Countyowned
and leased buildings; KGOV television
broadcasting and audio-visual production services;
property management services, including land purchases,
leases, franchises, rights of entry and easements; energy
and utility coordination; Countywide radio and
microwave communications; mail services; graffiti
abatement; purchasing; and payment and allocation of
utility costs.
Filling of vacant positions will increase salaries and
benefits costs for FY 2012-13 by $634,000, or 7%,
although the direct General Fund impact is only $188,000
for the year, due to the use of Budget Savings Incentive
(BSI) credits. Services and supplies costs will increase
$553,000 over the prior budget, or 28%, due primarily to
increased use of contracted janitorial services in
applicable instances and the additional responsibility for
Parks and Recreation Department facilities maintenance,
as discussed below.
The recommended budget includes an additional General
Fund contribution of $485,255 to allow a transfer of
responsibility to the General Services Division of
maintenance of County buildings in outlying areas that
had previously been maintained by the Parks and
Recreation Department. These funds include the cost of
filling two vacant Maintenance Worker I/II/III/IV
positions and the purchase of two utility pick-ups as well
as other supplies, tools, and materials costs.
In FY 2011-12, the General Services Division had
planned to use $287,000 of its accumulated BSI credits to
maintain service levels. However, due to the careful
management of budgetary resources, only $26,000 of BSI
credits were used in FY 2011-12. In FY 2012-13, the
division plans to use approximately $446,000 of
accumulated BSI credits to fill current vacancies.
However, even with the planned filling of vacant
positions, the division expects that there could be delays
in addressing maintenance requests due to lack of
adequate staffing.
The recommended budget also includes $436,000 in
capital equipment purchases in the Digital Infrastructure
and Video Competition Act (DIVCA) special revenue
fund, budget unit 1611, for upgrades to KGOV systems,
funded by revenue from collected cable franchise fees.

The recommended budget is funded at a level that
requires holding positions vacant and unfunded due to
budgetary constraints: one (1) Communications
Technician I/II/III position at an annual cost savings of
$75,000, and one (1) Graphic Artist position at an annual
cost savings of $64,000. The recommended budget
includes no position additions or deletions.
This budget unit is used to pay utility costs for most County
facilities. Utilities include electricity, gas, water, sewer,
garbage, postage, elevator services, pest control, security
and fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishers/sprinkler
systems. The General Services Division administers this
budget unit. Some utility costs for Sheriff, Fire, Roads, and
Kern Medical Center are not included in this budget unit.
The General Services Division continues to review and
evaluate the acquisition of utility services and commodities
to attain the best rates possible. Overall, however, services
and supplies costs are budgeted approximately 4% higher,
or $310,000 over the prior year. The increase is primarily
due to expected changes in electricity rates and additional
charges for sanitation and disposal services. An expected
decrease in payments for gas utilities partially offsets other
cost increases.
Two major photovoltaic solar power projects for County
facilities were completed in FY 2011-12. Both the County
Administrative Center and the Sheriff’s Lerdo detention
facility will see a reduced need for traditional electricity
purchases because of the power produced from the newlyconstructed
solar arrays. The Utility Payments budget is
also seeing a benefit of approximately $300,000 in
additional revenues from solar energy rebates provided by
PG&E because of these projects.
Energy conservation measures implemented a number of
years ago continue to assist in lessening overall energy
requirements and reducing the County’s utility costs. These
measures aim to eliminate wasteful use of energy in County
facilities and include reducing lighting levels and burn
hours, retrofitting for lower-wattage lighting and purchase
of more energy-efficient equipment, turning off equipment
whenever it is not needed, and raising air conditioning
thermostat levels during the warmer months. This
heightened awareness and responsiveness to energy issues is
critical in reducing costs to the County.
The Construction Services section within the General
Services Division provides design, engineering
preliminary cost estimation, bids and awards, inspection
and project management for capital and major
maintenance projects related to the County’s real property
infrastructure. The majority of expenses within this
section are offset by revenue received for services
provided, primarily from the funding provided in the
Capital Projects and Major Maintenance budget units.
The recommended budget includes sufficient resources
for project management and inspection services for
projects at various parks, and other capital and major
maintenance projects. Administration will also be
provided for Job Order Contract (JOC) projects
throughout the County. The division staff continues to be
involved in Community Development Block Grant
projects and court-related projects.
The demand for design support and project management
is expected to continue as Construction Services
endeavors to accomplish a large number of ongoing
projects, as well as those projects that have been approved
for debt financing. County design staff efforts will be
augmented through the use of architectural and
engineering consultant contracts, when appropriate.
Salaries and benefits costs are budgeted at a 20% increase
over FY 2011-12 due to increased retirement and health
benefit expenses as well as the additional funding of
positions previously held vacant. Services and supplies
are budgeted relatively flat compared to the prior year.
Revenues within this budget unit are largely billed against
the cost of specific projects budgeted elsewhere, as
reimbursements for the services provided by this unit.
Because a number of projects previously deferred are
recommended to begin in FY 2012-13, revenues are
budgeted to increase $260,000, or 19%, over the prior
year.

In anticipation of additional staffing needs to address the
large increase in capital and major maintenance projects
recommended for FY 2012-13, all positions are funded.
The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions.
The County Administrative Office annually develops a
master list of all major maintenance and capital projects
requested by departments. The projects are prioritized
using the following criteria: legally mandated, health and
safety concern, preventive maintenance concern, cost
reduction impact, and extent of direct use or benefit to the
public. Offsetting revenue and special funding is also
considered when prioritizing the projects requested for
funding consideration.
The table below contains a list of the recommended
projects for FY 2012-13. For each project, the project
cost, any offsetting revenue or special purpose funding,
and the net General Fund cost are presented. Typical
major maintenance projects include replacing and
repairing roofs, replacing flooring, demolition projects,
and replacing and repairing heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC) units. The projects listed in the
table below include 43 new projects at a net cost of
$14,966,274. Additionally, 11 prior year projects are
being re-budgeted at a net cost of $5,331,813. Offsetting
revenues for the Public Services Building HVAC
replacement will come from tenants of that building,
while the Golf Course Enterprise Fund will provide
reimbursement for the golf course building re-roofing.
Also, court-related projects are reimbursable from the
State for a portion of those shared facilities.
The recommended projects are in accordance with the
County’s objective of evaluating and meeting the
County’s infrastructure needs. These recommended
projects were identified by both the General Services
Division and other operating departments as urgent unmet
maintenance and capital facility needs.
The Board of Trade promotes the County nationally by
exhibiting County products, developing promotional
materials, and encouraging tourism via fairs, conventions,
and the Internet. As the Film Commission, the
department advertises, publicizes, and promotes film
production resources and locations within Kern County.
The recommended budget restores $17,000 in funding for
travel related events. The recommended budget will allow
the department to maintain current levels of service.
The department will continue to administer the Tourism
Promotion Grants Program. This program offers funding
to local chambers of commerce and other organizations
on a competitive basis for the promotion of travel and
tourism in the County. Funding for this program totals
$100,000 and is included in the Special Services budget
unit 1040.

There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. The budget contains one vacant
and unfunded Marketing Associate position.
The Engineering, Surveying, and Permit Services
Department reviews and processes tract and parcel maps,
and oversees drainage, floodplain, and geologic activities
related to land development permits. The department
reviews construction and grading plans for code and
regulation compliance. Other functions include operating
drainage facilities, performing surveys required by the
Board of Supervisors or the County Recorder, reviewing
legal descriptions, and other maps, and developing the
County’s geographic information system (GIS)
capabilities.
The recommended budget provides funding at a level that
is slightly more than FY 2011-12. The additional funding
allows the department to maintain existing service levels.
Staffing levels have been reduced over the past few years
but are expected to remain stable for FY 2012-13. As the
economy improves and service demands increase, the
department may struggle to keep pace.
Funding for sump maintenance has been reduced slightly
for FY 2012-13. Floodplain management will be
maintained at existing levels.
GIS services will be maintained at existing levels;
however, the update for the County’s aerial photography
has been put on hold and previous plans to expand
services have been suspended until additional resources
can be allocated.
In order to avoid additional decreases in service levels,
the department plans to use 30% of its remaining Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits to offset expenditures
planned for FY 2012-13.

The recommended budget includes the deletion of one
vacant funded Engineer I/II/III position at an annual
savings of approximately $160,000 and the deletion of
two vacant unfunded Engineering Aide I/II/III positions.
The County Counsel Risk Management Division
administers the County’s General Liability and Workers’
Compensation self-insurance programs, processes
employee and liability claims, and provides loss
prevention and safety programs. The division also
negotiates the purchase of specialty insurance coverages
for County departments. All costs incurred in this budget
are recovered through charges to other departments.
In FY 2012-13, Risk Management will be filling two
positions held vacant for a number of years, primarily for
the purpose of implementing a pilot program to “carve
out” certain employees from the traditional Workers’
Compensation process. To help streamline an otherwise
cumbersome and lengthy process, Risk Management will
be implementing an Expedited Resolution Process (ERP)
program to improve patient accessibility and provide an
alternative means to quickly resolve Workers’
Compensation claims to the benefit of the affected
employees as well as the County. It is expected that this pilot program will produce an annual savings in the range
of $1.3 to $1.7 million.
The recommended budget includes an increase in salary
and benefit costs of $177,000 over the FY 2011-12
budget, primarily due to additional costs for retirement,
health benefits, and employee salary increases. The
division will also be filling positions that had been held
vacant in prior years for a total cost of $412,000.
Excluding insurance policy premiums, services and
supplies appropriations remain relatively flat. Specialty
insurance policy premiums have been reduced $233,000
from the prior year’s appropriations due to the availability
of actual quotes prior to finalizing the budget. The actual
insurance policy costs paid from this budget will have
increased only $69,000 to $1.24 million over FY 2011-12
actual expenses.
In prior budgets, uninsured litigation, or the cost of
defending the County in civil and administrative matters
that are not covered under the County’s self-insurance
programs, had been the only direct General Fund expense
in this budget unit. Uninsured litigation expenses have
traditionally included payments for contracted services
such as expert witnesses and outside legal counsel,
settlement payments such as opposing attorneys’ fees, as
well as the billing of time and expenses by County
Counsel attorneys working on uninsured matters. For FY
2012-13, the recommended budget has consolidated these
costs in County Counsel budget unit 1210, and removed
any direct General Fund contribution from budget unit
1910.

The recommended budget is funded at a level that will
allow the division to fill all six vacant positions: one (1)
Disability Management Coordinator position for a cost of
$110,000, one (1) Safety Specialist for a cost of $85,000,
one (1) Information Systems Specialist – Desktop
Technician position for a cost of $99,000, and two (2)
Office Services Assistant positions at a cost of $59,000
each.
The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions.
The Capital Projects budget provides funds for land and
facility purchases, new construction projects, and major
building alterations for most County departments. This
budget unit is administered by the General Services
Division.
No new capital projects were initially identified for
funding in the FY 2012-13 Preliminary Recommended
Budget presented to the Board on June 19, 2012.
However, due to available carry forward balances from
the close of FY 2011-12, a portion of these one-time
resources are now recommended to be used to address
priority capital needs.
The only anticipated offsetting revenues for capital
projects are those tied to projects for the intended
acquisition of property and upgrade and improvement of
facilities for the County Recorder. These projects will be
funded through fees collected for that function of the
Assessor-Recorder’s office, specifically intended to
support and improve those services.
The following projects are recommended for funding:
 $3.5 million for replacement for deteriorating
inmate barracks at the Lerdo Minimum Security
facility. The existing barracks are 30 years old
and it is now more cost effective to replace the
barracks rather than continue the extensive
maintenance and repairs required to address
health and safety issues. Full replacement to
current capacity will require that the project
continue for multiple years.
 $12.8 million for replacement of the aging
domestic water and wastewater treatment
capacity at Lerdo. This thirty year-old
infrastructure requires a new well, domestic
water distribution, pump station, waste treatment
plant, and refurbishment of retention basins and
dissipation systems.
 $125,000 for a mechanical engineering study to
determine the most appropriate system and
provide a plan for upgrade of the heating portion
of the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) units at the Lerdo Pre-Trial facility. 
$158,000 to replace the currently inoperable
outlet gate at the Lake Ming dam. The outlet
gate provides functionality to release water from
the lake if needed and this project will bring the
structure into compliance with State regulations.
 $450,000 for Hall of Records modernization
efforts and $1.1 million for property acquisition.
Both of these projects are offset by non-General
Fund revenues specifically for the funding of
County records needs. The County Recorder
function of the Assessor-Recorder’s office has
outgrown the current Hall of Records and is
seeking to expand capacity to better serve the
public. These projects are also expected to
improve services through information
technology upgrades as well as providing
improved customer service flow.
 $150,000 for improvements and security
upgrades in the Treasurer-Tax Collector’s lobby.
 $50,000 for replacement of piezometers at the
Buena Vista Aquatic Recreation Area (BVARA).
These sensors are required to monitor and
measure seepage and water-loss or migration.
The current sensors are non-functional and must
be replaced to achieve compliance with State and
federal requirements.
 Two projects for upgrades to improve
functionality and expand capacity at the
Emergency Communications Center for
emergency services dispatch. The first project,
recommended at $815,000, will allow the Fire
Department to expand capacity to provide
dedicated space and equipment to increase
flexibility in coordinating response to multiple
incidents simultaneously. The second project,
for $353,000 will allow a similar expansion of
capacity for Sheriff’s dispatch, providing for
improved support of those services.
 $322,000 to replace water tanks at Tehachapi
Mountain Park for domestic water service to the
campgrounds and day use area.
 $1,351,000 for seismic retrofits at the Sheriff’s
Buttonwillow substation.
 $200,000 for study to determine the feasibility of
acquiring land along Caliente Creek, upstream of
Highway 58, and restoring habitat in order to
intercept flood water and help mitigate routine
flooding of Arvin and Lamont.
 $500,000 for the design of a replacement for the
current Fire Station 11. This project will relocate
the station from Keene to Hart Flat due to lack of
infrastructure in the current location and no
available domestic water.
 $500,000 for land acquisition and design of a
replacement for the current Fire Station 72 at
Lake Isabella. The Fire Department is seeking to
expand capacity to provide improved base camp
facilities for seasonal crews fighting wildfires in
the area and to potentially partner with other
agencies for a multi-jurisdictional facility.
This budget unit is used to pay the State-mandated
funding requirements for the County’s courts, including
the County’s maintenance of effort (MOE) payments to
the State for court operations and funding for courtrelated
costs that are not recognized by the State under the
Trial Court Funding Act definition of court operational
costs. The County Administrative Office administers this
budget unit.
The County and the courts reached an agreement to
finalize transition of court operations to the State on April
1, 2009, meeting the legislative deadline of December 31,
2009.
This process was initiated with the passage of the Trial
Court Funding Act of 1997. The State Task Force on
Trial Court Facilities required a set maintenance of effort
(MOE) payment obligation be paid by counties to the
State for facility maintenance costs after transfer of a
facility. This MOE obligation is per Government Code
section 77201.3. Counties retain responsibility for any
existing facility debt.
The County is required to submit $9.2 million to the State
for statutory MOE obligations, which were determined
from actual court costs from FY 2006-07. In addition,
$5.2 million is included in the MOE for baseline revenues
collected. Additional costs associated with this budget
unit include payments for facility charges, for operations
and maintenance agreements, auto allowances for judges,
and earthquake insurance.
Revenues are expected to increase slightly this year as
estimated by the courts. The collection of fines and
forfeitures, as designated to be distributed to the County
for its share of the MOE, are projected to increase by
approximately 1%. Revenues in this budget unit are fines
and forfeitures collected by the County and the Metro,
East, North and South court districts.
The recommended level of funding in this budget will
meet the County’s statutory fiscal responsibilities to the
State and the courts.
The County Clerk is a division of the Auditor-Controller-
County Clerk’s Office and is responsible for issuing
marriage licenses and fictitious business names, and
accepting filings of notary public bonds, environmental
impact reports, County loyalty oaths, and other
miscellaneous filings.
The recommended budget provides a level of funding to
permit the County Clerk to continue serving the public
without any impacts to service levels. As a result of
increased efficiencies due to internal programming
efforts, the department has been able to absorb the
impacts of reduced staffing over previous years. The
department continues to receive supervisory,
administrative, and technical support from staff in budget
units 1110 and 1420 as needed. This section falls under
the direct supervision of the Election Division Chief.

There are no position additions or deletions included in
the recommended budget. All authorized positions are
funded.
The Grand Jury conducts civil and criminal
investigations. The Grand Jury may examine the
accounts and records of local government agencies and
schools, and may inquire into possible criminal offenses,
determining whether to return indictment charges in
felony cases. Legal support is provided to the Grand Jury
by the County Counsel’s Office in civil matters and by the
District Attorney’s Office in criminal matters.
This budget unit is entirely funded by the County General
Fund. Funding appropriated to this budget unit is used to
pay for staffing, office supplies, training, expert witness
expenses, travel expenses, and other costs incurred by the
Grand Jury members.
The recommended budget includes additional funding to
allow the department to do indictments as requested by
the District Attorney, and provides funding for training of
new jurors. The recommended budget also contains
additional funding to cover increased mileage expenses
anticipated for FY 2012-13. The increased expense is the
result of the make up of the current pool of jurors. The
FY 2012-13 jury has several members who reside in
outlying areas.
POSITION DISCUSSION
This budget funds the Grand Jury’s one clerical support
position in a part time capacity of 32 hours per week.
Defense attorney services are required when the Public
Defender declares a conflict of interest or is otherwise
unable to represent an indigent adult or juvenile
defendant. This budget unit is used to process payments
for these services. The revenue source for this budget
unit is State aid for trial court funding, and State
reimbursements for costs of representing incarcerated
defendants. The County Administrative Office
administers this budget unit.
The County contracts with the Kern County Bar
Association (KCBA) for the administration of this
program. The KCBA submitted a budget that includes
decreased overall costs. Costs for attorney fees and court
processing are paid from this budget unit. The KCBA is
paid a fee for administering the program.
The recommended level of funding is $500,000 higher
than FY 2011-12 to cover the anticipated costs of indigent
defense cases projected for FY 2012-13.
The recommended budget provides for the operation of
the District Attorney Criminal Division. The
recommended budget includes sufficient funding to
conduct prosecutorial activities, including gang related
activities.
Salaries and benefits costs increased $2.3 million. This
increase is the result of retirement cost increases for the
department of over $1 million and the funding of three
additional Deputy District Attorney positions, previously
held vacant and unfunded. Unlike previous years, the
department did not need to use any accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits to offset salaries and
benefits, thus giving the appearance of an increase to
salaries and benefits. The services and supplies object
remains relatively stable with an increase of only $20,000.
The recommended budget also includes the replacement
of five passenger vehicles and 200 computers.
Revenue for the department increased by $2.8 million. A
large portion of this increase can be attributed to a $1.1
million increase in Prop 172, Local Public Safety Funds.
The recommended budget also includes an allocation of
AB 109, Criminal Justice Realignment Act funds as
recommended by the Community Corrections Partnership.
The $232,000 allocation will fund staff to handle the
review of the increased number of cases being submitted
to the District Attorney for possible prosecution.

The recommended budget includes the deletion of two
District Attorney Investigator I/II/III positions for a total
annual cost savings of $144,000; one Supervising Legal
Process Technician position for an annual savings of
$78,000; and one Fiscal Support Technician position for
an annual savings of $67,000. These positions have been
held vacant and unfunded for several years.
The Child Support Services Department initiates court
actions necessary to establish responsibility for the
financial support of minors. The department establishes
legal paternity, enforces support orders, and collects child
support payments from absent parents under the Social
Security Act. The department is committed to ensuring
that all children have the resources available to achieve
long-term self-sufficiency and independence, and
continues to educate and advocate on behalf of children to
ensure appropriate services are received.
The recommended budget provides for the operation of
the Child Support Services Department with no net
General Fund cost. This budget is financed entirely from
State and federal subvention revenues and other
departmental operating revenues.
Expenditures and revenues have decreased slightly from
FY 2011-12. The recently adopted State budget has kept
Child Support Services’ funding at a level sufficient to
maintain the current level of service.
The economy has had a significant impact on this
department, as the number of unemployed non-custodial
parents has increased, making it difficult to collect
outstanding child support.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Supervising Department Analyst position, and the
deletion of four Child Support Officer I/II/III positions,
for a net savings of $210,000.
The recommended budget provides an adequate level of
funding to provide legal representation for defendants
accused of criminal offenses when appointed by the
Superior Court.
The Public Defender's Office continues to handle a
significant number of felony jury trials per attorney. For
the past three years, homicide case numbers have been at
a historical high. The department currently has 40 open
homicide cases. In addition, a large number of recent
retirements have required the department to assign more
complex cases to less experienced attorneys.
The recommended budget includes an increase in Prop
172 Public Safety Funds of just over $1 million from FY
2011-12. Salaries and benefits increased $1 million due
to the addition of two staff mid-year and increased
retirement costs.
The recommended budget also includes $200,000 of
funding from AB 109, Criminal Justice Realignment, as
allocated by the State. However, the department did not
receive an allocation from the local Community
Corrections Partnership Committee.
The recommended budget does not require the department
to use any of its accumulated Budget Savings Incentive
(BSI) credits.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Office Services Assistant position at an annual cost of
$57,000, and one Investigative Aide position at an annual
cost of $74,000. The department will hold one Chief
Public Defender Investigator position vacant and
unfunded at an annual cost savings of $148,000.
The recommended budget provides for the operation of
the District Attorney’s Forensic Sciences Division.
Functions performed by the forensic lab include activities
such as comparison of hair, fiber analysis, blood spatter,
shoe prints, and ballistics comparisons. Some functions
performed by the lab, such as toxicology and solid dosage
narcotics analysis, generate revenue for the department.
The lab currently meets deadlines imposed by State
statutes in these areas and will make every effort to
continue to do so. The recommended budget should
allow these efforts to continue.
The recommended budget includes a slight decrease for
salaries and benefits of $200,000. Budget Savings
Incentive (BSI) credits in the amount of $440,000 were
used to offset increases in salary costs. Services and
supplies have remained relatively stable as well as
revenues. The department received additional funding
from the DNA Identification Fund for the one time
purchase of a $300,000 DNA robot system to assist in the
processing of DNA samples.
At the request of the department, both revenue and
expenditures related to testing done for Proposition 36,
the Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act, have
been removed from the recommended budget. Other
County departments are in the process of contracting with
private companies to perform this service.

The recommended budget requires the department to
continue to hold three Laboratory Assistant positions
vacant and unfunded at an annual savings of $156,000;
one Supervising Investigative Aide at an annual savings
of $80,000; and one Office Services Assistant at an
annual savings of $59,000.
The recommended budget includes an allocation for AB
109, Criminal Justice Realignment Act, as recommended
by the Community Corrections Partnership. The total FY
2012-13 allocation to the department is $9,934,431. The
department also has a carry forward of AB 109 funding of
$2,099,816. Other increases to revenue include an
additional $8.7 million in Local Public Safety funding
(Prop 172).
The detention of federal prisoners in the jail system
continues to be an important source of revenue to the
department. The department continues to house inmates
for the U.S. Marshals Service, resulting in an estimated $6
million in revenue for FY 2012-13. At the end of FY
2010-11, the Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) agency canceled a contract to house prisoners with
the County, and revenue resulting from the housing of
State prisoners ended in FY 2011-12.
The recommended budget contains an increase in services
and supplies of $2.1 million from FY 2011-12. An
additional $20 million was added to the department’s
salaries and benefits. Retirement cost alone increased $6
million. The remainder of this increase is primarily
related to additional staff hired to supervise inmates
related to the criminal justice realignment changes. The
department thus far has experienced a 15% increase in
inmates at the Lerdo facility and now has over 900
inmates participating in some type of alternative
incarceration program.
Expenditures for leased equipment include a new lease
payment for FY 2012-13 of $1 million as a result of $4.2
million in planned vehicle replacements.
The recommended budget will allow the same level of
service to be provided by the Coroner and Public
Administrator as in FY 2011-12.
The recommended budget also includes $20 million of
major maintenance and capital projects for the Lerdo
facility, including $12.8 million to upgrade the waste
water treatment plant. These projects are budgeted in the
Major Maintenance and Capital Projects budget units.

The budget includes the addition of one Supervising
Sheriff’s Report Technician position at an annual cost of
$78,000; six Sheriff’s Report Technician positions at an
annual cost of $372,000; one Technology Services
Supervisor position at an annual cost of $140,000; nine
Deputy Sheriff I/II positions at an annual cost of
$1,116,000; one Administrative Coordinator position at
an annual cost of $94,000; two Programmer I/II positions
at an annual cost of $200,000; and 17 Sheriff’s Detentions
Deputy positions at an annual cost of $1,683,000. The
recommended budget also includes the deletion of two
Information Systems Coordinator positions at an annual
cost savings of $240,000.
The recommended budget provides funding for mandated
services in public protection, prevention of crime, and
redirection of offenders.
The recommended budget includes an allocation for AB
109, Criminal Justice Realignment Act, as recommended
by the Community Corrections Partnership. The total FY
2012-13 allocation to the department is $8,832,000. The
department also has a carry forward of AB 109 funding of
$887,820.
Other increases to revenue include an additional $2.3
million in Local Public Safety funding (Prop 172),
$400,000 in Juvenile Justice Crime Prevention Act
funding, and $700,000 in Juvenile Probation and Camp
Funds revenue.
The recommended budget contains an increase in services
and supplies of $600,000 from FY 2011-12. An
additional $14 million was added to the department’s
salaries and benefits. This large increase is primarily
related to additional staff hired to supervise probationers
as a result of the criminal justice realignment changes.
The department thus far has received over 1,850 post
release community supervision offenders from the State.
Service impacts include requiring the department to
continue to operate with increased caseload sizes,
resulting in decreased probationer contact and successful
completions of probation. Decreased contacts and
decreased supervision of the higher risk individuals could
also result in an increase in recidivism.

The recommended budget includes the addition of the
following positions: two Juvenile Correctional Officer III
positions at an annual cost of $202,000; five Deputy
Probation Officer III positions at an annual cost of
$560,000; one Assistant Division Director position at an
annual cost of $160,000; one Probation Supervisor
positions at an annual cost of $130,000; 16 Deputy
Probation Officer II positions at an annual cost of
$1,440,000; one Office Services Technician position at an
annual cost of $62,000; two Database Analyst positions
at an annual cost of $308,000; one System
Analyst/Programmer position at an annual cost of
$118,000; and the deletion of one Information Systems
Specialist position at an annual savings of $105,000.
The recommended budget includes a General Fund
contribution of $21.4 million. Property tax revenues are
expected to generate $81.6 million in discretionary
revenues for the Fire Fund, an increase of 3.5%.
The department has once again been awarded a Staffing
for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER)
grant. This $7 million federal grant allows the department
to be reimbursed for up to 30 firefighter positions. The
department must use the funds to increase existing
staffing levels for the next two years. Unlike past awards
though, this grant does not require a commitment by the
County to retain the positions when the grant period ends.
The department intends to restore staffing at the stations
that were reduced to two-man stations because of fiscal
constraints FY 2009-10.
Reimbursement revenue from other agencies for fire
suppression costs is budgeted at $3 million. Historically,
this number fluctuates dramatically and the department
may receive additional reimbursement revenues
throughout the fiscal year. Additional funds would be
recognized and appropriated mid-year to cover overtime
and other costs associated with fire response on behalf of
other agencies.
The department currently has agreements with several
cities and neighboring counties to facilitate
reimbursement of costs of services provided. Estimated
revenue of $5.2 million is included in the recommended
budget for these agreements. The amount is slightly
lower than prior year. Agreements with these agencies
involve calculations based on actual costs and may
fluctuate.
In recognition of the County’s fiscal constraints, the
department has delayed the replacement of equipment for
the past three years. The recommended budget includes
$3.3 million to be placed in a designation with the
specific purpose of purchasing equipment.
The department will continue to use four seasonal fire
crews to support helicopter operations, manage brush
control, and control wild land fires.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Fiscal Support Supervisor position at an annual cost of
$95,000; one Fiscal Support Specialist position at an
annual cost of $79,000; one Fire Equipment Services
Worker position at an annual cost of $60,000; one
Systems Analyst/ Programmer I/II position at an annual
cost savings of $107,000; four Fire Dispatcher I/II
positions at an annual cost of $332,000; three Fire Captain
positions at an annual cost of $519,000; three Fire
Engineer positions at an annual cost of $435,000; one
Firefighter position at an annual cost of $114,000; and
one full time Office Services Technician position at an
annual cost of $62,000. The recommended budget also
includes the deletion of one part time Office Services
Technician position at an annual cost savings of $60,000.
The recommended budget requires the department to hold
vacant and unfunded one Chief Deputy position at an
annual cost savings of $255,000 and one Fire Battalion
Chief position at annual cost savings of $142,000. These
positions are being held vacant while the department
considers a reorganizational staffing plan.
This budget unit has been established to facilitate the
appropriation of the General Fund contribution to the Fire
Department. The General Fund contribution supplements
the Fire Fund and is used for general operating expenses.
Appropriations within this budget unit will be transferred
to the Fire Department’s operating budget unit 2415 and
is included in that budget unit under the revenues
category of Other Financing Sources.
The recommended budget includes an increase of $4.5
million to backfill for the 2010 Staffing for Adequate Fire
and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant. This grant
provided funding for two years for the retention of
firefighter positions that were originally slated for lay-off
in FY 2010-11. Now that the grant has been fully
expended, the cost of these positions will revert back to
the General Fund. The County may opt to not fund these
positions, however the department would no longer be
eligible for the $7 million 2012 SAFER grant recently
awarded to the department. The 2012 grant must be used
to provide additional staffing for a two-year period. The
department intends to use this funding to restore staffing
at the stations that were reduced to two-man stations
because of fiscal constraints in FY 2009-10.
In addition, $2 million was provided specifically for fire
equipment and will be held in a designation until the
department prioritizes equipment needs.
The Agriculture and Measurement Standards Department
promotes and protects the County’s agricultural industry
and provides agricultural research and information
services. The department enforces laws and regulations
established by the State Department of Food and
Agriculture and the State Department of Pesticide
Regulations, and enforces consumer protection laws and
regulations.
The department enforces laws and regulations related to
commercial transactions involving weight, measure, or
count. The department inspects packaged goods and bulk
commodities to ensure that their weights and measures are
as advertised and that they conform to the Federal Fair
Packaging and Labeling Act. The department also
inspects petroleum products for proper labeling and
quality conformance to established standards.
The recommended budget allows the department to
operate at current service levels. Although in some
instances clients may experience an increased wait time
for certain services.
The recommended budget reflects an increase in salaries
and benefits of $200,000 that is primarily the result of
increased retirement costs and increased unemployment
insurance costs. The department will also use $740,000 in
earned Budget Savings Incentive credits to offset
expenses.
The department should receive Unclaimed Gas Tax
revenue in FY 2012-13. Other than a slight increase in
the Unclaimed Gas Tax, revenues for the department
remain relatively stable. The State calculates this
subvention on the amount of County contribution to
agricultural program expenses. The previous year’s
expenses are used to calculate the percentage of the tax
revenue each county is to receive.

The recommended budget includes the deletion of one
Agricultural Biologist/Weights and Measures Inspector
Trainee position, at an annual savings of $72,000 and the
addition of one Agricultural Biologist/Weights and
Measures Technician position, at an annual cost of
$62,000. This newly created Technician position will
perform many of the functions currently done by an
Agricultural Biologist/Weights and Measures Inspector
that do not require a license.
Code Compliance is a division of the Engineering,
Surveying, and Permit Services Department. The
recommended budget provides sufficient funding to
support the division’s core functions to enforce and
correct violations that threaten public health and safety in
County areas, such as public nuisances, weeds, building
and housing, solid waste, and abandoned wrecked,
inoperative, or dismantled vehicles. One of the division’s
functions is to provide for enforcement to combat littering
and illegal dumping. This recommended budget does
continue to support that effort.
The recommended budget provides funding at a level that
is slightly more than FY 2011-12. This is due to the
addition of one Code Compliance Officer position. In FY
2010-11, department staffing was reduced from 13
employees, which included ten Code Compliance
Officers, to seven employees, including five Code
Compliance Officers. An additional Code Compliance
Officer position was added in FY 2011-12, which
provided one Code Compliance Officer for each
Supervisorial District and one officer to rotate as needed
based on case loads for a total of six officers. Over the
past year, the department has experienced increased
workload from assisting the Sheriff’s Department with
marijuana cases and residential foreclosures, resulting in a
need for an additional position to maintain service levels.
The proposed budget provides for $282,656 for clean-up
and abatement. The abatement fund, which is used to
fund clean-up and abatement, has been declining over the
last five years as a result of abatement efforts.

The FY 2012-13 budget includes the addition of one Code
Compliance Officer position to help the department keep
pace with increased workloads resulting from marijuana
cases and residential foreclosures. The approximate
annual cost for this position is $107,000.
Building Inspection, a division of the Engineering,
Surveying and Permit Services Department, enforces
building regulations, and parcel map and zoning
requirements for land use by issuing building permits and
inspecting all new construction in the County
unincorporated area.
The recommended budget provides the necessary funding
to support the division’s functions and accommodate the
continuation of a steady workload. The Building
Inspection Division will be able to conduct field
inspections of building projects to ensure compliance with
the approved plans and codes during the construction
process. The recommended funding level will permit the
continued operation of outlying permit offices in
Ridgecrest, Mojave, Tehachapi, Lake Isabella, Taft, and
Frazier Park. The outlying permit offices take in all
permits and issue those that do not require engineering
review.
Permit fees in the residential housing market and
commercial building construction appear to have
stabilized. However, significant increases in activity in
these markets are not anticipated this year. The division
continues to experience increased workload and receive
increased revenue from renewable energy projects. As a
result, in FY 2011-12 the division reversed a five-year
trend of using accumulated reserves to balance the
budget.
The division was able to add to reserves as a result of
several wind turbine permit projects being approved. The
use of funds related to the wind energy projects will likely
extend into FY 2012-13. The Building Inspection Fund
has a reserve of over $5 million at the start of FY 2012-
13.
There is no General Fund contribution to this budget unit.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Engineer I/II/III or Engineer I/II/IIIC position, to handle
additional plan checking work resulting from wind and
solar projects. The approximate annual cost for this
position is $112,000.
The Recorder is a division of the Assessor-Recorder’s
Office. The Recorder, formerly budget unit 2705 in the
General Fund, is now in a separate fund as budget unit
2700. This change was made in FY 2011-12 to accurately
reflect the operational status of the department based on
legal opinions.
The department will be acquiring a new building, paid for
from the Recorders Modernization Fund. The
recommended budget includes $458,000 for the
remodeling of the Hall of Records, $100,000 for
miscellaneous improvements to the new building not
covered by tenant improvements, and $126,960 for lease
payments for the new building before it is purchased. All
of these expenditures will be reimbursed from the
Recorders Modernization Fund.
Data processing costs have increased by $354,802 over
last fiscal year due to anticipated software enhancement
projects. Since the Recorder was moved to a separate
fund, it now pays for certain services provided by other
County departments. Appropriations for these services
have increased by $179,649 over last fiscal year.
The recommended budget includes a revenue increase of
$835,392. The largest increases are transfers in from the
Recorders Modernization Fund, detailed above, and from
the Contribution to Recorder, detailed below.
The recommended budget includes a $360,918
contribution from the General Fund budget unit 2705.
This anticipated revenue is from a $1 fee charged on
subsequent pages of certain document transactions. This
$1 fee is passed through the General Fund in order to
achieve compliance with Government Code section
27361(b).
The division will continue to examine all documents,
primarily related to real estate and estate transactions,
presented for recording or filing, as to names, signature,
proper and complete notarization, legibility requirements,
and the completion of any required Documentary Transfer
Tax statements.
The division will also be able to fulfill its responsibility
for examining, accepting, and recording marriage
licenses, birth and death certificates, and assisting
members of the public requesting copies of any
documents on record.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Office Services Technician position and one Information
Systems Specialist position. It also includes the deletion
of one Document Image Technician position and one
Programmer I/II position, for a net increase of $12,000.
The department will be able to perform its duties more
efficiently with the position changes.
This budget unit was established in Fiscal Year 2011-12
to facilitate the appropriation of a General Fund
contribution to the Recorder. The contribution is
anticipated revenue generated from a $1 fee charged on
subsequent pages of certain document transactions. This
$1 fee is passed through the General Fund to the Recorder
operating fund in order to achieve compliance with
Government Code section 27361(b). The money collected
from this fee can only be used for the Recorder function.
The Development Services Agency (DSA) has undergone
significant changes in FY 2011-12. The agency no longer
oversees the development services departments and has
been placed under the direction of the Planning and
Community Development Department. Under this new
structure, agency personnel continue to provide
technology, payroll/personnel, and administrative support
to the development services departments and continue to
work with the departments to identify and incorporate
more efficient operating practices. DSA staff has also
maintained the role of liaison for the coordination of
maintenance, security, and logistics for the Public
Services Building. During the fiscal year, staff will seek
an appropriate title change from an agency to a division
within the Planning and Community Development
Department.
Expenses in the FY 2012-13 recommended budget are
projected to be $394,161 less than the FY 2011-12
adopted budget. This is primarily due to the unfunding
and deletion of the agency director’s position. Revenues
are projected to be approximately 1.5% more than last
year.
The department’s staff costs are partially reimbursed by
other departments for providing services to those
departments. The DSA will continue to provide technical
and communications support services to the departments
in the Public Services Building and outlying service
delivery sites. However, service levels to General Fund
departments will remain at reduced levels from previous
fiscal years. Services to non-General Fund departments
will continue at current levels, or increased levels,
depending on demand, as the agency is reimbursed for
costs incurred related to these activities.

The recommended budget includes the deletion of one
vacant unfunded Director of Development Services
Agency position at an annual savings of approximately
$230,000.
The recommended budget provides funding to support the
department’s functions. The department strives to employ
land use policies that ensure orderly growth, promote
economic vitality, and protect the local environment.
Major projects and programs that the department will
continue to pursue in FY 2012-13 are:
 Streamlined and expedited processing of
renewable energy projects, commercial, and
industrial development.
 Home Rule Program coordination providing
monitoring, reviews, and comments on various
State and federal activities, involving, but not
limited to, endangered species, wetlands, water,
air quality, and land use. The review emphasis
is placed on impacts on private property owners
and industries.
 Continued work on the Metropolitan
Bakersfield General Plan update, the
Metropolitan Bakersfield Habitat Conservation
Plan, and the Valley Floor Habitat
Conservation Plan.
 Public workshops and hearings for the Mojave
Business District—Visioning Workshop, the
Boron Business District –Visioning Workshop,
Proposed Wind Siting Exclusion Map, Safety
and Mobility Grant for Lamont, Weedpatch and
the City of Arvin, proposed ordinance and
program EIR for the Dairy Animals Facilities
program, implementation of the Joint Land Use
Study, and update of the Airport Land Use
Compatibility Plan.
 Resolution and monitoring of regional growth
issues.
In FY 2010-11, a designation was established in the
General Fund, in the amount of $402,000. These funds
were to supplement the department’s General Plan
Surcharge and grants to facilitate the completion of
programs that promote economic growth throughout the
County. The source of these funds was an additional
allocation from the Troubled Assets Relief Program
(TARP) to counties under the Payment In-lieu of Taxes
(PILT) program of the U.S. Department of Interior. This
year the remaining PILT designation of $101,900 has
been included in the budget for the Joint Land Use
Implementation, Indian Wells Valley Community Plan
and for the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
Increased activity associated with renewable energy
projects is expected to continue through 2012. As a
result, services and supplies are projected to increase by
approximately $400,000 over the FY 2011-12 adopted
budget. This increase is almost entirely due to
professional and special services required to complete
environmental studies related to renewable energy
projects and will be partially reimbursed by project
applicants.
Salaries and benefits are also budgeted to increase by
approximately $700,000 this fiscal year over FY 2011-12.
Most of the increase is due to the department’s use of its
remaining $410,000 in Budget Savings Incentives (BSI)
credits in FY 2011-12 to offset salaries and benefits costs.
The remaining increase in salaries and benefits is
primarily due to filling two vacant Planner I positions.
These new planning positions will help relieve workload
on more experienced planners responsible for processing
renewable energy applications before the expiration of
federal renewable energy tax credits. The increased
appropriations also funds an Accountant I/II/III position
to oversee the department’s accounting functions and
ensure compliance with adopted accounting procedures.

The recommended budget includes adding one
Accountant I/II/III position, at a cost of approximately
$103,000 and filling two vacant Planner I positions at a
cost of approximately $220,000.
The Animal Control Department provides for the care and
protection of unwanted and abandoned animals within our
community. The County operates shelters in Bakersfield
and Mojave, and contracts for shelter services within
Lake Isabella and Ridgecrest. The County provides
enforcement and shelter activities for the City of
Tehachapi and shelter services to the cities of Arvin and
Bakersfield through contracts.
Additionally, the department provides local rabies control
in accordance with California Health and Safety Code.
The rabies control program includes animal licensing,
rabies vaccinations, bite reporting, quarantine, and stray
animal control. In addition, the department provides lowcost
rabies vaccination clinics, investigates animal cruelty
and abuse complaints, conducts public education
programs, and promotes spaying and neutering.
Animal Control underwent many changes throughout FY
2011-12, all of which have yet to be completely
implemented or resolved. On November 8, 2011, the
Board of Supervisors approved the organizational
restructure of Animal Control from a division within the
Public Health Services Department to a stand-alone
department reporting directly to the Board of Supervisors,
allowing for an 18-month transition period through FY
2012-13. Additionally, a Director of Animal Control
position was created, which for the first time will be
appointed by and report directly to the Board of
Supervisors. The County also broached the possibility of
cancelling the provision of animal sheltering services for
the City of Bakersfield and operating a separate County
shelter in the Bakersfield area.
Due to the current number of outstanding items affecting
the operations of the Animal Control Department, the FY
2012-13 recommended budget includes a snapshot of a
point in time and the following tentative items:
 $107,802 in revenue from the City of Bakersfield
for animal sheltering services through October
21, 2012, in accordance with the June 26, 2012
proposed amendment number 3 to agreement
number 610-2009, which has yet to be adopted
by the Board of Supervisors;
 $500,000 in appropriations for the annual lease
costs and anticipated moving expenses for the
relocation of the County's portion of the
Bakersfield shelter services operations; and
 $83,363 in appropriations for eight extra help
Animal Care Worker positions through
November 31, 2012.
As the details of the potential continued partnership with
the City of Bakersfield are decided, and the location of
the County's portion of Bakersfield area shelter services is
determined, the appropriate budget changes will be
brought to the Board of Supervisors for consideration.
In addition to the major tentative changes listed above, the
recommended budget includes changes to the status quo
budget. The FY 2012-13 recommended budget includes
an increase of approximately $596,000 in salaries and
benefits. This is mainly due to the addition of the
Director of Animal Control position during the latter half
of FY 2011-12, the request for the addition of a Senior
Animal Care Worker position, an increase of
approximately $258,000 in retirement costs, and an
increase in overtime costs by approximately $160,000.

This department is currently authorized 50 positions, all
of which are funded in the recommended budget. The
recommended budget includes the addition of one Senior
Animal Care Worker position at an annual cost of
$63,523, in an effort to more adequately supervise animal
care staff. If approved, the department's authorized
positions would total 51.
The Roads Department designs, constructs, and maintains
public roads, bridges, streets, and traffic control devices
in the County unincorporated area, except for Statemaintained
highways and bridges. The Streets and
Highways Code specifies the procedures for preparing
plans and specifications, bidding, contracts, and allocating
road revenues, and governs the department’s functions.
The department provides engineering design for all
transportation projects (and related requests from other
departments), including preparation of preliminary studies
to determine the project scope and constraints, preparation
of detailed construction plans and specifications, and the
administration of construction contracts.
The recommended budget includes a General Fund
contribution of $10.77 million, which is $5.1 million
more than the FY 2011-12 adopted budget. The increase
in funding is to restore the department’s funding for road
maintenance that was reduced at the beginning of the
recent economic downturn, to fund an emergency access
project on Standard Street near a refinery on Rosedale
Highway and to repair Cache Creek Bridge in the Sand
Canyon area. The recommended budget does allow the
department to continue to meet performance measure
goals related to road paving and maintenance.
The recommended budget is largely a reflection of State
and federal allocated funding. Gas tax revenues were
slightly more than expected in FY 2010-11 and are
expected to continue this trend in FY 2012-13. In FY
2012-13, federal aid for construction will remain at
normal levels. Reimbursement from transportation
impact fees is expected to increase but will be offset by
expenditures for projects funded by these fees.
Increases in operating expenses continue to be a challenge
for the department. Higher fuel prices are expected to
increase the department’s expenditures by approximately
$500,000. Locally funded paving projects are expected to
be increased this year to offset the reduction in paving
that occurred in FY 2011-12. Construction projects are
anticipated to continue at the same pace for at least the
next couple of years as the department completes
previously allocated long-term projects. Major projects
and programs that the department will continue work on
in FY 2012-13 are:
 County Certificates of Participation (COP)
transportation bond projects are winding down.
The department has completed all but one of the
23 budgeted transportation bond projects, the
final project is under construction.
 The Seventh Standard Road widening and
separation of grade at Sante Fe way are
complete, and project closeout is underway.
 The undercrossing at Hageman and Allen Road
is under construction and should be complete by
September 2012.
 The auxiliary lane at Olive Drive and the State
Route 99 interchange went out for bid in April
2012, and is now under construction. The project
will be funded out of transportation impact fees
and upon completion will be reimbursed through
an agreement with Walmart.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one
GIS Specialist position at a total annual cost of $97,000.
This budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from
the General Fund to the Road Fund to support Roads
Department operations.
Appropriations within this budget unit will be transferred
to the Roads Department’s operating budget unit 3000
and will be reflected in that budget unit under the revenue
category Other Financing Sources. The contribution
recommended for FY 2012-13 is an increase of $5.1
million more than the FY 2011-12 adopted budget. The
additional funding is to restore funding to the department
for road maintenance that was reduced at the beginning of
the recent economic downturn, to provide funding for an
emergency access project on Standard Street and to repair
Cache Creek Bridge in the Sand Canyon area.
This budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from
the General Fund to the Airports Enterprise Fund. The
Airport Economic Opportunity Area (AEOA) that was
approved by the Board of Supervisors on September 15,
2009, is the sole General Fund contribution in the
recommended budget. The AEOA allocates the
incremental increase of property taxes collected on a
defined area of land in and around Meadows Field
Airport, to be applied directly toward the department’s
public capital facilities.
In FY 2011-12, this budget unit had also included an
additional General Fund contribution of $150,000 for the
Customs and Border Patrol Officer necessary to maintain
the County’s Foreign Trade Zone (FTZ) status, but for FY
2012-13, the Airports Enterprise Fund is absorbing this
cost with expected increases in Airports’ operating
revenues.
The Public Health Services Department provides a wide
range of services to assist in the prevention of disease and
the improvement of the health, safety, and quality of life
for County residents and visitors. The department
participates in improving the health of the community
through education, encouraging healthy lifestyles, and
studying disease and injury prevention.
The California Department of Corrections has, over the
past several years, contracted with the Public Health
Services Department to provide transitional case
management services to inmates, who have been
diagnosed with HIV/AIDS, as they are released from the
prison system. Under this agreement, County employed
Social Service Workers are stationed in prisons
throughout the State of California and provide guidance,
counseling, and parole planning services with these
inmates and assist in the application process for Social
Security, Medi-Cal, and Veterans Affairs benefits.
During FY 2011-12, the California Department of
Corrections expressed concerns of future funding
reductions, which the department prepared for by holding
vacancies in program specific positions. As a result of
budget reductions at the State level, the program budget
was reduced by approximately $3.1 million and 23 Social
Service Worker positions. This reduction of both funding
and positions was approved in June 2012, and is reflected
in the department's FY 2012-13 recommended budget.
With continued increased employee costs and the
significant reduction of the Transitional Case
Management program, General Fund programs continue
to be reduced in an attempt to absorb increased costs.
Over the past few fiscal years, field nursing staff has been
and continues to be transitioned to more narrowly focused
grant-funded programs in an effort to reduce General
Fund costs. Each year, this transition of staff has an
effect on services to the public and those in greatest need.
Combined, these reductions have now significantly
hindered program staff's ability to quickly respond to the
needs of the underprivileged communities. With
increased caseloads and decreased field nursing staff,
response to referrals of the most vulnerable, high risked,
drug exposed, medically fragile infants is delayed.
Additionally, due to the decline in staff, 30% of NICU
referrals from hospitals are being denied. Field nursing
will be further reduced during FY 2012-13 with the
elimination of availability for walk-in clinic visits at three
outlying district offices; Lamont, Tehachapi, and Wasco.
This will result in the closure of these three office
locations. Maintaining these outlying district offices
would require an additional $790,000 annual General
Fund contribution. The FY 2012-13 recommended
budget includes $122,500 in additional funding to
maintain service levels through budget hearings.
The department continues to attempt to locate alternative
revenue sources to fund the services currently provided
and to add new services not currently available to the
community through the department. The department has
successfully secured an additional $1.5 million in new
grant funding for FY 2012-13. A grant through Kaiser,
referred to as Healing Oildale, has been obtained and
provides $50,000 for the development of a detailed plan
of action that will improve eating and physical activity
policies and environments within Oildale's school
districts. A Community Transformation Grant in the
amount of $416,577 has also been obtained to assist in the
prevention of heart attacks, strokes, cancer, and other
leading causes of death or disabilities through evidence
and practice-based policy, environmental, programmatic,
and infrastructure changes. Performance measures will be
attributed to changes in weight, proper nutrition, physical
activity, tobacco use prevalence, and emotional wellbeing
and overall mental health of the local community.
The Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting
Program offers the department an additional $945,561 for
FY 2012-13 to strengthen and improve the programs and
activities the department currently carries out through
Title V, to improve coordination of services for at-risk
communities, and to identify and provide evidence-based home visiting programs to improve outcomes for families
who reside in the County's at-risk communities. Further,
the department was able to obtain an additional $90,256
through a Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Education (SNAP-Ed) grant, which will allow for
implementation of a comprehensive public health
nutrition program to promote 2010 Dietary Guidelines,
increase fruit and vegetable consumption, and increase
physical activity among the program eligible population.
Additionally, the Public Health Services Laboratory has
been successful in enhancing services and in fee
collection, resulting in an anticipated increase of
$350,000 in discretionary revenue to the department for
FY 2012-13. Also, on September 1, 2009, the department
was selected to participate in a program to develop and
test an innovative insurance reimbursement model, which
allowed the department to fund a contracted insurance
expert to review billing processes in the Health Officer’s
Clinic and initiate partnerships with insurance companies
to enhance collections. Through this program, Public
Health has become a preferred provider for Managed Care
Systems, Blue Shield, Blue Cross and affiliated carriers,
and SISC. The funding for this program will end on June
30, 2013, but the enhancements from this program will
continue.
To continue enhancement of laboratory services, the
department is requesting to purchase a vacuum centrifuge
and a Tuberculosis centrifuge for $18,000 and $25,000,
respectively. Both requested centrifuges will be
purchased with increased discretionary laboratory service
revenue received. The department is also requesting to
purchase two disaster tents to be used to augment the
response in the event of a large scale disaster where
hospitals are full with mass casualties or in the event of a
large outdoor response requiring shelter from the
elements. These disaster tents will be purchased with
emergency preparedness grant funds.

This department is currently authorized 263 total
positions; 250 full time and 13 part time positions. The
recommended budget funds 236 permanent positions and
10 extra help positions.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Administrative Coordinator position, at an annual cost of
$94,104, funded completely through the department's
emergency preparedness grant. The recommended budget
also includes the addition of one Public Health Deputy
Director position, at an annual cost of $138,053,
completely offset by the concurrent deletion of a Special
Projects Manager position, at an annual savings of
$138,053. The department is also requesting the addition
of one Office Services Coordinator position, at an annual
cost of $89,204, which will be partially offset by the
annual savings of $82,248 achieved from the requested
deletion of one Senior Office Services Specialist position.
The department is holding vacant and unfunded 28
positions: one Public Health Nurse III position, at an
annual savings of $158,852; two Public Health Nurse II/I
positions, at an annual savings of $263,245; eight Junior
Public Health Nurse positions, at an annual savings of
$905,168; one Staff Nurse position, at an annual savings
of $123,714; one Vocational Nurse I position, at an
annual savings of $76,707; one Fiscal Support Specialist
position, at an annual savings of $78,332; one Fiscal
Support Technician position, at an annual savings of
$67,770; two Office Services Specialist positions, at an
annual savings of $137,210; four Office Services
Technician positions, at an annual savings of $248,056;
one Office Services Assistant position, at an annual
savings of $56,858; three Medical Investigator positions,
at an annual savings of $234,996; and three Public Health
Aide I positions, at an annual savings of $159,729.
The Environmental Health Division provides Statemandated
regulatory oversight, compliance assistance,
and enforcement actions for community businesses and
activities. The division has over 8,000 business facilities
that it is responsible for reviewing and inspecting to
protect the public and the environment. The division uses
a risk-based approach for determining the allocation of
resources, inspection and audit services, and for
determining permit fees.
The recommended budget does not include a General
Fund contribution, as the division is self-supporting,
relying on permit and services fees to cover operating
costs. Increased employee costs and anticipated FY
2012-13 retirement payouts require the division to unfund
one vacant Environmental Health Specialist – In Training
position, in an effort to maintain the division's selfsupporting
status.
The recommended budget provides for services at the
same level as provided in FY 2011-12. The
recommended budget includes an overall decrease in
appropriations in the amount of $425,958, mainly due to
the decrease of one-time expenditures. The division used
a one-time General Fund designation from surplus fees
collected in FY 2009-10 in the amount of $347,000 in FY
2011-12 to replace aging equipment to enhance
emergency response capabilities.

This division is currently authorized 59 positions, 58 of
which are funded in the recommended budget. The
recommended budget includes the addition of one Fiscal
Support Specialist position, at an annual cost of $78,332,
which is mostly offset with the concurrent deletion of one
Office Services Technician position, at an annual savings
of $62,015. The recommended budget also includes the
addition of one Waste Management Technician position,
at an annual cost of $84,858, which is mostly offset by the
concurrent deletion of one Building Plans Technician
position, at an annual savings of $83,427.
The division is holding one Environmental Health
Specialist – In Training position vacant and unfunded, at
an annual savings of $79,997.
The Mental Health Services Department focuses its
efforts to ensure access to high quality mental health
services throughout the County. The department serves
as a community-based outpatient treatment system of care
with the purpose of the diversion of individuals served
from hospitalization to less costly treatment modes and,
ultimately, recovery from illness. Implementation of the
Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) has had a significant
positive impact on these efforts. MHSA funded programs
are augmenting the role of the department by providing
consumer-driven services to previously underserved
populations.
The State's FY 2011-12 budget plan included a major
shift, referred to as 2011 Realignment, of State program
responsibilities and corresponding revenues to local
governments. Within this plan, 1991 Mental Health
Program Realignment funding, one of the department's
main sources of revenue, was diverted to fund California
Work Opportunities and Responsibilities to Kids
(CalWORKs) Program responsibilities. The services that
were previously funded with 1991 Mental Health
Program Realignment are instead supported by a
guaranteed revenue source within the 2011 Realignment
structure. These funds are now transferred in equal
monthly payments, relieving the burden of variability in
timing of tax receipts under 1991 Realignment. All of the
policy and account structure provisions related to 1991
Mental Health Program Realignment are still in effect.
Additionally, FY 2011-12 brought a new funding source
to the department through AB 109, the Public Safety
Realignment Act of 2011. This act shifted a large portion
of the offender population responsibilities from the State
to local governments. Mental Health's allocation is
$1,749,252 for FY 2012-13, which will be used to provide
additional staffing and increased contractor funding for
both in-custody and outpatient mental health programs
and services for the AB 109 population.
Beginning in FY 2012-13, two additional programs are
included in the State's 2011 Realignment budget plan;
Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment
(EPSDT) and Mental Health Managed Care. EPSDT is a
federally mandated program that requires the County, as
the state's contractor, to provide Medi-Cal beneficiaries
under the age of 21 with all medically necessary specialty
mental health services. The Mental Health Managed Care
program provides Medi-Cal beneficiaries with specialty
mental health services. The services provided under this
plan include psychiatric inpatient hospital services and
outpatient specialty mental health services. It is
anticipated that the department's EPSDT and Mental
Health Managed Care allocations will not change from
the approximate $10.4 million and $7 million respectively
received in previous fiscal years, although they will be
funded through a different source.
During FY 2011-12, the Mental Health Department
created a study group to make recommendations
regarding the potential implementation of AB 1421,
known as Laura's Law, in Kern County. Laura's Law was
passed by the Legislature in 2002, and was intended to
provide the mentally ill with treatment, often on an
involuntary basis. Laura's Law does not provide a
funding source and contains a provision that does not
allow funding to be taken from existing services to
implement the program. However, the recommended
budget includes the addition of a Family Advocate
position. This position will not only address the
recommendations that have come from the Laura's Law
study group, but will also be one step towards increasing
departmental strategies in assisting the family members of
seriously mentally ill adults who are either having trouble
accessing treatment or who are not adhering to treatment
recommendations.
The FY 2012-13 recommended budget includes a $5.6
million increase in requested expenditure appropriations.
Approximately $2.9 million is from salary and benefit
increases and $2.3 million is from increases in services
and supplies. The department is experiencing an
approximate $2.3 million increase in existing employee
costs, $124,365 increase in unemployment costs,
$100,000 increase in Workers' Compensation costs, and
an increase in requested extra help due to the
implementation of AB 109 in the amount of $423,148.
The increases experienced in services and supplies are
mainly due to the implementation of AB 109, which
requires the department to increase contractor services. In
addition, the department is anticipating an approximate 20
percent increase in costs associated with patient stays in
the State hospitals totaling $300,000. The department is
also requesting to purchase six replacement servers, in the
amount of $39,000, and one replacement projector, in the
amount of $6,313. All equipment will be purchased with
MHSA funding and all expenditure increases are offset by
increases in program revenue.

The Mental Health Services Department is authorized 453
total positions; 447 full time positions and 6 part time
positions. The recommended budget includes the addition
of 14 positions and the deletion of 16 positions and
provides funding for 440 positions.
The recommended budget includes the addition of the
following positions: one Administrative Coordinator
position, at an annual cost of $94,089; two Junior Staff
Nurse positions, at an annual cost of $216,486; two Fiscal Support Specialist positions, at an annual cost of
$143,828; one Office Services Technician position, at an
annual cost of $62,015; one Mental Health Unit
Supervisor position, at an annual cost of $146,945; one
Supervising Mental Health Clinician position, at an
annual cost of $134,171; five Mental Health Therapist
positions, at an annual cost of $527,090; and one Family
Advocate position, at an annual cost of $94,923.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of the
following positions: one Departmental Analyst position,
at an annual savings of $86,881; one Program Technician
position, at an annual savings of $70,813; three Mental
Health Nurse positions, at an annual savings of $362,433;
one Nursing Attendant position, at an annual savings of
$54,009; two Fiscal Support Technician positions, at an
annual savings of $135,540; three Office Services
Specialist positions, at an annual savings of $198,189; one
Mental Health Therapist Trainee position, at an annual
savings of $44,025; and four Mental Health Recovery
Specialist positions, at an annual savings of $318,644.
The net effect of the requested position additions and
deletions is an overall reduction of two positions,
changing the departments authorized total positions to
451; 445 full time positions and 6 part time positions, and
an overall increase in annual costs of $149,013.
The recommended budget holds vacant and unfunded 11
positions; nine full time positions and two part time
positions. These unfunded positions include one
Administrative Services Officer position, at an annual
savings of $134,348; two part time Mental Health
Psychiatrist III positions, at an annual savings of
$594,964; one Nurse Practitioner position, at an annual
savings of $166,340; one Psychology Intern position, at
an annual savings of $26,407; two Substance Abuse
Specialist I positions, at an annual savings of $155,570;
one Mental Health Nurse I position, at an annual savings
of $120,811; one Office Services Specialist position, at an
annual savings of $68,604; and two Mental Health
Recovery Specialist I positions, at an annual savings of
$159,322.
The Mental Health Substance Abuse Program is the
provider of a variety of treatment and prevention
programs to meet the needs of the community. Primary
funding for the programs operated within this budget unit
is provided by sources outside the General Fund.
However, in order to qualify for much of the funding, a
County General Fund contribution in the amount of
$111,363 is required and is appropriated in the Mental
Health – County Contribution budget unit 4127.
FY 2011-12 brought much change to the funding sources
received by this department. The State, as part of the FY
2011-12 budget plan, enacted a major shift, referred to as
2011 Realignment, of State program responsibilities and
corresponding revenues to local governments. This plan
realigned several substance abuse treatment programs that
were previously funded through the State Department of
Alcohol and Drug Programs. The realigned programs
include Regular and Perinatal Drug Medi-Cal, Regular
and Perinatal Non Drug Medi-Cal, and Drug Courts.
Funding levels remained relatively consistent with prerealignment
levels, and no service impacts were
experienced with this change.
Additionally, FY 2011-12 brought a new funding source
to the department through AB 109, the Criminal Justice
Realignment Act. This act shifted a large portion of the
offender population responsibilities from the State to local
governments. Substance Abuse's allocation of this
funding in FY 2012-13 is $1,583,274, which will be used
to provide an evidence-based treatment program to serve
inmates in the Lerdo Jail facility and community-based
treatment for the released AB 109 population.
The recommended budget includes an increase in
appropriations by approximately $1.7 million. This is
mainly attributed to an increase in provider contracts due
to the implementation of AB 109 and for a one-time grant
with California Emergency Management Agency. The
department has attempted to absorb increases in existing
employee costs by holding nine currently vacant positions
unfunded in FY 2012-13 and utilizing extra-help where
appropriate.
While services have not been drastically reduced for FY
2012-13, primary funding for the programs operated
within this budget unit have eroded throughout previous
fiscal years and have yet to completely recover. During
FY 2009-10, the substance abuse system of care lost
approximately 36% of its revenue due to the loss of the
Substance Abuse Crime Prevention Act of 2000 and
Offender Treatment Program funds. These funds were
used to serve individuals sentenced into treatment in lieu
of incarceration. As a result, the department was forced
to lay off staff and there were several overall reductions to
the treatment capacity. While the funding for these
programs has dissipated, the law to divert non-violent
drug offenders into treatment is still intact. As a result,
the majority of the department’s treatment slots are
occupied by the criminal justice system, leaving little
capacity for the remaining non-criminal justice
population. Furthermore, due to loss of funding, the
department was forced to cut all sober living beds during
FY 2009-10 and treatment slots for persons with cognitive
disabilities in FY 2010-11.

The department is currently authorized 48 positions in the
Substance Abuse budget unit. The recommended budget
includes funding of 39 of the department's 48 authorized
positions. The department's FY 2012-13 vacant and
unfunded positions include two Substance Abuse
Specialist I positions, at an annual savings of $152,138;
one Youth Prevention Specialist I position, at an annual
savings of $73,678; one Office Services Assistant
position, at an annual savings of $57,565; three Mental
Health Therapist Trainee positions, at an annual savings
of $65,109; and two Mental Health Recovery Specialist I
positions, at an annual savings of $160,735.
This budget unit has been established to facilitate the
appropriation of the General Fund contribution to the
Mental Health Services Department. Appropriations
within this budget unit will be transferred to the Mental
Health Services operating budget unit 4120 and Mental
Health Services – Substance Abuse operating budget unit
4123.
A Maintenance Of Effort (MOE) with the State requires
the County to appropriate funding for mental health and
substance abuse services in the amounts of $771,125 and
$111,363, respectively. The County contribution includes
an additional $206,659 to Substance Abuse for assistance
with gang suppression enhancement activities consistent
with previous years.
Historically, a significant portion of the County
contribution consisted of Mental Health 1991 Program
Realignment revenues. During FY 2011-12, the State
implemented 2011 Program Realignment, which shifted
the Mental Health portion of 1991 Program Realignment
to the CalWORKs MOE, and backfilled Mental Health's
Realignment with a new revenue source. The 2011
Program Realignment also mandated that Mental Health
Program Realignment be used solely for Mental Health
Program purposes, and offers no transferability. Given
that the County has no discretion as to how these funds
are allocated, this revenue is no longer able to be
considered a County Contribution and is transferred
directly into the Mental Health operating budget unit.
Performance measures for the Mental Health Services
Department are included in the budget discussions for
budget units 4120 and 4123.
The Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Division is
responsible for monitoring the delivery of emergency
medical services and coordinating the EMS system
participants throughout Kern County. EMS system
participants include fire departments, ambulance
companies, other emergency service providers, hospitals,
the public, and Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)
training programs. EMS continually monitors the
performance standards of community ambulance
providers and ensures compliance with contract
requirements. The division provides certification and
accreditation of County pre-hospital personnel, including
certification and re-certification for EMTs, paramedics,
specialized nurses, and specialized dispatchers. The
division administers the Countywide trauma system and
manages the Emergency Medical Payments budget unit 4201 and Ambulance Service Payments budget unit 4203,
assisting with partial reimbursement to hospitals,
physicians, and ambulance providers for County indigent
services.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding to
support the division’s functions at existing service levels.
The recommended budget will also allow the division to
ensure that patients receive optimal, high quality, and
timely emergency medical care to improve survival of
sudden injury or illness.
Employee cost increases are being managed through
reductions in services and supplies and more involvement
in reimbursable disaster preparedness grant activities.
The division's Budget Savings Incentives (BSI) credits are
used primarily to offset unexpected decreases in revenue
collection and as a means for staff to devote time to EMS
related items that may not be specifically grant-related
when necessary.

The division is currently authorized eight positions, all of
which are funded in the recommended budget. The
recommended budget includes no position addition or
deletion requests.
State law mandates that the County provide medical care
for indigent residents and inmates of correctional
facilities. This budget unit appropriates funds to
reimburse the Kern Medical Center Enterprise Fund for
providing medical services to indigent patients, jail
inmates, and juveniles in County detention facilities.
The hospital is partially funded by an allocation from
Health Program Realignment revenues for services
provided to adult indigent. The recommended allocation
of this revenue is $16.2 million, which is approximately
$1.5 million more than budgeted in FY 2011-12 as result
of available FY 2011-12 carry forward.
The reimbursement and cost associated with providing
medical care for inmates and juveniles is being
recognized in the newly established Correctional
Medicine budget unit. The recommended budget includes
an increase of $2 million in the contribution for providing
inpatient medical services to jail inmates. These funds
will only be transferred to the Correctional Medicine
budget unit 8988 after the cost is incurred. Impacts of
AB 109, the Criminal Justice Realignment Act, have
included hospitalization of inmates that would otherwise
be the State responsibility after sentencing, however, no
AB 109 funds have been allocated to offset the increased
costs.
A full discussion of Kern Medical Center’s budget and
performance measures is provided in the discussion of the
KMC Enterprise Fund budget unit 8997. The new
Correctional Medicine budget unit’s discussion is
provided in budget unit 8988.
The Ambulance Service Payments budget unit is used to
reimburse County contracted ambulance companies for
otherwise non-reimbursed services provided to indigent
residents. The Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
Division administers this budget unit.
Exclusive operating areas have been established in Kern
County for ambulance service providers. Operators must
enter into a performance contract with the County before
services may be provided. Ambulance payments from
this fund are intended to assist with satisfying the
County’s indigent responsibilities under Welfare and
Institutions Code section 17000. Within each ambulance
operator contract, a percentage of the appropriation
approved by the Board of Supervisors in this fund is
allocated for each fiscal year. Quarterly payments are
issued based on agreed upon percentages.
Funding for this program comes from the Emergency
Medical Payments budget unit 4201, which is derived
from a portion of fines and penalties assessed by the
Courts. Use of this funding is regulated by Health and
Safety Code section 1797.98. In this regulation, EMS is
allowed discretionary use of 17% of the revenues
received, which a portion is allocated for this purpose.
Due to an increase in employee and operating costs and
an attempt to maintain status quo EMS Division
operations, the division was unable to allocate as much of
the discretionary portion of Emergency Medical Payments
funding as has been historically allocated for this purpose.
The California Children’s Services (CCS) Program
provides diagnosis, treatment, and therapy services to
children with disabling conditions. The program is
designed to ensure that children with medically eligible
conditions realize their maximum physical and social
potential.
The CCS Program is mandated by California Health and
Safety Code. This mandate requires the division to
annually appropriate at least $790,311 for diagnosis and
treatment and $214,323 for therapy services, up to which
the State matches the County’s costs. Historically, the
division has exceeded the mandated costs mainly due to
higher medical costs associated with children and
complex medical problems. CCS currently provides
diagnostic and treatment services, medical case
management and physical and occupational therapy
services to more than 6,500 children, and the caseload
size continues to increase due to the growing client
population and the decline of the economy.
The FY 2012-13 recommended budget adequately reflects
the County's anticipated share of costs; however, the
division continues to struggle with the lack of State
correction of erroneous charges to the County. It is
estimated that the State currently owes the County
approximately $1.2 million in reimbursement for these
erroneous charges. Due to the payment mechanism in
place, should the State not offer some form of relief from
these erroneous charges, a carry forward obligation from
FY 2011-12 may result. Should the division continue to
experience numerous erroneous charges throughout FY
2012-13 without correction from the State, additional
General Fund resources may be required to maintain
mandated service levels.
The recommended budget includes an overall increase in
appropriations of approximately $683,158. Historically,
additional funds have been placed in Appropriations for Contingencies budget unit 1970, specifically for the event
that caseload or the County's share of cost increased based
on children served and treatment required. The division
has consistently required use of the contingency. For FY
2012-13, this funding has been included within the
division's budget. A majority of the remaining increase
can be attributed to increased employee and Workers'
Compensation costs. Any decrease in salaries and
benefits will cause a like decrease in offsetting revenues.
The California Department of Health Care Services
mandates staffing levels, but treats the mandate as a
guideline until staffing deficiencies disrupt services.
Deficient staffing levels could result in the State
withholding program reimbursement. The remaining
appropriation increase is due to the addition of a
contracted medical consultant.
Performance measures related to this budget unit are
included in the discussion on the Public Health Services
Department budget unit 4110.

The division is currently authorized 64 positions; 58 fulltime
positions and six part-time positions. The
recommended budget provides funding for 63 of the
division’s 64 authorized positions. The division
anticipates filling eight currently vacant positions in an
effort to bring staffing levels up to the recommended
State staffing standards to meet the demands of the everincreasing
caseloads and be compliant with State
mandates.
The division is holding vacant and unfunded one Physical
Therapist position, at an annual savings of $143,000.
The Human Services Department administers State and
federally mandated public assistance programs. Services
and programs to assist needy individuals and families
include welfare-to-work, County-funded general
assistance, food stamps, child protective services,
adoptions, Jamison Children’s Center, information and
referral services, and foster family home licensing. The
department also administers the CalWORKs program,
which requires that certain able-bodied applicants and aid
recipients participate in work-related activities as a
condition of eligibility.
Most public assistance programs administered by the
department are controlled by federal or State laws, and are
regulated and supervised by the State Department of
Social Services (CDSS). The department continues to
direct its efforts to a family-focused service delivery
system. This includes initiatives such as Family-to-
Family, Linkages, Differential Response,
Disproportionality Project, Heart Gallery for adopted
children, and continued work on implementation of Child
Welfare League of America (CWLA) recommendations
through the resulting strategic plan for service
improvements.
CalWORKs, which provides cash assistance to eligible
and needy families, requires most welfare recipients to
participate in activities that will lead to employment and
self-sufficiency. The department also administers the
CalFresh Program (formally known as Food Stamps) for
eligible and certified low-income households, Medi-Cal,
which provides medical access to eligible children,
individuals, families and seniors, as well as the Countyfunded
General Assistance program. The department is
responsible for determining initial and continuing
eligibility for these programs’ applicants.
Because of the continually depressed economy and high
unemployment rates locally, the department has seen a
28% increase in CalWORKs cases since 2007. In the
same time period, CalFresh cases have increased by 85%
and Medi-Cal by 43%. As of December 2011, 27% of
Kern County’s population is now receiving some form of
assistance, with many individuals and families seeking
assistance for the first time. The department is currently
serving an average of more than 225,696 beneficiaries
through various public assistance programs.
In the Child Protective Services Bureau, the department
has in place a 24-hour response system designed to
receive, investigate, and evaluate reports of child abuse
and neglect. Focusing on the safety of the child, the
department works in conjunction with the juvenile court
system; should it be substantiated that abuse has taken
place, the child may be made a dependent of the court.
When that occurs, case plans may be ordered for family
reunification or family maintenance. Should families fail
reunification or maintenance services, children are then
referred to long-term placement, including foster care
homes, group homes, foster family agencies, or adoption.
When appropriate, children are also placed with relatives,
a first priority for the department. In conjunction with
this responsibility, the department operates the Jamison
Center, which temporarily shelters children who have
been removed from their home due to safety concerns
until a foster home can be arranged.
The recommended budget includes an increase of $7.7
million, or 7%, in salary and benefits costs due to
increases in retirement and health benefit costs as well as
increased hiring. The department has budgeted to fill
positions previously held vacant and is also adding a total
of 61 net new positions in FY 2012-13. The department
plans to bolster front-line staff to better address the
public’s needs and reduce caseloads for improved
customer service and more effective case monitoring.
Services and supplies have increased $1.3 million, or 3%
over the prior year. Fixed asset purchases of $281,000 are
primarily for information technology, network, and phone
equipment, software, and replacement of video
conferencing hardware.
The FY 2012-13 recommended budget includes
discretionary County funding of $7.6 million for child
welfare programs, the same level of funding as the prior
year. These funds had previously been described as
“overmatch” in excess of State allocations that were
inadequate to provide services at the recommended level.
State funding for these services is now provided through
2011 realignment, rather than the former allocation
method.
The recommended budget also includes $560,000 for
expansion of Phase 1 Differential Response services to
metropolitan Bakersfield. These services, provided
through the Kern County Network for Children, seek to
intervene and provide preventative services when
incidents reported to Child Protective Services do not
fully meet legal standards requiring in-person response.
For FY 2012-13, the recommended General Fund
contribution for this budget unit is $3.4 million. New
accounting methods implemented late in FY 2009-10 now
allow the department to accrue for revenue expected up to
nine months beyond the fiscal year close, rather than the
standard 90 days. Because of the lag between the time
expenses are incurred and when revenues are received,
this increased accrual period allows the department to
account for revenues that previously went unrecognized
until the following fiscal year. For the past two years, this change has provided a larger-than-expected fund balance
to carry forward, reducing the amount of contribution
required from the General Fund. It is hoped that this
change in accounting methodology will eventually
stabilize fluctuations in year-end fund balance and better
assist the department in reconciling State accounting
methods with County budgeting requirements. A General
Fund designation of $15.5 million is also being
recommended to help offset any potential increases in
contributions to the Human Services budget units in
future years.
Although there are a number of changes in the works at
the State level, the recently passed State budget is not
anticipated to require the department to make any
significant changes beyond what was previously
expected.

The recommended budget includes the addition of 63
positions for a total cost of $4.3 million: one (1) Special
Projects Manager position, for a cost of $128,000, two (2)
Administrative Coordinator positions, for a cost of
$83,000 each, three (3) Accountant I/II/III positions, for a
cost of $98,000 each, three (3) Office Services Technician
positions, for a cost of $60,000 each, two (2) Human
Services Program Specialist positions, for a cost of
$115,000 each, three (3) Assistant Program Director
positions, for a cost of $115,000 each, six (6) Human
Services Supervisor positions, for a cost of $76,000 each,
and forty-three (43) Human Services Technician I/II/III
positions, for a cost of $58,000 each. The recommended
budget also includes the deletion of two (2) Legal Process
Technician positions, for an annual cost savings of
$61,000 each.
Although this budget includes all authorized positions
with the above mentioned changes, the department has
also requested a budgeted salary savings of $5.7 million,
or 5% of total salaries and benefits expenditures, to offset
expected turnover and delays in hiring. This necessitates
that the department hold authorized positions vacant in
order to meet budgetary guidelines.
This budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from
the General Fund to the two other Human Services budget
units: Administration budget unit 5120 and Direct
Financial Aid budget unit 5220. These funds provide the
County’s share of cost for the department’s operations in
providing financial assistance and social services
programs to eligible recipients in the community.
A portion of the County contribution is made up of Social
Services Program Realignment revenues. This amount
remains relatively unchanged from the prior year at $16.5
million. Included in the $16.5 million is approximately
$1.1 million that is used to administer the Board-approved
Gang Prevention Program.
The overall County contribution to both Human Services
budget units, 5120 and 5220, has increased $2.2 million
over the prior year, in keeping with expected increases in
assistance needs in FY 2012-13. However, the
contribution had also been reduced by $18.3 million in
FY 2011-12 due to implementation of changes in
accounting at the end of FY 2009-10, which allowed the
department to recognize accruals for up to nine months
rather than the standard 90 days. This accounting change
should help stabilize year-end fund balances and provide
a more consistent reflection of expense and revenues in
the coming fiscal years. The recommended budget also
includes excess unused General Fund contribution from
prior years as a $15.5 million designation to help offset
any potential increases in contributions to the Human
Services budget units in future years.
This budget unit provides funds for direct financial
assistance payments to eligible recipients. The largest
component of this budget is the direct aid payments to
eligible needy families under the Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) Program.
Expenditures from this budget unit and the County’s share
of costs are dictated exclusively by State and federal laws
and regulations, which virtually eliminate any local
control over expenditures. Cost estimates are based on
the department’s caseload projections and payment rates
prescribed by State regulations.
This budget unit primarily provides financial assistance
payments to families eligible for CalWORKs, CalFresh,
and other programs. As required by State law, this budget
unit also provides for County funding for general
assistance payments to indigent adults. Families who
adopt children through the County are also eligible for
assistance payments. This budget unit provides for this
funding, as well as for the foster care payments made on
behalf of children placed in a County foster family home,
a foster family agency, or a group home after becoming a
dependent of the court. Funding for implementation of
AB 12, which extends foster care services to transitional
youth to age 21, will also be provided in this budget unit.
The recommended budget reflects an overall decrease of
$16 million in budgeted expenditures over the prior year,
but an increase of $7.5 million over the actual distribution
of aid in FY 2011-12. The department continues to see an
increase in those seeking aid. The recommended budget
includes only those expenditures and General Fund
contribution as required by State statute. There is no overmatch
in the Direct Financial Aid budget as these are
entitlement programs and must be provided to all eligible
applicants.
New accounting methods implemented late in FY 2009-
10 now allow the department to accrue for revenue
expected up to nine months beyond the fiscal year close,
rather than the standard 90 days. It is hoped that this
change in accounting methodology will stabilize
fluctuations in year-end fund balance and better assist the
department in reconciling State accounting methods with
County budgeting requirements.
The recommended allocation of County contribution is
increased by $8.7 million over the previous year, but is
still $6 million lower than FY 2010-11. To help protect
against large increases in County contribution, the
recommended budget also includes excess unused
General Fund contribution from prior years as a $15.5
million designation to help offset potential increased
contributions to the Human Services budget units in
future years.
The recommended budget includes funding for the
department to improve its levels of service over prior
fiscal years. In order to ensure that all veterans have the
resources available to achieve long-term self-sufficiency
and independence, the department coordinates housing,
nutrition, health, job training, and job recruiting services
for veterans, and assists their families in applying for any
federal or State entitlement they may be qualified to
receive.
The recommended budget provides additional staffing
resources to mitigate any significant reduction in
workload units, which would cause a reduction in State
revenues related to the number of applications received.
The increase in appropriations will allow the department
to significantly improve wait times at the Bakersfield
location, as well as provide improved and dedicated
service to outlying communities throughout the County.
The department experienced an increase in clients due to
the recently opened Bakersfield Veteran Center located
next door to the department’s facility, and expects this
increase to continue as the new Veteran Center conducts
outreach services and generates referrals to the
department.

The recommended budget includes the addition of two
Veterans Service Representative positions and one Office
Services Assistant position, an annual increase of
$227,000. The department continues to hold vacant one
Supervising Veterans Services Representative position,
absorbing those responsibilities within the Interim
Director’s position.
The Aging and Adult Services Department administers
federal, State, and local funds to provide services to
elderly and disabled adults. Programs and services
coordinated by the department include the In-Home
Supportive Services (IHSS) program, abuse prevention,
nutrition, homemaker, conservator, disease prevention
and health promotion, insurance counseling, financial and
aid assistance.
The Adult Protection Services (APS) program responds to
reports of elder abuse. The department will remain within
the State mandated requirement to investigate reports of
self neglect and/or abuse, physical and financial, against
elder or dependent adults. The recommended budget
continues to hold vacant three APS positions. The
department will strive to maintain service levels at the
current level of staffing.
In accordance with State law, the County established the
In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority as the
employer of record for the IHSS service providers on
January 1, 2003. Under contract, department employees
administer the IHSS Public Authority. The recommended
budget includes reimbursements from the Public
Authority budget unit 9147 for providing payroll services
to IHSS providers.
The department faces fiscal uncertainty regarding State
funding for the IHSS program and the anti-IHSS fraud
program. The State budget extends the current 3.6%
reduction in provider hours through June 30, 2013.
Additionally, a 20% “trigger cut” from FY 2011-12 is
included in the State budget for this fiscal year, but a
pending lawsuit currently has a permanent restraining
order preventing the 20% reduction from being
implemented. If it is implemented, the additional 20% cut
would be a significant reduction in hours, which will
impact seniors and disabled individuals on IHSS. The
department is prepared to comply with all the processes
and procedures necessary to implement the across-theboard
reduction if implemented by the State.
The IHSS anti-fraud program is an essential component in
the department's effort to maintain program integrity in
the IHSS program. Although the State funding portion
of the program has been eliminated, the department has
absorbed the cost of the program through FY 2012-13,
and continues to receive federal matching funds for the
program. Eliminating the anti-fraud program would
impact the department's ability to investigate fraud cases
in IHSS. Additionally, the elimination of the program
could potentially result in the layoff of one District
Attorney investigative staff.
The increase in expenditures is primarily due to the filling
of numerous positions that remained vacant through most
of the previous fiscal year. However, since a significant
portion of costs are reimbursed by State and federal funds,
revenues are projected to increase as well, causing the
overall General Fund contribution to decrease by $80,000.
The Aging and Adult Services fund now includes budget
unit 5609. This budget unit will account for the
Appropriations for Contingencies line item.

The department is eliminating one Mental Health
Therapist Trainee position and one Junior Public Health
Nurse position. These deletions will have no impact to
current service levels as both positions have been vacant
and unfunded in previous fiscal years. The department is
also deleting a vacant Fiscal Support Assistant position
and replacing it with a lower cost Office Services
Technician position. The recommended budget holds
four positions vacant and unfunded.
This budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from
the General Fund to the Aging and Adult Services Fund to
provide for Aging and Adult Services Department
operations, namely providing abuse prevention, insurance
counseling, nutrition and other services to elderly and
disabled adults.
The recommended contribution includes an allocation of
$1.1 million in funding as required by State and federal
regulatory requirements for County match for specific
programs.
In addition, the County contribution is made up of Social
Services Program Realignment revenues. The
recommended allocation of Program Realignment funds is
$654,062.
State law mandates that the County provide services to
qualified aged and blind persons with disabilities so that
they can remain in their homes and avoid
institutionalization. These services are offered through
the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) program. The
IHSS program is funded with federal, State, and County
contributions and is administered by the Aging and Adult
Services Department.
The recommended budget contains approximately $7.74
million for IHSS service providers’ salaries and the
County’s share of administrative costs of the IHSS Public
Authority, which is administered by the Aging and Adult
Services Department. The County’s local match
requirement is partially offset through the allocation of
$7.44 million in Social Services Program Realignment
funds.
The Employers’ Training Resource (ETR) Department
coordinates and implements the County’s workforce
development system, and provides employment and
training services. ETR’s services are funded primarily
through the federal Workforce Investment Act (WIA).
ETR also receives some of its funding from the State
Employment Development Department, other counties or
collaboratives, the federal Department of Labor, and the
County Department of Human Services (DHS). In
addition, ETR administers the federal WIA funding for
Inyo and Mono counties, although each of these counties
operates its own employment and training programs and
services.
Reductions in available grant funding have resulted in a
$2.8 million decrease in appropriations for ETR. Office
expenses and extra help staffing levels will be
significantly reduced to meet the lower funding level.
ETR has reduced the amount of space it occupies in the
Southeast Community Services Center in order to reduce
costs. The anticipated service impact to the public will be
a reduction in the number of client orientations and longer
wait times for appointments for intake and eligibility
determination. Community outreach activities and events
will also be limited.
ETR provides services directly to customers and also
contracts for training and services to provide a variety of
occupational training, computer literacy skills, and
supportive services. The recommended budget will allow
the department to continue its functions and fulfill its
mission.

The recommended budget includes the deletion of one
Supervising Department Analyst position, two Program
Support Supervisor positions, one Accountant I/II/III
position, one Computer Lab Instructor position, one
Publications Specialist position, one Office Service
Specialist position, and One Office Service Technician
position, for a net savings of $628,000.
The Community Development Program is a division of
the Planning and Community Development Department.
The recommended budget provides funding to support
the primary functions of the division, including
improvement of public facilities and provision of decent
and affordable housing. The Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG) entitlement is awarded by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
Federal funds received from HUD primarily reimburse
the cost of the division’s operating budget.
Funding for the division is expected to be similar to FY
2011-12 funding levels. The projected funding level is
sufficient for the division to continue key programs, such
as assessing community development needs, providing
technical assistance to County departments, cities,
special districts, nonprofit organizations, and other
funding agencies in preparing project proposals and
applications for funding. The division will also continue
targeting new infrastructure investments based on
industry cluster needs. These activities are vital in
attracting and supporting commercial and industrial
businesses.
There is no General Fund contribution to this budget unit.

The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions.
The Library Department operates 25 branch libraries and
two bookmobiles to provide book lending, interlibrary
loan, reference, audiovisual, computer, and other literacy
and informational services to all County residents. The
recommended budget will allow the Library to maintain
current levels of service and continue to meet its mission
with no change in hours of opening.
Additional funding of $100,000 is being recommended
for materials acquisition, providing a total “book budget”
of $233,000, an increase of 70% over the prior year
budget.
The FY 2012-13 recommended budget also includes
$100,000 for the Library to implement self-checkout
systems at a number of branches both in metropolitan
Bakersfield and in outlying areas. Branches planned to
receive self-check systems during the beginning phases
of implementation currently include the Wilson,
Southwest, and Northeast branches in Bakersfield, the
Ridgecrest, Tehachapi, Delano, Rosamond, Kern River
Valley, and California City branches, and the Rathbun
branch in Oildale. Prioritization for implementation
includes consideration of circulation, patron use, and
opportunity to increase operational efficiency and services
to the public. Self-check at the new Frazier Park branch
library has been highly successful and has allowed library
staff to focus on providing other more specialized services
to patrons.
Overall, the recommended budget holds salaries and
benefits at a similar level to the prior year, with a
reduction of only $130,000, or 2%, although the
department is also absorbing additional costs from
retirement and health benefit rate increases. Services and
supplies are recommended at a 15% increase, or $205,000
over the FY 2011-12 budget, primarily due to the addition
of the aforementioned book budget and self-check
funding. However, the department will still suspend the
scheduled replacement of computer equipment, deferring
this $75,000 cost until the following year.
The department expects sharp reductions in revenues for
FY 2012-13. Aid for local libraries in the form of Public
Library Fund distributions were eliminated as part of
State budget cuts in FY 2011-12. This funding source is
again unavailable to the Library in FY 2012-13, for an
estimated loss of $66,000 in revenues. Additionally, as
part of a U.S. Department of Agriculture grant for
improving access to services for rural areas, the Library
had received one-time federal funding of $430,000 over
the past two fiscal years for the purchase of two new
bookmobiles, which has now been completed. In
recognition of pending reductions in State and federal
funds, late fines and other fee increases were approved in
June 2011 and are expected to provide some assistance in
offsetting these other lost revenues.
The recommended budget additionally includes $39,000
of donated funding from the Kern County Library
Foundation as transfers from the Kern County Library
Donations fund to allow continuation of on-going projects
from the prior year. These donations will allow the
Library to purchase self-check equipment for the Beale
Memorial Library ($21,000) and to continue the Library’s
popular, newly implemented e-books service for a second
year ($18,000).
The department has available $78,000 in Budget Savings
Incentive (BSI) credits, but does not currently plan to use
these funds in FY 2012-13.

The recommended budget includes the deletion of two (2)
Librarian I positions, one (1) Librarian II position, and
one (1) part-time Office Services Assistant position for a
total savings of approximately $265,000. The department
will also hold two positions vacant and unfunded due to
budgetary constraints: one (1) Library Associate and one
(1) Fiscal Support Technician for an additional annual
savings of $122,000.
The Farm and Home Advisor is a Cooperative Extension
of the University of California and the U.S. Department
of Agriculture. The Farm and Home Advisor budget unit
was established to account for the County’s costs
associated with the Cooperative Extension program. The
County provides funds for support and maintenance,
including four County employees, under a Memorandum
of Understanding with the University of California. The Farm and Home Advisor develops and distributes
information on the County’s production and consumption
of agricultural products and relays the County’s
agricultural needs to the University for research on
product quality and yield improvements. The Farm and
Home Advisor also operates the 4-H youth program,
Adult and Youth Expanded Family Nutrition Education
program, and the Master Gardener horticultural program.
Although the recommended budget does not reduce
funding from the prior year’s level, staffing will remain at
reduced levels.
The Farm and Home Advisor will be able to continue the
educational efforts of the traditional 4-H program, the
Master Gardener program, and train-the-trainer lessons
for pesticide safety in English and Spanish. The
recommended budget will also allow the County to retain
the educational and economic benefit of hosting the
Cooperative Extension researchers from the University of
California.
The Parks and Recreation Department is responsible for
the maintenance and operation of seven regional parks, 38
neighborhood parks, three streetscapes, and landscape
areas around 86 County-owned and/or occupied
buildings.
Security and public safety services are provided by boat
patrols on the lakes, and by roving patrols in some
regional park facilities. The department is responsible for
the operations of a number of the County’s veterans,
seniors, community and recreation buildings, although a
number of the buildings have been leased to other
operators to help with managing the costs of maintaining
those buildings. Additionally, the department provides
administrative support for the Golf Course Enterprise
Fund budget unit 8991, Wildlife Resources Commission
budget unit 2740, the Parks and Recreation Commission,
and Heritage Commission.
The recommended budget includes several measures to
maintain current operations and allow some increase in
the level of service to the public. The recommended
budget includes an additional $200,000 in appropriations
to cover anticipated increases in the costs of utilities. An
additional $75,000 was allocated for extra help positions
to service seasonal needs, and $125,000 was included for
deferred equipment needs. This additional funding will
help the department more efficiently and effectively serve
the community.
The department will be able to maintain service levels for
Senior, Veterans, Community and Recreation buildings.
Increases to levels of service for maintenance, cleaning,
mowing, edging, and graffiti removal are anticipated as
authorized positions are filled, and the department’s
privatization efforts are fully implemented.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one
Fiscal Support Supervisor position, one Maintenance
Electrician position, one Accountant I/II/III position, and
the deletion of one Accountant I/II/III position and one
Maintenance Worker I/II/III/IV position, for a net
increase of $95,000.
This budget unit is used to make annual debt service
payments for County projects and equipment financed on
a long-term basis, and to pay interest on the County’s
short-term cash flow borrowing. The County
Administrative Office administers this budget unit.
Short-Term Financing
Annually, the County issues tax and revenue anticipation
notes (TRAN) to meet the County’s cash flow needs. The
amount to be issued each year is based on the cash flow
analysis prepared by the County Administrative Office.
The interest cost and cost of issuance associated with this
financing are less than the interest earnings generated on
the additional cash.
In June 2012, the County issued the FY 2012-13 TRAN
for a par amount of $200 million, at an estimated 0.21%
net interest cost. The recommended budget includes
sufficient appropriations to fund the net interest cost of
$507,500.
Long-Term Financing
This budget funds the annual lease payments for the
Certificates of Participation (COPs) and other capital
leases that are paid from the General Fund to finance the
County’s major capital improvement, construction, and
acquisition projects. Four issuances paid from this budget
unit are still outstanding:
 1994 Rosamond Library COP: $1.94 million
was issued at an interest rate of 6.29% to finance
the County’s portion of the construction of the
Rosamond Library. The balance of the
construction cost was funded through a State
library construction grant.
 2011 Refunding Certificates of Participation:
$14.9 million was issued at an interest rate of
4.57% to refund the outstanding balance of the
1997 and 1999 Certificates of Participation that
were issued to finance the acquisition of various
equipment for the Fire Department, a countywide
microwave communications system and
construction of three hospital-related projects.
The portion of the debt service payment
associated with the communications system is
paid from this budget unit, while the balance of
the annual debt service is paid from the Kern
Medical Center Enterprise Fund and the Fire
Fund.
 2007 California Infrastructure and Economic
Development Bank Loan: $7.2 million was issued to finance curb, gutter and drainage
improvements in the Fifth Supervisorial District.
Revenue from the Community Development
budget offsets the loan repayment costs.
 2009 Capital Improvement Projects COP: $95.4
million was issued to finance various
transportation and facility projects, including the
Seventh Standard Road project, a new
Information Technology Services facility, a new
Fire Station 65 facility and a new Pine Mountain
fire station.
The County has two additional COP issuances related to
enterprise funds. The annual debt service related to these
issuances is budgeted within the respective operating fund
budget units.
The debt service related to the County Pension Obligation
Bonds is not paid out of this budget unit. The annual debt
service for the capital leases and the qualified energy
conservation bonds is budgeted within the departmental
budget unit owning the equipment and the utilities budget
unit, respectively.
The recommended budget includes an increase of
$300,000 in services and supplies for the estimated
issuance costs associated to refunding the 2008 Pension
Obligation Bonds to convert the current variable rate to a
fixed rate. In addition, this budget unit pays for the debt
service costs for vacant space in the Southeast Bakersfield
Community Services Center that are increasing with the
relocation of Employers’ Training Resource staff to
another facility.
The recommended contingencies amount of $9.3 million
represents a $3 million decrease from the level budgeted
in FY 2011-12. The following are included in
contingencies:
 $500,000 for potential costs for uninsured
litigation that may be incurred by Risk
Management.
 $300,000 for potential Planning Department
reclamation costs associated with the Syndex
mine.
 $500,000 for potential increase in indigent
defense claims paid from budget unit 2170.
 $250,000 for potential Code Compliance costs
associated with abatement clean-up.
 $500,000 for a capital project for the Kern
County Museum Foundation.
 $25,000 for potential costs for Grand Jury
indictments.
 $7.2 million for general purpose contingencies
that may arise during the fiscal year.
The summary shown above indicates no prior year
expenditures since funds from Appropriations for
Contingencies are transferred to other budget units as
required, and are shown as expenditures in the recipient
department's budget unit.
The recommended funding level for contingencies is
considered to be adequate to address possible emergency
needs that may arise during the fiscal year for all of Kern
County government.
Special Revenue Funds are transferred to a variety of
County departments to fund specific activities. Funds are
transferred into departments as an operating transfer in and
are detailed in the Summaries of Revenues and
Expenditures for each department as other financing
sources. There are a small number of Special Revenue
Funds that will expend directly out of the fund. However,
the majority of appropriations recommended below will be
transferred into operating budgets in other County funds.
The other capital projects encompass Countywide capital
projects not accounted for in other budget units. Capital
projects are financed through a variety of funding sources
including Certificates of Participation, State and federal
grants, private contributions, and traffic mitigation fees
and are budgeted in the year authorized. Budgeted and
actual expenditures and revenues in the above table are
listed cumulative for the projects.
 The Accumulated Capital Outlay - General was
established to account for infrastructure
replacement within the General Fund. FY 2012-
13 appropriations do not include any projects.
Approximately $10,836,000 has been designated
for infrastructure replacement in future years.
 The Accumulated Capital Outlay - Fire was
established to account for infrastructure replacement within the Fire Fund. FY 2012-13
appropriations do not include any projects.
Approximately $274,000 has been designated for
infrastructure replacement in future years.
 The Seventh Standard Road Project was
established at an estimated cost of $28,995,834
and is funded with federal and State grants.
Project closeout is underway.
 Wheeler Ridge Overpass Project was established
at an estimated cost of $9,700,000 and is funded
with federal and traffic mitigation fees. Project
closeout is underway.
 The County Assessment District 2006-01 was
formed to provide for the construction of the
Rexland Acres Sewer Improvement Project at an
estimated cost of $9,219,142. The project has
been completed and the capital project fund will
be closed during the fiscal year.
On March 24, 2009, the Board authorized the issuance of
Certificates of Participation (COPs) in the amount of
$95,410,000 for the following projects:
 Fire Station 65 Replacement, Pine Mountain Fire
Station Replacement and Information
Technology and Emergency Medical Services
Facility Replacement. The anticipated cost for
the Information Technology and Emergency
Medical Services Facility Replacement was
originally estimated at $11,686,480; the cost has
increased and an additional appropriation of $1.6
million is needed to complete the project.
Funding for the increase is available from the
Tobacco Securitization Proceeds funds not used
for completed projects and interest earnings.
 An allocation of $17 million was set aside to
fund the Seventh Standard Widening Project
with the remaining cost of approximately $26
million funded with State and federal grants. The
Hageman Road Separation of Grade Project
included an allocation of $17 million from the
COPs with the remaining $22 million being
funded with State and private grants and traffic
mitigation fees.
 The remaining COP funds were allocated to 23
additional local transportation projects accounted
for in budget unit 3010.
The Tobacco Securitization Proceeds Fund was
established to account for capital projects funded with the
proceeds of the Tobacco Revenue securitization. Projects
in various stages of completion include the Countywide
Radio Communication System, the Lamont Drainfields
Improvement, the Meadows Field Terminal and Runaway
Extension, the Rosamond Fire Station/Sheriff Substation,
roads repairs and the Frazier Park Library grant match.
Interest earnings from this fund are accounted for in
budget unit 1947. Available unexpended funds and
interest earnings are being transferred to fund the
Information Technology and Emergency Medical
Services Facility Replacement increased cost.
The Kern Medical Center-KHS Reserves accounts for the
Kern Medical Center share of the distribution of excess
reserves the Kern Health Systems’ Board of Directors
approved May 10, 2012 to the three Safety Net providers.
This budget unit facilitates the segregation of funds until a
plan is approved that targets the improvement of access to
primary care and other needed medical services for KHS
members, the availability of medical facilities to absorb
anticipated increased demand for services from expansion
of KHS enrollment and quality of care provided to KHS
members through enhanced care delivery infrastructure.
The recommended budget includes $13 million in revenue
anticipated from Kern Health System as well as interest
revenue. All funds are being placed in a designation until
a plan is approved.
The General Services Garage administers and maintains
vehicles assigned to County departments. Services
provided include vehicle maintenance including
lubrication, steam cleaning, and vehicle washing. Vehicle
repairs include body and engine repair and overhaul,
special body fabrication, and brake service. Funding
requirements for purchasing replacement and additional
vehicles are included in this budget unit.
To provide flexibility in addressing departments’ needs,
the Garage offers vehicle maintenance services under
three different plans. In Plan 1, the Garage owns the
vehicle and provides full-service maintenance and
replacement. In Plan 2, full-service maintenance is
provided, but County departments own and replace the
vehicle. In Plan 3, maintenance is provided to
department-owned vehicles on a time-and-materials basis.
Also, due to the on-going fiscal constraints facing
departments, the Garage has implemented a “Modified Plan 1” option to better assist departments that have
experienced budget reductions. This option allows
departments to defer purchase of replacement vehicles
required under the traditional Plan 1 option and extend
service for existing vehicles at a reduced cost.
The Garage maintains a rolling seven-year vehicle
replacement plan that forecasts future vehicle replacement
costs. A portion of Plan 1 revenue is set aside for vehicle
replacement costs and held in retained earnings (vehicle
replacement designation) within the Garage Internal
Service Fund to address long-term needs. For FY 2012-
13, the Garage will use $765,000 in accumulated internal
service fund retained earnings to purchase 79 replacement
vehicles with a total cost of $1,749,850. Sufficient
reserves are available in the fund to cover these expenses.
Additionally, departments have identified the need for
four new vehicles, which will be purchased for a total cost
of $98,000.

The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions. All positions are funded and there are no
planned vacancies for this budget unit.
The Group Health Self-Insurance Program is used to fund
the County’s medical, dental, and vision benefit plan
programs. This budget unit is used to pay self-funded
medical and dental claims, dental plan premiums, County
administration costs, third-party administration costs, and
Employee Assistance Program administration costs. The
County Administrative Office administers this budget
unit.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding of
the current health benefits plans and the same level of
administration of the County’s self-insured health plans.
Revenues consist of charges to County departments and
participating special districts, employee contributions, and
premium charges to COBRA participants and retirees.
Anticipated claims expenditures are projected based upon
current medical inflation rates and expert opinion
regarding plan utilization. In FY 2012-13, claims and
administrative expenditures are expected to increase from
FY 2011-12 estimated actual expenditures, mainly due to
medical cost trends.
The impact of federal Health Care Reform is not fully
known at this time. Because of expanded eligibility rules
that were effective January 1, 2011, it is anticipated that
costs will again be higher in FY 2012-13 as a result of
higher dependent enrollment for the entire fiscal year due
to additional dependents being enrolled January 1, 2012.
Reserves are maintained primarily for the Incurred But
Not Reported (IBNR) liability. The budgeted reserve is
being decreased in FY 2012-13, with projections of
ending unrestricted retained earnings balance at June 30,
2013 estimated at $20 million. This estimated ending
balance is considered adequate for the IBNR liability.
The Retiree Group Health Program budget unit is used to
pay the County’s contributions to the Retiree Health
Insurance Stipend and Retiree Health Premium
Supplement Programs, and for administration costs. The
Stipend Program provides a monthly stipend to all County
retirees, which helps to offset the premium cost of
medical benefits purchased by retirees through a County
administered retiree health plan. The Retiree Health
Premium Supplement Program (RHPSP) originated as a
negotiated item for all employee unions. It was designed
to further assist retirees under the age of 65 in paying for
their medical benefits purchased through a County
administered retiree health plan. The County
Administrative Office administers this budget unit.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding of
the Retiree Health Insurance Stipend Program at existing
levels for current participants. The Stipend Program is
funded by County contributions in the form of department
charges, as a fixed amount based on actual participation.
The recommended budget also provides for funding of the
RHPSP as provided by the memoranda of understanding
with employee unions. The RHPSP is funded by
employee contributions and County contributions in the
form of charges to departments, both of which are
determined by negotiations with employee unions.
The recommended budget also provides for
administration of retiree health insurance programs at
existing levels. This component is funded entirely by
retiree contributions.
The retained earnings balance at June 30, 2012, was
approximately $46 million. This balance is comprised
mostly of reserves for the RHPSP and Stipend Program,
which are required to fund future benefits under these
programs as determined by actuarial study. The
recommended budget increases retained earnings by
approximately $1.9 million, primarily related to funding
of the RHPSP.
The General Liability Self-Insurance Program is
administered by the Risk Management Division of the
Office of County Counsel. This budget is used to meet
the County’s legal liability for damages to individuals
and/or property arising out of the County’s general and
automotive activities.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding for
the County’s general liability program. This budget unit
is financed primarily through charges to County
departments. Charges to departments have been reduced
by $361,000 for FY 2012-13 based on reserves available
to finance the program.
Services and supplies appropriations are budgeted at $3.1
million, a $387,000, or 10%, increase over the prior year,
primarily due to expected increases in legal expenses.
Settlement and attorney fee payments are expected to
increase in FY 2012-13 and are budgeted at $4.1 million,
a $950,000, or 30%, increase over the prior year.
In FY 2011-12, both the other charges expenditures and
miscellaneous revenues in this budget reflect an
additional “pass-through” expense of $3,622,150 to pay
toward a legal settlement. The funds were provided as
proceeds under the County’s excess insurance policies,
since total payment of the $5.7 million settlement
exceeded the County’s insurance deductible. This
settlement payment is a one-time cost that will not recur
in FY 2012-13.
Retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2012 was $7.4
million. The department anticipates decreasing retained
earnings by $5.9 million due to actual expenses exceeding
revenues. A retained earnings balance of $1.5 million is
estimated for the FY 2012-13 year-end.
This budget unit is used to pay the cost of administering
and operating the County’s unemployment benefit
program for eligible former employees. The County
funds unemployment claims under the cost
reimbursement option, reimbursing the State Employment
Development Department quarterly for actual claims paid.
The County Administrative Office coordinates this
program and oversees the contract for cost review and
program oversight.
Future unemployment costs are not easily estimated.
Because unemployment costs are based upon wages
earned in a base period that is up to 18 months prior to the
date of the claim, claim costs against the County can lag
by up to 18 months. The availability of other
employment in the community has an effect on the
County’s claims. The maximum unemployment claim is
$11,700, based on the claimant drawing the maximum
weekly benefit of $450 for the first 26 weeks of
unemployment.
The cost impact of layoffs is not predictable because it is
affected by the amount of time it takes the claimant to
become re-employed. This can dramatically impact
unemployment claim costs for the County.
Revenues in this budget unit are primarily comprised of
charges to County departments based on each individual
department’s actual unemployment experience and
claims. The recommended budget is an estimate of the
cost of payment of the County’s unemployment claims
and administration.
The recommended budget anticipates a fund balance of
approximately $1.1 million, which is considered
sufficient.
The Workers’ Compensation Self-Insurance Program is
administered by the Risk Management Division of the
Office of County Counsel. The program meets the
County’s statutory obligation to compensate its
employees for work-related injuries.
The recommended budget will provide a level of funding
sufficient to cover projected workers’ compensation
claims and administrative costs. The County self-insures
and self-administers the Workers’ Compensation
program, financing the program through direct charges to
County departments. Each department’s operating
budget reflects the cost of the program based on the
department’s claims experience.
Charges to departments have increased $840,000, or 4%,
to $19.7 million due to increased expenditures budgeted
for FY 2012-13. Increased expenses include higher
overhead costs for personnel and services and supplies in
the Risk Management budget unit as well as Workers’
Compensation claims costs budgeted at $17 million for
FY 2012-13, an increase of $1.5 million, or 10%, over
the prior year. Due to the availability of reserves to fund
the program, expenditures are budgeted to exceed
revenues for FY 2012-13.
Retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2012 was $7.1
million. The department anticipates decreasing retained
earnings by $3.2 million to offset increased expenses. A
retained earnings balance of $3.8 million is estimated for
the FY 2012-13 year-end.
The Golf Course Enterprise Fund is used for operating the
three County-owned golf courses. Private contractors
operate the golf courses under land lease agreements.
The Golf Course Enterprise Fund is used to facilitate the
operation of the three County-owned courses, North Kern
Golf Course, Kern River Golf Course, and Buena Vista
Golf Course. All revenues generated from the land lease
agreements are deposited into the Golf Course Enterprise
Fund where they are used for completion of necessary
capital and infrastructure maintenance projects at the golf
courses. The Parks Department provides administrative
support and charges actual costs to this budget unit.
While revenues have remained on par with the prior year,
expenses have increased due to project costs. The budget
includes re-roofing of a building at the Kern River Golf
Course.
Also included is this budget unit are appropriations
toward repaying a long term loan made from the ACO
General Fund. The Golf Course Enterprise Fund received
a loan in the amount of $1,438,807 in 2008, and has two
years remaining on this seven-year loan. The purpose of
the loan was to redeem outstanding Certificates of
Participation so that the golf course management
agreements could be converted to land lease agreements
as recommended by the National Golf Foundation.
Appropriations of $214,383 are included toward the loan
reduction, with a remaining balance of $664,460. As of
June 30, 2013, the retained earnings balance will be
approximately $2 million.
The Universal Collection Enterprise Fund is used to
account for the revenues and expenses connected with
refuse collection in the Universal Collection Areas.
These areas cover the more densely populated,
unincorporated portion of metropolitan Bakersfield and
other portions of the County. All improved properties
within the Universal Collection Areas are required to
obtain services from a franchise garbage hauler. The
Waste Management Department administers this budget
unit.
The Board of Supervisors approved universal refuse
collection within the unincorporated metropolitan
Bakersfield area effective January 1, 2001. In subsequent
years, the program has been expanded to include other
areas of the County, such as unincorporated Taft, Lost
Hills, eastern Kern County, south Shafter, Buttonwillow.
Keene, and Randsburg in order to improve waste
collection and disposal methods. Funding for the
program is provided solely by a charge on the annual tax
bill for the affected properties.
Universal collection is maintained cooperatively with
other solid waste collection programs in order to comply
with mandated waste diversion goals.
The Waste Management Department provides ongoing
support, and administers contracts for waste pick-up and
disposal services to businesses and residents in the area.
The department is responsible for monitoring the waste
haulers for compliance with contractual service and
quality requirements, and adherence with all applicable
health, safety, and labor laws. The purpose of the
Universal Collection Enterprise Fund is to collect the
franchise hauler’s garbage hauling fee on the County’s
annual property tax bill and to pay the franchise haulers
their monthly garbage hauling fee for service provided in
the Universal Collection Areas.
During the initial startup phase of this fund, a cash
advance in the amount of $2,500,000 was needed from
the Solid Waste Enterprise Fund in order to pay the
franchise haulers for their service before the revenue was
collected on the annual property tax bill. The department
is planning to repay the Solid Waste Enterprise Fund this
fiscal year.
Projected revenues for FY 2012-13 are $9,700,010, a
decrease of $923,490, or 8.69% lower than the FY 2011-
12 adopted budget. The decrease is due to a
reimbursement to property owners for standardization of
the start of Universal Collection Services. When
Universal Collection Services were initially implemented,
some property owners did not begin receiving service
until January, however, they were charged for a full year
on the property tax roll. The reimbursement is for the six
months of service that these property owners did not
receive. Expenditures are projected to increase slightly by
3.02% due to franchise hauler rate increases.
On June 30 2013, it is estimated that the retained earnings
balance for this budget unit will be $2.5 million.
The Airports Department is responsible for the
management of seven airports and airfields within Kern
County: Meadows Field, Elk Hills, Kern River Valley,
Lost Hills, Poso/Famoso, Taft, and Wasco.
The department will continue its development, analysis,
and management of its Capital Improvement Program;
maintenance and development of the structures and
improvements in the seven airports in the system;
promotion of aviation and non-aviation services;
communication with federal and State aviation agencies
and compliance with their programs; provide for the
safety and security of passengers and tenants; and review
of all proposed development for impact on any of the
airports with regard to compatibility with federal, State,
and local noise and obstruction standards.
The recommended budget includes a modest increase in
salaries and benefits due to increased retirement and
health benefit costs and the filling of additional positions.
This budget also includes a slight increase in services and
supplies due to critical needs for repairs and replacement
of necessary equipment.
One component of this fund is an outstanding cash
advance from the ACO-General Fund in the amount of
$6,475,000. The advance was authorized to cover
construction costs of the international terminal. The
advance was to be repaid through Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) grant revenues. In accordance
with Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB)
Statement 54, the advance has been converted to a longterm
loan to be amortized over ten years. There is
currently a balance of $4.8 million remaining.
The Airport will receive a total of $74,000 in revenue
from the Airport Economic Opportunity Area (AEOA)
property tax increment in FY 2012-13. The AEOA was
established in 2009 to allow the department to realize a
portion of property tax increases from land values in and
around Meadows Field Airport. This new revenue is
applied directly toward the department’s public capital
facilities associated with the AEOA.
In FY 2012-13 the Airports Enterprise Fund is absorbing
the cost of the County’s Customs and Border Patrol
Officer. This allows the County to maintain Foreign
Trade Zone (FTZ) status. The FTZ is crucial to the
County’s economic development efforts as it provides an
additional means to attract large import/export-oriented
businesses to Kern County, such as IKEA, which then
provides additional tax revenue to the County through the
payroll, sales, and property taxes collected from these
businesses. The department also receives additional
income for administering the FTZ, to help offset costs
directly related to marketing and maintaining the FTZ.
Revenues are expected to be relatively flat compared to
the previous year, with some slight improvements seen
from additional enplanements as the result of added
flights. Revenue generation has remained a challenge for
the department because discretionary travel spending has
yet to fully recover from the economic downturn.

The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1)
Maintenance Electrician position, for an added cost of
$86,000.
The recommended budget also holds two positions vacant
and unfunded: one (1) Airport Operations and Security
Supervisor position at an annual cost savings of $88,000,
and one (1) Maintenance Worker I position at an annual
cost savings of $48,000.
Kern Medical Center (KMC) provides comprehensive
inpatient, outpatient, and ancillary services. It is the
largest provider of health care services and the only
hospital with physician residency programs in the County.
There are seven residency programs: Pharmacy,
Emergency Medicine, Family Practice, Internal Medicine,
Surgery, Obstetrics/Gynecology, and Psychiatry. All
residency programs are fully accredited by the
Accreditation Council on Graduate Medical Education.
KMC is designated by Kern County Emergency Medical
Services and the American College of Surgeons as the
County’s only trauma center.
KMC will face FY 2012-13 with significant fiscal
challenges. KMC will continue to seek program
improvements to align the community medical needs
while staying within its budget. Since Medi-Cal, indigent
and uninsured patients comprise nearly 77% of its
patients; the major challenge facing KMC is to continue
to be able to provide quality services to patient
populations within the limited resources available to the
Enterprise Fund.
State and federal programs designated to reimburse KMC
for the cost of treating low income and indigent patients
have changed over the years. On November 2, 2010, the
State entered into an agreement with the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) that is designed
to sustain and strengthen the Medi-Cal program. The
Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver is an agreement that
“waives” certain Medicaid requirements in order to test
new strategies and demonstration projects that can
improve care and care delivery. The waiver provides for
continuing funding of the Disproportionate Share Hospital
(DSH) and Safety Net Care Pool funding; however, it also
shifted DSH allocations to fund two new programs under
the waiver, the Low Income Health Program (LIHP) and
the Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool (DSRIP).
KMC’s net increase in waiver funding from FY 2011-12
is approximately $7.3 million; with an anticipated
increase of $5.6 million in the DSH and Safety Net Care
Pool, $1.5 million in the DSRIP program, $2.5 million in
the LIPH program; offset by a reduction in the Outpatient
DSH funding.
The LIHP program consists of two programs; Medicaid
Coverage Expansion (MCE) and Health Care Coverage
Initiative (HCCI). The objective of the program is to
transition patients seeking episodic care in the Emergency
Room to primary care at a significant lower cost. There is
no cap on the federal share of the funding for this
program, but the County is responsible for 50% of the
health care cost. KMC will be exploring changing to a
capitation rate in FY 2012-13. In FY 2011-12, KMC had
approximately 6,350 enrollees in the program. The
majority of the enrollees presented themselves to the
KMC Emergency Room. KMC has partnered with
community groups in order to enroll other community
members that lack coverage. The FY 2012-13,
recommended budget includes $18.5 million of
anticipated revenue for this program. The 1115 Waiver
provides funding for this program through December, 31,
2013 until the implementation of federal Health Care
Reform in 2014 is accomplished. It is anticipated that
KMC will be responsible for transitioning LIHP enrollees
to Medi-Cal or the exchange established under Health
Care Reform.
Under the DSRIP program, KMC is required to complete
a tremendous amount of work to show results in four
areas under the DSRIP funding: Infrastructure
development, innovation and redesign, populationfocused
improvement, and urgent improvement in care.
KMC’s five-year State approved plan includes 149
milestones showing how results will be achieved. The
recommended budget anticipates receipt of $26 million
for DSRIP. Costs associated with the program are
budgeted at $1.5 million and includes funding for 15 full
time positions, and infrastructure needed to accomplish
the projects, which include expansion of primary and
specialty care, infection prevention and treatment,
physical and behavioral integration and a new category
that includes transitioning Ryan White population to the
LIHP.
The recommended budget includes an estimated $40
million in Intergovernmental Transfers (IGTs) to the State
to draw down the federal funding portion of the new
programs requiring IGTs. The IGTs are to be used as the
non-federal share of the programs. As with the DSH
transfers, the IGT matching contributions to the State, as
well as the return of that initial investment is reported in
the budget under other charges and miscellaneous
revenue.
The recommended budget includes an allocation of $16.2
million of Health Program Realignment revenue, which
was established to help defray the cost of providing care
to indigents, which is $1.5 million more than budgeted in
FY 2011-12 as a result of available prior year carry
forward. The $350,000 Social Services Program
Realignment revenue that partially funded the Elder Care
Program was eliminated in FY 2012-13 since the program
closed June 30, 2012.
The County provides medical care to inmates incarcerated
by the County and for juvenile detainees. In FY 2011-12,
this funding was provided directly to Kern Medical
Center for providing medical care in seven locations
within the adult and juvenile correctional facilities and for
costs incurred for inpatient and specialty care at the
hospital for this population. In FY 2012-13, the program budget was moved to a separate budget unit. The
reimbursement and costs associated with providing
medical care to inmates and juveniles are being
recognized in the newly established Correctional
Medicine budget unit. KMC will be reimbursed for
inpatient and specialty care provided at the hospital. The
KMC recommended budget includes $6 million as
expenditure reimbursement for those services. The new
Correctional Medicine budget unit discussion is provided
in budget unit 8988.
Net patient revenue has been budgeted at $119.7 million,
which is $4.5 million less than budgeted in FY 2011-12.
Charges have been estimated at $643 million; a decrease
of $7.9 million from the prior year budgeted amount. The
recommended amount reflects the projected census based
on actual census during FY 2011-12. The recommended
budget anticipates a decrease of $4.8 million in
deductions from patient revenue as it is anticipated that
the payer matrix will change to include more insured
patients. The deductions from patient revenue was also
reduced to reflect the anticipated increase in cash
collections as a result of implementation of
recommendations made by the contracted revenue cycle
consultant.
The terms and conditions of employment including
compensation for the KMC employed physicians, and
department chairs and chiefs changed during FY 2010-11
to a productivity-based compensation model. KMC has
the exclusive right to bill and collect professional fees for
those employees. The anticipated professional fees
patient revenue generated by this change is $9 million,
$1.4 million less than budgeted in FY 2011-12. KMC has
experienced delays with the interface of the new
information system with the current system. Professional
fees will be paid to physicians based on a relative value
unit Under this compensation method, KMC must ensure
timely collections of professional fees as the risk of noncollection
has shifted from the physicians to KMC. The
requested budget includes $3.3 million for physician
enterprise staff and infrastructure that includes funding of
16 full time positions in order for KMC to bill and collect
the professional fees. This cost is offset with the
recommended professional fees patient revenue.
The recommended budget includes $2.3 million of
equipment replacement and capital projects that KMC has
prioritized as immediate need in the upcoming fiscal year.
Cash flow remains a challenge. Delays between revenue
receipts and operational expenses require the hospital to
rely on cash advances from the General Fund. The
outstanding balance of the advances fluctuates throughout
the fiscal year. The outstanding General Fund loan to the
hospital enterprise fund as of June 30, 2012 was $58.1
million, an increase of $24.4 million from the prior year.
The payment mechanism for the DSRIP program changed
in FY 2011-12; KMC only received $16.6 million of the
anticipated $24.5 million. In addition, the State did not
finalize claiming protocol for the LIHP program and
payments to counties have been delayed until October
2012, when the FY 2011-12 cost reports are finalized. To
comply with the requirements of Governmental
Accounting Standards Board (GASB) No. 54, the
Auditor-Controller-County Clerk identified $4.1 million
of the outstanding cash advance as long-term receivable.
KMC was able to repay $1.8 million of the previously
loan balance recognized as long-term receivable in the
General Fund. To mitigate the impact to the General
Fund programs, the recommended budget includes an
estimated repayment of $595,980. KMC’s net
income/loss position for FY 2012-13 is projected to
breakeven after this repayment.

The recommended budget includes the addition of four
Patient Access Representative positions at a cost of
$232,000. These positions will take over the payer source
eligibility responsibilities formerly outsourced to a
vendor, and to address collection deficiencies identified as
part of the revenue cycle improvement initiative. A
System Analyst I/II position, a Program Specialist I/II
position and a Supervising Department Analyst position
will be added with the concurrent deletion of two
Computer Operator positions, a Program Specialist I/IIPart-
time position, and a Health Information Services
Supervisor position for a net cost increase of $9,000. This
change is necessary to properly align the responsibilities
to the positions with the correct classifications. The
recommended budget includes the addition of ten Nursing
Attendant positions at a cost of $520,000. KMC incurred
$278,000 in overtime cost in this classification in FY
2011-12. Although the addition of the position will have
a net cost increase of $242,000, KMC is requesting the
addition of the positions to improve patient safety. Three
Hospital Service Aide positions are included in the
recommended budget in order to provide continuous
service and reduce the use of extra help employees. Two
Pharmacist positions are included in the recommended
budget with estimated cost of $378,000. The Joint
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations (JCAHO) requires that all drug orders be
reviewed by a pharmacist prior to administration for
patient safety. The addition of the two pharmacists will
ensure that a pharmacist is onsite 24-hours a day.
 State law mandates that the County provide medical care
for jail inmates and juveniles in County detention
facilities. This budget unit was established to account for
the cost of this mandate.
Since 1984, Kern Medical Center (KMC) has provided
medical care to adult inmates and juveniles at Countyowned
and operated detention facilities, when the Board
of Supervisors approved the reorganization of the
program and transferred the medical staff from the
Sheriff’s Department to KMC. Since that time, KMC has
accounted for the cost within its internal cost accounting
system. Beginning in FY 2012-13, the Correctional
Medicine budget unit, division of KMC, was established
to more accurately account for the cost of the program.
Ninety-two (92) authorized positions were transferred
from KMC budget unit 8997 to this budget unit, but
employees will continue to be employees of KMC.
KMC retains responsibility for managing the program.
In previous fiscal years, the County has met its obligation
to provide medical care to the correctional system
population by providing a fixed contribution to Kern
Medical Center. In FY 2012-13, the recommended net
General Fund cost for these services is $21.3 million.
Appropriations in the amount of $14.8 million will cover
the cost of staff and medical supplies to provide medical
care in seven locations within the adult and juvenile
correctional facilities and funds the 92 full-time positions
transferred to this new budget unit. Funding in the
amount of $6.5 million has been allocated for anticipated
inpatient and specialty care services, provided at the
hospital and for payments to outside vendors for services,
such as ambulance transportation for inmates and
juveniles, and for payments to other hospitals for services
provided to this population. The reimbursement and cost
associated with providing medical care for federal
inmates is included in the Kern Medical Center Enterprise
Fund budget unit 8997.
The recommended budget includes $2 million in
additional net General Fund cost for an anticipated cost
increase as a result of the 2011 Public Safety Realignment
(AB 109). The Governor signed AB 109 in FY 2011-12
as a solution for reducing the number of inmates in the
State’s 33 prisons to 137.5% design capacity as ordered
by the U.S Supreme Court. The State transferred the
responsibility of lower-level offenders to County jails.
Since October 2011, the effective date of AB 109, the
correctional program has had an increase of 15% in
overtime costs and approximately $295,000 in inpatient
care costs for two lower-level inmates sentenced to
County jail. Although fiscal impacts of AB 109 to the
Correctional Medicine Program were debated by the
Community Corrections Partnership Executive
Committee, the Committee did not allocate a portion of
the State funding to meet this burden.
The Roads Department Transit Division develops and
operates public transportation systems. The division
studies and makes recommendations on public
transportation needs and administers contracts with public
and private transit service providers.
The recommended budget provides adequate support to
fund the division’s functions at its current level of service.
The division will continue to plan, coordinate and
administer the public transit system, Kern Regional
Transit, within the County’s unincorporated areas. The
division will also continue to provide a combination of demand-response, fixed-route and inter-city transit
service.
Revenues for FY 2011-12 are projected to be
approximately $4.7 million more than the FY 2011-12.
Approximately $2.7 million is due to increases in
Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement
Program (CMAQ) and Proposition 1B funding. The
additional $2 million is the recognition of deferred
revenue from FY 2011-12. The division’s expenses for
FY 2011-12 are projected to be approximately $1.2
million more than the FY 2011-12 adopted budget
primarily due to bus replacements and higher fuel costs.
On June 30, 2012, the department’s retained earnings
balance was approximately $1.3 million. The division’s
retained earnings fluctuate depending on timing of
expenditures and reimbursements. A delay in
reimbursement from State and federal agencies requires
the division to rely on its retained earnings to meet its
mission.

The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions. The division has four funded positions.
The County’s solid waste disposal facilities and transfer
stations are operated and maintained through the Solid
Waste Enterprise Fund. This budget unit finances the
management and contract operations of seven active
landfills, seven recycling/transfer stations, and three
special waste facilities. It also provides for the continuing
maintenance of eight inactive or closed landfills and 43
closed burn dumps. The Waste Management Department
administers this budget unit.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding for
the department to operate its various programs. It also
allows for recycling activities that assist in complying
with mandated waste diversion goals. The department
will continue to provide the public with environmentally
safe management of wastewater and solid waste services
without impact on the General Fund.
In August 2010, a fee increase was approved, which has
allowed the department to establish a reserve fund for the
financing of future capital projects eliminating the need
for future debt financing. The total projected revenue for
FY 2012-13 is $42,345,309, this is an increase of
$2,082,083 or 5.17% more than the FY 2011-12 adopted
budget.
Total expenditures for FY 2012-13 are projected at
$40,802,966 (excluding capital projects discussed below),
this is an increase of $1,844,159 or 4.7% higher than the
FY 2011-12 adopted budget. The department has
managed to hold expenses down through an extensive
cost cutting plan implemented in FY 2010-11. Factors
that could drive-up future costs for the department are
State mandates to recycle more and cleaner air mandates.
The complexity of solid waste management from both
environmental and financial standpoints continues to
increase. The department will exceed the diversion
requirements of the Integrated Waste Management Act of
1989, which mandates a reduction of waste being
disposed, and to use new technology in methods of waste
management. The department continues to comply with
increasingly complex air monitoring requirements and
utilize cross-functional teams to solve complex problems
and manage projects.
In recent years, increased emphasis has been placed on
the proper disposal of hazardous waste. The Special
Waste Facilities in Bakersfield, Ridgecrest and Mojave
provide for safe disposal of household hazardous waste
and hazardous waste generated by small businesses. The
recommended budget continues to support this program.
The problem of illegal dumping continues throughout the
County. This challenge continues to be addressed by a
team consisting of staff from several County departments
working together to better educate the public and to
provide some relief in the way of cleanup. The
recommended budget again allocates funds for Code
Compliance to be used towards these efforts.
As of June 30, 2012, after adjustments for long-term debt,
retained earnings within the Solid Waste Enterprise Fund
was approximately $42.5 million. The recommended
budget is estimated to result in a decrease to retained
earnings of approximately $9.1 million. This is due to
$10.7 million in capital projects planned for FY 2012-13.
The major capital projects planned for FY 2012-13 are the
Bena Sanitary Landfill Phase I Closure project at $5.8
million; the Bakersfield Landfill Closure project at $1.1
million; and the Arvin Closure Vegetation project at
$709,000.

The recommended budget includes the addition of three
Waste Management Support Supervisor positions, at an
annual cost of $294,000; the deletion of two Waste
Management Aide I/II/III positions, at an annual savings
of $146,000; and the deletion of one Waste Management
Specialist I at an annual savings of $107,000. The net
annual impact to the department’s budget from these
position changes is approximately $41,000.
The Employers’ Training Resource Department (ETR)
administers the federal Workforce Investment Act (WIA),
other Department of Labor grants, and Welfare-to-Work
funds received through the U.S. Department of Labor,
State Employment Development Department, other
counties or collaboratives, and the County Department of
Human Services (DHS). In addition, ETR administers the
federal WIA funding for Inyo and Mono counties,
although each of these counties operates its own
employment and training programs and services.
The recommended budget will allow the department to
administer the federal WIA funds and provide educational
and job training services, including post-employment
follow-up services. The recommended budget includes a
significant reduction in appropriations due to the loss of
grant funding. The loss of funding will decrease the level
of educational and job training assistance that the
department will be able to provide to the public in FY
2012-13. New State legislation has placed a requirement
on Adult and Dislocated Worker allocations to provide
25% of the funding on training. This new requirement
will be met with the lower levels of funding, but will
make service delivery more difficult.
The department’s staff and overhead costs incurred for
administering WIA and other programs are budgeted in
the department’s operating budget unit 5923. Based on
federal and State guidelines, all revenue received under
the WIA must be accounted for in a single budget unit. 
The Employers’ Training Resource Department (ETR)
administers the federal Workforce Investment Act (WIA)
funds. The department also administers Non-Workforce
Investment Act (non-WIA) funds for expenses not
covered by special grant funding or federal funding.
There is no General Fund cost associated with this budget
unit. The recommended budget provides sufficient
funding to administer and operate the non-WIA programs
in the County. Operating transfers reimburse expenses
incurred in the department’s operating budget unit 5923
and in budget unit 8907 for which federal funding is not
available.
The federally funded Community Development Block
Grant (CDBG) Program provides funds for community
improvement projects, various housing programs, and
certain local economic development activities. Projects
and activities must help people with low- to moderateincomes,
eliminate physical blight, or meet other
qualifying criteria. The Planning and Community
Development Department administers this budget unit.
The recommended budget is a reflection of available
allocations and provides adequate funding to support the
Community Development Program pursuant to the
Housing and Community Development Act. The program
will continue to promote the development of viable urban
communities, ensure that decent housing and suitable
living environments are available to the public, and
pursue expansion of economic opportunities. Examples
of projects that represent these activities within defined
areas of benefit are curb and gutter improvements,
drainage improvements, public facility improvements,
park improvements, low-income housing rehabilitation
and accessibility improvements, and business
development assistance.
Projects proposed for approval by both the Board of
Supervisors and the U. S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) for FY 2012-13 are:
 Oildale Community Improvements
 East Bakersfield Community Improvements
 Rexland Acres Park Parking Lot and Basketball
Court Improvements
 California City Central Park Facility Renovation
Improvements (Multi-Phase/Phase III)
 City of McFarland Streetscape/Lighting
Improvements (Multi-Phase/Phase II)
 City of Ridgecrest Handicap Access Improvements
 City of Shafter Veterans Park Lighting Improvements
 South Taft Sewer System Improvements (Multi-
Phase/Phase I)
 BARC Material Recovery Facility (MRF)
Improvements
This budget also provides reimbursements to the
Community Development budget unit 5940 for staff
support of community development projects.
The federally-funded Economic Development Revolving
Loan Fund is used to fund loans for eligible economic
development projects, and to deposit income from loan
repayments. The Planning and Community Development
Department administers this budget unit.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the Economic Development Revolving Loan
Fund Program.
Program income is derived from loan repayments and is
the source of funds for loans to other eligible economic
development projects. Projects include loans to for-profit
businesses for qualifying business purposes. To be
eligible for the loans, businesses must meet program
specific eligibility criteria.
No loans have been made from this program for quite
some time. Eligibility criteria for the program may be too
stringent and create too many barriers for applicants. The
Planning and Community Development Department will
examine eligibility requirements for this program and retool
the program to better meet the needs of small
businesses. The department is also analyzing the
possibility of using this funding to assist in the
development of an incubator program.
The user-funded County of Kern Industrial Development
Authority Program provides assistance to for-profit
companies for the acquisition of qualified
manufacturing/processing facilities and equipment
through the issuance of tax-exempt bonds. Additionally,
this fund is a depository of proceeds received as part of a
judgment against a bond trustee involving a since-closed
housing assistance bond. The Planning and Community
Development Department administers this budget unit.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the County of Kern Industrial Development
Authority’s issuance of tax-exempt industrial
development bonds. Bonds are issued for the benefit of
for-profit businesses seeking below market interest rates
for the acquisition of qualified capital assets. Services
provided through this fund are based upon demand. The
cost of providing services is offset by fees collected from
the user. To be eligible for assistance, projects must
satisfy specific public benefit criteria.
Demand from for-profit companies for funding under this
program has been almost non-existent since its inception.
The department has begun to use this funding to
reimburse staff costs for higher demand community
development programs. Funding from this program may
also be used to reimburse costs associated with the
Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Re-Housing (HPRP)
program.
This is the second round of federal funds granted to the
County under the Housing and Economic Recovery Act
of 2008 (HERA) Neighborhood Stabilization Program
(NSP). This funding will be used to continue to address
the effects of abandoned and foreclosed properties in the
communities. The Planning and Community Development
Department administers this budget unit for the federal
stimulus funds.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the program. Local governments may utilize these
funds for a variety of activities to address the effects of
foreclosures and property abandonment, including
acquisition of property; demolition or rehabilitation of
abandoned property; or to offer down payment and
closing cost assistance to low to middle-income
homebuyers. The program also seeks to prevent future
foreclosures by requiring homebuyer counseling for
families receiving homebuyer assistance. The program
requires grantees to obtain a mortgage loan from a lender
who agrees to comply with sound lending practices.
This funding will enable the County and sub-recipients to
continue to address the high foreclosure rate problems and
abandoned property issues in the community. This budget
unit also provides reimbursement to the Community
Development budget unit 5940 for staff support.
Federal funds granted to the County under the McKinney-
Vento Homeless Assistance Act have been consolidated
with funding from the Homeless Emergency Assistance
and Rapid Transition to Housing Act of 2009 (HEARTH
Act). As a result, the Emergency Shelter Grants Program
(ESG) has been renamed the Emergency Solutions Grant
Program (ESG). Funds are used not only to provide
emergency shelter services or facilities for homeless
people, but greater emphasis will be placed on helping
people quickly regain stability in permanent housing after
experiencing a housing crisis and/or homelessness. The
Planning and Community Development Department
administers this budget unit.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the ESG Program. The program will continue to
provide emergency shelter and transitional housing
assistance to the homeless through eligible activities:
renovation, major rehabilitation, or conversion of
buildings for use as shelters for the homeless; provision of
essential services to the homeless; payment of operations,
maintenance, rent, repair, security, fuel, equipment,
insurance, utilities, and furnishings for the homeless; and
homelessness prevention and housing stability activities.
ESG funding will enable service providers to improve the
quality and availability of emergency shelter capacity, and
to broaden the range of services available to prevent
homelessness and regain stability in permanent housing.
This budget unit also provides reimbursement to the
Community Development budget unit 5940 for staff
support of community development projects.
Federal funds granted to the County under the Housing
and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA)
Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) will be used
to address the effects of abandoned and foreclosed
properties in the communities. The Planning and
Community Development Department administers this
budget unit for the federal stimulus funds.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to
support the program. Local governments may utilize these
funds for a variety of activities to address the effects of
foreclosures and property abandonment, including
acquisition of property; demolition or rehabilitation of
abandoned property; or to offer down payment and
closing cost assistance to low to middle-income
homebuyers. The program also seeks to prevent future
foreclosures by requiring homebuyer counseling for
families receiving homebuyer assistance. The program
requires grantees to obtain a mortgage loan from a lender
who agrees to comply with sound lending practices.
This funding will enable the County and sub-recipients to
address foreclosure issues and problems resulting from
abandoned properties in the community. This budget unit
also provides reimbursement to the Community
Development budget unit 5940 for staff support.
Funding under this grant program was temporary and is
scheduled to conclude in FY 2012-13.
Federal funds for this program are granted to the County
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 for the Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Re-
Housing Program (HPRP) through the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The
program funds will be used to assist individuals and
families who would otherwise be homeless. The Planning
and Community Development Department administers
this budget unit.
HPRP funds may provide for a variety of assistance,
including: short-term or medium-term rental assistance
and housing relocation and stabilization services, which
includes such activities as mediation, credit counseling,
security or utility deposits, utility payments, moving
costs, and case management.
The HPRP Grant Program will end in FY 2012-13, and
the grant will be closed-out appropriately per HUD
guidelines.
This budget unit also provides reimbursement to the
Community Development budget unit 5940 for staff
support of HPRP projects.
Federal funds were granted to the County under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 for the
Community Development Block Grant Recovery (CDBGR)
program through the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development. The funds under this program were
intended to stimulate the local economy by creating and
maintaining jobs through the construction of
infrastructure and other eligible development projects on
an expedited basis. This grant program was temporary
and has been discontinued.
As a designated participating jurisdiction, the County is
eligible to receive an annual allocation of federal funds
for the HOME Investment Partnerships Program. The
funds must be used to benefit households at or less than
80% of the County median income level. For rental units,
90% of the monies must benefit households at or below
60% of the median income. The Planning and
Community Development Department administers this
budget unit.
This program provides funding for eligible activities and
projects, such as expanding the supply of decent, safe,
sanitary and affordable housing, particularly rental
housing, for very low and low-income families;
strengthening the ability of local communities to design
and implement strategies for achieving adequate supplies
of decent, affordable housing; and extending and
strengthening partnerships among all levels of
government and the private sector, including for-profit
and nonprofit organizations, in the production and
operation of affordable housing. This budget unit also
provides reimbursement to the Community Development
budget unit 5940 for staff support.
The 121 active County Service Areas (CSAs) were
established to provide such services as landscape
maintenance, street sweeping, sewer service, and street
lighting services. In order to form a CSA, property owners
must initiate the process. The formation request is voted on
by affected property owners who are asked to approve the
CSA and agree to pay for the services provided. At least
50% of the returned ballots must approve the CSA and
associated charges in order for the action to be completed.
The Engineering, Surveying, and Permit Services
Department administers all of the County Service Areas.
All assessments and fees charged to property owners are
limited to covering the cost of providing a special benefit to
the property being charged. California law does not permit
the fees collected through CSAs to be used to benefit the
general public residing outside a CSA. As a result of this
limitation, the cost for services benefiting the general
public, such as general fire protection provided by fire
hydrants and street lighting for non-area motorists, total
$136,209 for all CSAs. This General Fund contribution is
included as an expenditure in the Engineering, Surveying,
and Permit Services budget unit 1900.
The recommended budget provides adequate support to
fund the Authority’s functions. The Authority is a special
district established to provide sanitary sewer system
service for the residents of the district, and is administered
by the Waste Management Department. The Authority
will continue to maintain its current level of service
through maintaining its wastewater collection system,
sewage treatment plant, and treated water disposal
system. Disposal and collection system maintenance
consists of cleaning, inspection, vector control, and line
segment replacement. Plant maintenance also includes repair and replacement of major treatment facility
components.
In addition to providing service within the area served by
the Authority, the budget unit also contains the
appropriations for staffing and services to the Ford City-
Taft Heights Sanitation District and other entities under
the control of the Board of Supervisors.
It is anticipated that revenue will increase by $134,150 or
3.53% more than the FY 2011-12 adopted budget. The
slight increase in revenue is due to an increase in the
number of parcels billed, a proposed fee increase, and
reimbursements from other departments and agencies for
services. Expenses are forecast to increase by 20.1% over
the FY 2011-12 adopted budget. The increase in
expenditures is due primarily to major maintenance
projects budgeted in the FY 2012-13 budget.
On June 30, 2011, after adjustments for long-term debt,
the retained earnings balance was approximately $1.3
million. In FY 2012-13, it is estimated that the Authority
will decrease its retained earnings by approximately
$848,000.

The recommended budget includes no position additions
or deletions.
The recommended budget funds the district’s functions
including the design, maintenance, construction, and
operation of the Ford City-Taft Heights Sanitation district
facilities. The district provides sanitary sewer system
service for the residents of the district. Services are
provided through a sewage treatment plant jointly owned
with the City of Taft. The district will continue to
maintain its current level of service through maintaining
its wastewater collection system consisting of 90,190 feet
of sewer lines.
The Waste Management Department administers this
special district. The management expenses and
employees for the district are included in the Kern
Sanitation Authority budget unit.
It is anticipated that revenue will increase slightly by
2.15% due to a proposed fee increase to keep pace with
inflation. Expenses are forecast to increase by 4.5% due
primarily to increased maintenance costs for the aging
system.
On June 30, 2012, the retained earnings balance was
$352,634. In FY 2012-13, it is estimated that the Ford
City-Taft Heights Sanitation District will decrease its
retained earnings by approximately $179,000.
The In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Public
Authority was established by the Board of Supervisors in
November 2002, and is administered under contract by
the Aging and Adult Services Department. The Public
Authority is the employer of record for the purpose of
collective bargaining for individuals that provide services
to eligible aged and blind persons and persons with
disabilities, in order to allow those persons to remain in
their homes and avoid institutionalization.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding for
the Public Authority to perform its required functions.
The IHSS program is designed to assist persons with
disabilities and older adults in avoiding premature
placement in long-term care facilities. The Public
Authority and the Aging and Adult Services Department
also collaborate with other service providers and
community agencies to provide supportive services to
older adults in their homes.
The Public Authority contracts with the Aging and Adult
Services Department for staffing. Thus, personnel costs
for the Public Authority are found in budget unit 5610.
The recommended budget estimates the County’s
financial responsibility for the cost of IHSS services at
$7.74 million. The decrease in General Fund Contribution
is related to the proportional increase in Social Services
Realignment revenue as a result of a larger than
anticipated carry-forward balance from FY 2011-12. The
extension of the 3.6% reduction in service provider hours
included in the State budget will continue to decrease the
County’s net General Fund contribution. The County’s
contribution is recommended in budget unit 5810, and is
included in this budget as revenue.
The 125 active County Service Areas (CSAs) were
established to provide such services as landscape
maintenance, street sweeping, sewer service, and street
lighting services. In order to form a CSA, property owners
must initiate the process. The formation request is voted on
by affected property owners who are asked to approve the
CSA and agree to pay for the services provided. At least
50% of the returned ballots must approve the CSA and
associated charges in order for the action to be completed.
The Engineering, Surveying, and Permit Services
Department administers all of the County Service Areas.
All assessments and fees charged to property owners are
limited to covering the cost of providing a special benefit to
the property being charged. California law does not permit
the fees collected through CSAs to be used to benefit the
general public residing outside a CSA. As a result of this
limitation, the cost for services benefiting the general
public, such as general fire protection provided by fire
hydrants and street lighting for non-area motorists, total
$136,209 for all CSAs. This General Fund contribution is
included as an expenditure in the Engineering, Surveying,
and Permit Services budget unit 1900.
