A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with salaries and benefits. This
budget unit is primarily funded by general purpose revenues of the General Fund through an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost. There are no major changes in expenditures and revenue
expected in FY 2015-16. Due to geographic variances in district size the travel costs will be
captured in Special Services, budget unit 1040. The recommended budget does not require the
use of Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The recommended budget provides adequate resources to assist the Supervisor in performing the
various duties and functions required of the governing body. The department is authorized five
permanent positions. The recommended budget provides the department with funding for three
full-time positions and two part-time positions.
The majority of expenditures for the department are associated with staff costs and supplies
necessary to perform the functions of the office. The budget unit is funded primarily by an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Additionally, the department receives reimbursement of
staff costs for information security services and debt management activity. These
reimbursements account for the majority of charges for services and expenditure transfers
transactions.
There are several operational changes that are impacting the budget for FY 2015-16. The former
departments of Board of Trade, Personnel, and Employers’ Training Resources (ETR) have
become divisions of the CAO. Eight positions that performed employee relations and health
benefits functions were transferred to the former Personnel Department as part of the
establishment of the Human Resources Division. Salaries and benefits expenses, and charges for
services revenue have been significantly reduced to reflect the transfer of these positions. One
position was transferred to the ETR Division and is being partially charged back to the CAO
budget unit, which is creating some cost savings. Additionally, the department added a position
in FY 2014-15 to manage the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act requirements. Finally,
the department received the transfer of the Information Security Officer from the Information
Technology Services budget unit to work in the Compliance and Accountability function of the
office.
The department is able to absorb personnel cost increases and the 2.4% NGFC reduction by
holding one position vacant and unfunded and using approximately $58,235 in accumulated BSI
credits. The department will be charging Kern Medical Center for approximately 60% of the
salary costs related to the Information Security Officer, as the position is shared. The budget is
sufficient to support the County’s economic development activities and costs for services
provided by the Kern Economic Development Corporation.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist-Confidential
position, at an annual cost of approximately $102,000. The department plans to hold vacant and
unfunded one (1) Senior Administrative Analyst position. The reduction in FY 2015-16 positions
reflects the prior transfer of eight positions to the Human Resources Division.
The majority of the Clerk of the Board expenditures are associated with salaries and benefits for
staff to support the functions of the Board of Supervisors and assessment appeals processing.
Services and supplies expenses include office supplies, application maintenance and assessment
appeals costs. The department is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Charges for services represent reimbursements for processing assessment appeals applications.

The recommended budget includes sufficient resources for the department to maintain status quo
service levels.
The recommended budget includes holding one (1) Deputy Clerk of the Board position vacant
and unfunded. The department is mitigating impacts from this change.
A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with special projects activities,
such as costs for the County’s single audit contract, contributions to other agencies and
consulting services for the AAB, legislative review and updates and sales tax analysis. Salaries
and benefits include the countywide payments for group life insurance premiums and the
replacement benefits offered by the County pursuant to Section 31899.4 of the Government Code and the Kern County Replacement Benefits plan. The budget unit is primarily funded by an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Contributions to Other Agencies
The Special Services budget contains recommended contributions totaling approximately
$702,070 to various non-profit agencies for performance of cultural or humanitarian services
benefiting the public. Due to budgetary constraints affecting the County General Fund,
contribution allocations have been recommended with a reduction of 2.4% from the previous
fiscal year. The following contributions are included in the recommended budget:
? Alzheimer’s Disease Association of Kern County: $60,268
? Arts Council of Kern: $92,720
? Bakersfield Museum of Art: $46,360
? Bakersfield Symphony: $92,720
? Center for Blind and Visually Impaired: $36,227
? China Lake Alliance: $9,760
? Community Action Partnership of Kern County (CAP): $92,720
? Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA): $92,720
? Greater Antelope Valley Economic Alliance: $13,908
? Kern Adult Literacy Council: $19,237
? Small Business Development Center: $55,638
? Southwest Defense Alliance: $34,160
? Valley Fever Vaccine Project: $46,360
? Volunteer Center of Kern County: $9,272

The recommended budget includes an allocation of $50,000 for each District Supervisor to
support activities within their respective areas. In addition, approximately $1 million of
Supervisorial carry forward discretionary funds is budgeted under services and supplies. The
recommended budget includes $104,000 for the anticipated payment to the City of Bakersfield
for costs related to the Education Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) that was included in a
settlement agreement concerning property taxes, and contributions to the Local Agency
Formation Commission, the Kern Council of Governments and Board of Trade grant program
are included.
The recommended budget includes $140,500 in consultant fees and other costs; a majority of
these costs are associated with the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act requirements.
Additionally, travel costs for the Board of Supervisors will be accounted in this budget unit to
accommodate the geographic variances in district size.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the financial functions of the County. The department receives
some reimbursement for services but is primarily funded by general purpose revenues of the
General Fund through the allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 50 authorized positions,
which requires the use of $317,866 of accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits. The
department has indicated that it will no longer be performing payroll services for Special
Districts which has resulted in a reduction of revenue. The department is also anticipating a reduction of revenue due to the dissolution of redevelopment agencies that will reduce
administrative fees and also a decrease in assessment fees and tax fees collected.
The department has proposed using BSI to fund two (2) Programmer I/II/III and one (1)
Administrative Coordinator positions. The use of these funds will allow the department to
continue to move TRACS and other countywide programs forward.
The recommended budget includes holding vacant and unfunded the following positions: two (2)
Accountant I/II/III positions, one (1) Programmer I/II position, and one (1) Fiscal Support
Assistant position. There are no reported significant impacts on levels of service as a result of
these vacancies.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the banking and property tax collection functions of the County.
The services and supplies expenditures originate from banking fees, as well as costs related to
printing and mailing tax bills. The department is primarily funded through charges to participants
in the treasury pool for banking and investment services, various property tax delinquency
charges, and an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Changes in expenditures from FY 2014-15 are primarily the result of the increasing cost of
services associated with banking fees, mailing, and printing. The department is purchasing two
servers to replace those that are currently out-of-warranty, and is using $115,535 in Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits in order to meet the budget guideline. There are no significant
operational impacts at the recommended Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 30 full-time equivalent
positions, and six extra help positions. The department will fund one Programmer I/II position,
held vacant in the previous year, to mitigate outages or delays in the network systems used to
process and store payments.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the functions of the Assessor’s office. The budget unit is funded
primarily through an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. In addition, the department receives
revenue for reimbursement of costs for the administration of property taxes and supplement
property taxes as statutorily allowed.
The recommended budget requires the department to use $241,390 of its accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits towards salaries and benefits for FY 2015-16. The recommended
budget provides the department sufficient appropriations to mitigate service level impacts.

The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 99 out of 106 authorized
permanent positions. The Assessor’s office has submitted the budget holding seven positions
vacant and unfunded: one (1) Auditor Appraiser I/II/III position, one (1) Draft Technician I/II/IIEngineering
Technician I/II/III position, four (4) Appraiser I/II/III positions and one (1)
Petroleum Geologist position. The department expects to maintain current levels of service.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to establish and support the information technology platform for the County. The
division pays for internet, storage, phone and IT maintenance and is reimbursed by charging
departments for the cost. In addition, the division receives an allocation of Net General Fund
Cost.
The recommended budget includes similar staffing levels to FY 2014-15. Services and supplies
are estimated to be higher in current year primarily due to one-time equipment and furniture
acquisitions for the new Information Technology Services facility. Charges for services revenue
is anticipated to decline due to the termination of the Notifylink software and service, and
changes to other billable services.
Included under capital assets is $4.9 million in appropriations for the license and implementation
cost for the replacement of the Criminal Justice Information System. The new system will
provide adult and juvenile probation case management, jail management system, in addition to a
number of other functions necessary to support the work flow of the criminal justice partners and
the interface with the Superior Court. Internet proxy replacement and a new SAN device for
storing backup data are also are also budgeted under capital assets for FY 2015-16.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Programmer I/II-Systems Analyst I/II
position and one (1) Technology Services Manager at an annual cost of approximately $348,000.
The recommended budget holds the following authorized positions vacant and unfunded: one (1)
Technology Services Division Chief, one (1) Senior Systems Analyst, one (1) Database Analyst
I/II, one (1) System Programmer I/II, and one (1) Network Systems Administrator at an annual
savings of approximately $690,000.
The budget unit is primarily funded through charges for services to other departments and an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). The majority of the expenditures for this budget
unit are associated with staffing costs for positions required to perform the legal functions of the
County. The expenses in the other charges category cover the costs of uninsured litigation,
exclusive of associated in-house attorney and paralegal costs. The recommended budget includes
$1.14 million for uninsured litigation, or legal matters requiring litigation not covered under the
County’s General Liability or Workers’ Compensation self-insurance programs. The department
has accrued Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits in the amount of $1,310,314. The
recommended budget includes the use of $360,807 in BSI credits to cover the operating costs of
the department.
Salaries and benefits have increased from prior year actual to reflect all authorized positions
being funded, as well as planned retirement payouts of approximately $131,000. Services and
supplies have increased primarily due to an additional legal expert on water matters, at a cost of
$200,000. Total water expert costs for FY 2015-16 are budgeted at $300,000. Capital asset
appropriations will be used to acquire new furniture and information technology support
equipment.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Programmer I/II-Systems Analyst I/II
position and one Accountant I/II/III position, and deletion of one (1) Information Systems
Specialist I/II/III/Sr. position, at an annual net cost of approximately $143,000.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform the functions of the department. The department is funded by an allocation
of Net General Fund Cost. However, the department also receives reimbursement of staff costs
for administration of the County’s health benefits programs and is reimbursed for the expenses of
purchasing employee service awards to recognize employees for their years of service.
The FY 2015-16 recommended budget reflects operational changes from the realignment of the
Personnel Department and, the Employee Relations and Health Benefits Divisions of the County
Administrative Office into a consolidated Human Resources Division. The centralized Human
Resources Division includes all authorized positions under the former Personnel Department and
eight positions that performed employee relations and health benefit functions previously under
the County Administrative Office (CAO). Additionally, the division is adding three (3) positions
to absorb additional administrative oversight of Kern Legacy Health Plan and provide more
detailed involvement in the day-to-day operations of the County’s health plans. The cost of these
positions will be offset by reductions in fees and other administrative expenses currently paid to
outside vendors. These operational changes are anticipated to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of the County’s centralized human resources processes.
The change in revenue reflects the reimbursement for staff costs related to the employees health
benefits services previously performed under budget unit 1020, CAO. Additionally, the
department is expecting to process less employee service awards in FY 2015-16, which will
result in decreased revenue. The recommended budget will allow the division to maintain current
levels of service, including all additional functions being absorbed through reorganization.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Health Plan Administration
Coordinator position and two (2) Health Plan Services Representative I/II positions, at an annual
cost of approximately $344,971. The increase in FY 2015-16 positions reflects the realignment
of the Personnel Department, the Employee Relations Division and the Health Benefits Division
into the consolidated Human Resources Division. As part of realignment it is anticipated the
Human Resources Division will be revising the existing job classifications during FY 2015-16,
however, there is no expected budgetary impact.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing and supply
costs for the positions and materials required to perform the legally mandated election functions
of the County. The largest revenue source for the budget unit is charges for election services
provided to other entities, and general purpose revenue received from the General Fund through
the allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget provides funding for the scheduled special election in November and a
scheduled Primary election in June. Increases in staffing and supply costs are related to the
creation of new classifications and anticipated workloads during the fiscal year.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. However, the Board
of Supervisors approved the creation of new classifications specific to the division which will
increase costs but will aid in employee retention and quality of services. Salaries and benefits
includes the anticipated costs for the new classifications; the classifications will be added as part
of the departmental reorganization after approval by the Civil Service Commission, anticipated
in mid-September.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing and supplies
costs for the positions and materials required to perform the assigned functions. The division
receives some reimbursement for services but is primarily funded by an allocation of Net
General Fund Cost (NGFC).
The recommended budget provides the division with funding for 105 permanent positions, which
requires the use of $214,480 of accumulated BSI credits. Total staffing is in line with FY 2014-
15 levels which will allow the department to maintain status-quo service levels.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The following
authorized positions will be held vacant and unfunded: one (1) Administrative Coordinator, two
(2) Communications Technician I/II/III, two (2) Building Service Worker I/II/III, two (2)
Maintenance Worker I/II/III/IV, one (1) Office Services Specialist, one (1) Real Property Agent
I/II/III, one (1) Buyer I/II/III, and one (1) Security Attendant I/II at an annual savings of
approximately $802,000.
The General Services Division continues to review and evaluate the acquisition of utility services
and commodities to attain the best rates possible. Services and supplies are budgeted to cover the
anticipated cost of utilities. Charges for services and other financing sources revenue are
primarily collected from customer entities for services provided, and general purpose revenue
received from the General Fund through the allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The anticipated increase in expenditures is primarily due to expected changes in electricity, gas,
and water rates. A portion of increased expenditures are offset by increased revenue collected
from service recipients. The anticipated decrease in revenue is primarily due to expiring
alternative energy incentives, and decreased receipts of surcharges levied on select Court
transactions, which are collected for the purpose of constructing, operating, and maintaining
criminal justice and court facilities, including the cost of utilities.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform project related services. The costs are offset by revenue received
for services provided, primarily from charges to capital and major maintenance projects.

The recommended budget includes an increase in salaries and benefits compared to prior year
primarily due to increases in employee benefit costs. Charges for services and expenditure
reimbursements are adjusted to reflect anticipated staffing costs and project workloads.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The budget holds
one (1) Engineering Aide I/II/III position, one (1) Construction Project Inspector I/II/III position,
and two (2) Engineer I/II/III positions vacant and unfunded for a savings of approximately
$418,000. Although staffing costs for this division are largely offset by service charges, the
anticipated FY 2015-16 project workload is insufficient to fund all authorized positions.
The table below contains a list of the recommended projects for FY 2015-16. For each project,
the project cost, any offsetting revenue or special purpose funding, and the Net General Fund
Cost (NGFC) are presented. The projects listed in the table below include 50 new projects with a
combined NGFC of $14,346,248. Revenue for this budget unit includes $468,659 for projects
started in prior fiscal years. The recommended projects are in accordance with the County’s
objective of evaluating and meeting the County’s infrastructure needs. These recommended
projects were identified by both the General Services Division and other operating departments
as urgent unmet maintenance and facility needs
The majority of expenditures for the department are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform the functions assigned. The department is primarily funded by an allocation
of Net General Fund Cost. Other revenue sources include event ticket sales, advertising, and
reimbursement of marketing and promotions costs.
Salaries and benefits are recommended at a reduced level from FY 2014-15 actual costs. This
reduction is due to the department opting to hold a Fiscal Support Specialist position vacant for
one-half of FY 2015-16. Services and supplies are recommended at an increased level to allow
the procurement of specialized services for video production as well as the reimbursement of
administrative costs of the Assistant County Administrative Officer to Employers' Training
Resource. The recommended budget will allow the department to maintain current levels of
service.
Staffing costs comprise the majority of the division’s expenditures. Major revenue sources
include services provided to other County departments and the public. The remainder of funding
is fulfilled through a Net General Fund Cost allocation.
As part of the consolidation of the Public Works budget units into an internal service fund (ISF),
appropriations for salaries and benefits have been shifted to services and supplies to reimburse
the ISF for labor applicable to Engineering, Surveying and Permit Services. Expenditures are
projected to increase from current year actual due to the increase in pension costs and additional
projects including the California High Speed Rail project. The recommended budget includes
$26,500 for the purchase of Geographic Information System server equipment.
The recommended budget will allow the division to maintain current levels of service, including
meeting or exceeding agreed turnaround timelines established in their performance measures.
The recommended budget does not include any authorized positions, all budgeted positions have
been transferred to the Public Works Internal Service Fund.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs necessary to
provide the services and perform the functions of the division. Services and supplies
expenditures are primarily for the various insurance policies managed by the division. These
insurance costs, and all staffing costs, are charged directly to customer departments. These
charges come in as expenditure reimbursements and charges for services.

The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all authorized positions,
resulting in the increase over FY 2014-15 actual salary expenditures. The services and supplies
category is anticipated to increase primarily due to insurance coverage costs. Charges for
services and expenditure reimbursements have been adjusted to reflect the planned expenditures.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. FY 2014-15 average
filled positions were lower due to three unplanned vacancies.
The table below contains a list of the recommended projects for FY 2015-16. For each project,
the project cost, any offsetting revenue or special purpose funding, and the Net General Fund
Cost (NGFC) are presented. The projects listed in the table below include three new projects at
an NGFC of $1,504,000 and seven rebudgets at an NGFC of $2,237,543. Revenue for this
budget unit includes $3,922,134 for projects started in prior fiscal years. The recommended
projects are in accordance with the County’s objective of evaluating and meeting the County’s
infrastructure needs. These recommended projects were identified by both the General Services
Division and other operating departments as urgent unmet needs.
The following new projects are recommended for funding:
 $500,000 for the Caliente Creek Habitat Restoration Feasibility Study. The purpose of
this project is to reduce flooding and reintroduce native plant species.
 $775,000 for the County Facility Irrigation Infrastructure to replace facility irrigation
infrastructure throughout the county to mitigate water usage.
 $229,000 for the Jamison Center Laundry Room Expansion to provide sufficient capacity
at the center.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated to payments to the State for court
operations, and the required maintenance of effort (MOE) payment effective when the municipal
Courts transitioned to the State. The courts collect fines, forfeitures and traffic school fees that
are deposited in this budget unit and are used to offset the costs. The court collections are not
sufficient to cover the estimated costs; therefore, an allocation of Net General Fund Cost is
required.

Services and supplies are expected to increase from prior fiscal year due to the increase in the
court facilities transfer payments as a result of amendments approved to share the cost of utilities
at the Superior Court Complex and the Bakersfield Justice Building. Revenue in this budget unit
is from fines and forfeitures, and fees collected by the Courts throughout the County, which
fluctuate annually. The budget includes funding to meet the County’s statutory fiscal
responsibilities to the State and the Courts.
The primary expenditures of the division are for staffing necessary to complete all assigned
functions. The estimated revenue from licenses, permits and fictitious business name filings is
anticipated to fully offset expenditures. The division will use $69,500 of the current $87,505
Budget Savings Incentive credits balance to cover the cost of an additional position that is being
added.

The recommended budget provides a level of funding to permit the County Clerk to continue
serving the public without any impacts to service levels.
The recommended budget includes holding vacant and unfunded one (1) part-time Office
Services Assistant position. The division has requested to use their BSI to add one (1) Office
Services Technician position that will receive ongoing support through increased fees in
subsequent fiscal years.
All salaries and benefit expenditures for the department are for one administrative support
position to assist the volunteer Grand Jurors. Services and supplies provide for anticipated expert
witness expenses and travel reimbursement for Grand Jurors. The County provides an allocation
of net General Fund cost to fund the activities of the Grand Jury in accordance with California
Penal Code sections 888-939.91.

The recommended budget provides the funding necessary to allow the department to perform
indictments as requested by the District Attorney and attend Grand Juror training. The
recommended budget continues to provide funding for the one staff position. The department’s
allocation of Net General Fund Cost will increase due to the rise in employee health benefits and
retirement costs. Services and supplies continue to be budgeted above prior year expenditures
which ensures no service level impacts.
The majority of expenditures for this program represent payments to the Kern County Bar
Association for the administration and representation of indigent clients in the metro area. In the
outlying areas of the County, attorneys are paid directly for services provided. This budget unit is
primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. In addition, the budget unit receives
intergovernmental revenues from State aid for trial court funding and State reimbursements for
the cost of representing incarcerated defendants.

The recommended budget provides sufficient resources to meet the County’s constitutional
mandate of providing legal representation. Expenditures in this budget unit are dependent on the
number of cases referred to the Indigent Defense Program, which fluctuate annually.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing costs necessary to continue to
investigate and prosecute criminal cases. Approximately half of the department’s expenditures
are funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). Other major sources of revenue
include funding from the State for special prosecutions and investigations within the Prison and
Special Investigation Units. The department also receives approximately $5.7 million of Local
Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172) and an allocation of 2011 realignment funds of
approximately $2.1 million to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under
Assembly Bill 109 (AB 109).

The recommended budget requires the department to use nearly all of its accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive credits, $934,632 of $1,000,472, to maintain service levels. The recommended
budget includes sufficient funding to conduct prosecutorial activities, including gang related
activities, as well as administer the Victim Witness Assistance Program.
Appropriations for salaries and benefits have increased over the prior year due to the
department’s desire to fill previously vacant positions to meet increased operational demands.
Similarly, revenue in the recommended budget has increased from FY 2014-15 primarily due to
increased revenue estimates for State prison reimbursement, Local Public Safety Funds, and
AB109. Services and supplies are expected to remain relatively unchanged over FY 2014-15.
The FY 2015-16 recommended budget includes funding for 225 positions, a net decrease of three
positions achieved by the addition of one (1) Legal Process Technician position and deletion of
one (1) vacant Office Services Assistant position, one (1) vacant Fiscal Support Technician
position, one (1) vacant Office Services Technician position, and one (1) vacant Assistant Chief
District Attorney’s Investigator position.
The budget for Child Support Services is maintained in a special revenue fund and does not
receive a General Fund contribution. This budget is funded entirely from State and federal
subvention revenue and other departmental revenue. The majority of expenditures are associated
with staffing costs to perform the functions of the department. Services and supplies expenses of
$3.7 million include rents and leases, utilities, and office expenses.

The recommended budget includes sufficient revenue for the department to continue to provide
its current level of services and meet State program goals and objectives. While there are no
major expenditure and revenue changes, costs are anticipated to increase slightly due to an increase in contract service costs, utilities, building rent, and higher salaries and benefits due to
the rising employee benefit costs and an increase in filled positions.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Department of Child Support Services
Program Manager, one (1) Supervising Child Support Customer Service Representative position,
one (1) Senior Child Support Customer Service Representative position and seven (7) Child
Support Customer Service Representative positions and the deletion of one (1) vacant
Departmental Analyst I/II position, one (1) vacant Office Services Assistant position, one (1)
vacant Office Services Technician position, one (1) vacant Child Support Officer IV position,
one (1) vacant Fiscal Support Specialist position, one (1) vacant Information Services Specialist
I/II/II position, one (1) vacant Local Area Network System Administrator position, one (1)
vacant Supervising Investigative Aide position, and one (1) vacant Investigative Aide position.
The addition of these positions will assist to serve the community in the establishment process
and more efficiently serve internal customers.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission of providing high quality legal representation. These
expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Other sources of
revenue include $4.8 million of Local Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172) and an allocation of
2011 Realignment to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under Assembly Bill
109. The department has a balance of $1,011,641 of accumulated Budget Savings Incentive
(BSI) credits.
The recommended budget provides an adequate level of funding to provide legal representation
for defendants accused of criminal offenses when appointed by the Superior Court and will allow
the department to retain all of its accumulated BSI credits. As with past years, the department has
continued to experience workload increases. In FY 2014-15 the Public Defender received 46,166
case appointments, which represents a 13% increase from two years ago, a 3% increase over the
past year. The department is able to meet the constraints imposed by increasing employee health
benefits and pension costs through an increase in Local Public Safety revenues and prudent
budget practices. Services and supplies are expected to increase due to the uncertain costs
associated with defending high-profile cases, often requiring expert services.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 95 of the department’s 99
authorized positions. The department will hold vacant one (1) Chief Public Defender Investigator
position; (1) Public Defender Investigator position; and two (2) Deputy Public Defender
positions. The recommended budget also includes funding for four extra help positions. The
increase in salaries and benefits is primarily associated with an increase in employee health
benefits and pension costs.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission of providing local law enforcement agencies with scientific
analysis and testing. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net General
Fund Cost (NGFC). Other sources of revenue include $214,728 in Local Public Safety Funds
(Proposition 172), an allocation of 2011 realignment funds to mitigate impacts of the State prison
realignment under Assembly Bill 109, and other revenue derived from fines and forfeitures.
The recommended budget will require the department to commit $308,464 of the $718,828 in
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
Salaries and benefits will be higher than FY 2014-15 as health benefits and retirement rates have
increased. Services and supplies, which is primarily comprised of consumable supplies for
laboratory testing and service contracts necessary to properly maintain the high-tech equipment,
will remain similar to prior years. Revenue will change slightly as 2011 Realignment and Local
Public Safety (Prop 172) funding is anticipated to increase.
The recommended funding level will allow the department to pursue its mission and to achieve
full ISO/IEC accreditation within FY 2015-16.
The department will delete four vacant positions: two (2) Laboratory Assistant positions; one (1)
Office Services Technician position; and one (1) Laboratory Helper position. There are no
anticipated impacts caused by these deletions, as the job duties have been absorbed elsewhere in
the department.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
provide patrol operations for the County’s unincorporated areas and operate the County’s adult
detention facilities. The budget also includes costs related to the following: Coroner, public
administrator, civil unit, court services, specialized investigations, communication and
administrative functions. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net
General Fund Cost (NGFC). Other sources of revenue include $47.7 million in Local Public
Safety Funds (Proposition 172) and an allocation of 2011 Realignment of $27 million to mitigate
the impacts of the State prison realignment under Assembly Bill 109 (AB 109). The department
charges for services for providing housing and transportation for federal prisoners and law
enforcement services to the City of Wasco.

The recommended funding level provides the Sheriff’s Office with the resources necessary to
continue to provide law enforcement, coroner, and public administration services. Expenditures
related to salaries and benefits will increase as health benefit and retirement rates rise, while
services and supplies will remain steady. The recommended budget provides for the leasepurchase
of 41 patrol vehicles, 8 civilian vehicles, 6 pickups, and a special weapons and tactics
(SWAT) equipment truck which total approximately $3 million to be financed over five years.
Asset forfeiture funds will be used to partially offset the cost of the SWAT truck and civil trust
funds will be used to purchase the civilian vehicles.
The recommended budget also includes an additional allocation of NGFC in the amount of
$651,195 to mitigate reductions that would have otherwise necessitated the closure of the
Ridgecrest Jail. Additionally, the department budgeted to use $51,653 in accumulated budget
savings incentive (BSI) credits to fund one-time purchases to implement a deputy administered
Naloxone (Narcan) program and to conduct a site review for the potential SB863 funding
opportunity. This increases the reported NGFC while reducing their available BSI by an equal
amount, resulting in no additional cost to the General Fund.
Revenue will decrease slightly overall as state funding for the Kern Narcotics Enforcement Team
(KNET) was eliminated and funding for state mandated cost reimbursement related to mandatory
child abuse reporting will decrease due to legislative changes. Revenue reductions are partially
offset by an increase in Proposition 172 funds.
The department currently has 1,353 authorized positions. The recommended budget includes the
addition of one (1) civilian Public Information Officer position, one (1) Accountant I/II position,
one (1) Sheriff’s Program Technician position, and two (2) Sheriff’s Program Specialist positon
while deleting of the following vacant positions: two (2) Sheriff’s Sergeants, seven (7) Sheriff’s
Deputies, one (1) Sheriff’s Senior Deputy, and one (1) Fiscal Support Supervisor position. The
recommended funding level will require the department to hold 96 positions vacant and
unfunded throughout FY 2015-16. The addition of the three Sheriff’s Program positions is
funded by the department’s AB109 allocation.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and facility costs related to the
supervision of adult offenders and legally detained minors. A significant portion of these
expenditures are funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). The department
receives $9 million through State and federal funding which offsets a portion of its expenditures.
Other financing sources account for the largest portion of revenue which includes $13.2 million
of Local Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172), approximately $26.5 million in 2011
realignment to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under AB 109, and $5.1
million in juvenile realignment funds.

At the recommended funding level, the department will have no significant service level impacts,
although the department will continue to cope with large caseloads as individuals continue to be
released from jail back into the community under the department’s supervision. Revenue in the
recommended budget associated with Title IV-E program has decreased by $2 million, in
addition to the $3 million reduction of FY 2014-15, for a total $5 million impact over two years
due to a change in billing requirements for administrative activity. Local Public Safety Funds,
AB 109, and Community Corrections Performance Incentive (SB 678) revenue continues to
provide resources and accounts for an overall increase in revenue of approximately $7.5 million.
Salaries and benefits are expected to increase in FY 2015-16 as health benefits and retirement
rates rise. In addition, the department has budgeted to fill all but 12 positions while historically
averaging 80 vacancies over the past three years. Services and supplies are expected to increase
slightly due to the receipt of $1,004,344 from the Bureau of Justice Assistance aimed at reducing
the delinquency of at-risk youth.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all but 12 vacant authorized
positions and 90 extra help positions. The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1)
Assistant Probation Division Director, the addition of one (1) Probation Division Director, one
(1) Departmental Analyst I/II, and one (1) Office Services Technician all of which are funded
through the department’s allocation of AB109 funding. Additionally, the department has
averaged 80-100 vacancies over the last two years, therefore holding the 12 positions vacant will
have no significant operational impact.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission. These expenditures are funded primarily by property taxes
collected in budget unit 1114 in the Fire Fund of approximately $99.59 million. In FY 2014-15 a
transfer of property tax base revenue between the General Fund and the Fire Fund in lieu of a
direct Net General Fund Contribution (NGFC) for fire protection services was approved by the
Board of Supervisors. The transfer of property taxes eliminated the need for an NGFC allocation
beginning FY 2014-15. Other major sources of revenue for the Fire Department include charges
for services from other municipalities for whom the Fire Department provides fire and
emergency response services totaling $25.3 million and a $7.65 million allocation of Local
Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172).

The recommended budget proposes the use of on-going resources to support on-going needs and
allows the department to set aside reserves for future retirement increases or other uncertainties.
The Fire fund’s fund balance at fiscal year-end was $10,680,021 and, in conjunction with
slightly improved anticipated property tax receipts, covers the initial budget the department
anticipated. The department will be able to preserve existing designations for future
infrastructure and equipment purchases of a grant funded fire simulator re-budgeted from FY
2014-15; a used fire apparatus; a vegetation masticator; and a low-boy trailer with the increased
resources available in FY 2015-16.
The budget provides sufficient funding for the department to maintain three-person staffing at all
County fire stations, but remains contingent upon the County receiving a new Staffing for
Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant to fund 36 Firefighter positions at $4.8
million for each of the next two fiscal years. It is expected the department will be notified if the
SAFER grant is awarded by August 2015.
Charges for services associated with fire cost reimbursement revenue for fire suppression is
budgeted at $3 million. Historically, reimbursements fluctuate dramatically depending on the
severity and number of wild land fires during any given year, and the department may receive
additional revenue throughout the fiscal year. Additional funds would be recognized and
appropriated mid-year to cover overtime and other costs associated with fire response on behalf
of other agencies. Other charges for services also include agreements with several cities and
neighboring counties to facilitate reimbursement of costs of services provided.
The department will delete one (1) Administrative Coordinator position and add one (1) Program
Specialist I/II position within the Office of Emergency Services Division. In addition, the
department will hold vacant 25 Firefighter positions to cope with reduced resources.
The County Contribution – Fire budget unit is used to appropriate supplemental funding from the
General Fund to the Fire Fund to support general operating expenses if needed. When a
contribution is recommended, funds within this budget unit are transferred to the Fire
Department’s operating budget 2415 and the contribution is included in that budget unit under
the revenue category of other financing sources.

In FY 2014-15 a transfer of property tax base revenue from the General Fund to the Fire Fund in
lieu of a direct Net General Fund Contribution (NGFC) for fire protection services was approved
by the Board of Supervisors. This resulted in no direct NGFC during the fiscal year. The
preliminary recommended budget included a contribution of $2.8 million due to a budget gap in
the Fire Fund resulting from a decline in property tax revenue. However, due to a higher than
anticipated fund balance available within the Fire Fund at June 30, 2015 and a moderate rebound
in estimated property tax receipts the contribution is no longer needed.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staff costs. These expenditures are
necessary to provide mandated inspection services in the field of agriculture and weights and
measures. Vehicles and fuel charges comprise a majority of the operating expenses.
The department is funded through charges for phytosanitary services, weight and measures
registration fees, reimbursement from State contracts, a portion of the State’s pesticide mill
assessment and the County’s portion of unclaimed gasoline tax. The department also receives an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget allows the department to operate at current service levels but will
require the use of $474,692 of the department’s $493,163 in accumulated Budget Savings
Incentive (BSI) credits. Expenditures are expected to remain similar to FY 2014-15. Revenue,
particularly associated with State contracts, has been budgeted solely based on what the
department has already been awarded. Additional State contracts may be awarded throughout the
year, and consistent with prior years, the department plans to recognize new revenue throughout
the fiscal year as it is received.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of two (2) Agriculture Biologist/Weights and
Measurement Inspector IV positions and the addition of two (2) Agriculture Biologist/Weights
and Measurement Inspector I/II/III positons resulting in an annual savings of approximately
$20,000. Funding for all 49 authorized positions will require the use of $474,692 of the
department’s accumulated BSI credits. Consistent with prior years, the department will continue
to utilize extra help staff to assist with seasonal workloads related to State contracts.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the assigned functions. The division receives reimbursement for
cleaning areas subject to illegal dumping and revenue from code enforcement violation fees but
is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

As part of the consolidation of the Public Works budget units into an internal service fund (ISF),
appropriations for salaries and benefits have been shifted to services and supplies to reimburse the ISF for labor applicable to Code Compliance. The division’s revenue is expected to increase
in FY 2015-16 due to an anticipated increase in reimbursable labor performed to clean-up illegal
dumping violations paid out of the Solid Waste Enterprise Fund. A $1.2 million designation has
been established in the General Fund for Blight Remediation to pay for abatement activities and
is transferred to Code Compliance for specific projects throughout the year as needed. The
recommended budget will allow the division to maintain current levels of service.
The recommended budget does not include any authorized positions, all budgeted positions have
been transferred to the Public Works Internal Service Fund.
The majority of the expenditures of the division are associated with staffing cost, engineering
consultant services and reimbursement to Engineering, Surveying and Permit Services for
grading and map checks. The primary source of revenue for the division is building permit fees.

As part of the consolidation of the Public Works budget units into an internal service fund (ISF),
appropriations for salaries and benefits have been shifted to services and supplies to reimburse
the ISF for labor applicable to Building Inspection. Services and supplies and other charges are
expected to increase slightly due to an increased demand for solar and wind energy surveying
and zoning services. The division anticipates revenue to decrease for FY 2015-16 as a result of
fewer building permit requests as compared to FY 2014-15 actual revenue. The budget also
includes appropriation for contingencies in Budget Unit 2624 in the amount of $550,000 to
mitigate uncertainties.
The fund balance as of June 30, 2015 is $3.8 million. Effects of decreased revenue will be
mitigated in FY 2015-16 by using $2.7 million of fund balance available. The remaining fund
balance at year end in the amount of $1.1 million, will be added to the general designation for
use in future years.
The recommended budget will allow the department to maintain or exceed current levels of
service.
The recommended budget does not include any authorized positions, all budgeted positions have
been transferred to the Public Works Internal Service Fund.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs and service
and supplies required to perform the functions of the department. Most of the revenues for this
department are derived from customers for recording and providing copies of documents. In
addition, operating transfers in are received from various other special revenue funds listed in the
summary of revenues that contribute to the functions of the department. The department receives
a General Fund contribution from budget unit 2705 from pass-through revenue comprised of a $1
fee per recording transaction.
Services and supplies includes additional funds to cover to the cost for custodial services
provided by General Services. The department will use its ending fund balance of $567,074 to
establish an appropriation for contingencies in budget unit 2701-Appropriation for Contingencies
Recorder to accommodate unanticipated operational costs, which could not be reasonably
anticipated at the time the budget was prepared.
The majority of expenditures for the agency are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform the administrative and technology services. The division is primarily funded
through charges to non-General Fund departments and by an allocation of Net General Fund
Cost.
The recommended budget has a reduction of Salaries and Benefits of nearly $102,115 primarily
due to a position deletion as well as a reduction in Other Charges of $19,590 due to the final
payment for a phone switch made in FY 2014-15. Appropriations for the purchase of a Storage
Area Network have been included. The recommended budget will allow the division to maintain
current levels of service.
The recommended budget includes funding for 10 authorized positions, and the deletion of one
(1) vacant Technology Services Manager. In addition, the department will keep one (1)
Programmer I/II position vacant during FY 2015-16.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs and
contracts for outside consultants with whom the department contracts with for professional
services. The recommended budget includes $320,623 for RENEWBIZ projects. The division
receives significant revenue from applicant fees and reimbursements for costs related to contracts
for development projects. The remaining funding is primarily an allocation of Net General Fund
Cost.
The division will pursue the update of the Metropolitan Bakersfield General Plan Amendment,
completion of the Consolidated Plan/Action Plan, and the Housing Element update in the coming
fiscal year.

The recommended budget provides the division funding for all but three of its authorized
positions with no impacts to current service levels. The division anticipates an additional $2.1
million in revenue over FY 2014-15 adopted budget due to an increase in Charges for Services
and Other Financing Sources to offset consultant costs on several large planning projects.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Accountant I/II/III position and one
(1) Supervising Planner position as well as the deletion of one (1) Accountant I/II position, one
(1) Senior Office Services Specialist position, and one (1) Planner I/II/III position. The
department does not anticipate any operational impacts due to these position changes.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary for
field services which include local rabies control in accordance with California Health and Safety
Code and animal shelter services. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of
Net General Fund Cost. Other sources of revenue include animal license, animal redemption and
adoption fees as well as reimbursement from the Cities of Tehachapi and Arvin for shelter and
enforcement activities. The department receives a portion of the 1991 health realignment
revenue.

The recommended budget for FY 2015-16 will allow the department to maintain status quo
staffing levels and will continue to provide the resources necessary to maintain a high level of
care for County animals. Completion of the surgical suite capital project at the Fruitvale facility
is included in budget unit 1960 and $250,000 in appropriation for spay and neuter activities is
included in budget unit 1970.
Salaries and benefits will increase as a result of the rise of health benefits and retirement costs.
Services and supplies are anticipated to decrease slightly as the department completes its first full
fiscal year at the Fruitvale Avenue facility and continues to find operational efficiencies. The
department continues to utilize volunteers to facilitate adoptions, provide animal socialization,
and assist with cleaning and sanitization.
Road Fund activities are funded primarily from highway-users sources. Funding consists of
State and federal fuel taxes (Gas Tax), local sales taxes, and development fees. The division also
receives reimbursement from Kern Regional Transit for administrative cost and maintenance and
repairs to the fleet. The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing, equipment and supplies costs for the positions and materials required to construct,
service, and maintain public ways.

As part of the consolidation of the Public Works budget units into an internal service fund (ISF),
appropriations for salaries and benefits have been shifted to services and supplies to reimburse
the ISF for labor applicable to the Roads division. Agreements with Private Entries, under
services and supplies have been reduced by $6.9 million to mitigate the reduction of State
revenue. The amount of Highway Users Tax (HUTA) revenue allocated from the State has
decreased by approximately $3.5 million. To offset the reduction in HUTA revenue, the division
has decreased locally funded paving and sealing projects by $2 million and has budgeted to
decrease fixed asset purchases in the amount of $1.4 million. Federal-Aid project revenue has
increased $10 million from actual revenue with the anticipation of project reimbursements.
The division had an ending fund balance at June 30, 2015 of $12.9 million and general
designations have been canceled in the amount of $8.6 million to balance the budget. The fund
balance is sufficient to cover the FY 2015-16 Net Fund Cost. 
The County Contribution – Roads budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from the
General Fund to the Roads Division of the Public Works Department to support road
maintenance, emergency projects, and ongoing road improvement projects. When available,
funds within this budget unit are transferred to the Roads Division and are reflected in that
budget unit under the revenue category other financing sources.

As part of the consolidation of the Public Works budget units, the recommended budget for FY
2015-16 has been adjusted. Funds previously earmarked for roads will be included in the
Contribution to Public Works budget unit 3016. These funds will be used to reimburse the Public
Works Internal Service Fund for various road maintenance and construction projects including
equipment maintenance and acquisition.
The County Contribution – Public Works budget unit will appropriate supplemental funding
from the General Fund to the Public Works Internal Service Fund to support countywide
maintenance which may include emergency, and ongoing improvement projects. Appropriations
within this budget unit will be transferred to the Public Works Internal Service Fund and will be
reflected in that budget unit under the revenue category other financing sources.

In January 2015, the Board of Supervisors approved the formation of a Public Works
Department that combined the authorized positions of the Roads Department, Waste
Management Department, Code Compliance, Engineering, Surveying and Permit Services,
Building Inspections and Kern Regional Transit into the Public Works Internal Service Fund
(ISF). These departments will reimburse the ISF for labor applicable to their respective
functions.
The recommended budget includes the contribution that was previously allocated to the Roads
Department. This contribution will now be provided to the Public Works Internal Service Fund
to be spent on countywide local road, maintenance and other public works projects including
equipment acquisitions.
Other Financing Uses of $278,753 are available for transfer to the Airports Enterprise Fund to
fund the cost associated with capital facilities, including debt service. This budget unit contains
no revenue as the AEOA revenue is collected within Budget Unit 1112 discretionary revenue as
property taxes for the General Fund.

The recommended budget includes an increase in General Fund Contribution from last fiscal
year of $40,277 or 17% as a result of growth in property tax allocations within the defined area
of the AEOA.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs necessary to
provide the services and perform the functions of the department. The largest revenue category
for the department is intergovernmental, which is comprised of revenue received from the State
and federal government. This revenue is intended to cover the range of services provided by the
department. Charges for service revenue is generated from document recording, clinic fees, case
management fees, laboratory fees, and other sources. The department also receives an allocation
of Net General Fund Cost.
The increase in salaries and benefits when compared to FY 2014-15 is primarily due to rising
employee benefit costs and an anticipated increase in filled positions. A portion of the increase in
employee costs will be recovered through increased charges for services. The recommended
budget includes $95,193 for the acquisition of one (1) replacement storage area network virtual
server, and one (1) additional server.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of four (4) Office Services Technician positions,
two (2) Office Services Specialist positions, one (1) Storekeeper II position, one (1) Fiscal
Support Technician position, one (1) Social Services Worker position, two (2) Medical
Investigator positions, and two (2) Staff Nurse Jr./I position at an annual savings of
approximately $1,200,070. The position deletions will not result in lay-offs.
The recommended budget holds the following authorized positions vacant and unfunded: one (1)
Deputy Public Health Officer, one (1) Public Health Nurse III, one (1) Assistant Public Health
Lab Director, one (1) Public Health Lab Director, two (2) Stock Clerk, four (4) Public Health
Nurse Jr./I/II, one (1) Public Health Aide, one (1) Health Educator, one (1) Medical Investigator,
one (1) Senior Office Services Specialist, and two (2) Office Service Technician positions, at an
annual savings of approximately $1,787,000. The department will be able to provide current
levels of service at the recommended staffing level.
The division receives a significant portion of revenue for permitting, inspecting and enforcement
services provided. The division performs these services for food, hazardous waste, water, solid
waste, housing, and medical waste facilities. A smaller portion of revenue is derived from grants
and educational programs. The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with
staffing costs for positions required to perform the functions assigned.
Revenue collected for permitting and services is anticipated to increase due to fee adjustments
approved by the Board of Supervisors late FY 2014-15. Capital assets expenditures and other
financing sources revenue are elevated in FY 2014-15 due to one-time equipment purchases.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1) Fiscal Support Technician position
and one (1) Building Plans Technician position and the addition of two (2) Environmental Health
Technician I/II/III positions, at an annual net cost of approximately $17,184.
Operating expenses of $44.4 million are comprised mostly of contracted and specialized
professional services, and make up the majority of the department’s expenditures within the
services and supplies category. Staffing expenses of $56.4 million are the other major expense
category for the department. Together, these expenditure categories support programs and
clinics that provide mental health services to County residents. State, federal, and realignment
revenue are provided through sales tax, vehicle license fees, Medi-Cal, MHSA, the Assembly
Bill 109 (AB 109) Public Safety Realignment program, and federal grants.
The department’s primary sources of revenue in FY 2015-16 are Medi-Cal, Realignment, and
MHSA funding. Funds for the programs operated within this budget unit are provided by sources
outside the General Fund. In order to qualify for some of the funding from the State, a County
General Fund contribution in the amount of $771,124 is required and is appropriated in the
Mental Health – County Contribution budget unit 4127.
The department added 44 new, permanent, positions at the end of FY 2014-15 to meet the
increased demand on services resulting from implementation of expanded Medi-Cal services
under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The newly eligible population qualifies for 100%
reimbursement under the Federal Financial Participation reimbursement methodology. After
2016, Medi-Cal will cover no less than 90% of costs on a permanent basis for newly eligible
Medi-Cal beneficiaries. Overall, the department’s revenue and expenditure totals are up slightly
compared to FY 2014-15 due to the increased staffing level costs and corresponding increase in
Medi-Cal revenue. The department’s largest expense items in FY 2015-16 will be salaries and
benefits ($56.4 million) and funds disbursed via service delivery contracts to provide patient
treatment ($33.3 million of the total $44.4 million allocated to services and supplies).
In 2011, the State realigned the assignment of program and fiscal responsibility to local
governments (2011 Realignment). The services that were previously funded with 1991 Mental
Health Program Realignment are now supported by a guaranteed revenue source within the 2011
Realignment structure. 2011 Realignment funds are transferred in equal monthly payments,
relieving the burden of variability in timing of tax receipts that often created cash flow concerns
under the previous 1991 Realignment disbursement model. The department’s share of 2011
Realignment funding will be $40.1 million in FY 2015-16. The department will benefit from a
reversion of State funding for the California Work Opportunities and Responsibilities to Kids
(CalWORKs) program that was previously diverted to the County Department of Human
Services (DHS). CalWORKs funding is budgeted at roughly $2.7 million and will be used to
pilot collaborative programs with DHS that co-locate Mental Health staff at DHS facilities in an
effort to improve outreach to residents who seek both DHS and Mental Health services.
State realignment also brought a new funding source to Mental Health in 2011 via Assembly Bill
109 (AB 109), also known as the Public Safety Realignment Act of 2011. This act shifted a
large portion of the offender population responsibilities from the State to local governments.
Mental Health's AB 109 allocation is $3.1 million for FY 2015-16 and will be used to provide
staffing and increased contractor funding for both in-custody and outpatient mental health
programs and services for the AB 109 population.
Beginning in FY 2012-13, two additional programs were added to the State's 2011 Realignment
budget plan; Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment (EPSDT) and Mental
Health Managed Care. EPSDT is a federally mandated program that requires the County, as the
State's contractor, to provide Medi-Cal beneficiaries under the age of 21 with all medically
necessary specialty mental health services. The Mental Health Managed Care program provides
Medi-Cal beneficiaries with specialty mental health services. The services provided under this
plan include psychiatric inpatient hospital services and outpatient specialty mental health services. The department's EPSDT and Mental Health Managed Care allocations in FY 2015-16
will be $10.3 million and $6.9 million, respectively.
MHSA funding is set at $29.6 million in FY 2015-16 and will be used to provide community and
support services as well as prevention and early intervention services to County residents.
Overall, the FY 2015-16 recommended budget provides the department with the desired
flexibility to continue to meet the demands and challenges of providing quality mental health
services to County residents. The department will use $8.4 million in available fund balance
carry forward from FY 2014-15 to cover the costs of several major maintenance projects needed
at the Mary K. Shell facility, complete the buildout of Tower 1 at the recently acquired 28th
Street administrative facility, and offset the department’s remaining operating fund costs.
The coming fiscal year will bring continued service delivery growth for the Department as newly
enrolled Medi-Cal recipients under the ACA engage the system for services. New Medi-Cal
clients with serious mental illnesses and substance use disorders increased the Department’s
overall units of service in FY 2014-15 by 29% compared to prior year. The department
anticipates a continued and ongoing increase in Medi-Cal funding in the coming fiscal year.
Finally, the department expects to repay the State for cost report settlements related to FY 2008-
09 and FY 2009-10. This payback is a result of the department claiming certain ineligible costs
in prior years. Funds for the anticipated repayments are set aside in designations and will be
repaid once the State completes its settlement processes. The department has improved its cost
reporting and allocation practices to mitigate future paybacks.
The department added 44 full The department added 44 full time positions at the end of FY 2014-15 to meet the increased
demand on services resulting from implementation of expanded Medi-Cal services under the
ACA. The recommended budget includes the addition of one Program Support Supervisor
position at an annual cost of $108,000. The addition is funded by AB 109 resources allocated to
the Mental Health Department by the Community Corrections Partnership.
The department’s largest expense items in FY 2015-16 will be salaries and benefits ($4 million)
and funds disbursed via service delivery contracts for substance abuse counseling and treatment
($10.8 million). Overall, the department’s revenue and expenditure totals are on par with prior
year spending and do not represent significant deviations from the status quo. The department
will use $168,367 in available fund balance carry forward from FY 2014-15 to offset the
department’s remaining operating fund costs.
Funds for the programs operated within this budget unit are provided by sources outside the
General Fund. In order to qualify for much of the funding, a County General Fund contribution
in the amount of $111,363 is required and is appropriated in the Mental Health – County
Contribution budget unit 4127.
The Criminal Justice Realignment Act, also known as AB 109, provides a significant funding
source to the department. AB 109 Realignment funds are split between Mental Health and
Substance Use Disorder services, with the majority of funding applied to direct services
delivered by the department and contracted providers, housing, and medications. Substance Use
Disorders’ programmatic allocation of AB 109 funding in FY 2015-16 is $1.5 million, which
will be used to provide evidence-based treatment to inmates in the Lerdo Jail Facility and
community-based treatment for the released AB 109 population. The Substance Abuse
Prevention and Treatment block grant will provide approximately $4.3 million in funding to the
department in FY 2015-16 and the General Fund will contribute $196,328 for assistance with
gang suppression activities.
With the rollout of 2011 Realignment, the State shifted program responsibilities and
corresponding revenue to local government. This plan realigned several substance abuse
treatment programs that were previously funded through the State Department of Alcohol and
Drug Programs. The realigned programs include Regular and Perinatal Drug Medi-Cal, Regular
and Perinatal Non Drug Medi-Cal, and Drug Courts. Funding levels remain relatively consistent
with pre-realignment levels, and no service impacts have been experienced with this change.
2011 Realignment funding amounts to $3.4 million in the recommended budget.
The coming fiscal year will bring continued service delivery growth for the Department as newly
enrolled Medi-Cal recipients under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) engage the system for
services. New Medi-Cal clients with serious mental illnesses and substance use disorders
increased the Department’s overall units of service in FY 2014-15 by 29% compared to prior
year. Medi-Cal beneficiaries enrolled through the State’s ACA expansion efforts have 100% of
their costs reimbursed by the Federal Government for the first three years of coverage, as
opposed to a 50% Federal and 50% local funding arrangement used in years prior to the ACA.
After 2016, Medi-Cal will cover no less than 90% of costs for the newly eligible and enrolled
beneficiaries on a permanent basis.
The recommended budget includes the addition of two Mental Health Recovery Specialist I/II/III
positions at an annual cost of $198,000. The additions are funded by AB 109 resources allocated
to the Substance Use Disorders Department by the Community Corrections Partnership.
The State requires the County to appropriate funding through a Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for
mental health and substance use disorders services in the amounts of $771,124 and $111,362
respectively. The County contribution includes an additional $196,327 to Substance Use
Disorders budget unit 4123 for assistance with gang suppression activities. Funding for this
program was reduced by 5% in FY 2014-15 from $206,659 down to $196,326 and remains at
prior year level to mitigate fiscal constraints on the County General Fund.
In addition to the MOE and General Fund contribution, the Mental Health Services operating
budget unit 4120 will receive $402,624 in 1991 Realignment Vehicle License Fees (VLF)
revenue and $461,002 in one-time prior year 1991 Realignment growth funds.

The recommended budget represents the mandated funding in accordance with MOE
requirements. Gang suppression funding remains consistent with prior year and the department
has indicated there will be no significant service level impacts.
The division receives revenue for issuing ambulance permits, issuing certifications and recertifications,
performing oversight of trauma systems at Kern Medical Center and for medical
assessment fees collected from court fines and penalties. The largest expenditure category for the
division is staffing which is anticipated to remain relatively flat.

The division’s largest revenue source, transfers from the Emergency Medical Services Fund, is
expected to increase next fiscal year due to the implementation of the Richie’s Fund program.
This program collects additional revenue by levying charges on the same fines and forfeitures as
the core Emergency Medical Services Fund. The increase in charges for services revenue is
primarily due to a revision of the ambulance rates process that required service providers to
reimburse the division for contracted rate reviews. This has no net impact on the division as the
services and supplies expense will increase by an identical amount. Salaries and benefits remain
flat in FY 2015-16 due to similar staffing levels.
This budget unit accounts for $37.5 million in payments to the Kern Medical Center (KMC) and
Correctional Medicine budget units for providing medical care to indigent, uninsured residents,
and inmates housed in the County’s detention facilities. In total, the County has budgeted $23.2
million for Correctional Medicine ($19.3 million for adult inmate care and $3.9 million for
juvenile inmate care). The remaining County contribution is comprised of $2 million in capital
project re-budgets, $2.4 million for a 2006-07 Disproportionate Share Hospital Safety Net Care
Pool payment, and $7.4 million earmarked for day-to-day operations at KMC.
In prior years, some of the County’s costs were offset by an allocation of 1991 Health
Realignment derived from sales taxes and vehicle license fees. However, due to the State’s new
Realignment methodology approved under Assembly Bill 85 (AB 85), the County anticipates
drastically reduced funding from 1991 Health Realignment in FY 2015-16 as a result of the
hospital’s enhanced Medi-Cal reimbursement for the previously uninsured. The recommended
budget includes $2.3 million from 1991 Health Realignment.

The hospital is partially funded by an allocation from 1991 Health Realignment revenue to help
offset the cost of providing medical services to indigent adult patients. The State implemented
Medi-Cal expansion to those individuals with incomes up to 138% of the federal poverty level under the federal Affordable Care Act (ACA) beginning January 2014. As a result, individuals
previously covered by the County as indigent residents have gained health care coverage under
Medi-Cal expansion, resulting in increased Medi-Cal revenue for the hospital. The Brown
Administration assumes counties will achieve enough savings from expanded Medi-Cal
eligibility to offset the State’s reductions in realignment funding. Due to the hospital’s improved
reimbursement from Medi-Cal, the recommended allocation of 1991 Health Realignment
revenue is $2.3 million in FY 2015-16, a reduction of $9.6 million compared to FY 2014-15.
The County is currently exploring the possibility of transitioning KMC into a separate Hospital
Authority. On September 26, 2014, Governor Brown approved Assembly Bill 2546-Salas (AB
2546) which gave the Board of Supervisors the authority to establish, by ordinance, the Kern
County Hospital Authority to manage, administer, and control KMC. Until an enabling
ordinance is adopted and the Board transfers control of KMC to the Hospital Authority, KMC
will remain a County owned and operated hospital under the control of the Board of Supervisors.
The County is currently performing a feasibility analysis to determine if the Authority is the best
operational model for the hospital. It is not anticipated that the transfer of control will occur in
FY 2015-16.
Since KMC will continue as a County owned and operated facility in FY 2015-16, it is
recommended that the County General Fund contribute $7.4 million to KMC in FY 2015-16 to
support the hospital’s day-to-day operations. By comparison, KMC received a $9.9 million
contribution to fund day-to-day operations in FY 2014-15. The FY 2015-16 General Fund
contribution is reduced by 2.4% as a result of the NGFC reduction for all departments and is
further offset by the unexpected retention of $2.3 million in 1991 Health Realignment funds. In
addition, the General Fund will also allocate $23.2 million in FY 2015-16 to cover adult and
juvenile inmate medical costs.
Finally, the recommended budget includes approximately $2 million in capital project re-budgets
and $2.4 million to cover the 2006-07 Disproportionate Share Hospital Safety Net Care Pool
payment to the State.
The administrative and case management costs incurred by CCS are reimbursed by the State and
federal government, at varying ratios, depending on the health benefits a child is eligible to
receive. Medi-Cal eligibility results in a 100% reimbursement by the State; Targeted Low
Income Children’s Program (formerly Healthy Families) eligibility results in an 82.5%
reimbursement. Ineligibility for either program results in a 50% State reimbursement to CCS.
Revenue from the State is budgeted using actual CCS caseload eligibility statistics for the current
year. Medical therapy services are reimbursed 50% by the State. Services and supplies
expenditures include costs related to diagnostic and treatment services provided.

While the FY 2014-15 budget funded 60 authorized positions, greater than anticipated vacancies
lowered the salaries and benefits costs for the year. The FY 2015-16 recommended budget
assumes that all authorized positions will be filled resulting in salaries and benefits higher than
FY 2014-15. In an effort to alleviate the cost and inefficiency of paper record keeping, a software platform was purchased in FY 2014-15 to provide protected electronic transmittal of patient
health data and allow for electronic document storage, indexing and data mining. The completion
of this project will result in lower services and supplies expenditures in FY 2015-16.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Therapy Supervisor position, and the
deletion of one (1) Program Support Supervisor position, one (1) Office Services Technician
position, and one (1) Office Services Assistant position, at an annual net savings of
approximately $60,097.
The recommended budget includes holding vacant and unfunded one (1) Occupational/Physical
Therapist position and one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist position, at an annual savings of
approximately $250,118.
Salaries and benefits are the largest expenditure of this budget unit totaling $148.2 million which
covers employee costs for the administration and operation of various programs such as
CalWORKs, CalFresh, Child Protective Services, Adoptions, and Foster Care. Services and
supplies are budgeted at $45 million which includes the cost associated with community
providers for services required under several programs. Other charges are budgeted at $17.7
million and include reimbursements to other County departments for professional services for
programs as well as administrative costs through the county-wide cost allocation plan.
The largest revenue source for the department is federal and State reimbursements in the amount
of $165.3 million. The majority of funding for the department's various programs is funded by
federal and State funds, however many programs have a County share of cost which is the
portion the County is responsible for funding. The County's responsibility is funded by $25.2
million in 2011 Realignment revenues, $1.7 million in 1991 Realignment revenues, and $29
million in General Fund contribution. Realignment revenues are derived from sales taxes and
vehicle license fee collections of the State and as such are contingent upon the stability of the
economy.

The recommended budget includes an increase in appropriation of approximately $15.5 million
due primarily to filling federal, State, and 2011 Realignment funded positions added during FY
2014-15 for administration of Medi-Cal, CalFresh, CalWORKs, and Child Welfare Services, an
increase in retirement rate, an increase in health benefits and an increase in General Assistance
caseload. The budget continues to include $560,000 for expanded Phase 1 Differential Response
services provided by the Kern County Network for Children.
Intergovernmental revenue is increasing $13.7 million primarily due to the increase in
administration costs associated with CalWORKs, CalFresh, Medi-Cal, Family Stabilization, and
Expanded Subsidized Employment. The County Contribution from the General Fund is
increasing by $17.1 million from the FY 2014-15 adopted budget, which includes $14.8 million
necessary to cover a shortfall in fund balance available at June 30, 2015 of $10.6 million and
$4.2 million to maintain current service levels. The recommended budget is sufficient to cover
the County's financial responsibility of providing financial assistance to eligible recipients in the
community.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Fiscal Support Supervisor position
and the deletion of one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist position. The department funds all of its
authorized permanent positions and 180 extra help positions; however, an adjustment is included
in total salaries to account for the savings related to staff turnover in the amount of $7.2 million.
The recommended budget provides $30.7 million to budget unit 5120, Human Services
Administration, and $73.3 million to budget unit 5220, Human Services Direct Financial Aid for
a total of $103.9 million in appropriations.
These contributions are funded by Social Services Program Realignment revenues of $1.7
million for Administration and $22.9 million for Direct Financial Aid; redirected 1991 Health
Services Program Realignment for Child Poverty and Family Support revenue of $32.1 million
for Direct Financial Aid; and finally $12.8 million of CalWORKs Maintenance of Effort Vehicle
License Fees for Direct Financial Aid. The remaining $34.5 million is provided by a
contribution from the General Fund.
The recommended budget includes an overall increase over FY 2014-15 actual of approximately
$23.3 million in appropriations budgeted to be transferred to the Department of Human Services
budget units. The additional contribution is funded by an increase of $20.2 million in General
Fund contribution and an increase in 1991 Social Services Program Realignment of $3.2 million.
The increased General Fund contribution is necessary to cover a fund balance shortfall as of June
30, 2015 as a result of higher caseload demands resulting in greater aid payments primarily in
General Assistance and Foster Care Programs and a shortfall of other revenue that impacted fund
balance. In addition, the increased General Fund contribution will provide the Department of
Human Services budget units sufficient funds to cover the County's anticipated financial
responsibility of providing financial assistance and social services programs to eligible recipients
in the community during FY 2015-16.
See Human Services Administration budget unit 5120 and Human Services - Direct Financial
Aid budget unit 5220 for further discussion.
The Human Services – Direct Financial Aid budget unit provides direct financial assistance to
qualifying persons throughout the County. CalWORKs is the greatest expenditure out of this
budget unit at approximately $124.3 million. Adoptions Assistance and Foster Care Assistance
are budgeted at $33.9 million and $46.6 million, respectively.
Major revenue sources of the department include $84 million in federal funds and $133.2 million
in 2011 Realignment and 1991 Realignment funding.
The recommended budget includes a $9.1 million increase in expenditures over FY 2014-15 as a
result of anticipated increases in CalWORKs assistance payments, an increased general
assistance grant amount approved in FY 2013-14, and an increase in Foster Care payments due
to increased rates to be paid to foster family agencies as prescribed by the federal government.
Realignment revenue is budgeted at a $13.1 million increase over FY 2014-15, which includes
$7.6 million in carry forward from the prior year. Intergovernmental revenue is budgeted at a
$8.6 million increase over FY 2014-15 actual to cover increases in CalWORKs assistance and
Foster Care costs. The recommended budget also includes a $5.5 million contribution from the
General Fund, which includes $3.8 million necessary to cover a shortfall in fund balance
available at June 30, 2015. The recommended budget is sufficient to cover the County's
financial responsibility of providing financial assistance to eligible recipients in the community.
The majority of expenditures in this budget unit are associated with staffing costs to perform the
services provided by the Veterans’ Service Department. The department is primarily funded by
an allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). Additional sources of revenue are from State
Aid for Veterans’ Affairs and the sale of veterans’ license plates.

The recommended budget includes a reduction in revenue due to one-time funding from the
California Department of Veterans’ Affairs and miscellaneous grant awards received in FY
2014-15. The department anticipates higher salaries and benefits cost in FY 2015-16 due to
increasing health insurance benefits, retirement costs and increase in filled positions. The
increase in NGFC is associated with grant funding received in the FY 2014-15 budget that was rebudgeted. The recommended budget allows for the department to maintain current service
levels.
The recommended budget includes holding one (1) Office Services Assistant position vacant and
unfunded. The department is mitigating impacts from this change through the use of one extrahelp
position.
Staffing expenses of $11.5 million fund 187 budgeted positions, of which 126 are permanent
positions and 61 are extra-help/temporary positions. Services and supplies expenditures of $3.5
million consist of cost for contracted services for adult protective services, supportive services,
senior nutrition programs and California Department of Aging programs. The department is
primarily funded through federal and State sources of $10.2 million that include revenue for
senior nutrition, protective services, and supportive services. Additionally, the department
receives approximately $1.5 million in 2011 Realignment revenue, $722,439 in 1991 Social
Servies Realignment, and $808,636 from an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget includes an increase in salaries and benefits in FY 2015-16 primarily
due to the continued conversion of per diem employees to permanent and/or extra help, budgeted
increase of minimum wage effective January 1, 2016, providing nutrition services previously
contracted to a vendor, and an increase in retirement and health benefits costs. A portion of
increased salaries and benefits are offset by increased revenue from federal and State sources.
Other charges are projected to decrease by approximately $187,000 primarily due to a decrease
in the county-wide cost allocation charges.
Revenue is expected to increase in FY 2015-16 due to an anticipated increase in reimbursable
activities for the IHSS program. The increase of approximately $345,000 Net General Fund Cost
from FY 2014-15 is the result of lower fund balance available at June 30, 2015. The Aging and
Adult Services fund balance at June 30, 2015 was $652,609, of which all has been budgeted in
FY 2015-16.
The recommended budget includes funding for 127 permanent authorized positions and 61 extrahelp/
temporary positions.
The department has requested to add two (2) Part-Time Senior Nutrition Site Coordinator
positions, one (1) Part-Time Food Service Worker I position, eight (8) Part-Time Senior Home
Delivery Driver positions, seven (7) Part-Time Cook I/II positions, two (2) Program Technician
positions, one (1) Program Support Supervisor position, and one (1) Social Services Supervisor
position. The permanent Part-Time Senior Nutrition Site Coordinator positions, Part-Time Food
Service Worker I position, and Part-Time Senior Home Delivery Driver positions are currently
filled with extra-help/per diem positions, which will no longer be needed once the permanent
positions are filled. The department will unfund and delete Food Service Worker I/II positions as
they become vacant, which will offset the cost of the Cook I/II positions. The net increase of these changes will primarily be funded with Department of Social Services and California
Department of Aging funds. The department will hold nine positions vacant and unfunded: one
(1) Program Specialist II position, two (2) Cook I/II/III positions, one (1) Social Service Worker
I/II/III position and five (5) Food Services Worker I/II positions.
The recommended budget includes an allocation to Aging and Adult Services Department,
budget unit 5610, in the amount of approximately $1.5 million to meet County match
requirements in specific programs as required by State and federal regulations. Social services
program realignment revenue provides funding in the amount of $722,439, with the remainder
being funded by a General Fund contribution.

The recommended budget includes an increase of approximately $345,000 in Net General Fund
Cost (NGFC) from FY 2014-15. The reduction in NGFC in FY 2014-15 was a result of a higher
than anticipated fund balance available at June 30, 2014. The budget as recommended will
enable the department to maintain status quo service levels.
The recommended budget includes a contribution of $8 million to cover the IHSS Maintenance
of Effort (MOE) with the State as well as the County’s administrative costs of the IHSS Public
Authority. Social services program realignment revenue in the amount of $8 million offsets the
County’s local match requirement.
Major expenditures for FY 2015-16 include salaries and benefits of $10.5 million to fund 97
budgeted positions. The costs in this budget unit are funded primarily by operating transfers in
from budget unit 8907, Employers' Training Resource – WIOA.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to allow the department to maintain its
current level of service to the community. The WIOA funds received by the department cover
two fiscal years at a time while many of their smaller grants cross fiscal years. The department
budgets the full amount of each grant available, regardless of which fiscal year they will be
spent.
Salaries and benefits of $10.5 million fund 97 authorized positions. The department is adding
eleven positions, including one (1) Accountant I/II/III position, one (1) Program Coordinator
position, eight (8) Program Specialist I/II positions, and one (1) Office Services Coordinator
position. The Program Specialist I/II positions are currently filled with extra-help positions,
which will no longer be needed once the permanent positions are filled. The funding for the
additional Program Specialist positions will be provided by a memorandum of understanding for
placement services with the Department of Human Services and will offset the cost of extra-help
positions funded in prior years. In addition, one (1) Senior Office Services Specialist position
and one (1) Fiscal Support Specialist position will be deleted, which will offset the cost of the
Office Services Coordinator position and the Accountant I/II/III position. The department
anticipates maintaining current levels of service for its primary mandated tasks of providing
employment services to job seekers and businesses with a higher level of continuity in placement
services.
The major expenditures for the division include the staff and related expenditures related to the
administration of the grant programs. The expenditures are funded with an allocation of the
grants. There is no General Fund contribution to this budget unit.

The recommended budget includes funding similar to FY 2014-15, allowing the division to
continue operations without any impacts to service levels.
The preliminary recommended budget includes funding for 11 permanent positions, and
continues to hold vacant and unfunded one (1) Housing Inspector position from FY 2014-15.
Staffing expenses are the largest portion of the department’s expenditures for FY 2015-16, which
includes staffing for all the library facilities and the mobile units. Services and supplies
expenditures of $1.8 million include operating expenses for branch locations, memberships, and
library books and materials. Funding for books is established in the recommended budget at
$389,205, which is $131,205 more than in FY 2014-15. Included in services in supplies is
funding for participation in San Joaquin Valley Library System (SJVLS). SJVLS is an
organization composed of nine public libraries in six counties. As a member of SJVLS Kern
County residents are able to search the shared catalog and request that items be sent to their
preferred branch.
The department is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. The transfer from
the County Library donation fund is used to cover the OverDrive contract for Ebooks.
Throughout the fiscal year, funds are transferred to purchase materials and enhancements of
service. During FY 2014-15, $153,277 was transferred and used for library materials, reading
programs and Wi-Fi.

The recommended budget will allow the department to add wireless service to all branches
currently without wireless connectivity and provides additional funding that will support 37,864
combined hours of opening at all 27 library facilities. The increase hours will allow the Beale
Memorial branch to be open an additional one day per week allowing for seven days per week
service. The department is projecting a slight decrease in revenue due to more patrons using ebooks,
which are not assessed late fees.
The recommended budget includes funding for 118 authorized permanent positions and 50 extra
help positions. The department will delete one (1) vacant Fiscal Support Technician position and
hold four positions vacant and unfunded: one (1) Librarian III position, two (2) Librarians II
positions and one (1) Assistant Director position.
A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs to perform
the functions of the Farm and Home Advisor. The department is primarily funded by an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all authorized positions,
which requires the department to use $38,739 of its accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits. Overall the recommended budget includes expenses and revenues similar to FY 2014-15.
The recommended budget will allow the County to retain the educational and economic benefit
of hosting the cooperative extension researchers from the University of California.
Staffing costs of $7.8 million fund 81 permanent positions for the administration, operations and
maintenance of the County’s numerous parks and County buildings. Services and supplies
appropriations of $4.5 million include utilities, maintenance, insurance, and fleet costs. The
department is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Additional sources of
$2.1 million represents fees from camping, fishing, park entrance, facility use, permits, and
concession agreements.

In FY 2014-15, the department continued with the evaluation of the maintenance needs in remote
locations, as well as the restructuring of the department organizational structure, specifically the
Park Rangers. These operational reviews lead to the department not filling funded Parks Rangers
and Maintenance Worker positions, resulting in lower salaries and benefit costs in FY 2014-15.
The recommended budget provides funding that will allow the department to fund 81 of the 94
authorized positions. This will require the department to hold three additional positions vacant
and unfunded in FY 2015-16. Charges for services is slightly increasing due to fee adjustments
approved by the Board of Supervisors in FY 2014-15. Services and supplies will remain
relatively at the same level as FY 2014-15. The department began implementation of drought
related restrictions in FY 2014-15 and will continue to monitor drought requirements and
implement water conservation programs to reduce water usage at parks and recreational facilities
throughout the County.
The FY 2015-16 recommended budget includes funding to maintain current operations and to
allow for an increase in the level of service to the public through the privatization of services in
Phase III areas (Frazier Park, Ford City, Valley Acres, Derby Acres, and Fellows). This model
has worked well for the department in Phase I (Lost Hills, Wasco, Shafter, McFarland and
Delano), and the department hopes to realize budget savings, as well as concentrate the staff in
the metro-Bakersfield and regional parks area.
The recommended budget includes funding for 81 of the 94 authorized positions and 12 extra
help positions. The department will hold vacant and unfunded eight (8) Groundskeeper I
positions, three (3) Building Services Worker positions, one (1) Tree Trimmer II position and
two (2) Park Ranger positions. One (1) vacant Maintenance Worker I/II position will be deleted
and one (1) Fiscal Support Technician position and one (1) Tree Trimmer III position will be
added to better service operational needs.
The recommended budget includes an increase in services and supplies of $91,000 to reimburse
the County Administrative Office for the cost of staff assigned to perform the additional
administrative and compliance duties associated with the refunding of the Tobacco Settlement
Asset-Backed Bonds and the increase in the rent cost for the additional vacant space in the
Southeast Bakersfield Community Services Center. Other charges increased as a result of the
interest cost associated with the FY 2015-16 Tax and Revenue Anticipation Bonds. The notes were sold with a premium of approximately 7% or $11,960,000 resulting in net interest cost of
$605,000.
Expenditures are not incurred in this budget unit but rather appropriations are transferred to other
General Fund budget units under limited circumstances if approved by the Board of Supervisors.
The recommended budget includes the appropriation of 1% of General Fund general purpose
revenue in the amount of $4 million to accommodate unanticipated operational changes,
legislative impacts, or other economic events affecting the County’s operations that could not
have been reasonably anticipated. In addition, $500,000 is appropriated for other uncertainties
departments may encounter such as emergency maintenance projects and other unforeseen
circumstances. The budget unit is funded through an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

In addition to the standard general purpose contingencies identified above, the recommended
budget includes set asides for the following:
? $250,000 for Animal Services spay/neuter activities.
? $1,000,000 for potential Senate Bill 90 State mandated audit liabilities.
? $2,020,110 for coverage of the Group Health Internal Service Fund negative retained
earnings. Reserves have been substantially depleted after reduced charges to departments
and unexpected claims fluctuations.
The recommended budget includes $921,346 in appropriation for contingencies and $8.8 million,
or 39% of total funds, to provide contracts to service providers, individual training accounts, on
the job training contracts and other services and assistance to clients. Another $12.7 million has
been budgeted to be transferred to Budget Unit 5923, Employers' Training Resource, to fund
employee salaries and benefits, as well as other operational costs to provide employment and
client services. Revenues of $20.9 million, primarily Department of Labor WIOA funding,
support federal programs administered by ETR.

Budgeted resources are sufficient to maintain service levels and the department continuously
seeks out additional revenue sources in order to expand or augment services provided. The
department has budgeted to use assigned fund balance at June 30, 2015 in the amount of
$1,453,531 which includes $532,185 of unspent 2011 Realignment AB109 growth funding for
job training services for certain released inmates. The WIOA funds received by the department
cover two fiscal years at a time while many of their smaller grants cross fiscal years. The
department budgets the full amount of each grant available, regardless of which fiscal year they
will be spent.
Services and supplies of $90,000 and other charges of $50,000 are estimated to be adequate to
cover expenditures that may arise through the normal course of business during FY 2015-16 that
will not qualify for reimbursement under special grants or federal funding provided by the
Department of Labor.
The recommended budget includes the use of $165,800 of the department's $365,905 assigned
fund balance as of June 30, 2015.

The recommended budget provides sufficient funding to administer and operate the non-WIOA
programs in the County. Operating transfers in the amount of $30,000 reimburse expenditures
incurred in the department's operating budget units 5923 Administration and 8907 Employers'
Training Resource – WIOA, for which federal funding is not available. Funding from the
Department of Labor for the Drought Relief Program was available in FY 2014-15, however,
there is no indication the program will be continued through FY 2015-16.
The recommended budget is a reflection of available federal allocation to the County. The
majority of expenditures are associated with projects. Other financing uses include
reimbursement to Community Development for the administration of the program. There is no
cost to the General Fund. Projects proposed for approval by both the Board of Supervisors and
HUD for FY 2015-16 are:
• Buttonwillow Senior Park Improvements: Design and construction of a new park on
County-owned land to serve community of Buttonwillow senior citizens.
• California Infrastructure Bank Loan Payment: Loan payment for the construction of
street and drainage improvements in unincorporated East Bakersfield and Lamont.
City of Ridgecrest – Senior Center Parking Lot Rehabilitation: Design and construction
of improvements to rehabilitate the Ridgecrest Senior Center parking lot, including
compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
• City of Shafter Kirschenmann and Stringham Parks Improvements: Design,
rehabilitation, and construction of improvements at Kirschenmann and Stringham Parks.
and construction of permanent playground equipment, surface materials, pathways, and
other related improvements for the Child Development Center.
• City of Tehachapi Northside Neighborhood Sidewalk and Alleyway Improvements:
Design and construction of sidewalks, alleyways, and other related improvements within
City's right-of-way.
• Community Action Partnership of Kern Food Bank Solar Energy Improvements: Design
and construction/installation of solar energy system panels and other related
improvements to improve energy efficiency of an existing, food bank warehouse.
• East Bakersfield Bicycle/Pedestrian Safety Street Improvements: Design and
construction of street improvements in the public rights-of-way.
• Ford City Park Improvements: Design and construction/rehabilitation of neighborhood
park improvements serving the community of Ford City.
• Housing Authority of the County of Kern Sunset Labor Camp Improvements: Design,
construction and/or rehabilitation of improvements for the Sunset Labot Camp which
may include installation of new outdoor lighting and ADA accessible improvements.
• Oildale Bicycle/Pedestrian Safety Street Improvements: Design and construction of
street improvements in the public rights-of-way.
• Rosamond Senior Center Parking Lot Rehabilitation Improvements: Design and
rehabilitation of senior center parking lot improvements.
Budget Changes and Operational Impacts
The recommended budget provides adequate funding to support the Community Development
Block Grant Program pursuant to the Housing and Community Development Act. Revenue and
expenditures fluctuate annually based on identified eligible projects. The recommended budget
includes funding for an additional $5.5 million in projects over the previous fiscal year actual.
All budgeted expenditures are to ensure funding is available for qualifying applicants. The fund
has sufficient projected fund balance available at June 30, 2015 to cover the Net Fund Cost.
There is no cost to the General Fund.
Although there has been no activity in prior years, the recommended budget continues to
establish spending authority in order to fund projects should an eligible business apply to the
program for funding.
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development notified Community Development
that the grant period has expired and funds will not be available in FY 2015-16. Funding may
become available in future years
The recommended budget includes an additional $15,484 in funding, which is offset by an
increase in revenues in the same amount. The increase is primarily due to the department having
prior year carry forward grant funding allocations from the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has yet to notify Community
Development whether the program has ended and whether there will be any funding available
under this grant in FY 2015-16.

The department has $53,726 in fund balance available to use in FY 2015-16. In FY 2014-15, the
funds provided by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development were not expended
and are available to be budgeted in FY 2015-16.
The majority of expenditures are associated with projects and administrative cost funded through
the federal program. There is no cost to the General Fund.

The department has multiple projects that crossover fiscal years. The recommended budget
provides approximately $5.8 million in funding over FY 2014-15 actual costs in anticipation of
the completion of multiple projects which include construction and renovation of low to verylow
income housing. The department has budgeted to use all of its fund balance available at
June 30, 2015, which totals $66,961.
Major expenses for the department include new vehicle purchases for customer departments and
the supplies needed to service the vehicles. Remaining expenses cover the staffing needed to service customer vehicles and respond to service requests. Revenue for the department is
primarily derived from charges to departments for vehicle purchases and services provided.

The recommended budget includes the purchase of 26 vehicles at a cost of $685,260. In FY
2014-2015 the department budgeted 48 vehicle purchases, which accounts for the variance in
capital assets expenses. The decrease in the services and supplies object is primarily due to a
decrease in the number of Sheriff vehicles that will be serviced, resulting in fewer parts being
needed. The Sheriff will be using an outside vendor to expedite vehicle repairs turn-around time.
The retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2015 is $224,776. The recommended budget
anticipates $523,464 in revenue above expenses, bringing total potential retained earnings to
$748,240. The department also anticipate increasing the vehicle replacement designation by
$648,290, which will be used to cover the cost of future vehicle purchases. This increase in
designations will reduce total potential retained earnings, resulting in an estimated retained
earnings balance for June 30, 2016 of $100,000.
A majority of expenses in this fund will be used for salaries and benefits that will be reimbursed
from the appropriate budget units. Services and supplies include reimbursement from the
consolidated budget units for equipment maintenance and for contracts for countywide local
roads maintenance and other public works projects.

The recommended budget includes the contribution that was previously allocated to the Roads
Departments. This contribution will now be provided to the Public Works Internal Service Fund
to be spent on countywide local roads maintenance and other public works projects. A retained
earnings balance of $2 million is estimated for June 30, 2016.
The recommended budget includes 454 authorized positions that were previously transferred
from the Roads, Kern Regional Transit, Waste Management, Engineering, Surveying and
Permitting Services, Code Compliance and Building Inspections budget units. The recommended
budget includes 455 authorized positions after the addition of one (1) Waste Management
Technician I/II at an estimated cost of $103,000. The additional position will assist with
enhancements to the greenwaste program.
This budget unit funds all expenses related to active employee health care benefits with
utilization and actual claims being the primary drivers of costs. The recommended budget also
includes $1 million allocated for Patient-Centered Outcome (PCORI) fees and reinsurance fees
now payable to the federal government under the Affordable Care Act. The Human Resources
Division is exploring changes to health plan cost-sharing and employee wellness and education
in an effort to reduce overall claims expenses for self-funded plan options. Revenue is also
expected to increase, primarily due to an 18% increase in the employer contribution, in order to
ensure adequate reserves are maintained.
Actuarially recommended minimum reserves (unrestricted retained earnings) were $25 million
for FY 2013-14, excluding Incurred But Not Reported (IBNR) liabilities of $10 million.
Reserves have been significantly depleted after reduced charges to departments and unexpected
claims fluctuation, an appropriation for contingency has been included in the General Fund to
increase reserves if expected savings are not achieved. The reserve is budgeted to increase by
$1.4 million in FY 2015-16. The estimated retained earnings balance at June 30, 2016 is $11.4
million.

Department charges have been budgeted at an increase of 18% after remaining flat for several
years. Reserves have been below recommended levels for some time. Due to higher than
expected costs in the prior fiscal year, reserves are now virtually depleted with only the
minimum IBNR amount remaining. Despite expected savings related to changes in plan
offerings and reductions in administrative costs, claims expenses are budgeted to remain
relatively flat in the next fiscal year, as there is always a potential for increased expenses due to
general medical inflation.
This budget unit collects and distributes appropriate employee and County contributions for the
retiree health benefits programs; all revenue and expenses in this fund are related to these
programs. Both the Stipend and RHPSP assist in paying monthly health benefits costs for
qualified County or special district retirees and their dependents or beneficiaries. Based on
current enrollment, total annual expenses are estimated at $10 million. Administration of these
programs is funded through a small fee charged to retirees as part of their monthly health
benefits costs, at a budgeted cost of $230,000. Most retirees contribute directly to pay at least a
portion of their retiree health care costs, limiting the County’s total liability.
In prior fiscal years, more than $50 million in Retiree Group Health Program reserves were
transferred to an irrevocable trust fund for funding of future Other Post-Employment Benefits
(OPEB). Beginning in FY 2014-15, biweekly employee and County contributions to the Stipend
and RHPSP programs are now deposited directly into the OPEB trust. Monthly program
expenses are then reimbursed from the OPEB trust. This budget unit still maintains minimum
reserves adequate to ensure payment of benefits on a monthly basis and is reimbursed from the
OPEB trust for actual expenses for both the Stipend and RHPSP programs for current retirees.
Additional reserves may be transferred to the OPEB trust fund as appropriate. The recommended
budget decreases retained earnings by $520,000, which approximates this fund’s budgeted
appropriations for contingencies. Retained earnings are estimated at $1.5 million for June 30,
2016.
The primary expenses of this budget unit are insurance expenses and legal costs. This budget unit
is financed primarily through charges to County departments for coverage and services provided.

The recommended budget provides adequate funding for the County’s General Liability
Program. Expense changes are based on anticipated settlement and litigation activity. Charges
for services revenue will adjust to reflect estimated administrative and claims costs. However,
expenses will exceed revenue as retained earnings will be used to control premiums charged to
departments. The retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2015 was $13.2 million. The
department anticipates decreasing retained earnings by $2.6 million to offset expenses. A
retained earnings balance of $10.6 million is anticipated for June 30, 2016.
The majority of expenses in this budget unit are payment of actual unemployment benefit claims.
Future unemployment costs are not easily estimated, as unemployment costs are based upon
wages earned in a base period that is up to 18 months prior to the date of the claim. The
availability of other employment in the community also has an effect on the County’s claims.
The maximum unemployment claim is $11,700, based on the claimant drawing the maximum
weekly benefit of $450 for the first 26 weeks of unemployment. Revenue in this budget unit is
primarily comprised of charges to County departments based on each individual department’s
actual unemployment experience and claims.

Based on trends in recent years, it is expected that the unemployment claims for eligible former
employees will not increase substantially and may even decline. The recommended budget
increases expenses over the prior year, as total unemployment claims were higher than the
budgeted amount in FY 2014-15. Charges to departments have been increased slightly to help maintain adequate reserves. The recommended budget would provide for an increase in
budgetary retained earnings in the amount of $23,000 for FY 2015-16. After adjusting for the
Incurred But Not Reported (IBNR) liability, the budgetary retained earnings are estimated at
$1.7 million at June 30, 2016.
The Workers’ Compensation Self-Insurance Program is financed through direct charges to
County departments largely based on each department’s claims history. The primary expense for
the program is claims costs of injured workers.

The recommended budget includes increased expenses compared to prior year actual to reflect a
projected increase in claims costs, and changes in administrative costs from the Risk
Management Division due to higher anticipated staffing levels. Charges for services revenue will
adjust to reflect estimated administrative and claims costs. However, expenses will exceed
revenue as retained earnings will be used to control premiums charged to departments. The
retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2015 was $10.9 million. The department anticipates
decreasing retained earnings by $2.1 million to offset expenses. A retained earnings balance of
$8.8 million is anticipated for June 30, 2016.
Staffing expenses of $2.4 million fund 23 positions that provide support for seven Countyoperated
airports. Expenses for services and supplies of $2.1 million include property insurance,
utilities, other professional services, and general maintenance. In addition, expenses of $3.6
million are budgeted to cover county-wide cost allocation charges and depreciation. The
department has also included debt service payments totaling $937,890 and capital expenses of
$17.4 million for the repaving of the main runway at Meadows Field as well as other various
projects, which will be primarily funded with State and federal reimbursements.
The County's airports produce revenue to operate and maintain the airport system. The
recommended budget includes $3.5 million in revenue associated to space rentals, concessions
and user fees. Additionally, the Meadows Field Airport receives a County contribution from the
General Fund from property taxes collected in the Airport Economic Opportunity Area. State
and federal grants are significant sources of revenue to construct, improve and maintain airport
infrastructure.

The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 23 permanent authorized
positions and three extra help positions. Appropriations of $17.4 million are included in capital
assets, of which $16.8 million is estimated for the Meadows Field Runway 30R rehabilitation
project. The estimated project costs are offset by a similar increase in revenue from State and
federal reimbursements. Other revenue sources are increasing slightly as a result of building
space rentals, new car rental concession agreements and fee adjustments approved by the Board
in FY 2014-15. The department does not anticipate the use of retained earnings in FY 2015-16.
Revenue is primarily generated from land lease agreements and is deposited into the Golf Course
Enterprise Fund where it is used for necessary capital and infrastructure maintenance projects at
the golf courses and to reimburse the Parks and Recreation Department for administrative
support.

Overall the recommended budget includes appropriations and revenues similar to FY 2014-15.
The recommended budget includes an appropriation of $75,000 per golf course for ongoing
maintenance. The retained earnings at June 30, 2015 is $1.2 million of which the department
anticipates using $40,330 in FY 2015-16.
The majority of expenses and revenue in this budget unit are for contracts with local waste
haulers for services, and the collection of waste assessment fees collected through property tax
bills.

The recommended budget includes expenses and revenue similar to FY 2014-15, increasing
slightly due to general inflation. The retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2015, is
approximately $2.2 million. The department is anticipating utilizing approximately $237,000 of
retained earnings towards the budget in FY 2015-16.
Staffing costs of $189.3 million are KMC’s largest expense in FY 2015-16. Operating expenses
of $92.6 million are comprised primarily of medical supplies, contracted physician fees,
purchased medical services, external provider care services, insurance, utilities, and equipment
rental and maintenance. Other charges of $53.5 million include $47.5 million of
intergovernmental transfers necessary to drawdown federal and State funding. The remaining
appropriations in other charges include the interest paid to the General Fund for the outstanding
loan, the countywide cost allocation plan, and settlement and attorney fees. KMC receives
reimbursement from the Correctional Medicine budget unit 8988 for the cost of providing
inpatient and outpatient services to adult inmates and juvenile detainees; $10.5 million is
included in the recommended budget as expense reimbursement for this activity.
Total revenue of $335.3 million includes $137.1 million in gross State and federal funding
primarily from programs to reimburse KMC for providing services to uninsured and
underinsured patients, $155.6 million from patient revenue net of contractual adjustments and
bad debt from services to Medi-Cal, Medicare, private pay patients and insurance, and $25.6
million in other revenue from Kern Health Systems (KHS) capitation payments, KHS Physician
Recruitment and Retention Grant, cafeteria sales, reimbursement from medical education and
services provided to other County departments.
Other financing sources include a $7.4 million county contribution to fund daily operations, $2.3
million from 1991 Health Realignment, and $1.9 million from the KHS excess reserve to cover
the startup cost of the new Ambulatory Surgery Center.
KMC’s total budgeted revenue in FY 2015-16 is $335.3 million, which includes $89.5 million in
net state and federal revenue from programs that reimburse the medical center for services
provided to uninsured and underinsured patients. In November 2010, the State entered into an
agreement with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) under Section 1115 of
the Social Security Act. The goal of the “Medicaid waiver” was to provide funding for projects
that promote the objectives of Medicaid, such as the Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH),
Safety Net Care Pool (SNCP), and the Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool (DSRIP)
programs. The current 1115 waiver will sunset on October 31 2015; however, the California
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) organized discussions among California’s
stakeholders beginning in July 2014 to propose a revamped waiver renewal to CMS aimed at
extending federal funding beyond the current five-year limit.
California’s proposed waiver renewal endeavors to deliver high quality, cost efficient care for
Medicaid beneficiaries, and ensure the long-term viability of the health care delivery system
post-Affordable Care Act (ACA) expansion. The proposed waiver renewal focuses on five key
concepts: 1. Medicaid funded shelter/housing to contribute to better health outcomes and reduce the total
cost of care for beneficiaries. The idea is that subsidized housing can support the goal of a
whole-person approach to care.
2. Provider and Managed Care Plan incentive programs with potential pay-for-performance
structures and shared savings/accountable care arrangements. The goal is to avoid
unnecessary hospitalization and costly care by strengthening primary care delivery and
access. Incentive programs are geared towards achieving the goals of the Triple Aim
(improving patient experience, improving the health of populations, and reducing the per
capita cost of health care).
3. Create a “DSRIP II” program that builds upon the lessons learned from the 2010 DSRIP and
other states’ DSRIP programs. The successor program will be a more outcomes and valueoriented
approach that seeks to demonstrate and advance the Triple Aim more consistently
across the public hospital system.
4. Workforce development to increase the number of new health workers to reduce medically
underserved areas and create financial incentives to encourage greater commitment to serve
the Medicaid (Medi-Cal) population. The overall aim is to address and improve wholeperson
care.
5. Safety Net Reform – DSH and SNCP bundle payments. The goal is to align incentives for
SNCP and DSH reimbursement structures by coordinating care between hospitals and safety
net providers in a manner that provides care for the remaining uninsured to include primary
care and lower cost outpatient and clinic settings.
Until a new Waiver is fully negotiated, approved, and adopted by CMS, governmental funding
for the 21 designated public hospitals in the State of California is relatively uncertain heading
into FY 2015-16.
Gross revenue for DSRIP in FY 2015-16 is estimated at $32.4 million and will require an
intergovernmental transfer (IGT) of $16.2 million to draw down the federal funding portion.
Similarly, gross DSH and SNCP allocations for FY 2015-16 are budgeted at $58.1 million and
will require an IGT of approximately $12.5 million to draw down funds. All funding sources
associated with the pending 1115 Waver renewal are best estimates until negotiations with CMS
are completed. Since public hospitals receive DSH, SNCP, and DSRIP to help cover the costs of
providing care to the uninsured and the poor, as more Americans obtain health care coverage
through the ACA, funding could potentially be shifted away from programs like the Section
1115 Medicaid Waiver program to cover the increased cost of Medicaid expansion. As a result,
KMC will need to begin exploring strategies that maximize patient revenue rather than rely on
government subsidies.
In addition to the pending 1115 Waiver renewal, CMS released a long-awaited final rule,
effective December 31, 2014, that broadens the definition of an “uninsured patient”. The ruling
will impact costs and revenue included in KMC’s DSH payment limit. California, in turn, must
either repay the federal share of DSH payments made to hospitals that exceed hospital-specific
DSH limits, or redistribute the overpaid amounts to other hospitals with room under their caps.
The CMS ruling is retroactive to State Plan Rate Year 2011. Due to its relatively recent
implementation, the impact of the CMS ruling on KMC’s finances is currently unknown.
In total, the FY 2015-16 budget includes approximately $47.5 million in IGTs to the State that
will be used to draw down federal funding. The IGT amounts represent the non-federal share of
programs. Matching contributions to the State, as well as the return of the initial IGT investment
are reported in the budget under other charges and intergovernmental revenue, respectively.
KMC is also funded by an allocation of Health Program Realignment revenue from the State to
help cover the costs of services provided to adult indigent patients. The State implemented
optional Medi-Cal expansion to those individuals with incomes up to 138% of the Federal
Poverty Level via the ACA beginning January 2014. Some individuals previously covered by the
County as indigent residents have since gained health care coverage under Medi-Cal expansion,
resulting in some savings for the County. Since January 2014, California has begun to reduce its
Realignment allocations to counties. The Brown Administration assumes counties will
eventually achieve enough savings from expanded Medi-Cal eligibility to offset the State’s
reductions in Realignment funding. Due to the hospital’s improved reimbursement from Medi-
Cal, the recommended allocation of 1991 Health Realignment revenue is $2.3 million in FY
2015-16, a reduction of $9.6 million compared to FY 2014-15.
Net patient revenue in FY 2015-16 is budgeted at $155.6 million and is directly correlated to
substantial improvements in the hospital’s revenue cycle management.
The County General Fund is making a contribution to KMC to support the hospital’s operations
and fund several capital projects deemed critical to the medical center’s future success. In total,
$7.4 million is allocated to the hospital to fund day-to-day operations and capital needs in FY
2015-16. From the $7.4 million contribution, $3.1 million will fund new and replacement capital
assets and $2.2 million will fund capital projects that include a replacement nurse call system and
installation of three radiology machines. Approximately $1.9 million in funds from the excess
reserve distribution made by KHS will be used to cover the startup costs for KMC’s planned
Ambulatory Surgery Center (ASC) in west Bakersfield. KMC’s strategic goal for the ASC is to
provide improved access for patients to the hospital’s wealth of specialists while simultaneously
enhancing hospital revenue by attracting a more diverse payer mix to the new surgery center.
KHS continues to recognize the vital role KMC plays in the lives of Medi-Cal beneficiaries and
has helped bolster the overall quality of the safety net by providing additional financial support
for the day-today operations at KMC. In FY 2015-16 alone, KMC will benefit from
approximately $12.5 million in capitation revenue from KHS that will be used to support the
hospital’s efforts to attract, recruit, and retain top quality physicians to Kern County. In addition,
KMC was awarded a $1.8 million Physician Recruitment and Retention Grant by KHS; the funds
are allocated in the hospital’s FY 2015-16 recommended budget. As KMC continues to make
improvements towards fiscal stability, the hospital’s administration has begun to refocus the
medical center’s attention on strong programmatic relationships with partners in the local health
care community like KHS.
The County continues to explore the feasibility of transitioning KMC into a separate Hospital
Authority. On September 26, 2014, Governor Brown approved Assembly Bill 2546-Salas (AB
2546) which gave the Board of Supervisors the authority to establish, by ordinance, the Kern
County Hospital Authority to manage, administer, and control KMC. Until an enabling
ordinance is adopted and the Board of Supervisors transfers control of KMC to the Hospital
Authority, KMC will remain a County owned and operated hospital. Although it is not
anticipated that a transfer of control will occur in FY 2015-16, the County continues to work
diligently to find viable solutions, interim and long-term, aimed at improving the medical
center’s financial and operational standards.
Changes in the health care landscape due to the ACA, the pending waiver renewal, and changes
in state health care policy are creating a much more challenging environment in which KMC
must operate. KMC’s transition to a Hospital Authority is considered a crucial first step in
reforming the hospital to meet the demands of the post-ACA health care environment and
become a provider of choice for local patients. It is equally important for KMC to make use of its
relative strengths such as capitalizing on its position in the local market as the only trauma
center, while continuing to expand and strengthen relationships with local plans and community
partners, in order to demonstrate its value, experience, and outcomes to the community.
The recommended budget provides funding for all authorized positions and includes the addition
of one Clinical Pharmacist at an annual cost of $252,474. Although all recommended positions
are funded in FY 2015-16 (as depicted below) it is important to note that, unlike a typical County
department, KMC budgets for staffing based on patient census and full time equivalents (FTEs),
not authorized positions. Mandated staff-to-patient ratios and the correct allocation of FTEs drive
the hospital’s staffing costs, as is customary in virtually all hospital settings. The department also
experiences a high vacancy rate, exacerbated by the FTE model and the hospital’s use of
temporary staff, resulting in a significant disparity between the average number of filled
positions in prior years compared to the number of requested positions in the recommended
budget. In addition, some of KMC’s authorized permanent positions, such as residents and some
physicians, display as “extra help/temporary” in the table below due to the finite duration of their
employment at the hospital. For example, residents typically do not exceed five years of
employment with the hospital in the resident physician classification. Because residents are
coded with a definite end date, the payroll system gathers their data and reports it as “extra
help/temporary”. The same condition exists for physicians who are under contract with the
hospital and are scheduled to separate at the end of the agreed upon term pending renegotiation
and contract renewal with the County.
As part of the budget process, the department is requesting to delete 12 vacant positions: one (1)
Executive Director of Managed Care - Contract; one (1) Senior Nutrition Program Coordinator –
Part Time; one (1) Project Manager - Contract; one (1) Elder Life Program Coordinator; one (1)
Infection Control Coordinator; one (1) Stock Clerk, and six (6) Linen Services Associates I/II –
Part Time. The hospital will add one (1) Clinical Pharmacist in FY 2015-16.
Appropriations in the amount of $12.8 million will cover the cost of staff; funding is sufficient
for 95 full-time positions. Approximately $943,000 is budgeted for medical supplies needed to
provide medical care at seven locations comprised of the adult and juvenile correctional system.
Appropriations in the amount of $10.5 million have been allocated for anticipated inpatient and
specialty care services provided at the hospital and for payments to outside vendors for services,
such as ambulance transportation for inmates and juveniles, and for payments to other hospitals
for services provided to the inmate population. Medical care in the County’s correctional
facilities is funded primarily by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
In previous fiscal years, the County has met its obligation to provide medical care to the
correctional system population by providing a fixed contribution to Kern Medical Center. In FY
2015-16, the recommended Net General Fund Cost for these services is $23.2 million.
The cost and reimbursement associated with providing medical care for federal inmates as well
as the reimbursement for inmates eligible for inpatient Medi-Cal coverage under the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) are included in the recommended budget. While federal law generally excludes
individuals in an institutional setting (such as in county jails) from participating in the Medicaid
program, inmates who are referred off-site for inpatient care lasting at least 24 hours are eligible
to participate in Medicaid if they otherwise meet the program’s eligibility requirements. As a
result, when county inmates receive inpatient care at a hospital, nursing facility, or other facility
that is outside of the correctional system, they can be enrolled into Medi-Cal and a federal match
can be applied to the cost of the entire duration of their inpatient stay.
Although the recommended budget anticipates approximately $400,000 in net revenue for
providing care to inmates eligible for inpatient Medi-Cal reimbursement under the ACA, the
State has yet to disclose how it will receive claims and pay counties for providing inpatient care
to inmates.
Beginning in FY 2012-13, the Correctional Medicine budget unit, division of KMC, was
established to more accurately account for the cost of the program. Ninety-two (92) authorized
positions were transferred from KMC budget unit 8997 to the Correctional Medicine budget unit;
however, employees remain under the management of the hospital. The recommended budget
includes the addition of three Pharmacy Technicians at an annual cost of $255,027. The new
positions will help KMC improve medical pass procedures, reduce wasted pharmaceuticals,
follow a standardized formulary, and enhance 340B drug discount program utilization. The added staff are expected to improve efficiency and reduce overall costs for services and supplies,
therefore no additional NGFC is necessary. The recommended budget provides funding for 95
full time positions and 9 extra help/temporary positions.
Although all full time positions are scheduled to be filled in FY 2015-16, as depicted below, it is
important to note that the department continues to deal with a high vacancy rate resulting in a
significant disparity between the average number of filled positions in prior years compared to
the number of requested positions in the recommended budget. The large number of vacancies
has forced the department to use overtime to provide adequate medical coverage during shifts,
which has subsequently impacted the departments overall staffing costs.
The activities of Kern Regional Transit are funded primarily from Sales and Use Tax for local
transportation, State Public Transportation Modernization, Improvement, and Service
Enhancement Account Program and funding from the State Department of Transportation
Section 5311 that provides funding for public transit in non-urbanized areas. The primary
expenditures for the division include purchase of buses and other capital assets and contracts for
transportation services.
As part of the consolidation of the Public Works budget units into an internal service fund (ISF),
appropriations for salaries and benefits have been shifted to services and supplies to reimburse
the ISF for labor applicable to the Transit division. The division plans to purchase four
compressed natural gas buses required to replace aging buses and augment services due to
increased ridership. The buses will be funded with an allocation from the federal Congestion
Mitigation and Air Quality Grant.
While the Kern Regional Transit Enterprise Fund has approximately $906,000 in short-term
unrestricted cash that can be used to support operations of the division, the retained earnings at
June 30, 2015 is a deficit of approximately $1 million due to the inclusion of approximately
$260,000 of long term liabilities associated with pension obligation bonds and the deferral of
$2.1 million of revenue received in FY 2014-15 that is included in the FY 2015-16 budget. The
pension obligation bonds do not come due within the current year budget and represent future
costs that will be funded with future revenue. After adjusting for these obligations, the budgetary
retained earnings balance at June 30, 2015 is approximately $1.2 million. The division has not
budgeted to use any retained earnings for operations in FY 2015-16.
The recommended budget does not include any authorized positions, all budgeted positions have
been transferred to the Public Works Internal Service Fund.
A major expense for the division continues to be salaries and benefits. Services and supplies
includes landfill operating contracts and other professional services needed to maintain the
County’s disposal sites, payment to the Board of Equalization based on a per ton of landfill
waste, and costs associated with educational and recycling programs. Division revenue is
generated from special land use assessments collected through property tax bills, landfill gate
fees and waste bin fees.
As part of the consolidation of the Public Works budget units into an internal service fund (ISF),
appropriations for salaries and benefits have been shifted to services and supplies to reimburse
the ISF for labor applicable to the Waste Management division. The recommended budget
includes funding for several large capital asset purchases, road maintenance, drainage
improvements, monitoring of wells and other maintenance and capital projects for solid waste
facilities throughout the County.
The division will continue to implement the organics strategy in order to enhance the green
waste recycling program to assist the Cities and the County in meeting State waste diversion
mandates. The problem of illegal dumping continues throughout the County. This challenge is
being addressed by a team of staff from several County departments who work together to better
educate the public and to provide relief in the way of cleanup. The recommended budget
allocates funds to Code Compliance to be used toward these efforts.
While the Waste Management Enterprise Fund has approximately $34.7 million in short-term
unrestricted cash that can be used to support the operations of the division, the estimated retained
earnings at June 30, 2015 is a deficit of $10.2 million due to the inclusion of approximately
$44.1 million of long term liabilities associated with pollution remediation obligations, future
closure and post-closure maintenance and pension obligation bonds. These liabilities do not
come due within the current year budget and represent future costs that will be funded with
future revenue or existing reserves. After adjusting for long-term debt, the estimated budgetary
retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2015, is approximately $33.9 million. The division is
anticipating utilizing approximately $6.8 million in FY 2015-16.
The largest expense for the district is staffing costs related to the positions required to operate
and maintain the system and wastewater treatment plant. Services and supplies include the costs
associated with the equipment and materials needed to service and maintain the sanitation
resources of the district as well as maintenance projects needed throughout the fiscal year. The
primary revenue sources for this budget are sewer service charges collected through the property
tax bill on properties within the district boundaries and one-time sewer connection fees.
The recommended budget for the district includes sufficient appropriations to cover the
anticipated cost of funding two full-time positions that were vacant for most of FY 2014-15. 
Capital projects include re-budgeting the installation of a wastewater recycling system for the
district as well as capital assets which include a truck, van and sewer cameras. The
recommended sewer service charges include a consumer price index rate increase approved by
the district Board which will result in a small increase to projected revenues.
Kern Sanitation authority entered into an agreement with the City of Taft effective June 16, 2015
to operate and maintain the City of Taft wastewater treatment facilities. Compensation for all
expenses will be provided by revenue collected from the City of Taft, resulting in no additional
cost increases to the Authority.
The district has a budgetary retained earnings balance at June 30, 2015 of $552,199. The
recommended budget requires the use of all retained earnings and the release of $180,861 from
the designation for capital projects to offset the increased operational and capital costs.
The district will fill two Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator Trainee positions that were vacant
for most of FY 2014-15. As a result of the operating contract with the City of Taft, the Authority
added two (2) full-time Waste Water Treatment Operator positions and two (2) part-time Sewer
Maintenance Worker positions in FY 2014-15 that will be filled in the coming year.
The major expense for the district is the cost paid to Kern Sanitation Authority for the operations
and maintenance of the treatment plant as stipulated by the new agreement with the City of Taft.
The district also reimburses Kern Sanitation Authority and Public Works Department for
administration. The operational, administrative and maintenance costs are paid with sewer
service charges collected through property tax bills. Charges for services and miscellaneous
revenues are collected for connection fees and other district costs reimbursement.
The recommended budget includes appropriations sufficient to pay the Kern Sanitation Authority
for the operation and maintenance costs of the plant and to reimburse the Kern Sanitation
Authority and Public Works Department for the administrative costs. Beginning in FY 2014-15,
the district began paying to the City of Taft its portion of the U.S. Department of Agriculture
Rural Development loan secured for a major plant upgrade. The loan amount of $3,619,000 will
be repaid over 20 years at a reduced interest rate of 2.5%. The district is responsible for 48% of
the debt service payment. On May 12, 2015, the Ford City-Taft Heights Sanitation District
Board approved a $30.27 per equivalent single-family dwelling increase for FY 2015-16 to fund
increased annual cost resulting from the improvements at the plant in addition to operational
expenses.
The district has a budgetary retained earnings balance at June 30, 2015 of $151,392, the
recommended budget requires the use of all retained earnings and the release of $207,298 from
the designation for capital projects to offset the increased operational and capital costs.
Federal and State revenue offset all of the financial responsibility for the cost of IHSS Services,
with the exception of the mandated County Maintenance of Effort (MOE). The MOE is
supported by social services realignment funds of approximately $8.1 million.

The recommended budget includes a slight increase in other charges that is offset by a similar
increase in revenue. The increase in other charges for FY 2015-16 is due to a restructuring of
Aging and Adult Services personnel assigned to the IHSS program to be able to adequately cover
additional requirements and training on the Affordable Care Act, new federal legislation on
overtime and additional services for IHSS homecare workers. The Public Authority contracts with the Aging and Adult Services Department for staffing. Thus, personnel costs for the Public
Authority are found in budget unit 5610.
The fund balance as of June 30, 2015 is $360,216. The department anticipates using $132,382 of
fund balance to offset expenses. The remaining fund balance, in an amount of $227,834, will be
added to the general designation for use to mitigate future year fluctuations in realignment
revenue.
The recommended budget provides adequate funding for the IHSS Public Authority to perform
its required functions.
 Projects approved in prior years but not yet completed total $293.1 million inclusive of operating
transfers. The major multi-year carryover projects include construction of replacement fire
stations, a new information technology services facility, several local transportation projects,
construction of a new jail facility and a capital contribution to Kern Medical Center for facility
improvements. The recommended budget includes additional appropriations for the following
projects:
 $400,000 to transfer to the General Fund. Interest earnings from the Tobacco
Securitization Tobacco Endowment fund are available for discretionary purposes.
 $766,001 to cover final project cost for the Seventh Standard Widening Project related to
adjoining property owners.
 $1,976,000 to cover the start-up cost for Kern Medical Center Ambulatory Surgery
Center.
