A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with salaries and benefits. This
budget unit is primarily funded by general purpose revenues of the General Fund through an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost. There are no major changes in expenditures and revenue
expected in FY 2014-15. The recommended budget requires the department to use a portion of
its accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The recommended budget provides adequate resources to assist the Supervisor in performing the
various duties and functions required of the governing body. The department is authorized five
full-time permanent positions. The recommended budget provides the department with funding
for three full-time positions, two part-time positions and one full-time extra help position.
The FY 2014-15 budget includes the use of $27,694 of accumulated BSI credits. Services and
supplies remain relatively flat.
The department plans to hold one permanent authorized position vacant and unfunded to achieve
cost savings. There are no anticipated operational impacts from this change.
The department is managing to a
5% reduction of NGFC from the prior fiscal year.
The department plans to hold two permanent authorized positions vacant and fill three extra help
positions to achieve salary and benefit cost savings. There are no operational impacts anticipated
from this change.
To meet budgetary reductions, the department will hold one part-time Supervisor Field
Representative position vacant and fill one extra-help position. The Department does not
anticipate service level impacts from this change.
The majority of expenditures for the department are associated with staff costs and supplies
necessary to perform the functions of the office. The budget unit is funded primarily by an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Additionally, the department receives reimbursement of
staff costs for health benefits and debt management activity.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all authorized positions,
which requires the use of $109,115 of accumulated BSI credits. Services and supplies remain
relatively flat. Reimbursements for staff time related to the County employees health benefits,
debt service, and other services also remain relatively at the same level as FY 2013-14. The
budget is sufficient to support the County’s economic development activities and costs for
services provided by the Kern Economic Development Corporation. The department also
continues to perform the function of and fund the Board of Trade’s Interim Director position.
The recommended budget includes funding for all authorized positions and one extra-help
position.
The majority of the Clerk of the Board expenditures are associated with salaries and benefits for
staff to support the functions of the Board of Supervisors and assessment appeals processing.
Services and supplies expenses include office supplies, application maintenance and assessment
appeals costs. The department is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Charges for services represent reimbursements for processing assessment appeals applications.
The recommended budget includes sufficient resources for the department to maintain status quo
staffing and service levels.
A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with special projects activities,
such as costs for the County’s single audit contract, contributions to other agencies and
consulting services for the AAB, legislative review and updates and sales tax analysis. The
budget unit is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Contributions to Other Agencies
The Special Services budget contains recommended contributions totaling approximately
$730,000 to various non-profit agencies for performance of cultural or humanitarian services
benefiting the public. Due to budgetary constraints affecting the County General Fund,
contribution allocations have been recommended with a reduction of 5% from the previous fiscal
year. The following contributions are included in the recommended budget:
 Alzheimer’s Disease Association of Kern County: $61,750
 Arts Council of Kern: $95,000
 Bakersfield Museum of Art: $47,500
 Bakersfield Symphony: $95,000
 Center for Blind and Visually Impaired: $40,078
 China Lake Alliance: $10,000
 Community Action Partnership of Kern County (CAP): $95,000
 Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA): $95,000
 Greater Antelope Valley Economic Alliance $14,250
 Kern Adult Literacy Council: $19,710
 Small Business Development Center: $57,000
 Southwest Defense Alliance: $35,000
 Valley Fever Vaccine Project: $47,500
 Volunteer Center of Kern County: $9,500

The recommended budget includes an allocation of $50,000 for each District Supervisor to
support activities within their respective areas. Services and supplies are budgeted to decline
significantly by $2.7 million primarily due to one-time costs that were incurred for the transition
to the new Animal Services Department facility in FY 2013-14. The recommended budget
includes a one-time payment in the amount of $420,000 to the City of Bakersfield for costs
related to the Education Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) that was included in a settlement
agreement concerning property taxes. The recommended funding is sufficient to support status
quo service levels.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the financial functions of the County. The department receives
some reimbursement for services but is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund
Cost (NGFC). The recommended budget requires the department to use a portion of its
accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 50 authorized positions,
which requires the use of $312,875 of accumulated BSI credits. The large increase in the services
and supplies and expenditure reimbursement objects is primarily due to a change in accounting
for external audits performed for other departments. The department is also experiencing an
increase of $120,000 in insurance costs for FY 2014-15 due to a large current year liability
claim. The NGFC for the department has been temporarily increased by $120,000 to offset the
insurance increase. The department has indicated that it will no longer be performing audits for
two enterprise funds which has resulted in a reduction of revenue.
The department has proposed staffing changes in the Systems Division to allow for improved
oversight of programming functions. The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1)
Technology Services Manager position, one (1) Local Area Network Systems Administrator
position, one (1) Administrative Coordinator position and the concurrent deletion of one
Technology Services Supervisor position, one (1) Information Systems Specialist I/II/III/Senior
position, and one Programmer I/II-Systems Analyst I/II position.
The recommended budget includes holding vacant and unfunded four positions: one (1)
Programmer I/II-Systems Analyst I/II position, two (2) Accountant I/II/III positions and one (1)
Fiscal Support Assistant position. The department has indicated that the Accountant position
vacancies will hinder its ability to perform internal control audits of Kern Medical Center.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the banking and property tax collection functions of the County.
The services and supplies expenditures originate from banking fees, as well as costs related to
printing and mailing tax bills. The department is primarily funded through charges to participants
in the treasury pool for banking and investment services, various property tax delinquency
charges, and an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
Changes in expenditures from FY 2013-14 are primarily the result of a new $105,000 contract
with an investment advisory service. The department is using $90,000 in Budget Savings
Incentive (BSI) credits in order to meet the budget guideline. There are no significant operational
impacts at the recommended Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 29 full time equivalent
positions, and six (6) extra help positions. The department will be holding one (1) Programmer I
position vacant for the year. The department is also facing retirement payouts totaling close to
$200,000 for two retirees. The department is budgeting to temporarily double slot the Assistant
Treasurer-Tax Collector position and Principal Treasury Investment Officer position for training
purposes.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the functions of the Assessor’s office. The budget unit is funded
primarily through an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. In addition, the department receives
revenue for reimbursement of costs for the administration of property taxes and supplement
property taxes as statutorily allowed.
The recommended budget requires the department to use $210,000 of its accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits towards salaries and benefits. The budget includes a slight
increase in salaries and benefits that is offset by a similar increase in revenue. The department is
able to absorb the 5% reduction in Net General Fund Cost allocation with no significant service
level impacts.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 102 full time positions. The
Assessor’s office has submitted the budget holding five positions vacant: one (1) Auditor
Appraiser position, one (1) Engineering Technician position, and three (3) Appraiser positions.
The department expects to deliver status quo service levels despite holding these positions
vacant.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to establish and support the information technology platform for the County. The
department pays for internet, storage, phone and IT maintenance and is reimbursed by charging
departments for the cost. In addition, the department receives an allocation of Net General Fund
Cost.
The recommended budget includes $250,000 in retirement payouts that is contributing to an
increase in staffing costs from the previous fiscal year. Services and supplies are reduced by
nearly 15% due primarily to changes in telephone charges consequently also reducing revenues
by 3%. However, the savings achieved in services and supplies is sufficient to help offset the
costs associated to the retirement payouts. In order to meet the reduced Net General Fund Cost
allocation, the department is continuing to hold vital positions vacant. The department anticipates
a slight reduction in property tax administration revenue that reimburses the costs from
maintenance of the Kern Integrated Property Management System (KIPS).
The recommended budget for Information Technology Services will require the department to
unfund and hold vacant seven positions: one (1) Systems Programmer position, one (1)
Programmer I position, two (2) Computer Operators position, one (1) Senior Systems Analyst
position, one (1) Database Analyst position and one (1) Network Systems Administrator
position. While the department is restructuring to allow more flexibility in responding to
customer demands, the vacancies will hinder the department’s ability to provide 24/7 help desk
support. The department will be deleting two (2) vacant Programmer I positions and adding and
funding two (2) Technology Services Supervisor positions in order to assist with the restructure
of the management organization.
The budget unit is primarily funded through charges for services to other departments and an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). The majority of the expenditures for this budget
unit are associated with staffing costs for positions required to perform the legal functions of the
County. The expenses in the other charges category cover the costs of uninsured litigation,
exclusive of associated in-house attorney and paralegal costs. In FY 2012-13, accounting costs
for uninsured litigation, or legal matters requiring litigation not covered under the County’s
General Liability or Workers’ Compensation self-insurance programs, was reassigned from the
Risk Management Division. This reassignment resulted in an initial increase of $1.8 million to
the NGFC of budget unit 1210.
The department has accrued Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits in the amount of $1,213,285.
$91,214 are being utilized to cover the estimated cost of a major maintenance project for the
County Counsel library. While none of the remaining $1,122,071 BSI balance is budgeted for
use in FY 2014-15, the department has indicated that a significant portion will be necessary to
cover costs related to anticipated employee retirements.
Salaries and benefits have been increased to reflect all authorized positions being funded as well
as planned retirement payouts. The increase in the expenditure reimbursements category is
primarily due to planned services for General Fund departments that have subvented programs.
The charges for services revenue category increase reflects an adjustment to the billing rate of
attorneys and paralegals, as well as planned billable hours.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. In FY 2013-14 the
department had a lower number of average filled permanent positions due to two unplanned
vacancies.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform the functions of the department. The department is primarily funded by an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost. The increase in Net General Fund Cost from the
preliminary to recommended phase is caused by a $20,000 carryover in AB109 program revenue
that was realized in FY 2013-14, but will be utilized in FY 2014-15. The department also
receives revenue from County departments for employee service awards to recognize employees
for their years of service that is offset with the expense of purchasing the awards.
The recommended budget is at a five percent decrease compared to FY 2013-14. The department
is expecting to process additional employee service awards this fiscal year which will result in
$40,000 of additional revenue as compared to FY 2013-14 actuals to offset the expense of
purchasing the awards. Expenditures are declining due to the $90,000 purchase of an applicant
tracking system in FY 2013-14 that will now incur an annual maintenance cost of approximately
$50,000. Through the reduction in expenditures and slight increase in revenue, the department is
able manage the reduced Net General Fund Cost allocation with no significant service level
impacts.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all authorized permanent
positions and two extra help positions.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing and supply
costs for the positions and materials required to perform the legally mandated election functions
of the County. The largest revenue sources for the budget unit are charges for election services
provided to other entities, and an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget provides funding for the scheduled general election in November and
a potential special election in June. Increases in staffing and supply costs are related to
anticipated workloads during the fiscal year. The division will be installing security cameras at
an estimated cost of $25,000.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing and supplies
costs for the positions and materials required to perform the assigned functions. The department
receives some reimbursement for services but is primarily funded by an allocation of Net
General Fund Cost (NGFC). The recommended budget requires the department to use a portion
of its accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 106 authorized permanent
positions, which requires the use of $314,000 of accumulated BSI credits. The recommended
budget includes an increase of $266,000 to the NGFC to this budget unit to prevent the deletion
of filled positions. Salaries and benefits are reduced to reflect staffing changes that are discussed
below.The recommended budget includes the deletion of one vacant (1) Graphic Artist position, one
vacant (1) Air Conditioning Mechanic position, and one vacant (1) Mail Clerk I/II position, at an
annual cost savings of approximately $221,000.
The recommended budget also holds vacant and unfunded the following positions: one (1) Fiscal
Support Assistant, one (1) Office Services Technician, two (2) Communications Technician
I/II/III, one (1) Building Services Worker I/II/III, two (2) Maintenance Worker I/II/III, one (1)
Security Attendant I/II, and one (1) Real Property Agent I/II/III for an annual cost savings of
approximately $632,000.
The General Services Division continues to review and evaluate the acquisition of utility services
and commodities to attain the best rates possible. Services and supplies are budgeted to cover the
anticipated cost of utilities. Charges for services and other financing sources revenue are
primarily collected from customer entities for services provided, and general purpose revenue
received from the General Fund through the allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The anticipated increase in expenditures is primarily due to expected changes in electricity and
water rates. A portion of increased expenditures are offset by increased revenue collected from
service recipients. Beginning FY 2013-14, this budget unit started incurring a portion of the
insurance costs for claims made against the County.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform project related services. The costs are offset by revenue received
for services provided, primarily from charges to capital and major maintenance projects.
The recommended budget includes an increase in salaries and benefits compared to FY 2013-14
actual due to anticipated staffing level changes. Charges for services and expenditure
reimbursements are adjusted to reflect anticipated staffing levels and project workloads.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The budget holds
one (1) Engineering Aide I/II/III position, one (1) Supervising Construction Project Inspector
position, and two (2) Engineer I/II/III positions vacant and unfunded for a savings of
approximately $402,000. Although staffing costs for this division are largely offset by service
charges, the anticipated FY 2014-15 project workload is insufficient to charge for all authorized
positions. The division will be utilizing an additional temporary staff member in FY 2014-15.
The table below contains a list of the recommended projects for FY 2014-15. For each project,
the project cost, any offsetting revenue or special purpose funding, and the Net General Fund
Cost (NGFC) are presented. The projects listed in the table below include 34 new projects with a
combined NGFC of $7,410,834. Revenue for this budget unit includes $1,251,593 for projects
started in prior fiscal years. The recommended projects are in accordance with the County’s
objective of evaluating and meeting the County’s infrastructure needs. These recommended
projects were identified by both the General Services Division and other operating departments
as urgent unmet maintenance and facility needs.
The majority of expenditures for the department are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform the functions assigned. The department is primarily funded by an allocation
of Net General Fund Cost. Other revenue sources include event ticket sales, advertising, and
reimbursement of marketing and promotions costs.
Salaries and benefits are recommended at a reduced level over the FY 2013-14 Adopted budget.
This reduction is due to the deletion of one (1) Marketing Promotions Coordinator position.
Services and supplies are recommended at an increased level to allow the procurement of
specialized services for video production. The acting Director’s salary and benefits will continue
to be funded by the County Administrative Office. The recommended budget will allow the
department to maintain current levels of service.
Staffing costs comprise the majority of the department’s expenditures. The department revenue
sources include primarily charges for services for permits and plan reviews. The remaining
funding comes from an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget contains salaries and benefits at lower levels than FY 2013-14 due to
moving one (1) Housing Rehabilitation Programs Supervisor position to the Code Compliance
Division and deleting four vacant positions. Services and supplies are recommended at a slight
decrease due to a reduction of general liability insurance charges and a reduced need for external
professional services. The recommended budget also includes $57,000 for new surveying
equipment.
The recommended budget will allow the department to maintain current levels of service,
including meeting or exceeding agreed turnaround timelines established in their performance
standards.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1) vacant Program Coordinator position,
two (2) vacant Engineer Aide I/II/III positions, and one (1) vacant Supervising Engineer position
that have been vacant for the past two years. The recommended budget also holds vacant and
unfunded one (1) Senior Engineering Manager position and one (1) Supervising Engineer
position. One (1) Housing Rehabilitation Programs Supervisor position is being moved to the
Code Compliance Division for a cost savings of approximately $112,000.
Services and supplies expenditures are primarily for the various insurance policies managed by
the division. These insurance costs, and all staffing costs, are charged directly to customer
departments. These charges come in as expenditure reimbursements and charges for services.
Prior to FY 2012-13, uninsured litigation, or the cost of defending the County in civil and
administrative matters that are not covered under the County’s self-insurance programs, had been
the only major General Fund expense of this budget unit. In FY 2012-13 these costs were
transferred to County Counsel, budget unit 1210.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all authorized positions,
causing the increase over FY 2013-14 actual salary expenses. The services and supplies category
is anticipated to increase primarily due to insurance coverage expenses. Charges for services and
expenditure reimbursements have been adjusted to reflect the planned expenditures.
The table below contains a list of the recommended projects for FY 2014-15. For each project,
the project cost, any offsetting revenue or special purpose funding, and the Net General Fund
Cost (NGFC) are presented. The projects listed in the table below include five new projects at an
NGFC of $1,615,370 and four rebudgets at an NGFC of $50,000. Revenue for this budget unit
includes $2,739,047 for projects started in prior fiscal years. The recommended projects are in
accordance with the County’s objective of evaluating and meeting the County’s infrastructure
needs. These recommended projects were identified by both the General Services Division and
other operating departments as urgent unmet needs.
The following new projects are recommended for funding:
 $790,131 to complete the second phase of the Agriculture Commissioner/Weights and
Measures warehouse expansion. The project would continue the expansion of facilities to
provide adequate space to house large capacity test equipment and a heavy capacity
standards metrology lab.
 $6,100,000 for the acquisition of a building for the Mental Health Department. This
building will house staff who are currently in a higher-cost rental facility.
 $200,000 to expand the feasibility study of the Golden Hills sanitation project. The
purpose of this project is to conduct a planning study to evaluate options available for
resolving the wastewater treatment and disposal needs of the community.
 $825,239 to cover additional project improvements for the new Information Technology
Services facility.
 $100,000 for improvements of the land for a future fire station located in Golden Hills.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated to payments to the State for court
operations, and the required maintenance of effort payment effective when the municipal courts
transitioned to the State. The courts collect fines, forfeitures and traffic school fees that are
deposited to the County in this budget unit and are used to offset the costs. The court collections
are not sufficient to cover the costs incurred; and, therefore an allocation of Net General Fund
Cost is required.
The recommended budget, compared to the past two fiscal years, remains relatively similar.
While costs have remained flat, court collections have declined over the past two years resulting
in an increase of an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. The budget includes funding to meet
the County’s statutory fiscal responsibilities to the State and the courts.
The primary expenditures of the division are for staffing necessary to complete all assigned
functions. The estimated revenue from licenses, permits and fictitious business name filings is
anticipated to fully offset expenditures. The division will use $7,529 of the current $92,196
Budget Savings Incentive credits balance to cover a portion of planned extra-help staffing costs.
The recommended budget provides a level of funding to permit the County Clerk to continue
serving the public without any impacts to service levels.
All salaries and benefit expenditures for the department are for one administrative support
position to assist the volunteer Grand Jurors. Services and supplies provide for anticipated expert
witness expenses and travel reimbursement for Grand Jurors. The County provides an allocation
of net General Fund cost to fund the activities of the Grand Jury in accordance with California
Penal Code sections 888-939.91.

The recommended budget provides the funding necessary to allow the department to perform
indictments as requested by the District Attorney and attend Grand Juror training. The
recommended budget continues to provide funding for the one staff position. The reduction in
the Net General Fund Cost allocation from FY 2013-14 will be absorbed by a reduction in
services and supplies with no significant service level impact.
The majority of expenditures for this program are allocated to the Kern County Bar Association
that is paid to administer the program and provides representation to the indigent clients of the
metro area. In the outlying areas of Kern County, attorneys are paid directly for services
provided. This budget unit is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. In
addition, the budget unit receives intergovernmental revenues from State aid for trial court
funding and State reimbursements for the cost of representing incarcerated defendants.

The recommended Net General Fund Cost is 5% higher than the FY 2013-14 adopted budget,
this will cover a projected increase in the number of indigent defense cases for FY 2014-15. The
recommended budget contains sufficient resources to meet the County's constitutional mandate
of providing legal representation.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing costs necessary to continue to
investigate and prosecute criminal cases. Approximately half of the department’s expenditures
are funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). Other major sources of revenue
include funding from the State for special prosecutions and investigations within the Prison and
Special Investigation Units. The department also receives approximately $5.6 million of Local
Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172) and an allocation of 2011 realignment funds of $1.8
million to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under Assembly Bill 109 (AB
109).

The recommended budget requires the department to use most of its accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive credits, $569,393, to maintain service levels. The recommended budget
includes sufficient funding to conduct prosecutorial activities, including gang related activities,
as well as administer the Victim Witness Assistance Program which transferred to the District
Attorney from the Probation Department during the prior fiscal year’s budget cycle.
Appropriations for salaries and benefits have increased over the prior year due to the
department’s desire to fill previously vacant positions to meet increased operational demands.
Similarly, revenue in the recommended budget has increased from FY 2013-14 primarily due to
revenue from State prison reimbursement and a truancy agreement that directly reimburses the
department for expenditures associated with staffing and administrative costs. The State provides
reimbursement for the investigation and prosecution of violent acts or misconduct within the
confines of the prison for staff and inmates alike. The truancy agreement reimburses the
department for investigation of truant students and their parents. Other revenue, particularly
related to AB 109 is expected to remain relatively unchanged, while the allocation of Local
Public Safety Funds will increase slightly by $282,134.
The recommended budget includes appropriations sufficient to support 225 permanent
authorized positions and one extra help position, but will require the department to hold one (1)
Supervising Investigative Aide position vacant and unfunded for FY 2014-15. The department
has requested to add the following positions during the FY 2014-15 budget: one (1) Fiscal
Support Specialist position; two (2) Legal Process Technician positions; one (1) Victim Witness
Specialist position; and transfer of one (1) Supervising Investigative Aide position from the
Forensic Sciences Division. The recommended budget also includes deleting two (2) Office
Services Assistant positions. The General Fund cost increase for these position changes is
$126,045. This amount excludes the addition of the Victim Witness Specialist position which is
completely offset by revenue.
The budget for Child Support Services is maintained in a special revenue fund and does not
receive a General Fund contribution. This budget is funded entirely from State and federal
subvention revenue and other departmental revenue. The majority of expenditures are associated
with staffing costs to perform the functions of the department. Services and supplies expenses of
$3.6 million include rents and leases, utilities, and office expenses.

The recommended budget includes sufficient revenue for the department to continue to provide
its current level of services and meet State program goals and objectives. While there are no
major expenditure and revenue changes, costs are anticipated to increase slightly due to an
increase in process service costs, phone charges, and building rent.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Program Specialist I/II, one (1)
Supervising Child Support Officer, one (1) Systems Analyst I/II and one (1) Office Services
Specialist and the deletion of one (1) vacant Child Support Officer IV position. The addition of
these positions will assist to serve the outlying Kern County communities more efficiently and
assure the stability of the department’s technology services unit.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission of providing high quality legal representation. These
expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Other sources of
revenue include $4.7 million of Local Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172) and an allocation of
2011 Realignment to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under Assembly Bill
109.
The recommended budget provides an adequate level of funding to provide legal representation
for defendants accused of criminal offenses when appointed by the Superior Court and will allow
the department to retain all of its accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits. As with
past years, the department has continued to experience significant workload increases, in the first
nine months of FY 2013-14 the Public Defender received 33,935 case appointments, which
represents a 32% increase from two years ago, and a one-year increase of 13%. The department
is able to meet the recommended 5% budget reduction through an increase in Local Public
Safety revenues and prudent budget practices. Salaries and benefits will increase slightly as a
result of increased salary expenses related to filling all but one authorized position. Services and
supplies are also expected to increase due to an increase in general liability insurance premiums.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all authorized positions with
the exception of one (1) Chief Public Defender Investigator position. The recommended budget
also includes funding for four extra help positions. The department incurred salary savings in FY
2013-14 through temporary vacancies; therefore, there is an increase in salaries and benefits for
FY 2014-15 as a result of anticipating filling all but one authorized permanent position.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission of providing local law enforcement agencies with scientific
analysis and testing. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net General
Fund Cost (NGFC). Other sources of revenue include $207,791 in Local Public Safety Funds
(Proposition 172), an allocation of 2011 realignment funds to mitigate impacts of the State prison
realignment under Assembly Bill 109, and other revenue derived from fines and forfeitures.
The recommended budget of $5,773,682 is $362,702 over the NGFC guideline of $5,410,980
which will avoid a layoff and allow the department to continue its core mission.
The recommended budget will require the department to use all of its accumulated Budget
Savings Incentive (BSI) credits of $653,973. This BSI amount includes $198,185 transferred
from the District Attorney – Criminal Division to allow the Forensic Division to purchase two
requested fixed assets totaling $300,000. The additional NGFC recommended will fund one (1)
Laboratory Helper position at a cost of $53,610 to avoid a layoff, one (1) vacant Criminalist
position at $118,188, two (2) vacant Forensic Laboratory Technician position at $164,563, and
an unspecified salary adjustment of $26,341. Capital asset expenditures will increase as the
department will be using BSI to purchase two gas chromatography-mass spectrometers which are
used for forensic substance identification. Travel was reduced by $30,000 from the requested
budget after discussion with the department to limit the number of employees from nine to five
that the department will be sending to TrueAllele DNA training during FY 2014-15.
Revenue will be similar to FY 2013-14 and will continue to be down from prior fiscal years due
to the discontinuance of drug testing for the Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act
(Proposition 36) that the department indicates was inconsistent with their core mission to provide
services for law enforcement purposes. Revenue in the recommended budget has decreased by
$50,002 due to a reduction in funding available in the Criminalist Laboratories special revenue
fund.
The recommended funding level will allow the department to continue to operate at a status quo
staffing level and will allow the department to purchase the two fixed assets necessary to achieve
ISO certification by FY 2015-16.
No additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The department will hold
vacant and unfunded 3 positions: two (2) Laboratory Assistant positions and one (1) Office
Services Technician position. In addition, one (1) Supervising Investigative Aide position will be
transferred to the District Attorney’s Criminal Division.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
provide patrol operations for the County’s unincorporated areas and operate the County’s adult
detention facilities. The budget also includes costs related to the following: Coroner, public
administrator, civil unit, court services, specialized investigations, communication and
administrative functions. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of Net
General Fund Cost. Other sources of revenue include $46.2 million in Local Public Safety Funds
(Proposition 172) and an allocation of 2011 Realignment of $10.2 million to mitigate the impacts
of the State prison realignment under Assembly Bill 109 (AB 109). The department charges for
services for providing housing and transportation for federal prisoners and law enforcement
services to the City of Wasco.

For FY 2014-15, all General Fund departments were requested to develop budgets at a 5%
reduction of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC) the departments received in FY 2013-14. The 5%
reduction equates to a $5.8 million reduction to the Sheriff’s Department for a NGFC total of
$110,743,576. The department was originally unable to meet this guideline request and
submitted a budget which was $13,476,512 over the NGFC guideline. Through discussion with
the department and direction from the Board the recommended NGFC is $117,085,078 which
eliminates major service level impacts by avoiding layoffs and facility closures.
Several issues have impacted the Sheriff’s Department budget:
Reduced Revenue
Revenue related to the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) grant which provided
funding for 27 Deputy Sheriff positions has expired. The COPS grant requires the department to
retain these Deputy Sheriff positions for 12 months after the grant’s expiration in FY 2013-14.
The cost to retain these positions through the 12 month period is estimated to cost $2.3 million in
FY 2014-15.
AB 109 revenue will be lower than years prior due to a statutory reduction in base funding
provided. Until a new AB 109 allocation formula is created and approved by the State the
County will continue to receive a disproportionately lower share of revenue per individual
realigned to the County’s custody, further compounding public safety issues. The department
will also experience a decrease of $654,000 in revenue previously received for federal contract
jail beds whereby the County provided interim housing for federal inmates. The volume of
federal contract beds has decreased from approximately 200 to 180 per day.
Increased Expenditures
Services and supplies in the recommended budget will increase by $230,837 over the FY 2013-
14 adopted budget. Capital assets will increase significantly due to the inclusion of $1 million for
the purchase of a new Records Management System that will replace the current system that will
not be supported by the developer as of January 1, 2015, and an additional $1 million so the
Sheriff’s Department can purchase up to 20 replacement patrol vehicles. The department’s
expenditures associated with salaries and benefits will remain nearly the same as FY 2013-14
adopted budget. The department will unfund and hold vacant 107 positions, resulting in no
layoffs.
Mitigating Adjustments
The recommended budget provides an NGFC that maintains a status quo funding level for the
Sheriff’s Department. The recommended budget includes $2,432,000 which prevents the layoffs
of 19 Deputies; $413,400 to continue funding 3 full-time equivalents in the rural crime taskforce;
$1 million for replacement patrol vehicles; and $2,496,102 which provides funding for
approximately 35 vacant positions. Although additional NGFC has been recommended the
department has expressed concerns with being able to achieve the recommended funding level
and has therefore requested to have $1,391,240 set aside in appropriations for contingencies
(Budget Unit 1970). This additional funding can only be transferred mid-year by subsequent
request by the Sheriff and approval by the Board of Supervisors.
The department currently has 1,345 authorized positions. The recommended budget includes the
following five new positions: one (1) Deputy Public Administrator position, one (1) Property
Control Officer position, one (1) Deputy Coroner position, one (1) Supervising Deputy Coroner
position, and one (1) Medical Transcriptionist position for a total cost of $442,230. While the
recommended budget includes five new positions, the funding level will require the department
to hold 107 positions vacant and unfunded throughout FY 2014-15.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and facility costs related to the
supervision of adult offenders and legally detained minors. A significant portion of these
expenditures are funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. The department’s revenue
offset a majority of its expenditures as nearly $8 million is received through State and federal
funding. Other financing sources account for the largest portion of revenue which includes $12.8
million of Local Public Safety Funds (Proposition 172), approximately $22.5 million in 2011
realignment to mitigate the impacts of the State prison realignment under AB 109, and $3.9
million juvenile realignment funds.

For FY 2014-15, all General Fund departments were requested to develop budgets at a 5%
reduction of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC) the departments received in FY 2013-14. The 5%
reduction equates to a $1.7 million reduction to the Probation Department for a NGFC total of
$32,403,852. Due to various issues discussed below, the department was unable to meet this
guideline request and submitted a budget with an NGFC of $35,857,331 which is $3,453,479
over the NGFC guideline.
Through discussion with the County Administrative Office, the department has been able to fully
reduce the NGFC overage for FY 2014-15 to the NGFC guideline without significant service
level impacts or facility closures. This funding level would achieve status quo staffing and
funding levels. To achieve this, the department would hold 10 Probation Officer positions vacant
and unfunded for a savings of $870,469; use approximately half, or $785,225, of accumulated
Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits; and reduce services and supplies by $152,700. Other
savings of $283,846 associated with employee health benefits and increases to revenue, primarily
related to Proposition 172, totaling $1.17 million will further mitigate impacts and achieves the
NGFC guideline of $32,403,852.
At the recommended funding level, the department will have no significant service level impacts,
although the department will continue to cope with large case loads as record numbers of
individuals are being released from jail back into the community under the Probation
Department’s supervision. Revenue in the recommended budget associated with Title IV-E
program has decreased by $3 million due to a change in billing requirements for administrative
activity. Local Public Safety (Proposition 172) revenue has increased slightly over last fiscal
year. This increase has assisted in alleviating the 5% reduction in Net General Fund Cost. The
recommended budget includes FY 2012-13 AB 109 carry forward specifically allocated to allow
the department to continue to operate the AB 109 Day Reporting Center at a capacity of 200
clients, which is the same capacity as FY 2013-14. At the recommended funding level the
department will also continue to operate all three pods at the Larry J. Rhoades Kern Crossroads
Facility.
Services and supplies will increase with additional costs associated with maintaining enhanced
service levels at the Kern Crossroads Facility. Services and supplies will also increase due to additional spending related to the Day Reporting Center, all of which is reimbursable and offset
by revenue.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all but 10 vacant authorized
positions and 95 extra help positions, which requires the use of $785,225 of accumulated BSI
credits. No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The
department has averaged 80-100 vacancies over the last year, therefore holding the 10 positions
vacant will have no operational impact.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary to
achieve the department’s mission. These expenditures are funded primarily by property taxes
collected in budget unit 1114 in the Fire Fund of approximately $89.6 million. The General Fund
also provides a contribution to the Fire Fund which has decreased by nearly $582,000 in FY
2014-15 to $18.4 million. Other major sources of revenue include charges for services from other
municipalities for whom the Fire Department provides fire and emergency response services
totaling $21.7 million and a $7.4 million allocation of Local Public Safety Funds (Proposition
172).

Through a higher than anticipated fund balance available within the Fire Fund at fiscal year-end
and an increase in property tax revenue estimates the department has been able absorb the 5%
reduction in NGFC without service impacts. The recommended budget provides sufficient
funding for the department to enhance administrative staffing by adding three new positions, in
addition to continuing three person staffing at County fire stations even after the Staffing for
Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant expires during the first quarter of FY
2014-15.
In FY 2013-14 the department purchased and implemented a new Computer Aided Dispatch
(CAD) system and in FY 2014-15 the department will allocate $1 million to the purchase of a
new Records Management System (RMS). The RMS will interface with the new CAD system to
allow for enhanced reporting and response capabilities. Other charges will increase as the
department’s portion of the countywide cost allocation has increased by $1.2 million over FY
2013-14.
Intergovernmental revenue associated with the SAFER grant will decrease by $3 million as this
federal funding for 30 firefighters ends. Revenue associated with the General Fund contribution
has decreased by 5% over the prior year due to reductions necessitated by other General Fund
obligations. Charges for services associated with reimbursement revenue from other agencies for
fire suppression costs is budgeted at $3 million. Historically, reimbursements fluctuate
dramatically depending on the severity and number of wild land fires during any given year, and
the department may receive additional revenue throughout the fiscal year. Additional funds
would be recognized and appropriated mid-year to cover overtime and other costs associated
with fire response on behalf of other agencies. Other charges for services also include
agreements with several cities and neighboring counties to facilitate reimbursement of costs of
services provided, while some contracts have recently been renegotiated with less reimbursement
due to the County, new contracts have also been signed equating to no change in this estimated
revenue stream.
The Fire Fund fund balance available at June 30, 2014 was $8,037,878 of which $6.8 million is
anticipated to be used towards the department’s budget. The fund balance available was higher
than anticipated primarily due to the department’s efforts in billing charges to the State from
prior year activity. In addition, property tax revenue is expected to increase by $5.8 million over FY 2013-14 due to a modest growth in property valuations and a large property tax refund issued
in FY 2013-14. Both factors allow the department to put over $1.2 million into designations for
future fire apparatus and property purchases and will facilitate the purchase of a new hazardous
materials vehicle in FY 2014-15 that will assist the department to better serve communities.
Three new positions have been added in the recommended budget: one (1) Administrative
Coordinator position at an annual cost of $103,587; one (1) Office Services Technician position
at an annual cost of $71,364; and one (1) Supervising Fire Dispatcher position at an annual cost
of $123,549.
The County Contribution – Fire budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from the General
Fund to the Fire Fund to support general operating expenses. Appropriations within this budget
unit will be transferred to the Fire Department’s operating budget 2415 and is included in that
budget unit under the revenue category of other financing sources.

The preliminary recommended budget for FY 2014-15 reduces the General Fund contribution by
$581,893 from the prior fiscal year and is $3,366,909 less than the department requested for
contribution. The recommended contribution does not result in any significant service level
impacts for the Fire Department.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staff costs. These expenditures are
necessary to provide mandated inspection services in the field of agriculture and weights and
measures. Vehicles and fuel charges comprise a majority of the operating expenses.
The department is funded through charges for phytosanitary services, weight and measures
registration fees, reimbursement from State contracts, a portion of the State’s pesticide mill
assessment and the County’s portion of unclaimed gasoline tax. The department also receives an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget allows the department to operate at current service levels but will
require the use of the department’s entire accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits of
$708,984. Expenditures are expected to remain similar to FY 2013-14. Revenue, particularly
associated with State contracts, has been budgeted solely based on what the department has
already been awarded for FY 2014-15. Additional State contracts may be awarded throughout
the year, and consistent with prior years, the department plans to recognize new revenue
throughout the fiscal year as it is received.
The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all 49 currently authorized
positions and the addition of one permanent position, which requires the use of $705,984 of
accumulated BSI credits. The department utilizes extra help staff to assist with seasonal
workloads related to State contracts.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs for
positions required to perform the assigned functions. The division receives reimbursement for
cleaning areas subject to illegal dumping and revenue from code enforcement violation fees
although the division is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The department’s revenue is expected to increase for FY 2014-15 due to an anticipated increase
in reimbursable activities for the Waste Management Department for illegal dumping services.
Expenditures are approximately $1 million less than FY 2013-14 as abatement costs are added throughout the fiscal year as projects are identified. The recommended budget includes a $1.2
million designation in the General Fund for Blight Remediation that pays for abatement activities
that will be transferred to the department as needed to address specific projects. The
recommended budget will allow the department to maintain current levels of service.
Over the past two years the division has experienced an increased workload from assisting the
Sheriff’s Department with marijuana cases and residential foreclosures. The department is
requesting a transfer of one (1) Housing Rehabilitation Programs Supervisor from Engineering,
Surveying and Permit Services to mitigate the increased workload, which results in higher
expenses for salaries and benefits. The recommended budget also includes holding vacant and
unfunded one (1) Code Compliance Officer position.
The majority of the expenditures of the division are associated with staffing cost, engineering
consultant services and reimbursement to Engineering, Surveying and Permit Services for
grading and map checks. The primary source of revenue for the division is building permit fees.

Salaries and benefit expenses are expected to be higher for FY 2014-15 primarily due to the
funding of positions that are currently vacant. Historically, the division has funded all authorized
positions due to fluctuations in workload that are difficult to predict. Services and supplies and
other charges are expected to increase slightly due to an increased demand for solar and wind
energy surveying and zoning services. The division’s anticipated revenue is expected to decrease
slightly for FY 2014-15 due to fewer building permit requests. The budget also includes appropriation for contingencies in Budget Unit 2624 in the amount of $550,000 to mitigate
uncertainties.
The fund balance as of June 30, 2014 is $5.4 million. The division anticipates using $2.3 million
of fund balance to offset the revenue reduction. The remaining fund balance, in an amount of
$3.2 million, will be added to the general designation for use in future years.
The recommended budget will allow the department to maintain or exceed current levels of
service.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1) vacant Office Services Technician
position and one (1) vacant Office Services Assistant position; and the additions of one (1) Fiscal
Support Technician position and one (1) Supervising Engineer position. Consistent with
historical practices the division is once again requesting to fund all 43 authorized permanent
positions due to fluctuations in workload, but will likely achieve salary savings from vacancies
as in previous fiscal years.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs and service
and supplies required to perform the functions of the department. Most of the revenue for this
department is derived from customers for recording and providing copies of documents. In
addition, operating transfers in are received from various other special revenue funds listed in the
summary of revenue that contribute to the functions of the department. The department receives
a General Fund contribution from budget unit 2705 from pass-through revenue comprised of a $1
fee per recording transaction. Included in this budget is an appropriation for contingencies of
$548,946 from budget unit 2701-Appropriation for Contingencies Recorder.
The budget includes costs for computer and other equipment for the recently purchased building
adjacent to the Hall of Records, supplying the new building with furniture and installing an
elevator to better meet the needs of the public. The slight increase in revenue originates from an
operating transfer from the Recorder’s Modernization Fund to cover the costs associated with the
purchases. These changes will enhance customer service to the public. The department is
estimating to use $519,063 of the ending fund balance available towards the FY 2014-15 budget.
The contribution is funded by revenue generated from a $1 fee charged on subsequent pages of
certain document transactions. The $1 fee is passed through the General Fund to the Recorder in
order to achieve compliance with Government Code section 27361(b). The fee collected can only
be used for the Recorder’s functions. There are no major revenue or expenditure changes for FY
2014-15.
The majority of expenditures for the agency are associated with staffing costs for positions
required to perform the administrative and technology services. The department is primarily
funded through charges to non-General Fund departments and by an allocation of Net General
Fund Cost.

The recommended budget has no significant budgetary or operational changes from FY 2013-14.
Appropriations for the purchase of a server and back-up tape drive have been included. The
recommended budget will allow the department to maintain current levels of service.
The recommended budget includes funding 11 authorized permanent positions, and deleting two
(2) positions that have been vacant and unfunded the previous two fiscal years: one (1) Fiscal
Support Specialist position, and one (1) Fiscal Support Technician position. The recommended
budget also includes deleting one (1) Technology Services Manager position, and adding one (1)
Technology Services Supervisor position in order to achieve salary savings.
The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs and
contracts for outside vendors required to perform the assigned functions. The recommended
budget also includes $746,000 for RENEWBIZ funded projects and grant program. The division
receives significant revenue from applicant fees and reimbursements for costs related to
contracts. The remaining funding is primarily an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget provides the division funding for all authorized positions with no
impacts to current service levels. The division anticipates additional $600,000 in revenue over
FY 2013-14 due to an increase in applicant projects and reimbursements for staff time. The
recommended budget includes $110,000 more in RENEWBIZ funding than requested that will
be used to reimburse the Roads Department for design and inspection for a Mojave Community
Streetscape Improvement project.
The majority of the department’s expenditures are for staffing and operating costs necessary for
field services which include local rabies control in accordance with California Health and Safety
Code and animal shelter services. These expenditures are funded primarily by an allocation of
Net General Fund Cost. Other sources of revenue include animal license, animal redemption and
adoption fees as well as reimbursement from the Cities of Tehachapi and Arvin for shelter and
enforcement activities. The department receives a portion of the 1991 health realignment
revenue.

During FY 2013-14 the Animal Services Department underwent major changes, including
relocation to a new shelter location at 3951 Fruitvale Avenue, from its prior location on South
Mount Vernon Avenue. The move was made possible in less than 45 days through the
cooperation of many County departments and thousands of volunteer hours. In coordination with
a new facility, the Board of Supervisors formally adopted a name change from Animal Control to
Animal Services. Finally, on September 17, 2013 the Board appointed a new interim director and
on February 4, 2014 made the appointment permanent.
FY 2013-14 was the final year of the transition of Animal Services to its own stand-alone
department, previously under the purview of the Public Health Department. The final phase of
this three year process was complete with the transition of dispatching services.
The transition to a new facility has necessitated changes to the department’s allocation of Net
General Fund Cost as cost associated with rent and utilities of the new facility and the cost of
dispatching services are now accounted for within the department’s budget. The reduction in
revenue from FY 2013-14 is due primarily to the corresponding reduction in reimbursement for
services to the City of Bakersfield.
Salaries and benefits will increase slightly in FY 2014-15 but will require the department to hold
seven positions vacant and unfunded and reduce the use of extra help from nine to approximately
four full-time equivalents. Services and supplies are expected to decrease slightly as the
department is housing fewer animals, though the new facility has a greater number of kennels
which has increased expenses related to cleaning supplies and the cost of rent and utilities for the
new facility are now included within the department’s budget.
The recommended budget proposes to mitigate any layoffs in the requested budget to ensure the
department has the resources to operate the new shelter and provide a high level of care to
County animals. The recommended budget increases funding in salaries and benefits by
$300,886. Significant operational changes require the department to absorb increases in many
areas of the operation; specifically, costs associated with transitioning the animal control
dispatch activities from the Public Health Services Department estimated at $260,787, rental and
utilities expenses increases totaling approximately $166,900 for the new shelter facility.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The department will
unfund four (4) vacant Animal Care Worker positions, two (2) vacant Animal Control Officer
positions, and one (1) vacant Special Projects Manager position. The recommended budget
includes additional funding in an amount of $143,669 for two positions, one (1) Registered
Veterinary Technician and one (1) administrative position, which would have otherwise resulted
in layoffs. Additional funding of $157,217 was also included in the recommended budget for the
addition of four extra-help positions necessary to maintain a high quality of care and customer
service.
Road Fund activities are funded primarily from highway-users sources. Funding consists of
State and federal fuel taxes (Gas Tax), local sales taxes, and development fees. The department
also receives reimbursement from Kern Regional Transit for administrative cost and
maintenance and repairs to the fleet. The majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are
associated with staffing, equipment and supplies costs for the positions and materials required to
construct, service, and maintain public ways. The department receives some reimbursement for services provided and is also funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost from the
Contribution to Roads Budget Unit 3001.

The requested appropriation for salaries and benefits includes the addition of four (4)
Maintenance Painters for the Paint and Sign Shop. There have been revisions to the State’s
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices which require additional traffic signs and pavement
markings. Additionally, environmental restrictions and regulations on the type of paint that can
be used for pavement markings have necessitated the use of paint that needs to be reapplied more
frequently than previous paints. As such, expenses for salaries and benefits are recommended at
a higher level than FY 2013-14.
Services and supplies are recommended at a higher level due to the replacement of a road yard
on Roberts Lane. This facility houses the department’s soil laboratory and traffic signal control
center, among other functions. The facility has long needed updating to ensure the safety of the
machinery and technology housed there. There will be no operational impacts as a result of
replacing this road yard. Expenses for other charges are also expected to increase due to rising
fuel prices.
The department has an ending fund balance at June 30, 2014 of $23.2 million that will be used
towards the anticipated Net Fund Cost of $15.7 million for FY 2014-15.
The recommended budget includes the addition of four (4) Maintenance Painter positions for the
Paint and Sign Shop, totaling $338,000 annually.
The County Contribution – Roads budget unit appropriates supplemental funding from the
General Fund to the Road Fund to support road maintenance, emergency projects, and ongoing
road improvement projects. Appropriations within this budget unit will be transferred to Roads
Department and will be reflected in that budget unit under the revenue category other financing
sources.

The recommended budget for FY 2014-15 reduces the General Fund contribution by $170,260.
The recommended contribution does not result in any significant service level impacts for the
Roads Department. The General Fund Contribution will be spent on the local match towards
federally funded projects, various road maintenance and construction projects including
equipment maintenance/acquisition.
Other Financing Uses of $238,476 are available for transfer to the Airports Enterprise Fund to
fund the cost associated with capital facilities, including debt service. This budget unit contains
no revenue as the AEOA revenue is collected within Budget Unit 1112 discretionary revenue as
property taxes for the General Fund.

The recommended budget includes a 141%, or $139,531, increase in General Fund contribution
over FY 2013-14 as a result of growth in property tax allocations within the defined are of the
AEOA.
The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs necessary to
provide the services and perform the functions of the department. The largest revenue category
for the department is intergovernmental, which is comprised of revenue received from the State
and federal government. This revenue is intended to cover the range of services provided by the
department. Charges for service revenue is generated from document recording, clinic fees, case
management fees, laboratory fees, and other sources. The department also receives an allocation
of Net General Fund Cost.
The loss of the Community Transformation Grant will result in decreased revenue of
approximately $315,000. At the end of FY 2013-14 the contract with the California Department
of Corrections for transitional case management services expired, resulting in the deletion of 28
authorized positions. The end of the transitional case management program will result in lower
salaries and benefits costs and consequently intergovernmental revenue. Improved billing
practices and services are expected to increase charges for services revenue.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1) Health Education Assistant I/II
position, one (1) Departmental Aide position, three (3) Fiscal Support Technician positions, two
(2) Fiscal Support Specialist positions, one (1) Office Services Technician, and two (2) Office
Support Specialist positions at an annual savings of approximately $717,000. The recommended
budget includes the addition of five (5) Billing Office Specialist positions, two (2) Senior Office
Services Specialist positions, and one (1) Technology Services Manager position at an annual
cost of approximately $802,000. The cost of the Technology Services Manager position addition
will be partially offset by lower reimbursement expenditures, as the Public Health Department
currently pays another department for the work that will now be performed by this position.
The recommended budget holds the following authorized positions vacant and unfunded: one (1)
Public Health Program Specialist, one (1) Clinical Laboratory Assistant, one (1) Public Health
Nurse III, three (3) Public Health Nurse Jr./I/II, one (1) Staff Nurse Jr./I, one (1) Vocational
Nurse I/II, two (2) Stock Clerk I/II, one (1) Fiscal Support Technician, three (3) Office Services
Specialist, four (4) Office Services Technician, one (1) Health Educator, and four (4) Medical
Investigator positions at an approximate annual savings of $2,150,000. The department will be
able to provide current levels of service at the recommended staffing level.
The division receives a significant portion of revenue for permitting, inspecting and enforcement
services provided. The division performs these services for food, hazardous waste, water, solid
waste, housing, and medical waste facilities. A smaller portion of revenue is derived from grants
and educational programs. The majority of expenditures for this budget unit are associated with
staffing costs for positions required to perform the functions assigned.
Revenue collected for permitting is anticipated to increase due to program enhancements and fee
adjustments approved by the Board of Supervisors late FY 2013-14. Miscellaneous revenue will
decrease as grant revenue has been reassigned to the intergovernmental revenue object. Capital
assets expenditures and other financing sources revenue were sharply elevated in FY 2013-14
due to one-time equipment purchases. The division will use the remainder of the one-time
designation realized from salary savings in FY 2012-13 to offset its revenue shortfall and
maintain service levels with no impact to the General Fund.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of one (1) Chief Environmental Health Specialist
position, one (1) Health Education Assistant I/II position and the addition of one (1) Director of
Environmental Health position at an annual net savings of $9,400. The recommended budget
does not include funding for temporary staffing.
Operating expenses of $43.5 million are comprised mostly of contracted and specialized
professional services, and make up the majority of the department’s expenditures within the
services and supplies category. Staffing expenses of $48.5 million are the other major expense
category for the department. Together these expenditures fund programs and clinics necessary to
provide mental health services to County residents. State, federal, and realignment revenue are provided through sales tax, vehicle license fees, Medi-Cal, MHSA, Assembly Bill 109 (AB 109)
Public Safety Realignment program, and federal grants.
In addition to its typical operating functions, the department’s recommended budget establishes a
capital project in budget unit 1960 and sets up appropriations in the amount of $6.1 million from
the MHSA Designation to fund the purchase of a new Mental Health building located at 2001
28th Street in Bakersfield. The building purchase will allow the department to relocate its
Administration unit, Consumer Family Learning Center, and Southwest Recovery and Wellness
Center to the new, centrally located, facility. Purchase, design, and partial occupancy are planned
for FY 2014-15 with the remaining design of consumer space and remodel occurring in FY
2015-16. Long term savings on lease costs will be used to fund tenant improvements in FY
2015-16 with lease savings beyond FY 2015-16 being channeled back into direct client care.

Overall, the department’s revenue and expenditure totals are on par with prior year spending and
do not represent significant deviations from the status quo. The department’s largest expense
items in FY 2014-15 will be salaries and benefits ($48.5 million) and funds disbursed via service
delivery contracts to provide patient treatment ($33.5 million of the total $43.5 million allocated
to services and supplies).
In 2011, the State realigned the assignment of program and fiscal responsibility to local
governments (2011 Realignment). The 1991 Mental Health Program Realignment funding, one
of the department's main sources of revenue, was subsequently diverted to fund California Work
Opportunities and Responsibilities to Kids (CalWORKs) program responsibilities. The services
that were previously funded with 1991 Mental Health Program Realignment are now supported
by a guaranteed revenue source within the 2011 Realignment structure. 2011 Realignment funds
are transferred in equal monthly payments, relieving the burden of variability in timing of tax
receipts that often created cash flow concerns under the previous 1991 Realignment
disbursement model. The department’s share of 2011 Realignment funding will be $22.7 million
in FY 2014-15.
Additionally, realignment brought a new funding source to the department through Assembly
Bill 109 (AB 109), the Public Safety Realignment Act of 2011. This act shifted a large portion
of the offender population responsibilities from the State to local governments. Mental Health's
AB 109 allocation is $1.7 million for FY 2014-15, which will be used to provide additional
staffing and increased contractor funding for both in-custody and outpatient mental health
programs and services for the AB 109 population.
Beginning in FY 2012-13, two additional programs were added to the State's 2011 Realignment
budget plan; Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment (EPSDT) and Mental
Health Managed Care. EPSDT is a federally mandated program that requires the County, as the
State's contractor, to provide Medi-Cal beneficiaries under the age of 21 with all medically
necessary specialty mental health services. The Mental Health Managed Care program provides
Medi-Cal beneficiaries with specialty mental health services. The services provided under this
plan include psychiatric inpatient hospital services and outpatient specialty mental health services. The department's EPSDT and Mental Health Managed Care allocations in FY 2014-15
will be $10.3 million and $6.9 million, respectively.
MHSA funding is set at $30.1 million in FY 2014-15 and will be used to provide community and
support services as well as prevention and early intervention services to County residents. A
portion of MHSA funds will also be used for workforce education and training and to address the
department’s capital facilities and technology needs.
Overall, the FY 2014-15 recommended budget provides the department with the desired
flexibility to continue to meet the demands and challenges of providing quality mental health
services to Kern County residents. The department will use of $1.7 million in available fund
balance carry forward from FY 2013-14 to offset the department’s overall fund cost in FY 2014-
15; the remaining fund balance of $4.7 million has been placed in appropriations for
contingencies. The coming fiscal year will bring significant changes to the department with the
implementation of expanded Medi-Cal services as part of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). New
Medi-Cal clients with serious mental illnesses and substance abuse disorders are expected to be
served through the County’s system of care. Newly eligible individuals will have 100% Medi-
Cal funding in the first three years of coverage as opposed to the 50% Federal Financial
Participation (FFP) and 50% local match formula used in years prior to the ACA. After 2016,
Medi-Cal will cover no less than 90% of costs on a permanent basis.
Finally, the department will repay the State the difference between the interim Medi-Cal
payments received and the settled cost report for FY 2008-09. This payback is a result of the
department claiming certain ineligible costs during the 2008-09 period, which has now been
audited and settled. Funds for the payback are included in the department's FY 2014-15
recommended budget. Subsequent fiscal years beyond 2008-09 are anticipated to have amounts
due to the State, however, the funds for those repayments are set aside in designations and will
be repaid once the State completes its settlement processes in future fiscal years. The department
has improved its cost reporting and allocation practices to mitigate future paybacks.
The Mental Health Services Department is authorized 454 total positions; 451 full time positions
and 3 part time positions. The recommended budget includes the addition of 9 positions and the
deletion of 9 positions for no net change in authorized positions. Funding is provided for 444
positions, leaving 10 positions vacant and unfunded.
The recommended budget includes the addition of the following positions: one (1) Programmer
I/II; two (2) Program Support Supervisors; one (1) Administrative Services Officer; one (1)
Patient Rights Advocate; one (1) Mental Health Nurse I/II; two (2) Business Office Specialist III,
and one (1) Maintenance Worker I/II/III/IV.
The recommended budget includes the deletion of the following vacant positions: one (1)
Departmental Analyst I/II; one (1) Program Specialist I/II; one (1) Office Services Coordinator;
one (1) Psychiatrist (contract); one (1) Substance Abuse Specialist I/II; one (1) Mental Health
Unit Supervisor, and three (3) Fiscal Support Technicians.
The net effect of the requested position additions and deletions is an overall decrease in annual
costs of $62,970.
The recommended budget holds vacant and unfunded 10 full time positions. These unfunded
positions include: one (1) Mental Health Recovery Specialist; one (1) Mental Health Therapist
Trainee; one (1) Office Services Assistant; two (2) Office Services Technicians; one (1) Pre-
Licensed Vocational Nurse; one (1) Psychology Intern (contract); two (2) Substance Abuse
Specialists, and one (1) Supervising Mental Health Clinician.
The department’s largest expense items in FY 2014-15 will be salaries and benefits ($3.5
million) and funds disbursed via service delivery contracts for substance abuse counseling and
treatment ($9.9 million). Overall, the department’s revenue and expenditure totals are on par
with prior year spending and do not represent significant deviations from the status quo.
Primary funding for the programs operated within this budget unit is provided by sources outside
the General Fund. However, in order to qualify for much of the funding, a County General Fund
contribution in the amount of $111,363 is required and is appropriated in the Mental Health –
County Contribution budget unit 4127.
The Criminal Justice Realignment Act, also known as AB 109, provides a significant funding
source to the department. The Substance Abuse program’s allocation of AB 109 funding in FY
2014-15 is $1.7 million, which will be used to provide evidence-based treatment to inmates in
the Lerdo Jail Facility and community-based treatment for the released AB 109 population.
Additional 2011 Realignment funding amounts to $3.4 million in the recommended budget. The
Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment (SAPT) block grant will provide approximately $4
million in funding to the department in FY 2014-15. The General Fund will contribute $196,326
for assistance with gang suppression activities. Funding for this program was reduced by 5% as
all General Fund contributions are being reduced to mitigate current fiscal constraints.
Since 2011 Realignment, State program responsibilities and corresponding revenue has been
shifted to local government. This plan realigned several substance abuse treatment programs that
were previously funded through the State Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs. The
realigned programs include Regular and Perinatal Drug Medi-Cal, Regular and Perinatal Non
Drug Medi-Cal, and Drug Courts. Funding levels remain relatively consistent with prerealignment
levels, and no service impacts have been experienced with this change. AB 109
Realignment funds will continue to be split equally between Mental Health and Substance Abuse
services, with the majority of funding being utilized for direct services delivered through the
department and contracted providers, housing, and medications.
The coming fiscal year will bring significant changes to the department with the implementation
of expanded Medi-Cal services as part of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). New Medi-Cal clients
with serious mental illnesses and substance abuse disorders are expected to be served through the
County’s system of care. Newly eligible individuals will have 100% Medi-Cal funding in the
first three years of coverage as opposed to the 50% Federal Financial Participation (FFP) and
50% local match used in years prior to the ACA. After 2016, Medi-Cal will cover no less than
90% of costs on a permanent basis.
The department is currently authorized 47 positions in the Substance Abuse program. The
recommended budget includes funding for 37 positions. As part of the budget process, the
department is requesting to delete 10 positions that have remained vacant and unfunded for at
least two fiscal years. Deleting these long-term unfunded positions represents a “clean up” of the
salary schedule and will have no impact on expenses as the positions have historically been
unfunded. The department’s list of deletions includes: one (1)Youth Prevention Specialist; one
(1) Mental Health Nurse; one (1) Office Services Assistant; one (1) Supervising Mental Health
Clinician; three (3) Mental Health Therapist Trainees; one (1) Office Services Coordinator, and
two (2) Mental Health Recovery Specialists.
The State requires the County to appropriate funding through a Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for
mental health and substance abuse services in the amounts of $771,125 and $111,363
respectively. The County contribution includes an additional $196,326 to Substance Abuse
budget unit 4123 for assistance with gang suppression activities; funding for this program was
reduced by 5% as all General Fund contributions are being reduced to mitigate fiscal constraints
on the County General Fund.

The recommended budget represents the mandated funding in accordance with MOE
requirements. The only budget change is the 5% reduction of gang suppression funding for
which the department has indicated there will be no significant service level impacts.
The division receives revenue for issuing ambulance permits, issuing certifications and recertifications,
performing oversight of trauma systems at Kern Medical Center and for medical
assessment fees collected from court fines and penalties. The largest expenditure category for the division is staffing which is anticipated to remain relatively flat. The recommended budget
requires the department use a portion of its accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.

The division’s largest revenue source, transfers from the Emergency Medical Services Fund, is
expected to decrease next fiscal year due to declining court fee receipts. The increase in charges
for services revenue is primarily due to a revision of the ambulance rates process that required
service providers to reimburse the division for contracted rate reviews. This has no net impact on
the division as the services and supplies expense will increase by an identical amount. The
recommended budget provides funding for all eight authorized positions, which requires the use
of $27,948 of accumulated BSI credits.
This budget unit accounts for $44.8 million in payments to Kern Medical Center and
Correctional Medicine for providing medical care to indigent and uninsured residents and
inmates of correctional facilities. These costs are offset by an allocation of Health Program
Realignment derived from sales taxes and vehicle license fees.
The hospital is partially funded by an allocation from Health Program Realignment revenue for
services provided to adult indigent patients. The State implemented optional Medi-Cal expansion
to those individuals with incomes up to 138% of the federal poverty level under the federal
Affordable Care Act (ACA) beginning January 2014. As a result, individuals previously covered
by the County as indigent residents have gained health care coverage under Medi-Cal expansion,
resulting in some savings for the County. The Brown Administration assumes counties will
eventually achieve enough savings from expanded eligibility to offset the State’s reductions in
realignment funding. Kern Medical Center was able to negotiate amendments to the State’s
coverage expansion assumptions resulting in a substantial retention of health realignment
funding in FY 2014-15. The recommended allocation of Health Program Realignment revenue is
approximately $11.9 million in FY 2014-15.
Costs and reimbursements associated with adult and juvenile inmate medical care are recognized
in the Correctional Medicine budget unit 8988; however, the County contribution for providing
inmate care originates in budget unit 4202. In FY 2013-14 the County issued a Request for
Proposals (RFP) to medical care providers to assess the value of outsourced service delivery. The
RFP has been placed on hold until the hospital’s new administrative staff, Kern Medical Center
Management, Inc., completes its evaluation of correctional medicine services and meets with the
County Administrative Office and Kern County Sheriff to determine the best course of action
moving forward. The decision to outsource correctional medicine services or keep them in-house
is expected to be complete in FY 2014-15. In the interim, the County anticipates the correctional
medicine Net General Fund Cost will not exceed $21.5 million in FY 2014-15.
Finally, the County General Fund is making a contribution to Kern Medical Center to support the
hospital’s routine operations, fund several capital projects deemed critical to the medical center’s
future success, and true-up the hospital’s losses for the months of May and June in FY 2013-14.
In total, $13.4 million will be allocated to the hospital with $10 million earmarked to fund dayto-
day operations and approximately $2.5 million set aside for the seismic reclassification
project, G-Wing decommissioning project, pediatric remodel, medical records improvement, and
Phase I of the information systems rewire and nurse call system. The remaining funds of
approximately $930,000 will cover the hospital’s losses in May and June 2014.
The administrative and case management costs incurred by CCS are reimbursed by the State and
federal government, at varying ratios, depending on the health benefits a child is eligible to
receive. Medi-Cal eligibility results in a 100% reimbursement by the State; Targeted Low
Income Children’s Program (formerly Healthy Families) eligibility results in an 82.5%
reimbursement. Ineligibility for either program results in a 50% State reimbursement to CCS.
Revenue from the State is budgeted using actual CCS caseload eligibility statistics for the current
year. Medical therapy services are reimbursed 50% by the State. Services and supplies
expenditures include costs related to diagnostic and treatment services provided.

The recommended budget includes $99,554 in intergovernmental revenue to reflect a carryover
balance of 1991 realignment revenue. While the FY 2013-14 budget funded all authorized
positions, greater than anticipated vacancies lowered the salaries and benefits costs for that year.
The recommended budget assumes some of these positions will be filled resulting in salaries and
benefits costs higher than FY 2013-14 actual. In an effort to alleviate the cost and inefficiency of
paper record keeping, the services and supplies object is increased over FY 2013-14 actual to
accommodate the one-time purchase of a software platform that will provide protected electronic
transmittal of patient health data and allow for electronic document storage, indexing and data
mining.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The recommended
budget includes holding vacant and unfunded one (1) Physical Therapist position, one (1) Office
Services Specialist position, one (1) Public Health Nurse Jr./I/II position, one (1) Office Services
Assistant position, and (1) Assistant Program Director position at an annual savings of
approximately $514,000. Work duties have been absorbed by other program staff allowing the
division to meet State mandated service levels. In FY 2013-14 the division had a lower number
of average filled permanent positions due to eight unplanned vacancies.
Salaries and benefits are the largest expenditure of this budget unit totaling $135.5 million which
covers employee costs for the administration and operation of various programs such as
CalWORKs, CalFresh, Child Protective Services, Adoptions, and Foster Care. Services and
supplies are budgeted at $42 million which includes the cost associated with community
providers for services required under several programs. Other charges are budgeted at $17.9
million and include reimbursements to other County departments for professional services for
programs as well as administrative costs through the county-wide cost allocation plan.
The largest revenue source for the department is federal and State reimbursements in the amount
of $151.5 million. The majority of funding for the department's various programs is funded by
federal and State funds, however many programs have a County share of cost which is the
portion the County is responsible for funding. The County's responsibility is funded by $22.9
million in 2011 Realignment revenues, $1.5 million in 1991 Realignment revenues, $11.9
million in General Fund contribution, and $6.6 million in assigned fund balance. Realignment
revenue is derived from sales taxes and vehicle license fee collections of the State and as such
are contingent upon the stability of the economy.

The recommended budget includes an increase in other charges of $5.8 million due primarily to
the launch of the Expanded Subsidized Employment Program and an increase in the county-wide
cost allocation charges. The budget continues to include funding for expanded Phase 1
Differential Response services provided by the Kern County Network for Children.
Intergovernmental revenue is increasing $9.1 million due to the Expanded Subsidized
Employment Program and increased caseload. The County contribution from the General Fund
is decreasing by $6.8 million, which coincides with fund balance available of $6.7 million at
June 30, 2014.
The department is able to absorb the reduction to the General Fund County contribution with no
significant impacts to service levels.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. The department
funds all of its authorized permanent positions and 180 extra help positions; however, an
adjustment is included in total salaries to account for the savings related to staff turnover in the
amount of $6.1 million.
The recommended budget provides $13.5 million to budget unit 5120, Human Services
Administration, and $24.6 million to budget unit 5220, Human Services Direct Financial Aid.
These contributions are funded by Social Services Program Realignment revenues of $1.5
million for Administration, $22 million for Direct Financial Aid, and a $14.5 million
contribution from the General Fund.

The recommended budget includes an overall reduction of approximately $650,000 to the
Human Services budget units. The contributions from this budget unit, along with any fund
balance available in the Human Services funds, are sufficient to cover the County's financial
responsibility of providing financial assistance and social services programs to eligible recipients
in the community. See Human Services – Administration budget unit 5120 and Human Services
– Direct Financial Aid budget unit 5220 for further discussion.
The Human Services – Direct Financial Aid budget unit provides direct financial assistance to
qualifying persons throughout the County. The CalWORKs program is the greatest expenditure
out of this budget unit at approximately $122.1 million. Adoptions Assistance and Foster Care
Assistance programs are budgeted at $33.8 million and $43 million, respectively.
Major revenue of the department includes Intergovernmental revenue of $147.4 million which
consists of $82.4 million in federal funds and $65 million in State funds which are passed
through directly to recipients. State funds for 2011 Realignment and 1991 Realignment provides
an additional $53.4 million to fund the cost of direct financial assistance.
The recommended budget includes a $12.6 million increase in expenditures over FY 2013-14 as
a result of the ongoing 5% increase in CalWORKs grant funding which began March 1, 2014,
the 5% increase in CalWORKs grant funding effective October 1, 2014, the Board of Supervisor
approved increase in the general assistance grant amount, and the effects of Assembly Bill 12
(AB 12), which extends foster care services to transitional youth to age 21.
Revenue is budgeted at $13.4 million over FY 2013-14, of which $9.8 million funds the
CalWORKs grant increase and the effects of AB 12. The recommended budget also includes a
$2.5 million contribution from the General Fund as well as carryforward realignment revenue
which is sufficient to offset the negative fund balance available of $505,173 at June 30, 2014.
The majority of expenditures in this budget unit are associated with staffing costs to perform the
services provided by the Veterans’ Service Department. The department is primarily funded by
an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Additional sources of revenue are from State Aid for
Veterans’ Affairs and the sale of veterans’ license plates.

The recommended budget includes a decrease of $80,000 in revenue due to one-time funding
from the California Department of Veterans’ Affairs for outreach services in FY 2013-14.
Salaries and benefits reflect fully funding all ten authorized positions in FY 2014-15. The slight
increase in salaries and benefits costs is due to temporary personnel vacancies that occurred in
FY 2013-14. The recommended budget allows for the department to maintain current service
levels.
Staffing expenses of $10 million fund 179 budgeted positions (109 full-time positions and 70
extra-help/temporary positions). Services and supplies expenditures of $3.7 million consist of
cost for contracted services for Adult Protective Services, Supportive Services, Senior Nutrition
Programs and California Department of Aging Programs. The department is primarily funded
through federal and State sources of $9.3 million that include revenue for Senior Nutrition,
Protective Services, and Supportive Services. Additionally, the department receives
approximately $473,000 from an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget includes an increase in salaries and benefits in FY 2014-15 primarily
due to the conversion of per diem employees to permanent and or extra help, and the increase of
minimum wage effective July 1, 2014. Other charges are projected to increase by approximately
$260,000 primarily due to an increase in the county-wide cost allocation charges.
Overall revenue is budgeted at the same level as FY 2013-14, however a $633,700 reduction in
County contribution is recommended due to a higher than anticipated fund balance available at
June 30, 2014. Charges for services revenue is increasing by approximately $480,000 due to an
increase in grant funding.
The department is able to absorb the reduction to the General Fund County contribution with no
significant impacts to service levels.
The recommended budget includes funding for 107 permanent authorized positions and 70 extrahelp/
temporary positions.
The department has also requested to delete one (1) vacant Fiscal Support Technician position,
and one (1) vacant Cook I position; and add two (2) Cook III positions, one (1) Accountant
I/II/III position, four (4) Senior Nutrition Site Coordinator positions, and four (4) Food Service
Worker II positions. The net cost increase of these changes is approximately $464,000, which
will primarily be funded with Department of Social Services and California Department of
Aging funds.
The recommended budget includes an allocation to Aging and Adult Services Department,
budget unit 5610, in the amount of $1.2 million to meet County match requirements in specific
programs as required by State and federal regulations. Social services program realignment
revenue provides funding in the amount of $723,328, with the remainder being funded by a
General Fund contribution.

The recommended budget includes a reduction of approximately $600,000 in Net General Fund
Cost from the preliminary to recommended phase due to a higher than anticipated fund balance
available at June 30, 2014. The budget as recommended is sufficient to maintain status quo
service levels within the Aging and Adult Services Department.
The recommended budget includes a contribution of $8 million to cover the IHSS Maintenance
of Effort with the State as well as the County’s administrative costs of the IHSS Public
Authority. Social services program realignment revenue in the amount of $8 million offsets the
County’s local match requirement.

The recommended budget includes a reduction of approximately $126,511 in Net General Fund
Cost from the preliminary to recommended phase due to higher than anticipated fund balance
available at June 30, 2014. There are no operational impacts from this reduction.
Major expenditures for FY 2014-15 include salaries and benefits of $9.1 million to fund 94
budgeted positions. The costs in this budget unit are funded primarily by operating transfers in
from budget unit 8907, Employers' Training Resource – WIA.

The recommended budget provides adequate funding to allow the department to maintain its
current level of service to the community. The WIA funds received by the department cover two
fiscal years at a time while many of their smaller grants cross fiscal years. The department budgets the full amount of each grant available, regardless of which fiscal year the funding will
be spent.
Salaries and benefits of $9.1 million fund 94 budgeted positions of which 76 are permanent
positions and 18 are extra-help/temporary positions. The department is deleting two of its
unfunded positions, one (1) Program Specialist position and one (1) Program Technician
position. There is no cost savings in the FY 2014-15 budget year as these positions were not
previously funded. The department anticipates maintaining current levels of service for its
primary mandated task of providing employment services to job seekers and businesses.
The major expenditures for the division are the staffing costs related to the administration of the
grant programs. The expenditures are funded with an allocation of the grants. There is no Net
General Fund Cost allocation to this budget unit.

The recommended budget includes funding similar to FY 2013-14, allowing the division to
continue operations without any impacts to service levels.
The recommended budget includes funding for 11 permanent positions. The department is
holding one (1) Housing Inspector position vacant and unfunded.
Staffing expenses are the largest portion of the department’s expenditures for FY 2014-15, which
includes staffing for all the library facilities and the mobile units. Services and supplies
expenditures of $1.6 million include general operating expenses for branch locations,
memberships, and library books and materials. Funding for books is established in the
recommended budget at $258,000, which is $25,000 more than in FY 2013-14. The department
is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Additional sources of revenue of
$486,000 are comprised of library fines, fees, and charges for library materials.
The recommended budget allows the department to maintain current levels of service and
continue to meet its mission with no change in hours of operation. The recommended budget
provides funding that will support 37,856 combined hours of opening at all 28 library facilities,
which is the same as the estimated hours of opening in FY 2013-14. The department is projecting
a slight decrease in revenue due to more patrons using e-books, which are not assessed late fees.
The recommended budget includes funding for 121 authorized permanent positions and 52 extra
help positions. The department will hold two positions vacant and unfunded: one (1) Fiscal
Support Technician and one (1) Librarian III. The budget for salaries and benefits includes a
retirement payout that is contributing to the increase in expenditures from FY 2013-14.
A majority of the expenditures for this budget unit are associated with staffing costs to perform
the functions of the Farm and Home Advisor. The department is primarily funded by an
allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

The recommended budget provides the department with funding for all authorized positions,
which requires the department to use $16,724 of its accumulated Budget Savings Incentive (BSI)
credits. Services and supplies are recommended at a decrease, primarily due to a reduction in general liability insurance and fleet costs. The recommended budget will allow the County to
retain the educational and economic benefit of hosting the cooperative extension researchers
from the University of California.
No position additions or deletions are included in the recommended budget. Minor savings are
being recognized in the salaries and benefits object due to replacing a Fiscal Support position at a
lower step that resulted in lower salary costs.
Staffing costs of $7.8 million fund 84 positions for the administration, operations and
maintenance of the County’s numerous parks and County buildings. Services and supplies
expenses of $4.3 million include utilities, maintenance, insurance, and fleet costs. The
department is primarily funded by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost. Additional sources of
$2.1 million represents fees from camping, fishing, park entrance, facility use, permits, and
concession agreements.

In FY 2013-14, the department began the evaluation of the maintenance needs in remote
locations, as well as restructuring the security of the parks under the Sheriff’s Office. These
operational reviews resulted in the department not filling funded Parks Rangers and
Groundskeeper positions, resulting in lower salaries and benefit costs in FY 2013-14.
The recommended budget provides funding that will allow the department to fund 84 of the 94
authorized positions. This will require the department to hold two additional positions vacant and
unfunded in FY 2014-15. Services and supplies are recommended at a reduced level. The
department anticipated a reduction in Off Highway Motor Vehicle projects that are funded from
fees and licensing of off road vehicles. In addition, the management for Park Ranger functions
previously performed by the Sheriff will be reassigned to a new Park Ranger Manager. In order
to achieve the 5% reduction in NGFC in FY 2014-15, the department anticipates that park
maintenance in some areas will remain at minimum levels.
In FY 2013-14, the department had anticipated completing Phase II and III of the privatization
projects for Mojave, California City, North Edwards, Boron, Frazier Park, Ford City, Valley
Acres, Derby Acres, and Fellows; however, due to process delays the outsourcing has not been
finalized. In order to mitigate the 5% reduction the department requested appropriations that
removed the funding for privatization. Therefore, $207,700 authorized for contracted services in
FY 2013-14 is not included in the recommended budget. At this time the department estimates
that the full implementation of Phase II and III would cost $465,000 which is not included in the
recommended budget.
Revenue is slightly decreasing in use of money/property due to a decrease in license, concessions
and lease agreements. Intergovernmental revenue is increasing by approximately $167,000
primarily due to one-time grant funding from the Bureau of Reclamation for improvements at
Lake Woollomes.
The recommended budget includes funding for 84 permanent positions and 12 extra help
positions. The department will hold eight (8) Groundskeeper I positions and two (2) Building
Services Worker positions vacant and unfunded, two more than was adopted for FY 2013-14.
The recommended budget includes sufficient appropriations to cover debt service payments for
the 2009 Certificates of Participation, the 2011 Refunding Certificates of Participation, the 2007
California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank Loan, in addition to the anticipated
interest cost of the FY 2014-15 Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes. Appropriations are
included for the estimated issuance costs associated with the refunding of the California County
Tobacco Securitization Agency Tobacco Settlement Asset-Backed Bonds (Kern County Tobacco
Funding Corporation) Series 2002 in order to accelerate receipt of the tax settlement revenue and
to pay for the debt service costs for vacant space in the Southeast Bakersfield Community
Services Center that have increased with the relocation of some of the Employers’ Training
Resource employees and the Sheriff Civil Unit to other facilities. The major source of funding
for this budget unit is an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
The recommended budget includes an increase in services and supplies of $728,371 for the
estimated issuance costs associated with the refunding of the Tobacco Settlement Asset-Backed
Bonds and the increase in the rent cost for the additional vacant space in the Southeast
Bakersfield Community Services Center. Other charges increased as a result of the anticipated
interest cost associated with FY 2014-15 Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes as well as the
principal and interest related to the 2007 California Infrastructure and Economic Development
Bank Loan. A prepayment of the FY 2013-14 principal was made in the prior fiscal year with
available Community Development funds; therefore the principal is not included in the estimated
actual cost for FY 2013-14. The principal cost for FY 2014-15 is reflected in the other charges
category. Revenue from the Community Development budget offsets the loan repayment costs.
Expenditures are not incurred in this budget unit but rather appropriations are transferred to other
General Fund budget units under limited circumstances if approved by the Board of Supervisors.
The recommended budget includes the appropriation of 1% of General Fund general purpose
revenue in the amount of $4 million to accommodate unanticipated operational changes,
legislative impacts, or other economic events affecting the County’s operations that could not
have been reasonably anticipated. In addition, $1 million is appropriated for other uncertainties
departments may encounter such as emergency maintenance projects and other unforeseen
circumstances. The budget unit is funded through an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.

In addition to the standard general purpose contingencies identified above, the recommended
budget includes the following set asides:
 $1.5 million for Correctional Medicine budget unit 8988 if projected Medi-Cal revenue
for inmates is not realized
 $200,000 for fiscal reviews or audits of Kern Medical Center
 $250,000 for Animal Services for potential spay/neuter activities
 $1.4 million for the Sheriff Department if budget reductions are not achieved
The department has budgeted $9.8 million, or 46.6% of total funds, to provide contracts to
service providers, individual training accounts, on the job training contracts and other services
and assistance to clients. The remaining 53.4%, or $11.2 million, has been budgeted to be
transferred to budget unit 5923, Employers' Training Resource, to fund employee salaries and
benefits, as well as other operational costs to provide employment and client services. Revenue
of $16.4 million, primarily Department of Labor WIA funding, support federal programs
administered by ETR.
Budgeted resources are sufficient to maintain service levels and the department continuously
seeks out additional revenue sources in order to expand or augment services provided. The
department has budgeted to use assigned fund balance at June 30, 2014 in the amount of
$202,288. The WIA funds received by the department cover two fiscal years at a time while
many of their smaller grants cross fiscal years. The department budgets the full amount of each
grant available, regardless of which fiscal year they will be spent.
Services and supplies of $589,679 and other charges of $58,000 have been determined to be
adequate to cover expenditures that may arise through the normal course of business during FY
2014-15 that will not qualify for reimbursement under special grants or federal funding provided
by the Department of Labor, as well as expenditures associated with the Drought Relief Program
grant Employers' Training Resource (ETR) was awarded in FY 2013-14.
Miscellaneous revenue generated from the sale or disposition of equipment as well as the
Drought Relief Program grant proceeds provides $514,794 in funding for this budget unit.
The fund has sufficient assigned fund balance available at June 30, 2014 to fund the budget in
the amount of $316,298, as recommended.
The recommended budget provides sufficient funding to administer and operate the non-WIA
programs in the County, specifically the Drought Relief Program grant for FY 2014-15.
Operating transfers reimburse expenses incurred in the department's operating budget unit 5923
Administration, for which federal funding is not available.
The recommended budget is a reflection of available federal allocation to the County. The
majority of expenditures are associated with projects. Other financing uses include
reimbursement to Community Development for the administration of the program. There is no
cost to the General Fund, and the recommended budget includes using $28,233 of available fund
balance. Projects proposed for approval by both the Board of Supervisors and HUD for FY 2014-
15 are:
 California Infrastructure Bank Loan Payment: Loan payment for the construction of
street and drainage improvements in unincorporated East Bakersfield and Lamont.
 East Niles Senior Center Improvements: Design and construction of improvements to
the roof, parking lot, security fencing, and other related improvements for the center.
Claude W. Richardson Child Development Center Playground Improvements: Design
and construction of permanent playground equipment, surface materials, pathways, and
other related improvements for the Child Development Center.
 City of Arvin Street Improvements: Design and reconstruction of streets located within
Arvin, including grinding of deteriorated pavement; repaving; replacing damaged curbs,
gutters, and sidewalks; and making other related improvements.
 City of Ridgecrest Handicapped Access Improvements: Design and construction of
handicapped ramps and other improvements within the public right-of-way.
 City of Shafter Veterans Park Improvements: Design and construction of public
improvements at the City’s Veterans Park, including sports field lights, electrical
installation, storage building, and other related improvements.
 Inyokern Community Services District (CSD) Water System Improvements: Design and
construction of a new water well and transmission line as part of the water system
owned by Inyokern CSD.
 Mojave Community Streetscape Improvements: Design and construction of public
facilities and/or infrastructure within the unincorporated community of Mojave.

The recommended budget provides adequate funding to support the Community Development
Block Grant Program pursuant to the Housing and Community Development Act. Revenue and
expenditures fluctuate annually based on identified eligible projects. The recommended budget
includes funding for an additional $5.8 million towards existing and new projects.
All budgeted expenditures are to ensure funding is available for qualifying applicants. The fund
has sufficient fund balance available at June 30, 2014 to cover the Net Fund Cost. There is no
cost to the General Fund.

Although there has been no activity in prior years, the recommended budget continues to
establish spending authority in order to fund projects should an eligible business apply to the
program for funding.
The majority of expenditures are associated with projects and administrative cost. There is no
cost to the General Fund.

The recommended budget includes an additional $800,000 in funding, which is offset by an
increase in revenue in the same amount. The increase is due to the department not receiving
grant funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for ESG until very
late in FY 2013-14. As a result of the delay, the department dispersed a minimal amount of
funding in FY 2013-14.
The majority of expenditures are associated with projects and administrative cost funded through
the federal program. There is no cost to the General Fund, and the recommended budget includes
using $395,330 of available fund balance.

The department has multiple projects that cross over fiscal years. The recommended budget
provides approximately $5.6 million in funding over FY 2013-14 actual costs in anticipation of
the completion of multiple projects.
Major expenses for the department include new vehicle purchases for customer departments and
the supplies needed to service the vehicles. Remaining expenses cover the staffing needed to service customer vehicles and respond to service requests. Revenue for the department is
primarily derived from charges to departments for vehicle purchases and services provided.

The increase in the capital assets object compared to the FY 2013-14 is due to the planned
purchase of 48 vehicles at a cost of $1,204,240. The recommended budget anticipates the filling
of all authorized positions resulting in increased salaries and benefits costs. The retained earnings
balance as of June 30, 2014 was $516,844. The department anticipates decreasing retained
earnings by $286,894 to offset expenses. A retained earnings balance of $229,950 is estimated
for June 30, 2015.
This budget unit funds all expenses related to active employee health care benefits with
utilization and actual claims being the primary drivers of costs. The preliminary budget also
includes $1.25 million allocated for Patient-Centered Outcome (PCORI) fees and new
reinsurance fees payable to the federal government under the Affordable Care Act. The County
Administrative Office is exploring changes to health plan cost-sharing and employee wellness
and education in an effort to reduce overall claims expenses for self-funded plan options.
Revenue is also expected to increase slightly, due to a 1% increase in the employer contribution,
in order to ensure adequate reserves are maintained.
Actuarially recommended minimum reserves (unrestricted retained earnings) are $25 million for
FY 2013-14, excluding Incurred But Not Reported (IBNR) liabilities of $10 million. The reserve
is being decreased by $7 million in FY 2014-15, although this amount is equal to the fund’s
appropriation for contingencies. The estimated retained earnings balance at June 30, 2015 is $21
million.
The recommended budget includes $7 million in the fund’s appropriations for contingencies.
Actuarial claims projections for the County’s self-funded health plans include additional margin
for claims fluctuation and a portion of this excess estimate has been allocated to appropriation
for contingencies, rather than claims accounts in other charges, in order to more closely indicate
expected costs based on historical trends. Despite expected savings related to changes in plan
offerings and reductions in administrative costs, claims expenses are budgeted at an increase in
the next fiscal year, as there is always a potential for increased expenses due to general medical
inflation.
This budget unit collects and distributes appropriate employee and County contributions for the
retiree health benefits programs; all revenue and expenses in this fund are related to these
programs. Both the Stipend and RHPSP assist in paying monthly health benefits costs for
qualified County or special district retirees and their dependents or beneficiaries. Based on
current enrollment, total annual expenses are estimated at $10 million. Administration of these
programs is funded through a small fee charged to retirees as part of their monthly health
benefits costs, at a budgeted cost of $230,000. Most retirees contribute directly to pay at least a
portion of their retiree health care costs, limiting the County’s total liability.
In the two prior fiscal years, more than $50 million in Retiree Group Health Program reserves
were transferred to an irrevocable trust fund for funding of future Other Post-Employment
Benefits (OPEB). Beginning in FY 2014-15, biweekly employee and County contributions to
the Stipend and RHPSP programs will be deposited directly into the OPEB trust. This budget
unit will maintain minimum reserves adequate to ensure payment of benefits on a monthly basis
and will be reimbursed from the OPEB trust for actual expenses for both the Stipend and RHPSP
programs for current retirees.
Additional reserves may be transferred to the OPEB trust fund as appropriate. The recommended
budget decreases retained earnings by $490,000, which approximates this fund’s budgeted
appropriations for contingencies. With no additional transfers to the OPEB trust fund anticipated,
retained earnings are estimated at $3 million for June 30, 2015.
The primary expenses of this budget unit are insurance expenses and legal costs. This budget unit
is financed primarily through charges to County departments for coverage and services provided.

The recommended budget provides adequate funding for the County’s General Liability
Program. The recommended budget continues the elevated level of charges for services to pay
for anticipated settlement and litigation activity, and restore reserves to an appropriate level.
Expense changes are based on anticipated settlement and litigation activity. The retained
earnings balance as of June 30, 2014 was $7.1 million. The department anticipates increasing
retained earnings by $2.3 million to an estimated $9.4 million balance at June 30, 2015.
The majority of expenses in this budget unit are payment of actual unemployment benefit claims.
Future unemployment costs are not easily estimated, as unemployment costs are based upon
wages earned in a base period that is up to 18 months prior to the date of the claim. The
availability of other employment in the community also has an effect on the County’s claims.
The maximum unemployment claim is $11,700, based on the claimant drawing the maximum
weekly benefit of $450 for the first 26 weeks of unemployment. Revenue in this budget unit is
primarily comprised of charges to County departments based on each individual department’s
actual unemployment experience and claims.

Based on trends in recent years, it is expected that the unemployment claims for eligible former
employees will not increase substantially and may even decline. However, if the current fiscal
condition results in layoffs, there may be an unforeseen increase in expenses for this budget unit.
The recommended budget decreases expenses over the prior year, as unemployment costs seem
to be on the decline. Charges to departments have been increased slightly to help maintain
adequate reserves. The recommended budget includes use of budgetary retained earnings in the amount of $441,000 for FY 2014-15. After adjusting for the Incurred But Not Reported (IBNR)
liability, the budgetary retained earnings are estimated at $1.6 million at June 30, 2015.
The Workers’ Compensation Self-Insurance Program is financed through direct charges to
County departments largely based on each department’s claims history. The primary expense for
the program is claims costs of injured workers.

The recommended budget includes increased expenses from FY 2013-14 actual to reflect a
projected increase in claims costs, and changes in administrative costs from the Risk
Management Division due to higher anticipated staffing levels. Charges for services revenue will
increase to reflect the higher administrative and claims costs. However, expenses will exceed
revenue as retained earnings will be used to control premiums charged to departments. The
retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2014 was $8.5 million. The department anticipates
decreasing retained earnings by $1.7 million to offset expenses. A retained earnings balance of
$6.8 million is anticipated for June 30, 2015.
Staffing expenses of $2.1 million fund 20 positions that provide support for seven Countyoperated
airports. Expenses for services and supplies of $2.5 million include property insurance,
utilities, other professional services, and general maintenance. In addition, expenses of $3.7
million are budgeted to cover county-wide cost allocation charges and depreciation. The
department has also included debt service payments totaling $935,143 and capital expenses of
$1.1 million for the re-pavement of the main runway at Meadow's Field as well as other various
projects.
The County's airports produce revenue to operate and maintain the airport system. Revenue is
generated from facility rents, concession and user fees. Additionally, the Meadows Field Airport
receives a County contribution from the General Fund from property taxes collected in the
Airport Economic Opportunity Area. State and federal grants are significant sources for funds to
construct, improve and maintain airport infrastructure. The recommended budget includes $3.4
million in revenue associated to space rentals, concessions and user fees. Intergovernmental
revenue provides $2.2 million in funding for major maintenance and capital projects.

The recommended budget provides the department with funding for 20 permanent authorized
positions and two extra help positions. An increase of approximately $600,000 is included in
services and supplies for major maintenance projects. Overall, revenue is decreasing by
approximately $2.7 million. In FY 2013-14, the department received a one-time contribution
from the ACO-General Fund in the amount of $4.2 million due to the forgiveness of a long-term
loan by the Board of Supervisors on February 25, 2014 resulting in higher revenue collections.
Additionally, the budget includes an increase of $1.5 million in intergovernmental revenue
associated with major maintenance and capital improvements for which the department will
receive federal and State reimbursements.
Salaries and benefits of $2.1 million fund 20 permanent authorized positions and two extra help
positions. The department has unfunded and will hold vacant one (1) Maintenance Worker
I/II/III/IV position and one (1) Airport Operations and Security Supervisor position.
Included in the recommended budget are the deletion of one (1) Office Services Specialist
position for a cost savings of $75,407 and the addition of one (1) Building Services Worker
position at a cost of $64,267. The net savings to the department is $11,140.
The department does not anticipate any operational impacts with the proposed changes to
authorized positions.
Revenue is primarily generated from land lease agreements and is deposited into the Golf Course
Enterprise Fund where it is used for necessary capital and infrastructure maintenance projects at
the golf courses and to reimburse the Parks and Recreation Department for administrative
support.

The recommended budget includes an appropriation of $75,000 per golf course for ongoing
maintenance. A reduction in revenue of $232,639 is included in the recommended budget due to
the expiration of the golf course surcharge. In FY 2013-14, the revenue included a $2 surcharge
that was originally set up October 30, 1995, as part of the golf course water system construction
financing plan. The surcharge was set up for the repayment of debt, which has now been repaid
in full. The retained earnings at June 30, 2014 is $2.5 million of which the department
anticipates using $147,752 in FY 2014-15.
The majority of expenses and revenue in this budget unit are for contracts with local waste
haulers for services, and the collection of waste assessment fees collected through property tax
bills.

The recommended budget includes expenses and revenue similar to FY 2013-14, increasing
slightly due to general inflation. The retained earnings balance as of June 30, 2014, is
approximately $2.1 million. The department is anticipating utilizing approximately $138,000
towards the budget in FY 2014-15.
Staffing cost of $171.1 million is the primary expense of KMC. Operating expenses of $84.5
million are comprised primarily of medical supplies, contracted physician fees, purchased
medical services, external provider care services, insurance, utilities, and equipment rental and
maintenance. Other charges of $69.4 million include $52.9 million of intergovernmental
transfers necessary to drawdown federal and State funding. The remaining appropriations in
other charges include the interest paid to the General Fund for the outstanding loan, the
countywide cost allocation plan and settlement and attorney fees. KMC receives reimbursement
from the Correctional Medicine budget unit 8988 for the cost of providing inpatient and
outpatient services to adult inmates and juvenile detainees; $8.3 million have been included as
expense reimbursement for this activity.
Total revenue of $328 million includes $158.9 million in State and federal funding primarily
from programs to reimburse KMC for providing services to uninsured and underinsured patients,
$127 million from patient revenue net of contractual adjustments and bad debt from services to
Medi-Cal, Medicare, private pay patients and insurance, and $15.2 million in other revenue from
cafeteria sales, reimbursement from medical education and services provided to other County
departments.
Other financing sources include $11.9 million for the portion of 1991 Health Realignment
allocated to KMC, $12.2 million county contribution to fund daily operations and capital
projects, and $3.3 million from Kern Health Systems (KHS) excess reserve to cover the cost of
capital purchases.
KMC’s management team is working diligently to improve operations and combat the hospital’s
continued substandard financial performance. As part of these efforts, KMC Management Inc.
has implemented staffing standards that resize the labor force daily consistent with fluctuating
patient census. Adjusting the number of full time equivalents (FTEs) to match the patient census
will help reduce KMC's salaries and benefits by approximately $5.7 million in FY 2014-15.
Overall salary and benefit costs are budgeted at $171.1 million in FY 2014-15, which includes a
projected reduction in overall staffing.
The medical center’s recommended budget also includes $3 million for requested capital assets.
These appropriations will allow the hospital to purchase several pieces of medical equipment
identified by physicians and management at KMC as vital to providing beneficial impacts in
direct patient care. The majority of the capital asset purchases, approximately $2.3 million, will
be paid for by excess reserve funding received from KHS. The remaining $700,000 in
appropriations for capital assets will replace deteriorating equipment and greatly benefit multiple
service lines throughout the hospital. A balance of approximately $5.6 million in the KHS excess
reserve account is designated for a potential remodel of the hospital’s Sagebrush clinic. KMC
identified the need for a new Electronic Medical Record (EMR) in its requested budget and
estimated total costs could range between $5 million and $14 million for full implementation.
Appropriations for a new EMR are not included in the recommended budget per the Board of Supervisor’s direction to the hospital’s management team to produce a robust analysis of the
County’s options for EMR replacement. KMC has the option to reallocate KHS funds for the
Sagebrush remodel to help cover the costs of a new EMR. However, it should be noted that costs
in excess of the $5.6 million available in the KHS designation would require an additional
General Fund contribution later in the fiscal year if the hospital is unable to generate surplus
revenue from operations to cover the gap. KMC also requested $2.2 million in appropriations for
five capital projects; the largest project is a new nurse call system and information systems
rewire with an estimated cost of $1.8 million for Phase I. The recommended budget includes
appropriations for all five capital projects with funding provided by the General Fund.
The recommended budget provides $84.5 million for services and supplies in FY 2014-15. The
hospital is reducing costs for professional and specialized services primarily due to the
elimination of costs associated with the Low Income Health Plan (LIHP), which sunset January
2014, and as a result of continued reductions in the number of temporary contract employees
used by the hospital.
Effective January 1, 2014 all individuals enrolled in the LIHP transitioned from the financial
class of “County Indigent” to either Medi-Cal Managed Care or Medi-Cal Fee for Service (FFS).
Implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and the State’s expansion of Medi-Cal are
expected to improve net patient revenue by approximately $6.3 million; enhanced payer mix and
increases in Medi-Cal managed care contracts are the basis for KMC’s enhanced revenue
assumptions. Early payer mix indicators since the ACA ensued suggest the hospital has seen a
22% reduction in indigent patients compared to an 18% increase in Medi-Cal patients. It’s
important to note that previously uninsured patients who presented at KMC and have since
obtained coverage through the State’s ACA expansion efforts must be retained by KMC in order
to meet increased revenue expectations. Although the indigent payer mix has improved because
of the ACA, patients will now have the ability to choose where they receive their care. KMC
must compete with other hospitals in the community to retain market share.
State and federal programs designed to reimburse KMC for the cost of treating low income and
indigent patients have changed over the years. On November 2, 2010, the State entered into an
agreement with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) that was designed to
sustain and strengthen the Medi-Cal program. The Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver provided
continuing funding for the Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) and Safety Net Care Pool
(SNCP) programs; however, it also shifted DSH allocations to fund two new programs under the
waiver, namely the LIHP and the Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool (DSRIP). The LIHP
was sunset on January 1, 2014 in conjunction with the start of ACA implementation. LIHP
funding is no longer available to KMC in FY 2014-15. Gross revenue for DSRIP in FY 2014-15
is estimated at $34.7 million and will require an intergovernmental transfer (IGT) of $17.3
million to draw down the federal funding portion. Much like the LIHP, DSRIP is scheduled to
sunset after FY 2014-15; however, there have been discussions with CMS to extend the program
beyond its five-year limit. DSRIP funds represent a substantial revenue source for KMC and the
department must begin planning for the possible elimination of the program.
Similarly, gross DSH and SNCP allocations for FY 2014-15 are expected to be $78.9 million and
will require an IGT of approximately $22.6 million to draw down maximum funds. The DSH
model KMC employed to determine its share of funds, allotted among the 21 Designated Public Hospitals in California, is a conservative projection that relies upon variables and data tied to
each hospital’s Interim Payment Rate Workbook or “P14” report. The California Association of
Public Hospitals (CAPH) and healthcare consulting firm Toyon and Associates have provided
the finance team at KMC with advice on methods to reduce reporting errors and informed KMC
of assumptions included in the DSH model that can potentially impact other funding sources the
hospital relies upon. KMC’s Chief Financial Officer has worked tirelessly to improve the
accuracy of data provided in the annual P14 report to avoid overstating DSH funds and other
governmental receivables. The FY 2014-15 DSH revenue estimates are based on the best
information and projections available. It is also important to note that, like DSRIP, CMS is
scheduled to begin reducing DSH funds to the State in FY 2016-17 as part of the federal
government’s implementation of the ACA. In essence, public hospitals receive DSH, LIHP, and
DSRIP funding from CMS to help cover the costs of providing care to the indigent and the poor.
As more Americans obtain health care coverage, funding will be shifted away from programs
like the Section 1115 Medicaid Waiver program to cover the increased cost of Medicaid
expansion. As a result, KMC will need to begin implementing strategies that maximize patient
revenue rather than rely on government subsidies.
In total, the preliminary recommended budget includes approximately $52.9 million in IGTs to
the State that will be used to draw down federal funding. The IGT amounts represent the nonfederal
share of programs. Matching contributions to the State, as well as the return of the initial
IGT investment are reported in the budget under other charges and intergovernmental revenue,
respectively.
The hospital is also partially funded by an allocation of Health Program Realignment revenue
from the State to help cover the costs of services provided to adult indigent patients. The State
implemented optional Medi-Cal expansion to those individuals with incomes up to 138% of the
Federal Poverty Level under the ACA beginning January 2014. Some individuals previously
covered by the County as indigent residents have since gained health care coverage under Medi-
Cal expansion, resulting in some savings for the County. Much like the federal government’s
reduction in funding, California has begun to reduce its Realignment allocations to counties. The
Brown Administration assumes counties will eventually achieve enough savings from expanded
Medi-Cal eligibility to offset the State’s reductions in Realignment funding. KMC was able to
negotiate amendments to the State’s coverage expansion assumptions resulting in a substantial
retention of funding in FY 2014-15. The recommended allocation of Health Program
Realignment revenue is approximately $11.9 million for FY 2014-15.
Finally, the County General Fund is making a contribution to Kern Medical Center to support the
hospital’s routine operations, fund several capital projects deemed critical to the medical center’s
future success, and true-up the hospital’s losses for the months of May and June in FY 2013-14.
In total, $13.4 million will be allocated to the hospital with $10 million earmarked to fund dayto-
day operations and approximately $2.2 million set aside for the seismic reclassification
project, G-Wing decommissioning project, pediatric remodel, medical records improvement, and
Phase I of the information systems rewire and nurse call system. Approximately $300,000 will
be allocated to cover prior year encumbrances for the five capital projects, and the remaining
$930,000 will cover the hospital’s prior year losses in May and June 2014.
Changes in the health care landscape as a result of the ACA, coupled with the potential sunset on
several governmental funding sources, are creating a much more challenging environment in which the County must operate its hospital. KMC must begin a transition to maximize patient
revenue rather than rely on government subsidies, become a provider of choice for local patients,
make the best use of its relative strengths such as capitalizing on its position in the local market
as the only trauma center, continue to expand and strengthen relationships with local plans and
community partners, and demonstrate its value, experience, and outcomes to the community.

The recommended budget provides funding for all 1,732 authorized positions. Although all
authorized positions are funded in FY 2014-15 (as depicted below) it is important to note that,
unlike a typical County department, KMC budgets for staffing based on patient census and full
time equivalents (FTEs), not authorized positions. Mandated staff-to-patient ratios and the
correct allocation of FTEs drive the hospital’s staffing costs, as is customary in virtually all
hospital settings. The department also experiences a high vacancy rate, exacerbated by the FTE
model and the hospital’s use of temporary staff, resulting in a significant disparity between the
average number of filled positions in prior years compared to the number of requested positions
in the recommended budget. In addition, some of KMC’s authorized permanent positions, such
as residents and some physicians, display as “extra help/temporary” in the table below due to the
finite duration of their employment at the hospital. For example, residents typically do not
exceed five years of employment with the hospital in the resident physician classification.
Because residents are coded with a definite end date, the payroll system gathers their data and
reports it as “extra help/temporary”. The same condition exists for physicians who are under
contract with the hospital and are scheduled to separate at the end of the agreed upon term
pending renegotiation and contract renewal with the County.
Appropriations in the amount of $13 million will cover the cost of staff and medical supplies
needed to provide medical care in seven locations within the adult and juvenile correctional
facilities; funding is sufficient for the department’s 92 full-time positions. Appropriations in the
amount of $8.3 million have been allocated for anticipated inpatient and specialty care services
provided at the hospital and for payments to outside vendors for services, such as ambulance
transportation for inmates and juveniles, and for payments to other hospitals for services
provided to the inmate population. Medical care in the County’s correctional facilities is funded
primarily by an allocation of Net General Fund Cost.
In previous fiscal years, the County has met its obligation to provide medical care to the
correctional system population by providing a fixed contribution to Kern Medical Center. In FY
2014-15, the recommended Net General Fund Cost for these services is $19.3 million.
The cost and reimbursement associated with providing medical care for federal inmates as well
as the reimbursement for inmates eligible for inpatient Medi-Cal coverage under the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) are included in the recommended budget and account for a reduction of
approximately $2.1 million in the County’s General Fund contribution compared to prior years.
While federal law generally excludes individuals who are inmates in an institutional setting (such
as in county jails) from the Medicaid program, inmates who are referred off-site for inpatient
care lasting at least 24 hours are not excluded from participation in Medicaid if they otherwise
meet the program’s eligibility requirements. As a result, when county inmates receive inpatient
care at a hospital, nursing facility, or other facility that is outside of the correctional system, they
can be enrolled into Medi-Cal and a federal match can be applied to the cost of the entire
duration of their inpatient stay.
Although the recommended budget anticipates approximately $1.5 million in revenue for
providing care to inmates now eligible for inpatient reimbursement under the ACA, the State has
yet to disclose how it will receive claims and pay counties for providing inpatient care to
inmates. To mitigate against delays in State reimbursement, the County Administrative Office
will set aside $1.5 million, of the anticipated $2.1 million in General Fund savings, in the
General Fund’s appropriations for contingencies to cover the cost of inmate care if the State does
not have a viable reimbursement strategy in place when FY 2014-15 commences.
The County has issued a Request for Proposals (RFP) to explore service delivery options for this
program. Budgetary changes may be necessary as the fiscal year progresses, if a different service
delivery option is selected. The RFP has been placed on hold until the hospital’s new
administrative staff, Kern Medical Center Management, Inc., completes its evaluation of
correctional medicine services and meets with the County Administrative Office and Kern
County Sheriff to determine the best course of action moving forward. The decision to outsource
correctional medicine services or keep them in-house is expected to be complete in FY 2014-15.
In the interim, the County anticipates correctional medicine costs will not exceed $21.5 million
in FY 2014-15.
Beginning in FY 2012-13, the Correctional Medicine budget unit, division of KMC, was
established to more accurately account for the cost of the program. Ninety-two (92) authorized
positions were transferred from KMC budget unit 8997 to the Correctional Medicine budget unit;
however, employees remain under the management of the hospital. The recommended budget
provides funding for all 92 authorized positions and 9 extra help/temporary positions.
While all authorized positions are scheduled to be filled in FY 2014-15, as depicted below, it is
important to note that the department continues to deal with a high vacancy rate resulting in a
significant disparity between the average number of filled positions in prior years compared to
the number of requested positions in the recommended budget. The large number of vacancies
has forced the department to use overtime to provide adequate medical coverage during shifts,
which has subsequently impacted the departments overall staffing costs.
The activities of Kern Regional Transit are funded primarily from Sales and Use Tax for local
transportation, State Public Transportation Modernization, Improvement, and Service
Enhancement Account Program (PTMISEA) and funding from the State Department of
Transportation Section 5311 that provides funding for public transit in non-urbanized areas. The
primary expenditures for the division include purchase of buses and other capital assets and
contracts for transportation services.
The recommended budget holds salaries and benefits to a similar level as FY 2013-14. The
department plans to purchase 16 buses required to replace aging buses or to augment services
due to increased ridership. The buses will be funded with a combination of PTMISEA and an
allocation of federal Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Grant.
The retained earnings balance at June 30, 2014 is $3.1 Million. The division does not anticipate
to use retained earnings in FY 2014-15.
The recommended budget includes the necessary funding for four full-time positions. The
recommended budget holds vacant and unfunded one (1) Planner I/II/III position.
A major expense for the department continues to be salaries and benefits. Services and supplies
includes landfill operating contracts and other professional services needed to maintain the
County’s disposal sites, payment to the Board of Equalization based on a per ton of landfill
waste, and costs associated with educational and recycling programs. Department revenue is
generated from special land use assessments collected through property tax bills, landfill gate
fees and waste bin fees.
The recommended budget includes the addition of eleven positions to provide an increase in
service levels. The department plans to implement additional community collection events as
well as new household hazardous waste collection events to fill a gap in countywide coverage.
The department also plans to increase the days of operation at the Metro Special Waste Facility.
The recommended budget includes funding for several large capital asset purchases, including a
Slow Speed Shredder ($750,000), a Loader ($200,000), and a CAT Loader ($190,000). In
addition, $7.6 million has been included to acquire buffer property, provide for road
maintenance, drainage improvements, monitoring of wells and other maintenance and capital
projects for solid waste facilities throughout the County.
The problem of illegal dumping continues throughout the County. This challenge continues to be
addressed by a team of staff from several County departments who work together to better
educate the public and to provide relief in the way of cleanup. The recommended budget
allocates funds for Code Compliance to be used toward these efforts.
While the Waste Management Department has approximately $43.1 million in short-term
unrestricted cash that can be used to support the operations of the department, the retained
earnings at June 30, 2014 is a deficit of $10.2 million due to the inclusion of approximately $44
million of long term liabilities associated pollution remediation obligations, future closure and
post-closure maintenance and pension obligation bonds. These liabilities do not come due within
the current year budget and represent future costs that will be funded with future revenue. After
adjusting for long-term debt, the estimated budgetary retained earnings balance as of June 30,
2014, is approximately $34 million. The department is anticipating utilizing approximately $6.8
million in FY 2014-15.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Marketing and Promotions Assistant
position, three (3) part-time Disposal Site Gate Attendant positions, five (5) Waste Management
Technician positions, one (1) Waste Management Specialist position, and one (1) Engineering
Technician position. These positions are necessary for adding community collection events and
increasing the special waste facility days of operation. The recommended budget holds vacant
and unfunded one (1) Supervising Engineer position.
The largest expense for the district is staffing costs related to the positions required to operate
and maintain the system and wastewater treatment plant. Services and supplies include the costs
associated with the equipment and materials needed to service and maintain the sanitation
resources of the district as well as maintenance projects needed throughout the fiscal year. The
primary revenue sources for this budget are sewer service charges collected through the property
tax bill on properties within the district boundaries and one-time sewer connection fees.
The recommended budget for the district includes sufficient appropriations to cover the
anticipated cost of funding two positions that were vacant in FY 2013-14. Capital projects to
upgrade the water system and replace the electrical motor control center of the district have been
included as well as capital assets which include three vehicles, one tractor and a portable pump.
The recommended sewer service charges include a 1.10% consumer price index rate increase
approved by the district Board which results in a small increase in revenues.
The district has a budgetary retained earnings balance at June 30, 2014 of $1,361,959 of which
approximately $1.2 million will be used toward the budget. The district plans to increase a
designation for capital projects in the amount of $212,534 to offset the capital cost in future
years.
The recommended budget includes the addition of one (1) Wastewater Specialist I/II position
and the deletion of one (1) Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator Trainee I/II/III position at a net
cost of $6,820. The department anticipates filling two funded positions that were vacant for most
of FY 2013-14.
The major expense for the district is the cost paid to the City of Taft for the operation of the
treatment plant as stipulated by the agreement between the City of Taft and the district as well as
reimbursements to the Kern Sanitation Authority and Waste Management Department for
administration and maintenance. The operational, administrative and maintenance costs are paid
with sewer service charges collected through property tax bills. Charges for services and
miscellaneous revenues are collected for connection fees and other district costs reimbursement.
The recommended budget includes sufficient appropriations to pay the City of Taft the
operational cost of the plant and to reimburse the Kern Sanitation Authority and the Waste
Management Department for the administrative and maintenance cost. Beginning in FY 2014-15,
the district will also be paying to the City of Taft its portion of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Rural Development loan secured for a major plant upgrade. The loan amount of
$3,619,000 will be repaid over 20 years at a reduced interest rate of 2.5%. The district is
responsible for 48% of the debt service payment. On May 6, 2014, the Ford City-Taft Heights
Sanitation District Board approved a $30.27 per equivalent single-family dwelling increase for
FY 2014-15 to fund increased annual cost resulting from the improvements at the plant in
addition to operational expenses.
The district’s retained earnings balance at June 30, 2014 is $191,683 which will be used toward
the budget. The district plans to release a designation for capital projects in the amount of
$152,030 to offset the increased operational cost.
Federal and State revenue offset all of the financial responsibility for the cost of IHSS Services,
with the exception of the mandated County Maintenance of Effort (MOE). The MOE is
supported by social services realignment funds of $8.1 million.
The recommended budget includes a reduction in other charges from FY 2013-14 Actual of
$775,048. The reduction is due to the health insurance costs for the individuals that provided
services shifting from IHSS responsibility to the State. The recommended budget provides
adequate funding for the IHSS Public Authority to perform its required functions.
The recommended budget includes an increase of $177,214 to a general designation. It is
anticipated that social services realignment revenue collections will exceed the MOE.
Realignment revenue is derived from sales tax and vehicle license fee collections and as such is
contingent upon the stability of the economy. The designation will be used to mitigate future
year fluctuations in realignment revenue.
Projects approved in prior years but not yet completed total $236.4 million inclusive of operating
transfers. The major multi-year carryover projects include construction of replacement fire
stations, a new information technology services facility, several local transportation projects,
construction of a new jail facility and a capital contribution to Kern Medical Center for facility
improvements. The recommended budget includes additional appropriations for the following
projects:
 $890,979 to cover additional project improvements for the new Information Technology
Services facility.
 $114,784,898 for the Kern County Justice Facility. The additional appropriations will
establish the project at the total estimated cost of $127 million, which includes the $100
million conditional award under Assembly Bill 900, $2.2 million from the inmate welfare
fund for a video visitation system and $24.8 in local match funding.
 $807,864 to reimburse the Roads Department for work completed on the Seventh
Standard Road Project.
 $1,100,000 for the Twisselman Rd-State Route 33 to King Rd, transportation project.
The $1.1 million is being reallocated from the Seventh Standard Widening Project which
has available Certificates of Participation proceeds to cover the cost of this project.
 $102,446 to transfer the remaining funds in the Rexland Acres Sewer Improvement
Project. This project has been completed.
