1. Continue implementation of County priorities in the following areas: Promote the
role of agriculture; communicate county goals and objectives to employees and the
public; develop a long range plan for meeting future infrastructure needs; maximize
financial resources and opportunities; ensure an efficient and productive work
force; manage information resources effectively; provide effective and efficient
delivery of county services; support economic development; and promote programs
for healthy children and families.
2. Continue discussions with city councils and other local government entities
regarding most efficient means of delivering mutually provided services.
DISCUSSION:
This years Requested expenditure budget of $704,636 is $21,317 more than last
year's Budget of $683,319. Several of the Board of Supervisors members have
increased their traveling to discuss issues regarding the proposed California High
Speed Rail to include being heard in Sacramento as well as Washington D.C and
water issues continue to have to be monitored in Sacramento and throughout the
valley. There also are increases in deferred compensation as well as office expense
where we will share the cost of upgrading the conference room equipment to better
facilitate the increased use of audio visual equipment. The Board office has worked to
decrease their budget in the past and will continue to try to find cost saving measures
for the future.
In FY 13/14, the County is projecting to receive $1,950,870 more in discretionary
revenue than what was budgeted in FY 12/13. This represents an overall 4.7%
increase in revenues. We are projecting FY 13/14 taxes based on FY 12/13 estimated
actuals in increased Property Taxes due to the dissolution of Redevelopment (shown in
the line item titled RDA RPTTF Residuals $1,500,000) and a projected 1.3% higher
projection in Current Secured Property Taxes Sales Taxes ($440,000).
Use of Money and Property continues to decline due to record low interest rates. The
projected interest earnings will be down by 17%, or $100,000 below the Adopted 12/13
Budget.
Intergovernmental Revenue is expected to decrease by 4.1 %, or $35,000. This
decrease is made up in two parts, $61,000 decrease is associated with the reduced
projected reimbursement of State Aid - Land Conservation or Williamson Act fees and
$20,000 projected decrease in State Aid - Mandated cost claims being paid by the
State, these were estimated at $50,000 for FY 12/13, and are only estimated at
$30,000 for FY 13/14. On the positive side, Homeowner Property Tax Relief is
projected to be up $45,000 more than in 12/13.
Charges for services, which are CAP charges, have increased by $83,870 from FY
12/13, for a total of $1,979,788 per information from the Department of Finance.
In FY 07/08, your Board approved Hazardous Waste Taxes revenues to be moved from
this budget unit to the Capital Project (700000) and Fire Fund (241000) budgets in
order to use these revenues of a one-time nature toward our projected Capital and Fire
needs. There are no longer enough funds from this source to continue those transfers.
This proposed budget includes transferring the Hazardous Waste funds (now projected
at only $150,000) to a trust fund set up for building a reserve for the Kettleman City
Water Project.
1. Budget constraints and cautious optimism are both realities as the continuing
recession begins (hopefully) recovery. After "'re-benching" basic service levels
that were driven by dramatic budget reductions over the last several years, we
seem to be seeing a "light at the end of the tunnel". Even with that,
Administration will continue to be focused primarily on "living within our means"
in 2013/2014.
2. Continue to pursue funding for the Kettleman City Water project jointly with the
Kettleman City Community Services District and the Successor Agency to the
County Redevelopment Agency.
3. Pursue with the Sheriff, District Attorney, Chief Probation Officer and the Courts,
the implementation of new State laws requiring the incarceration, treatment and
application of other means necessary to handle low-level criminals at the local
level and seek additional realignment funds.
DISCUSSION:
For Administration, the Requested Budget totals $711,965. This is an increase in
expenditures from the 2012/2013 Adopted Budget of $101,185, primarily as a result of
the increase from the addition of a Risk Assistant totaling $59,675, the addition of
$11,000 in Extra Help and the loss of revenue offset for the Assistant CAO from the
Successor Agency (former Redevelopment Agency) of over $25,000. It should be noted that the allocation of Management Analyst Ill was frozen (not funded) effective
August 20, 2012 and remains recommended to be frozen during this budget year as
well.
 Completion of our audited Annual Financial Report by December 31st.
 Continue to establish procedures to achieve monthly financial reporting.
 Conduct quarterly meetings with County fiscal personnel.
 Develop and implement Internal Audit function.
 Create accounting policies and guidelines for countywide consistency.
 Monitor and timely file all State audits.
 Ensure all State/Federal mandatory reporting requirements are timely and accurate.
 Timely completion of basic financial statements or Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report.
 Conduct May phone campaign for tax-defaulted properties.
 Conduct annual tax sale of tax-defaulted properties (if needed).
 Implement e-payables once all parties are in agreement.
 Work cooperatively to advance the implementation of a third party vendor for county
acceptance of credit/debit cards.
 Manage the Kings County Investment Pool in such a manner as to ensure safety,
liquidity and return a market rate.
 Improve efficiency and effectiveness in all processes.
 Assist agencies with debt issuance.
 Continue cross training of Finance Department staff.
 Provide responsive and courteous service to the public and other
departments/agencies.
 Plan, prioritize, and maximize our resources to face the challenges presented at all
levels of government in California.
 Provide input for best practices for implementing the Auditor and Tax Collector modules
of the new comprehensive Property Tax system (Manatron).
The Department of Finance expects to complete fiscal year 2012/13 at a total cost of
$2,232,204, a decrease in cost of $121,596 from the budgeted amount of $2,353,800.
Due to a significant reduction in our Property Tax Admin. revenue account, the actual
un-reimbursed cost is estimated to be $1,451,884 or $16,484 more than the budgeted
cost of $1,435,400. Savings of $82,218 from Salaries & Benefits and $39,378 from
Services & Supplies helped offset our revenue shortfall of $138,080. Our Salary
savings resulted from a position being unfilled for the first part of the year as well as
having an employee on disability leave for several months. Revenues are estimated to
be $138,000 under budget mainly as the result of a change in the way we are allowed
to charge cities for Property Tax Administration.
For FY 2013-14, the Department of Finance is requesting a budget with a total cost of
$2,469, 175, revenue of $806,500 and an unreimbursed cost of $1,662,675. This is up
from the FY 2012-13 requested budget by approximately $227,275. Salaries and
Benefits are requested to decrease by $19, 986 due to some position reclassifications
and the elimination of an Internal Auditor position.
Total Services and Supplies are requested at $1,071,047, up $135,361 from last
year's adopted amount. The majority of this increase is from Information Technology
Services charges which are expected to increase by $100,205 due to the
implementation of the new Property Tax system. The Professional Services budget
was increased by $10,000 to allow for the payments of internal audits performed by an
outside CPA.
Department Revenue is expected to decrease by $111,900 compared to last year's
budget. This decrease is almost completely reflected in our Property Tax
Administration fees account. This account is being budgeted at $105,000 less than last
year due to a court decision that now requires us to leave out sales tax and vehicle
license fees from our fee calculation. The dramatically decreased the amount a County
can charge a city.
1. Complete negotiations begun in early 2013 with the newly formed Supervisors
and Blue Collar units as well as the General Bargaining unit, the Deputy
Sheriff's Association and the Prosecutor's Association for successor
agreements. Begin negotiations with the Fire Association and Detentions
Associations which expire in the spring 2014. Continue discussions on various
issues that arise throughout the year that are mandatory subjects of bargaining.
2. Work with Administration and the departments to plan possible workforce
reductions and potential layoffs, if needed. This requires meeting and
conferring with the unions regarding the impacts of layoffs and working
aggressively with individual employees to avoid layoffs by placing them in
vacant alternative positions within the County or assisting with other job
placement resources.
3. Conduct reorganization, classification and compensation reviews, as needed, to
accurately reflect the changing needs of the departments and to increase the
efficiency of County government.
4. Continue mandated AB 1825 bi-annual training on sexual harassment
prevention. Perform additional training for supervisors and staff on updated
FMLA policies and other areas of interest to department staff.
5. Continue to review, update and re-publish the County Personnel Rules and
Policies.
6. Update the County's pre-employment physical standards in cooperation with the
County Health Officer. These changes will be reviewed with the impacted
unions prior to being brought to the Board for approval.
7. Implement a new automated time and attendance system that would replace
the current hard copy form completed by County staff which is expected to be
significantly more efficient in the collection and tracking of this information. It is
currently a very time intensive task for both department payroll staff as well as
the Finance Department.
DISCUSSION:
The Department's current budget reflects the mid-year addition of a Personnel Analyst
funded entirely with AB 109 revenues to reflect the surge in workload created by this
additional hiring and maintenance of employee services, as well as other ongoing
workload demands. The industry standard for Human Resources staffing as a ratio to
number of employees supported is typically 1: 100. With almost 1300 County
employees, there should arguably be 13 staff in the Human Resources Department to
adequately ensure compliance with various labor laws and statutory requirements as
well as all other core services. With less than half that level of staff support, services
to both departments and the public are obviously impacted.
No fixed assets are requested in recognition of the fiscal constraints faced by the
County. Additional modifications have been made to various services and supplies
accounts to reflect our most recent expenditure experience primarily driven by the costs
of the increased recruitment activity. Notable changes in this budget category include
an increase of $40,000 in Professional Specialized Services (offset by corresponding
revenue) to perform a Request for Proposals (RFP) for the Deferred Compensation
program vendor. The Oversight Committee utilizes the services of SST Benefits
Consulting to perform this activity and those costs are included in the required program
response of the successful vendor, therefore there is no cost to the County.
Additionally, we are recommending the restoration of funding to the Education
Reimbursement program which has been suspended for several years due to severe
fiscal constraints. This program permits reimbursement for employees who pursue
degrees and certain certifications which make them more effective in their current
positions and/or more competitive in advancement opportunities.
The Budget for Insurance for FY 2013-14 is 1,123,309, an increase of $70,808 over FY
2012-2013.
1. Blanket Bond covers employees' faithful performance and honesty. All
employees, including elected officials, are covered to $10,000,000. The
premium for 2013-2014 is $7,900.
2. Medical Malpractice insurance provides coordinated coverage with our general
liability policy to provide additional protection for services performed in County
facilities by County staff and outside contractors. The insurance is provided
through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority and the premium for 2013-2014
is estimated to be $18,400, an increase of $1,400 from the 2012-2013 Adopted
Budget.
3. General Liability excess insurance provides coverage to $15,000,000 for
personal injury or property damage caused by the County. The County selfinsures
the first $500,000 of any accident resulting in a damage award against
the County. The excess insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess
Insurance Authority. The cost of the program and the overall dollars necessary
to pay claims and fund reserves is $1,100,000.
4. Fire and Property Insurance provides protection for County owned buildings and
contents. The insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority and the premium for 2013-2014 is estimated at $85,459. This amount
includes coverage on the County's heavy equipment fleet including fire
apparatus. Heavy equipment and fire trucks will be insured for their replacement
value after a $10,000 deductible. This program also includes Sabotage &
Terrorism coverage, as well as Boiler & Machinery coverage.
5. Pollution Liability Insurance is for a three year term starting in 2012-2013 through
FY 2014-15, in the amount of $24,518, the premium is financed over three years
at $9,000 a year.
6. Fiduciarv Insurance - provides protection to the Members of the Deferred
Compensation Oversight Committee. This premium of $11,200 is paid for out of
the Human Resources Budget.
7. Cost Applied figures are those costs associated with insurance on leased
facilities not included in Countywide Cost Allocation Charges.
$41, 140,000 is budgeted for liability claims administration and claims expense. These
moneys are transferred to Budget Unit 867000, Fund 2800, out of which all
expenditures are tracked.
This Budget reflects a summary of the Employee Benefit costs as reflected in each
department budget. Requested Expenditures for 2013-2014 total $23, 154,898, an
increase of $1,884,006 from the 2012-2013 Adopted Budget. The increase is due to
the additional staff added related to the Public Safety Realignment. The
departments' requested budget includes all employer costs associated with those
requests.
This Budget is for display purposes and is zeroed out by cost applying these
charges to individual departmental budgets.
Cost per permanent employee is estimated at $100 per person. Costs are included
in each individual department budget and displaced in this budget unit to show the
overall cost of this insurance. The projected costs for FY 2013-2014 are $221,000.
Training and implementing the replacement property tax system will take place through
the entire 2013-14 budget year as scheduled under the project's timeline.
The Department Head is also requesting organizational chart changes for the
department. The return of the Assistant Assessor-Clerk-Recorder position is being
requested as well as the addition of a new position, an Assessment Roll Manager. The
elimination of the Management Analyst and Supervising Appraisal Aide positions are
being proposed as well. For the Clerk-Recorder division, an additional Department
Specialist position is being requested to help handle the increased activity in that unit.
An ongoing evaluation of products and services purchased by the department will
continue to be done in an effort to provide the most value to the taxpayers as well.
DISCUSSION:
The Assessor-Clerk-Recorder budget is projected to increase by 58%. The significant
increase is primarily due to the additional costs of the Elections Office and a loss
estimated to be $300,000 in revenue for the Assessors Division. A new ballot
tabulating system that is estimated to cost approximately $600,000 is being requested.
The machines acquired more than five years ago, under the Help America Vote Act,
were decertified by the California Secretary of State shortly after implementation.
Replacing it has been the Department's objective but certification for a comparable
system has not been accomplished during the last few years. The requested units are
in their final stages of approval. The Elections Office budget specifically is estimated
to increase by 73% as a result.
The budget for the Assessors Office is projected to increase by 48%, primarily
because of the revenue reduction. The Assessors unit's loss is a result of a court decision that reduced the share of funds paid by districts charged for their portion of
administering property assessments.
The Clerk-Recorders income is projected to continue to cover the total cost of their
office. The two projects planned for the Office last year are in full implementation.
The first is now near completion which involves the conversion of documents from the
microfilm medium to a computer storage medium at a cost of up to $100,000. The
second is an upgrade of the broader computer storage system to be compatible with
the future Assessor's Property Tax system. The funds for both projects came from the
Department's Record Modernization Trust accounts. Any reduction in both the related
expenses and revenue reductions are due to these phases being completed. A
request for an additional clerical position is also requested as the workload of recorded
documents has continued to increase with the real estate market improving.
Per the Mitigation Agreement with the Santa Rosa Rancheria, the County anticipates
receiving a total of $900,000 in revenue in this budget unit. Although the Mitigation
Agreement allows for any receipt of these funds to be an offset against the $900,000
payment from the Tribe, none is reflected here as they are currently unallocated at the
State.
As was the case in FY 10/11, FY 11/12 and FY 12/13:
 $700,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Fire Fund in FY 13/14, going toward
operating costs at the South Lemoore Station, on the ladder truck purchased
by the Tribe and located at the Houston Avenue Station, and for service and
supply purchases.
 $200,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Sheriffs Department for the staffing
of deputy sheriff positions.
 Per the Mitigation Agreement with the Santa Rosa Rancheria, the County
anticipates receiving a total of $900,000 in revenue in this budget unit.
 This Budget shows revenue received in FY 2009/10.
 For sequencing purposes this Budget Unit converted to Budget Unit 178000 in
FY 2010/11. More detail is provided under Budget Unit 178000.
The proposed 2013-14 budget includes General Fund contributions (Other Charges) to
Building Maintenance in the amount of $2,933,619, the County Engineer (Surveyor)
budget, whose title by State law is Surveyor, receives $144,931. The former Williamson
Act funds that come into General County Revenues State Aid - Land Conservation are
transferred out to the Capital Building Projects $339,000 through this budget in the line
item titled Contribution to ACO Fund and to the Fire Fund $225,000 through the line item
titled Contribution to Fire Fund. The Cost Applied of $600,000 is the amount of Building
Maintenance costs that can be charged out to other funds or departments, thereby
reducing the net cost to the County. The 12/13 Adopted Budget included transferring
$1,000,000 out from the General Fund to the Workers Compensation and General
Liability funds. Those transferred happened in 12/13, but are not repeated for 13/14.
Lastly, there is a new transfer out titled Cont to Kettleman Water - which is established
to set up the annual transfer of Hazardous Waste fees to a newly established
trust/reserve for the Kettleman City Water Project.
The requests in this budget reflect the Board's policy as stated in the program
description. All requests received are listed for consideration of the Board. The Board
may add to or delete any item during budget deliberations. Only those items which
were adopted in the prior fiscal year are included as expenses in the requested
budget. Each request received is reflected below:
Industrial Promotion: $53,000 is requested for the County share of the cost for Kings
County Economic Development Corporation which seeks to encourage business and
industrial development in the County. The County and cities share in the total cost for
the Economic Development Corporation on a population basis.
Homecoming Parade: $2,000 is requested for the Kings County Homecoming Parade
and related events for FY 2012/2013.
In Home Support Services Public Authority (IHSS PA): $65,443 is requested for FY
2012/2013 which, when combined with the $41,583 contributed from the Kings County
Human Services Agency equals 17.5% of total IHSS PA budget, a sum that is required
by the State to be paid by the County to support the IHSS PA using County General
Fund dollars.
1. To maintain accreditation of the Veterans Services Office and Public
Guardian staff, as required by both State and Federal regulations. This
includes the initial accreditation of two new Veterans Service
Representatives.
2. To continue to provide services to veterans and their dependents in a
timely manner.
3. To expand outreach efforts to include colleges, senior centers, Family
Resource Centers, and senior housing developments.
4. To continue oversight and support of the Kings County Military and
Veterans Coalition. Provide support necessary to establish and maintain
a Veterans Court in Kings County.
5. Establish the Veterans Service Office as a satellite office of the County
Recorders Office in order to assist veterans and their families with
recording and accessing documents.
DISCUSSION:
In this budget this department is projecting a slight increase in both Probate and
LPS Conservatorships. The department is also projecting an increase in
Representative Payee clients. This projection is consistent with the past several
years of data. Revenue generated from court approved fees will continue to
decline this year. LPS clients, for the most part, have fewer assets available to
collect fees from than the typical Probate client.
For FY 13/14, this department will receive through the Behavioral Health
Administration the amount of $170,000, the same as the previous year. This
revenue will fund LPS lnvestigations/Conservatorships, and Representative
Payee services for Behavioral Health consumers identified through the County's
Behavioral Health Plan. The Behavioral Health Administration continues to fund
a full time Public Guardian Technician for additional Representative Payee
services. As Mental Health Services Act funding continues to be reduced, the
department continues to work very closely with Kings View and the Behavioral
Health Administration to identify those conservatorship clients that are ready to
be moved to a lower, less expensive, level of care. The Behavioral Health
Administration also partially funds one Veterans Service Representative position.
This department is projecting a decrease in California Department of Veterans
Affairs Subvention Funds this year, due to a decrease in auditable claims
processed. The department continues its outreach efforts, and is currently
handling services to veterans on a walk-in basis. Service time will suffer this
year while training two new VSRs. The department has requested a
Classification Study on one of the Veterans Service Representative (VSR) I/II
positions to consider several additional major duties within the office. These
additional duties are not included in the current position description.
This department conducts speaking engagements at local retirement homes,
colleges, activity fairs, hospitals, service organizations, prisons, etc. A
representative from the office serves as the Service Officer for many of the
Veterans Service Organizations in the county. The office is also responsible for
updating and maintaining the Kings County Freedom Memorial. The office also
has a major support role for the Kings County Veterans Employment
Committee.
The department continues to support the Kings County Military and Veterans
Coalition, whose main purpose is to distribute information of interest to our military and veterans community. As part of this effort the information email
distribution list is approaching 3000 that have signed up. The office has begun
issuing l.D. Cards to honorably discharged veterans. These cards can be used
as proof of military service for discounts at many of our local businesses.
Veterans that come into the office for an l.D. Card are also told about the many
other benefits they may be eligible for.
By working with the California Department of Veterans Affairs, this department
identifies recently released county veterans and is sending "Welcome Home"
letters to each. These letters discuss the many services the office provides,
and invites the veteran and their family to come in and discuss benefits they
have earned. The department continues to use "Veterans Corner" newspaper
articles and numerous speaking engagements to reach out to county veterans.
The office also receives Department of Motor Vehicles (OMV) information on all
drivers license applicants who identify themselves as veterans.
Working with veterans and their families involves sensitive and complex issues
that are often very personal in nature such as those related to combat or sexual
trauma. The clients represent all ages, ethnic and socio-economic
backgrounds. The staff requires "Geriatric" awareness of specific issues such
as dementia, Alzheimer's, stroke and profound hearing loss. The office
endeavors to be alert, sensitive, respectful and compassionate to the needs
and concerns of the clients.
The Veterans Service Office significantly impacts the lives of veterans and their
families in Kings County. In addition to benefit claims, the many other programs
that this office assists clients with such as VA and Department of Defense
(DOD) TRICARE medical care access, VA and CALVET home loans, burial
benefits, survivor benefits, and education benefits all contribute to the costeffectiveness
of this department. This year the department was recognized as
the "Service Organization of the Year" by both the Kings County Veterans
Employment Committee and the Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 5869.
During FY 11/12, the total amount of VA Compensation and Pension benefits
paid to Kings County veterans and their families was over $53 million dollars.
This is a tremendous increase over the $18 million paid in FY 05/06. This
increase is due to the outreach efforts conducted by this department.
The budget for the Law Library includes the following changes from last fiscal year: an
increase of $1,463 for salaries and benefits; including a $513 increase for Workers'
Compensation Insurance, and a $767 increase Health Insurance; an increase of $169
for IT costs, and a status quo for Books & Periodicals because although there will be an
expected 4% increase in prices, the Law Library will be cancelling two more print
subscriptions to offset the increase.
Based on the trend for the past 8 months, filing fee revenue is expected to decrease
by approximately 12% over the course of Fiscal year 2013/2014. Interest revenue
decreased by $300 due to the interest rates and deposits being lower, and is expected
to stay low, and copy machine revenue is estimated to remain the same. At this writing,
civil filing figures are only available for January and February of 2013, so 12 months of
2012 were compared to 12 months of 2011. Mindful of the current economy, expected
filing fee revenue is based on a 15% decrease in the amount of filing fees paid during
FY 2012/2013 compared to FY 2011/2012.The amount of fees paid has decreased due
to more litigants qualifying for filing fee waivers, not necessarily because of fewer
filings.
As of March 2013, use of the Law Library by non-attorney patrons has increased by
10% over 2012. Total number of non-attorney patrons for period 07/12 to 03/13 was
1140. Total number of patrons, including attorneys, for period 07/12 to 03/13 is 1278.
The objective of the District Attorney's Office is to protect the people in our
community through the effective and efficient administration of criminal justice and to
redress the harm done to the victims of crime. 
Criminal Justice Realignment has dramatically changed our judicial and correctional
system. Under our new and radically different sentencing structure the majority of
convicted felons serve their time in county jail and in alternative programs instead of
prison. Many inmates are now supervised by probation officers and available custody
sanctions have been severely reduced.
Proposition 36, which became effective November 7, 2012 and applies retroactively,
has significantly limited the effect of our prior ''Three Strikes" Law. Under our prior
"Three Strikes" Law a criminal convicted of any new felony after having been convicted
of two prior "serious" or "violent" felonies would receive a sentence of at least 25 years
to life. Under the changes mandated by Proposition 36, with limited exceptions, a
criminal with two prior "serious" or "violent" felonies whose new felony offence was a
"non- serious" or "non-violent" felony will be treated as if he or she had only one strike.
In summary, under Realignment and Proposition 36 career criminal have been and will
be spending less time in custody and more time on the street.
Not surprisingly, felony filings are estimated to increase by 17% over FY13/14
However, as expected, impact of Realignment (AB109) has been an increase in filing in
the area of economic crimes and drug crimes. Drug and economic crimes are among
the most numerous crimes where sentencing under new Penal Code, section 1170(h)
and jail crowding has resulted in shorter sentences for all of these criminal offenders.
These changes, along with more generous time credits are introduced at a time when
nationally, small rural communities are overwhelmed with methamphetamine use and
when violent crime is dramatically increasing. Increasing despite the prior change in
focus from punishment to treatment wrought by proposition 36. When the focus is on
how drugs affect the meth addict rather than how the meth hurts the innocent -
children, spouses and citizens who are the victims of the increasing crime caused by
methamphetamine and when long sentences on serious crimes are to be served in
county jail, resulting in overcrowding, it was not unexpected that the early releases of
inmates resulting in an even greater increase in economic and drug crimes.
We expect this trend to continue and to be acerbated by the shorter sentences
mandated by Proposition 36. In addition, there are currently a minimum of 36 career
criminals sentenced from Kings County serving 25 years to life under the prior version
of ''Three Strikes" law who will be applying for release back into Kings County pursuant
to Proposition 36. Although the court has discretion to deny release if it determines the
petitioner/inmate will pose an unreasonable risk of danger to the public safety, many of
these 36 lifers may be release back into Kings County.
In summary we expect felony filing to increase by 17% during FY13/14 and our
workload to increase do to the continued impact of AB109 and the additional impact of
Proposition 36. Given our expectation of an increased volume of felony cases, we believe emphasis on the most violent crimes and the most violent offenders with a
dedicated violent crime unit to continue to be increasingly important in FY 2013/2014.
1. Pro-actively hire and maintain full staffing levels in all allocated positions, to
include unfreezing four Deputy Sheriff Patrol positions.
2. Continue to identify possible solutions for jail overcrowding.
3. Continue to utilize Reserves and "extra help" staff to reduce overtime
expenditures.
4. Continue to work on the analog radio system and convert to the Fire
Department's vacant UHF channel for improved radio communications
throughout the county.
5. Proactively seek local training opportunities including hosting training sessions
when possible and working with COS Public Safety division to identify which training classes will be most valuable to KCSO, including hosting Detentions
Core Academy training opportunities.
6. Continue meeting time-lines associated with phase II of AB900 schedule for
build-out of 252 new jail beds.
7. Break ground in early fall, 2013 and begin construction of a new morgue.
8. Continue efforts towards ground-breaking of court transfer tunnel in fall of 2013.
9. Implement the NEC Corp. of America Automated Fingerprint Identification
System (AFIS), countywide including Fast ID stations at the local police
departments. This will allow for local fingerprint analysis to take place. The wait
time at the California Department of Justice lab in Fresno has become extreme.
This implementation includes a new position of Fingerprint Technician in the
Sheriff's Office.
10. RMS, JMS, and CAD "go live" will take place in the fall of 2013 and spring of
2014.
11. Pursue more Jail construction funds through the application process under SB
1022.
Narcotics Task Force
1. Significantly diminish the availability and use of illegal drugs in Kings County by
aggressively pursuing and prosecuting those involved in illegal narcotics.
2. Provide a safe and drug free environment for the citizens of Kings County and
the State of California.
Rural Crimes
1. Continue to provide responsive services and develop a strong working
partnership with the farming community.
2. Educate farmers and Sheriff's Office personnel to current trends and methods of
Ag related thefts, and emphasizing the importance of marking their equipment for
the purposes of recovery and tracking.
3. Aggressively investigate, recover, and return stolen property to its owners.
Prosecute those involved in Ag Crime activity.
Detentions
1. Continue to aggressively recruit and hire custodial personnel to remain fully
staffed and compliant with Title 24 of the U.S. Government code governing
custodial facilities.
2. Continue to look at addressing overcrowding issues.
3. Continue to identify methods to diminish the amount of sick leave utilized and
maximize the efficiency of the jail staffing.
Kitchen
1. Continue to meet all regulations in the preparation of all meals to both adult and
juvenile inmates.
2. Accomplish minor storage area remodel and purchase additional cooking
equipment to keep pace with reopening of branch jail.
3. Hire two additional Jail Cooks due to increases in inmate population.
Animal Control
1. Update County Animal Codes.
2. Continue to implement new policy and procedure manual.
3. Continue utilizing the Outreach Coordinator to implement new volunteer and
adoption programs.
4. Continue records keeping upgrades through the Chameleon software.
5. Continue to enhance training for employees.
DISCUSSION:
Actual Salaries and Benefits in 2009-2010 were $18.1 million. Requested Salaries and
Benefits for 2013-2014 are $21.8 million. The Actual Position Allocation in 2009-2010
was 239.5 Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) and the Requested for 2013-2014 is 271 F.T.E.
In addition to changes in staffing levels, in large part due to AB 109 Realignment, a
portion of the increase is associated with the overall higher costs for employee benefits
over the past five years.
While most of the staffing level increases are directly tied to AB 109 Realignment, Patrol
staffing levels have remained unchanged in recent years. However, crime rates are
trending upwards. The four frozen and unfunded patrol deputy positions need to be
addressed this year and a plan needs to be implemented to return Patrol to full staffing.
These frozen deputy positions directly impact the Corcoran and Kettleman City beat
areas, thus leaving vacancies in scheduling that requires patrol deputies assigned to
Headquarters to be responsible for coverage.
Actual 2009-2010 Services & Supplies and Other Charges combined were $7.3 million.
The Requested 2013-2014 figures are $10.6 million. The increases are associated with
higher costs for: purchases from Clothing and Personal Supplies; Uniform Allowances;
Ammunition supplies; Information Technology fees; Medical Services for the Jails,
Motor Pool charges, and Utility bills. These costs are affected by: outcomes of
negotiations with labor bargaining units; an increase in the number of computers,
phones and vehicles utilized by the department; increased pricing for services and
supplies, and higher fuel and energy costs. The impacts of AB 109 Realignment and
the inclusion of the Spillman Contract are also factors affecting the increases.
Revenues have increased from an Actual 2009-2010 of $9.3 million to a Requested
2013-2014 figure of $14.3 million. Once again, the changes implemented by the State
with AB 109 Realignment have changed the overall revenue numbers coming into the
Sheriff's Office, significantly increasing revenues, with correspondingly higher costs.
A clear picture of the "bottom line" can be seen through a comparison of Net
Expenditures to Un reimbursed Costs. In 2009-2010, 61 % of the Net Expenditures
($24.3 million) were Unreimbursed Costs. For 2013-2014, only 54% of the Net
Expenditures ($31.4 million) are Unreimbursed Costs. The Unreimbursed Costs for all programs in the Sheriff's Office decreased from a 2009-2010 Actual of $15.0 million to a
2012-2013 Adopted figure of $14.8 million.
These comparisons define the successes of the Sheriff and his staff to keep their "belts
tightened" during difficult economic times. These savings were realized due to freezing
patrol deputy positions, delaying purchases, and seeking out other revenue sources.
The Sheriff's Office impact to the General Fund has been relatively small during this
time, while other County Departments have impacted the General Fund more
significantly.
However, the 2013-2014 Requested Unreimbursed Costs for all programs are $16.4
million, a $1.5 million increase over the 2012-2013 Adopted totals. As described in the
discussions for Salaries and Benefits, and Services & Supplies and Other Charges,
several factors affect this increase. Requests for additional staffing levels, to include
the unfreezing of patrol deputy positions; greater costs for salaries and benefits; the
implementation of the Spillman Contract and higher fees for services, supplies, fuel and
energy are chief among the driving forces behind this requested increase.
1. Grow participation in all alternative programs funded by AB109.
233000- 234800
2. With the closing of the Juvenile Academy we will make effective use of
our programs to maintain a daily population of 58 in KJC.
3. Fully implement the Containment Model for Adult Sex Offenders per
1203.067 PC in a program of supervision for pre-sentenced adult
offenders.
Highlights for 2013-2014 are:
Juvenile Treatment Center - (233000) The 2013-2014 Requested Budget reflects an
unreimbursed cost to the General Fund of $3,311,094 (a $555,310 decrease over the
FY 2012-2013 Adopted Budget). This decrease is associated with the closing of the
Juvenile Academy.
Probation AB109 - (233100) The Public Safety Realignment Act took effect October
1, 2011 and transfers responsibility for supervising specific low-level inmates and
parolees from the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) to
counties. This budget reflects staff additions related to the program due to the
continuing increase of AB 109 probationers.
Probation SB678 - (233200) The 2013-2014 Proposed Budget reflects the addition
of one (1) FTE Deputy Probation Officer I/II that is being transferred from Prop 36
(23340)0 budget unit. This transfer better reflects the funding of the position for the
Prop 36 caseload.
Prop 36 - (233400) In FY 2012-2013, the funding for the Prop 36 budget unit was
paid by the CalEMA Evidence-Based Probation Supervision Program grant which
ended in September 2012. Since the remainder was funded with SB 678 Evidence
based funding, it is requested that the expenditures associated with the Prop 36
caseload be moved to the SB 678 (233200) budget unit.
YOBG - (233600) This budget unit is fully funded by YOBG (SB81) and requires no
general fund dollars. This budget reflects the request for 1.0 FTE Probation Officer I/II
due to the closure of the Juvenile Academy. The closure has resulted in a decrease
number of beds and an increased need to rely on Programming, supervision,
assessment, and GPS home detention.
Probation - (234000) The FY 2013-2014 Probation Budget reflects the deletion of one
0.5 FTE Department Specialist Ill due to the discontinuation of the Gang Task Force
reimbursement revenue. This position will be funded with AB 109. This budget reflects
a decrease in revenue due to the Cal-EMA JAG grant ending in September 2012. This
budget also reflects a $70,000 decrease for the $24,000/year cost for offenders
committed to the State Division of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) out of juvenile court.
Victim Witness - (234200) The FY 2013-2014 requested budget funds staffing levels
that include one . 70 FTE Supervising Probation Officer and 1.25 FTE Victim Witness
Advocate 1111 positions. There is no general fund cost associated with this budget unit.
Victim Witness Assistant Program - (234700) The FY 2013-2014 requested budget
funds staffing levels that include one Victim Witness Advocate I/II position that will work
with the District Attorney's Office. There is no general fund cost associated with this
budget unit.
JJCPA - (234800) The estimated allocation for JJCPA funding in fiscal year 2013-2014
is $436,760. There is no general fund cost associated with this budget unit.
 Operational Area lead agency that has secured approximately $4,987, 101 to date from
Homeland Security Grants program for the purchase of equipment and training for the
Operational Area. Agencies assisted by these grant opportunities include the Fire Department,
Law Enforcement, Public Works, Department of Agriculture, and Public Health.
 The department has made progress in purchasing and replacing out-of-date and aging
apparatus within its fleet. In calendar year 2012 the department replaced two apparatus with
new Type I engines. These new engines were placed at the South Hanford and Hardwick Fire
Stations. In the FY 13/14 budget the department proposes to increase capital leases funding in
order to purchase two Type Ill fire apparatus. This apparatus will increase our capability related
to wildland fires in the county and be available for California Master Mutual Aid responses.
 Currently the Fire Department is without two crucial documents to establish a level of service
standard within its jurisdiction. The first plan is a 'Standards of Cover" model which details
response times related to travel distances, resource availability, and station locations. This
document uses the department's current level and compares it to a national model for evaluation
purposes and to suggest resource improvements that improve service delivery. The second
document is a "Master Plan' which establishes short, medium and long range goals for the
department. This is the road map that contemplates growth of the community, impacts of
workloads, organizational structure and establishes milestones in order to guide the responsible
growth of fire services based on needs.
 Develop a plan for management reorganization in order to enable operational efficiency and
improve span of control configuration for all divisions.
 Establish an "Automatic Aid Agreement" with the City of Hanford, review and update the existing
current agreements with surrounding agencies.
 Establish a system of succession for department staff to support promotional opportunities and
establish minimum qualification guidelines.
 Design and construct a Shift Battalion Chiefs living quarters at Fire Station 5 in Armona. This
project will allow for the Shift battalion Chief to be assigned to a location to ensure a rapid
response and maintain accountability for operation efficiency for the 48 hour shift duration.
Station 5 offers a central location within the county for response by the Chief Officer.
 Continue to provide the highest level of professional response and emergency services to our
communities.
 Continue to monitor and assess the expected changes to the Insurance Services Office (ISO),
Fire Services rating Schedule in order to maintain our current Public Protection Classification.
 Develop a staffing plan that meets the requirements of an expected ISO review and eliminates
single person stations. This plan would provide for a least two (2) firefighters in each apparatus
in a rural assignment.
 Develop and implement a "Standards of Cover" plan for the fire departments jurisdiction.
 Continue to expand the Wellness and Fitness Program and continue the downward trend of
illnesses and injuries to department personnel.
 Continue to seek funding opportunities to update the Fire Fleet and reduce the age of the
department's apparatus.
 Actively pursue alternative/grant funding for department equipment needs (e.g. Federal Fire Act
grant, State Domestic Preparedness and Equipment Program, and other Federal Homeland
Security grants).
 Continue to seek opportunities and partnerships, in our operational area, to improve and expand
service and training capabilities.
 To continue to work with the Santa Rosa Rancheria/ Tachi Palace Hotel and Casino
administration to adqress personnel, equipment, and apparatus needs that will improve and/or
enhance fire and life safety on tribal lands.
 Encourage and promote employee development through enhanced training programs, new
training, and formal education opportunities. Establish and support a succession training
program to facilitate building future department managers and leaders.
 Continue to improve and enhance our public education programs to address fire and life safety
education.
 Continue to work with the Central Planning Area to secure funding and resources to improve
Interoperability Communications for the Operational Area, Region and State.
s To provide high quality life safety and code compliance services to the County of Kings.
 Ensure that the Public Education Program reaches all segments of our communities regarding
the preservation of life and property.
 Ensure that prompt contact is made with entities involved with construction projects in order to
prevent delay, undue cost and enhance completion of the final fire inspection.
 Provide liaison and consultation services to the Cities of Avenal and Corcoran in order to
clarify California Fire Code and Fire Department requirements.
 Promote increased installation of fire sprinkler, fire alarms, and special hazard systems as the
first line of defense from fire losses.
 Investigate and determine the origin and cause of all fires occurring within our jurisdiction.
 Ensure expedient fire cause determination service in order to analyze and affect loss control.
 Provide fire code enforcement services that match the needs of the communities we serve.
 Initiate a fee study to explore the creation of a permit and inspection charges, consistent with
industry standards, in order to offset the division costs.
 Establish a fee schedule that supports the mission of the Fire Prevention Division and
expedites the processing of permits and plan checking.
 Establish a formal Fire Investigation Response Team for the investigation of all fires within the
County.
 Provide exceptional fire education programs and services to the public.
 To develop and maintain a turnout time of 120 seconds, from receipt of emergency call.
 To develop and establish a minimum response time based on geographical and resource
availability factors.
 Maintain all equipment, apparatus, and personnel in a state of readiness to ensure a rapid
response to emergencies.
 To utilize response data and informational systems to enhance the quality of our response to
emergencies.
 Develop, identify, and update target hazards and preplans.
 To meet the minimum amount of training hours as determined by the Training Division.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Confined Space Operations training per year.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Emergency Medical Technician training and implement a
recertification program based on continuing educations credits.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Hazardous Materials First Responder Operations training
per year.
 To deliver a minimum of 186 hours of additional training to each member of the career staff
and a minimum of 48 hours to volunteer staff.
 Develop and implement a web based training and education system for Emergency Medical
and Hazardous materials recertification.
 Continue to support the College of the Sequoias Basic Fire Academy with instructors and
participants,
 Continue to develop a Regional Type II Hazardous Materials Response Team in conjunction
with Hanford City Fire Department.
 Continue to support and provide assistance to the California Emergency Management Agency
with a Type II Urban Search and Rescue Team.
 The Office of Emergency Services Coordinator will participate in State-sponsored meetings,
workshops and training conferences to enhance communications and operations between
various State and local agencies.
 To continue OEM training activities. Training in SEMS, NIMS, RIMS, EOC Operations and
disaster preparedness is available to the Operational Area.
 To utilize State Homeland Security Grant Program funding to update the current Emergency
Operations Plan (EOP) for the County of Kings, City of Avenal, City of Corcoran, City of
Hanford and City of Lemoore as an Operational Area project. The current EOPs are
approximately 5 years old and are in need of update to meet State and Federal guidelines.
This program will be administered by the OEM Division.
 To manage the current and pending State Homeland Security Grant Program (SHSGP),
Emergency Preparedness Grant Program (EMPG). Develop and submit future Assistance to
Firefighters Grant (AFG) and the Staffing for Adequate Firefighter & Emergency Response
(SAFER) grant.
 The Emergency Services Coordinator will serve as the Chair of the Central Planning Area
Regional Interoperability Communications System committee and will be a direct conduit to
the State regarding interoperability efforts within the Central Valley.
 To continue to participate in State training, meetings and workshops in order to expand skill
level and to advise other agencies and the community of important issues.
 To continue to apply for new grant opportunities to enhance capabilities regarding disaster
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery efforts within the County of Kings.
 To continue to offer presentations and training to other departments and agencies in SEMS,
NIMS, RIMS, EOC/DOC operations, disaster preparedness and other important issues.
 To conduct tabletop exercises, drills and seminars to enhance skill level and to train additional
key personnel in the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and Department Operations Center
(DOC) functions.
 To continue to work toward re-establishing the Kings County Disaster Council in order to better
serve the Operational Area.
 Develop and seek funding opportunities for the purchase and maintenance of an interactive
communication and mass notification system.
 To continue to support the operational area during times of emergency.
Overtime remains a significant concern for the Fire Department due to staffing shortages as a result 
of vacation, sick leave and Workman's Compensation issues. Currently, there is insufficient relief
staff available to cover the daily staffing shortages due to these factors. This has occurred in the
previous years, resulting in as many as five per shift working unscheduled overtime to fill those
absences. Each year, these staffing shortages continue to negatively impact the department's
available overtime budget. Additionally, four (4) of the department's ten (10) fire stations continue to
be staffed by a single person. These stations are located in the areas of Burris Park, Hardwick,
Island, and Stratford.
This diminished level of staffing continues to hamper the effectiveness of emergency service
operations and contributes to the number of potential injuries to our personnel. With the pending
change in the Insurance Services Office (ISO) rating schedule and the application of the National Fire
Protection Agencies 1710 Standard, the department will struggle to hold its current ISO rating scale
should the revisions go into effect. This could result in an increase to residential and commercial
insurance rates within the fire departments district. The addition of personnel, establishment of
automatic aid agreement, and development of a "Standards of Cover" model will assist with easing
the impact of current and future evaluation by ISO.
Although the Volunteer Firefighters do an outstanding job responding to incidents and assisting in fire
department operations, the amount of trained and qualified volunteers has continued to decrease
each year. Currently the department is down to a total of 40 volunteer firefighter's county wide. This
decrease is a national trend that continues to be supported by data and has caused alarm within the
emergency services community. The department will continue to work with County Administration to
search for revenue in order to add additional staffing in order to eliminate single person fire stations
and provide for a minimum of two (2) personnel on each apparatus.
The age of our fire apparatus has and continues to be an urgent issue that needs to be addressed.
As the age of the fleet increases, maintenance costs increase and availability of replacement parts
becomes a critical issue. Each year rising costs of materials, as well as changing federal mandates,
have increased replacement costs by many thousands of dollars. Even with the current and previous
year's apparatus purchases, the fleet continues to experience high levels of repairs and has no ability
to maintain adequate protection against mechanical failure and unavailability of the apparatus.
As the backbone of our geographical deployment, the need to maintain our fire stations is a primary
issue. Due to this factor, we will need to continue to fund updates and repairs to these facilities.
Items such as fixtures, windows, and garage doors will need to be replaced due to costly service
issues and parts availability. Department personnel continue to inspect, repair, and make minor
improvement to the facilities; however, large scale maintenance issues will need to be completed by
qualified contractors to alleviate the impact to shift personnel and their duties.
The Office of Emergency Management (OEM) is off to an excellent start with the appointment of a full
time Emergency Services Coordinator. The joint effort between Office of Emergency management,
the Information and Technology Department, and the Health Department resulted in the
establishment of a new Emergency Operations Center (EOG) in a vacant health building. This was
an example of how county departments continue to pull together for the benefit of emergency
preparedness in Kings County. Based on the efforts of all involved, the new EOG became
operational quickly and provides increased efficiency and capabilities.
Developing, and delivering training to the County and surrounding Cities in order to ensure
emergency preparedness,- is a primary goal of OEM. OEM will continue to seek out these
opportunities to support emergency preparedness in the operational area and ensure compliance
with all state and federal requirements. To date the required update to the Local Hazard Mitigation
Pian has been completed and is expected to be approved by the State of California by the end of this
fiscal year. In the coming fiscal year, the task of updating the Emergency Response Plan for Kings
County and all of the cities is a task that will be initiated by OEM. This update will ensure that the
Kings Operational Area remains compliant with federal prerequisites in order to maintain eligibility for
federal assistance should the need arrive.
1. Pest Detection - Surveillance for pests and diseases not known to occur
within Kings County or be established in the State by performing detection
trapping consistent with state and federal standards. Provide pest
identification services for the public. The Asian Citrus Psyllid (ACP) and the
European Grape Vine Moth (EGVM) are two serious insect pests recently
added to our detection trapping program.
2. Pest Eradication - Prevent the establishment and spread of high priority pests
in accordance with USDA and California regulations. The Pink Bollworm
Cotton Plowdown Program is one of our Eradication programs.
3. Pest Management - To assist in the mandated control of recognized economic
pests of agriculture, pests affecting the public health, and those causing
environmental harm; to enable the reduction of agricultural losses through
grower enabled control programs; and provide specific control materials, at
cost, and technical advice as needed.
4. Pest Exclusion - Provides protection and promotion of Kings County
agriculture, pursuant to Federal, State and County regulations through the
inspection of incoming and outgoing shipments for quarantine compliance,
especially in high-risk environments or market pathways, therefore promoting
the high quality and cleanliness of Kings County export commodities.
5. Pesticide Use Enforcement - To assure the appropriate use of all pesticides;
to protect the public and the environment, while assuring safety of working
conditions for pesticide handlers and agricultural workers.
6. Seed Law Enforcement - To assure the quality of seed and that it is properly
labeled as to its contents, treatment, and viability.
a. Seed Certification - Working with the California Crop Improvement
Association certification program to verify the purity and quality of seed
grown in Kings County.
7. Nursery Inspection - To ensure the production and sale of commercially
clean, pest-free, true-to-variety, vigorous and healthy nursery stock.
8. Fruit and Vegetable Quality Control - Protects the consumer, producer, and
shipper, through inspection programs for compliance with standards of the
California Food and Agricultural Code, federal regulations, marketing orders,
and other related enforcement activities; thus promoting the local Fruit and
Vegetable industry.
9. Egg Quality Control - Inspect and certify eggs as required by the California
Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
10. Apiary Inspection - Maintain the identification of bee locations in the County
for the purpose of notification of pending pesticide applications and provide
colony strength and health certification inspections services upon request.
11. Crop Statistics - Maintain current and reliable agricultural production statistics,
as required by the California Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
Prepare and present an annual County crop report. Monitor and collect crop
disaster/loss statistics and report significant findings to CDFA, the USDA, and
the County Board of Supervisors.
12. Vertebrate Pest Control - Maintain a level of control sufficient to ensure the
protection of the health and safety of the public, food safety, crops, livestock,
and the environment from the detrimental impacts of physical damage or
diseases caused by such pests. The Department's rodent bait mixing program
is a resource used locally in addition to providing sales to numerous other
county programs around the state.
13. Emergency Animal Disposal - Provide guidance to efficiently and effectively
protect the health of the public, and the environment, while ensuring the
sustainability of the livestock industry through the use of safe and efficient
means of dead animal carcass disposal during times of emergency.
1. Service Agencies - Verify licensing and inspection of services performed by
service agents for accuracy and integrity. Proctor State licensing exams for
local persons seeking a service agent or agency license, issued by the State.
2. Device Inspection - Assures equitable protection to all persons in the sale of
commodities (weighed, measured or counted) through enforcement of
prescribed device standards and specifications.
3. Quantity Control - Assures consumer protection against deception or
misrepresentation as to the quantity of products in package form, through
testing and undercover purchase programs; test purchases are made to
discern the accuracy of advertised price computations; investigations of all
consumer complaints relative to transactions utilizing units of weights and/or
measures.
4. Weighmaster Enforcement - Assures that all licensed weighmasters are
performing in accordance with established state laws and regulations.
5. Petroleum Enforcement - Provides assurance that petroleum products offered
for sale in Kings County meet Federal and State quality specifications while
ensuring sale conditions are accurately and lawfully conducted.
DISCUSSION:
The Department of Agriculture [Department] projects the unreimbursed cost to the
County General Fund, in the current 2012-13 Fiscal Year (FY) to be $145,600 less
than was adopted, an estimated 22% savings. The cost savings projection is based
on revenue expected to be received by current FY end coupled with overall
expenditure reductions. Revenue for the current FY, 2012-13, is projected to be
$1, 720, 794 representing a $17, 156 increase to the current adopted budget.
For FY 2013-14 the Department requests a net expenditure of $2,355,168 which is
$260 (-0.01%) less than was adopted in the 2012-13 FY budget. The expenditure request includes a $39,316 (2.28%) increase in Salaries and Benefits and a
$27,580 (-4.5%) decrease in Services and Supplies. Significant factors contributing
to the increase in Salaries and Benefits are a 17.6% increase in Health Insurance,
a 41. 7% increase in Workers Comp Insurance, and a 5.6% increase in Retirement
costs. In the Services and Supplies category, reductions to Motor Pool by $38,500
(-21.6%), Utilities (-4.2%), and Postage and Freight (-30.8%) are the most
significant reductions in this category.
The requested revenues, for FY 2013-14, total $1,700,590 which is -0.18% or
$3,048 less than the 2012-13 Adopted Budget. The requested total revenues for
FY 2013-14 reflect the expected funding reduction of $13,443 (-1.34%) from
federal and state sources at the time of this Requested Budget submittal. State and
federal sources represent approximately 60% of all revenues requested for FY
2013-14.
The Agriculture Department's requested FY 2013-14 budget will result in the
Unreimbursed Net Cost of $654,578 to the county's General Fund. This Requested
Budget is a net expenditure increase of $2,788 (0.43%) from the 2012-13 FY
adopted budget.
1. Insure that the Building Official, a Building Inspector, or the Permit Technician is
available one-hundred percent of the time for office consultation with builders on
construction requirements, provide for responsive plan check turn-a-round, issue
building permits, and to keep up with the latest technology in the building
industry.
2. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year building activity reports for the
unincorporated area of Kings County.
3. Provide inspection services the next workday after the request for inspection is
received or the closest date and time available.
4. Carry out the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
5. Carry out the Water Well Ordinance.
6. Abate dangerous buildings.
7. Conduct Code Compliance programs including, but not limited to: vehicle
abatement, nuisance abatement, building compliance, and zoning compliance,
8. Insure that support staff is available to receive alleged code violations in the
office or over the phone during regular business hours.
9. Maintain and track active violation cases.
10. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year activity reports for the unincorporated
area of Kings County concerning resolutions of code violation cases and vehicle
and building abatements.
11. Provide initial investigation services generally five days a week, however
depending on the threat to the public health and safety and the workload of the
Building Official it may take a few days for the initial investigation after a
complaint is received.
12. Carry out the Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Program.
13. Provide vehicle and building abatement to address health and safety issues.
14. Ensure new development meets the provisions of the Accessibility Standards
Compliance Act (SB 1608, Chapter 549 of the Statutes of 2008) and government
Code Section 4459.5, by retaining a Certified Access Specialist (CASp).
15. Ensure compliance with the California Code of Regulations Title 24 as adopted
January 1, 2011.
1. Continue the implementation of the Kings County Subdivision Ordinance.
Ensure that both divisions of the Advisory Agency for Parcel Maps and
Subdivision complete action on tentative maps within 50 days of the application
being certified complete, or completion of the environmental review. This review
period includes a required 20-day public review period for comments on
proposed negative/mitigated negative declarations. Continue the implementation
of streamlined procedures for administrative processing of lot line adjustments,
parcel map waivers, and certain minor divisions of land.
2. Ensure Planning Commission completes action on conditional use permit
applications within two (2) months of the application being certified complete, or
completion of the environmental review.
3. Process applications for site plan reviews within three (3) weeks of application
being certified complete.
4. Conduct environmental reviews for all projects within required time intervals:
within 105 days after submittal of a complete application with approved
negative/mitigated negative declarations or within one year when an
environmental impact report (EIR) is required. This includes the requirement for
a 20-day public review (30 days for state agencies comments) for proposed
negative declarations.
5. Carry out grant application and management tasks assigned by the Board, for
the following programs: Community Development Block Grant (CDBG); HOME;
BEGIN, and CalHome.
6. Manage the National Flood Insurance Program, Local Flood Plain Management
Program through building and zoning permit reviews and environmental review
processes.
7. Carry out the policies of the Kings County Hazardous Waste Management Plan
through zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
8. Implement the Kings County General Plan in coordination with the cities and
unincorporated communities in Kings County.
9. Continue the Zoning Ordinance Updates to bring it into compliance with the 2035
Kings County General Plan.
10. Implement all of the elements of the General Plan.
11. Implement the mandated Integrated Waste Management Plan, (IWMP) through
zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
12. Continue the Countywide Regional implementation of the GIS system, and
automate the General Plan and Zoning maps, continue implementation of the
GIS System into the general plan, zoning, land division, and environmental assessment procedures, and provide GIS information to the Board and
Commissions, other departments and agencies, and the public where and when
appropriate.
13. Implement and maintain the County's GIS web application to provide increased
accessibility to planning information, and support Kings EDC, Kings County
Emergency Services and First Responding Agencies, and other County
Departments.
14. Provide GIS Services to the City of Avenal, City of Hanford, and other Cities or
Districts that contract with the County for such services.
15. Coordinate effort to produce a new countywide aerial image for the GIS and
other computer applications.
16. Provide staff and administrative services for the Building Division (Budget Unit
279000) and LAFCO of Kings County (Budget Unit 280000).
17. Continue staff training and mentorship efforts to build and retain a strong
foundation of knowledgeable and experienced staff and decrease potential
attrition.
18. Continue to provide staff support to the Agricultural Advisory Committee and
conduct studies as necessary.
19. Continue to provide staff support to the Kings County Water Commission and
conduct research as necessary.
The Requested Budget for the Building Division for 2013-14 is $599,041 with $367,955
in revenue and $7,532 in Cost Applied Funds for services provided to the Planning
(270000) Division. This includes an un-reimbursed cost of $223,554. This is
approximately a 4.2% increase from last year's un-reimbursed cost. The increase in
cost for this division is due largely to decreased personnel related expenses as well as
increases in revenue due to a slight increase in development.
Revenues are projected at $367 ,955, the same as last year since the estimated
revenue for the approved 2012-13 budget were nearly on target. This trend is expected
to continue into 2013-14.
The Requested Budget for the Planning Division for 2013-14 is for a total of $1,217,078
up $69,803 from last year's approved budget. This includes an un-reimbursed cost of
$1,022,933. This is an approximate 6.2% increase from last year's un-reimbursed cost.
CAP charges represented the largest increase in the overall budget with an increase of
$96,250 from last year representing a 91.29% increase.
Revenues are projected at $80,000, the same as estimated for 2012-13. The
Community Development Agency's annual dues payment to KCAG is estimated at
$14,841.
No Fixed Assets are requested.
1. Train new LAFCO staff on operational procedures and processes.
2. Process all applications for reorganization, etc., within the prescribed time
limits.
3. Process all spheres of influence amendments for the cities, communities, and
special districts in Kings County and prepare resources for the next required
update.
4. Review and assist Cities and Districts with the preparation of detailed MSRs
for any Sphere of Influence Amendment application submitted to LAFCO to
ensure compliance with Government Code Section 56430.
5. Conduct studies and analysis to comply with new State law requirements.
6. Continue involvement in CALAFCO workshops and training events to keep
staff informed and knowledgeable of State Law changes and innovative
approaches to more effectively conducting LAFCO practices.
Kings County Department of Finance provides accounting services to LAFCO, and
this budget is included in the County's budget as a General Fund program for this
purpose. The County's portion of the LAFCO budget is shown under General Fund
Contribution. The cities' portion is shown as Intergovernmental Revenue.
LAFCO Discussion:
The 2013-14 Budget for LAFCO, which is proposed for adoption on May 22, 2013,
includes the day-to-day operations of LAFCO, including administration and
application processing activities. The General LAFCO Activities represents about
half of the overall effort in this budget.
The budget is for a total of $56,672, increased $3, 113 from last year's approved
budget due primarily to increased Administrative Allocation expenses related to
replacing the LAFCO staff vacancy with another staff person from the Kings County
Community Development Agency. This represents the increased staff costs in this
budget. Revenues are projected at $29,836, up $1,557 from the 2012-2013 Budget.
This amount includes the LAFCO Application Fees. The County's share, $26,836,
up $1,557, is shown as Unreimbursed Cost in the budget. The total budget estimate
is $56,672.
The budget is funded equally between the cities and the County, except for
estimated LAFCO Fee activity projected for LAFCO application processing. The total
cost of the budget, less any revenue, is divided evenly and the Kings County
Department of Finance collects the money and accounts for it in separate accounts.
Any money remaining from the previous year's budget will be carried over and applied to this budget. Next year's funding support will include any carryover funds,
but the amount will not be known until the books are closed for the year.
The County is the recipient of fines, fees and forfeiture and other revenues that were
previously included in the Court's budget exclusively. An agreement was reached with
the Court that established a mechanism of revenue sharing for a long list of specific
fines and fees. It is out of the proceeds of these revenues and State Trial Court
realignment funds that the County makes its contribution to the State, which then
dispenses funding back to the Courts in Kings County.
In place of a Public Defender's office, Kings County contracts with independent
attorneys to represent indigent defendants. Contracts are issued to twenty
attorneys; eleven are assigned to represent felony defendants (three of those
attorneys handle prison cases), and five are assigned to represent misdemeanor
defendants, three are full-time juvenile contract defense attorneys, and there is one
misdemeanor contract conflict attorney. Also included in this budget is the contract
for the Coordinating Attorney who oversees the activites of these twenty attorneys'
between the Courts and the County.
For multiple defendant cases, or conflicts among the attorneys and/or defendants,
the Court appoints counsel from a separate list. These attorneys, generally referred
to as "conflict attorneys," are paid on an hourly basis.
 Maintain Annual Performance Indicators in the collection of current support and
collection on arrears.
 Maintain a zero net cost to the County of Kings.
 Remain in compliance.
 Provide quality customer service.
DISCUSSION:
In the requested 2013/14 budget, several major assumptions are made. The first
assumption is that our department's administrative baseline funding will be restored by
the identical amount of last year's 1.3% state imposed budget reduction. The 2013/14
proposed State Budget projects the restoration of the 2011/12 administration funding
baseline to California's Title IV-D Child Support Program. Funding was originally
reduced in the 2012/13 state budget due to the state budget shortfall, where the Local
Child Support Agency (LCSA) experienced a $52,337.00 budget reduction.
Additionally, the 2013/14 proposed State Budget projects the restoration of the county
share of assistance collections for the 2013/14 State Fiscal Year, this action reverses
two previous years of the county share being suspended.
Our planning allocation letter issued by the California Department of Child Support
Services on February 26, 2013 indicated funding of $4, 133,667. This amount does not
include the Electronic Data Processing (EDP) portion of the budget. The State EDP
budget was increased from $75,659.00 to $82,788.00 in 2012/13 and is subject to
change as a result of a new published pricing/billing model implemented by the County
Office of Information Technology. As a result of this new billing method, our information
technology charges and EDP budget will vary from year to year.
Our department's EDP portion of the budget is the second major assumption, in which
the department is assuming the previous year's EDP budget as a baseline to budget for
the 2013/14 budget year. If funding from the State does not come through as anticipated, or if the EDP portion of the department's budget is modified at the State
level, we will have to revise our budget request.
Total anticipated revenue from the state is $4,216,455 contingent upon a state
approved budget. Additional revenue of $4,000 is anticipated from interest earnings
and $11,000 is anticipated from "disregard" revenues the department receives from
Human Services.
For FY 13/14 the Department is not requesting any fixed assets, or capital
improvements. The Department is requesting to replace 2 vehicles which are each
326000
over ten years old for a total not to exceed $50,000.00. The Department is also
requesting software license upgrades for Adobe Acrobat Professional and WinZip.
Additionally the department is requesting software maintenance renewals for Quest,
Time Clock Plus, Survey Monkey, and Appriss Justice Xchange for FY 13/14 - a total of
$8,665.00.
Some of the changes of note for FY 13/14 in salaries and employee benefits are as
follows:
 The department is requesting to delete 2 vacant Child Support Specialist I
positions that were added in FY 12/13. The positions were originally added to
assist with receiving any additional calls as a result of a proposed statewide call
center project. However, the statewide call center did not transpire as
anticipated.
 The department is requesting to delete a Child Support Specialist I/II position
and replace the existing position with a Child Support Specialist Ill for our
Collections and Distributions Unit.
 The department is requesting a salary study for all Child Support Specialist 1/11/111
positions, as well as Child Support Supervisors, and Child Support Program
Managers.
 The department is requesting a reclassification study for our Process Server
position.
 The department is requesting an Account Clerk I/II to assist the department's
Fiscal Analyst.
Some of the changes to note for FY 13/14 in services and supplies are as follows:
 DA Charges - This category was increased from $0.00 to $34,000.00 as a result
of a pending project, where the department is planning on partnering with our
County District Attorney's Office to contract an extra help DA Investigator to
assist with the prosecution of non-custodial parents under California Penal Code
270.
 Sedan - This Category was increased from $0.00 to $50,000.00 as a result of a
request to replace 2 department vehicles which are each over ten years old.
 Motor Pool - This category was decreased from 17,200.00 to 12,500.00 to reflect
the FY 2013/14 budget forecast provided by the Public Works Department.
 Offset Printing I Stores - This category was increased from 1,053.00 to 2,350.00
to reflect the FY 2013/14 budget forecast provided by the Information
Technology Department.
 In Service Training - This category was increased from 1,500.00 to 4,000.00 to
reflect an upward trend in this category over the past 3 years.
 Computer Software Expense - This category was increased from 2,745.00 to
8,700.00. This increase is due to a request for software license upgrades and
software maintenance requests for FY 2013/14.
The Budget for Court Reporters is requested at $22,324. Costs include $22,324 for
Social Security & Retirement costs.
The Requested and Recommended Budget have been prepared by the County
Administrative Office and reviewed with the assigned member of the Grand Jury.
Meeting reimbursement has traditionally been paid to Grand Jurors at the rate of $10
per meeting. In FY 01-02, an increase to $11 per meeting was adopted. Since FY
2002-03, the Requested Budget includes a $15/meeting day, State-mandated rate.
1. Maintain quality legal representation
2. Cooperate with Probation, Human Services and District Attorney's offices to
resolve issues whenever possible so as:
a. To better ensure the clients' best resolution to their case and/or
problems
b. To assist in judicial economy whenever possible
c. To participate and assist any organization whose purpose is to offer
services to aid in the protection of children and their family.
d. To assist in the gathering of information to provide for proper
recommendations pertaining to emotionally disturbed juveniles.
DISCUSSION:
There is continued need in the budget for psychological evaluations and an investigator
for the Minor's Advocates Department.
1. Contract for the professional services of a psychologist. Due to change in court
funding, it is necessary for the Minor's Advocates Department to provide for a
psychologist who will complete thorough psychological evaluations for juveniles
with serious emotional and mental health disorders. Such evaluations will
provide diagnosis and recommendations for treatment, which are necessary for
determining appropriate dispositions for juveniles before the court due to criminal
offenses, but who are also emotionally disturbed. This department is dedicated
to providing the best of legal representation, which includes aiding the court in
determining the best course towards rehabilitation for all juveniles; however, the
court must be made especially aware of the problems and recommendations for
those children suffering from emotional disorders. This appears to be an
ongoing problem with minors who have serious mental health problems. At this
time there is problem acquiring a clinical psychologist.
2. The Supervising Attorney salary and benefits are reflected in the FY 13/14
budget with the hiring a full-time permanent Supervising Attorney.
3. The department is responsible for the billing of interpreting services for out-ofcourtroom
interviews. To maintain quality legal representation for Non-English
speaking clients, hearing impaired clients and their parents.
4. There is a continuing need for an experienced bilingual investigator due the
complexity of gang cases.
Court Charges and Billing
1. The department's procedure for billing the courts for legal representation of
parties before the court on a dependency case, (Welfare and Institutions Code
300) continues to remain unchanged. Dependency case attorneys include
attorneys from this department, 3 juvenile contract attorneys and list of conflict
attorneys.
Billing to the courts include:
a) Services of the Minor's Advocates Department, including attorneys,
support staff, and investigator.
b) Services of the contract attorneys, also for dependency cases
c) Services of the conflict attorneys, on dependency cases
2. Conflict Attorneys billing to the County for legal representation on delinquency
and dependency cases is also processed through this department.
The requested 2013/2014 budget includes only $2,250 in expenses and revenues
awaiting specific projects to be approved by the Fish & Game Commission and the
Kings County Board of Supervisors.
The Proposed 2013/2014 Budget includes contributions (Other Charges) to the Road
budget (925100) from the Road Fund in the amount of $7,355,000. This is an
increase of $1,475,000 from the Adopted 2012/2013 Budget of $5,880,000.
1. Implement the Department restructuring that is proposed in FY 2013-14.
2. Continue the on-going assessment of department organization and staffing to
assure community effectiveness and operational efficiencies.
3. Provide input to the Board, the CAO, state agencies and local legislators on the
state budget, federal health care reform and other issues that could affect Health
Department programs as well as other health care services available to Kings
County residents.
4. Implement the goals identified in the Departmental Strategic Plan for achievement
in FY 2013-14, including:
a. Updating/creating a written manual of all policies, procedures, and
protocols and cross-train staff to ensure that each position has a
designated back-up.
b. Develop a county-wide Emergency Response Committee that will define
agency roles and responsibilities in responding to disasters.
c. Develop a cross-training program in the workforce to protect the public in
the event of an emergency.
5. Prepare the Department to apply for accreditation by the Public Health
Accreditation Board to be achieved no later than December 31, 2016.
6. Assess all programs, policies and procedures using the Criteria for Performance
Excellence adopted by the Baldrige Performance Excellence Program.
DISCUSSION
The requested expense budget for the Health Department is $13,879,608 for
FY 2013/14. This is a decrease of $854,076 from the FY 2012/13 Adopted Budget.
The decrease includes reductions of $293,032 in salaries and benefits and $771, 764
in services and supplies from FY 2012/13. These reflect the proposed closures of the
Preventive Health Care for the Aging program as of July 1, 2013 and the Reproductive
Health Clinic effective December 31, 2013 as well as a reorganization of the Division of
Nursing and Community Services that will reduce the number of Supervising Public
Health Nurses from four to two. It also reflects the addition of a public health nurse
position assigned to communicable disease control in the Intervention and Prevention
Unit of the Division and the upgrading of an Emergency Services Specialist position to a
Public Health Emergency Planner position and the upgrade of the Fiscal Specialist I/II
to a Fiscal Specialist 111, which were adopted by the Board in April/May 2013.
1. Continue to strengthen and prioritize services for children and their families;
meeting the demand for National and State-driven outcome measures. A
partnership with Kings County Office of Education resulted in a transitional
MOU between KCOE and Behavioral Health to assist them with services for
severely emotionally disturbed (SED) children and their families with braided
IDEA funding. Working with the new Central Valley SELPA Directors and
Mental Health Directors in a consortium on Behavioral Support Plans will
strengthen those services available to SED children in the schools. Other
services that are expanding are Parent-Child Interactive Therapy (early-age
mental health program}, mental health screenings for children up to the age of
17, and further outreach through the PEI plan of the Mental Health Services Act
and other evidenced-based pilots to address early on-set behavioral problems
that continue to impact the developmental school years.
2. Work closely with California Forensic Medical Group (CFMG) in enhancing
protocol and policy training for Probation and Sheriff Department staff regarding
the mentally ill incarcerates and their transition back into the community.
Continue to strengthen the collaborative efforts of the QA Review Team to
ensure this continuum of care. Monitor and make any adjustments to the newly
approved practice of mandated medications for mentally ill inmates who are in
"holding pattern" from or to State Mental Hospital placement.
3. Lead the 5150 Work Group Collaborative (with the assistance of the Hospital
Council facilitator) in the on-going implementing a 5150 County-Wide Protocol
that now includes Minors in an amendment to protocol between Behavioral
Health, Kings View Crisis Services, Kings County Schools, Adventist Health
Medical Center, all Kings County Law Enforcement, and other community
stakeholders that ensures the safety, security, and minimization of county
resources in dealing with psychiatric emergencies.
4. Full Implementation of a Collaborative Justice Treatment Court with Courts and
other County Agency partners. Continue to advocate for the least restrictive
environment for individuals suffering from substance abuse disorders, PTSD
and mental illnesses who are incarcerated or face incarceration, or face an
eminent release into the community without resources. The pilot for this Veteran's Court, Drug Court, Behavioral Health Court combination "pilot" will
need strengthening and adjusting after launch date of April 2013.
5. Completely convert and implement the protocols of all service related activities
into the department's new Data Management System; Anasazi. With this
automated system, reporting outcomes and creating performance based
measures with help the department track effectiveness, access to care and
service gap areas to be addressed. Ensure that data collected at local level is
interfaced with State data management system-DRC on an on-going basis.
6. Improve HIPAA practices. and structural and policy safeguards that ensure the
protection of all private health information for the department. Re-vamp and/or
improve encryption mechanisms and monitor ongoing risks to breaches in
security in partnership with Information Services Department.
7. Create goals, objectives. and strategies that serve to prevent Suicide in Kings
County. Through the Tulare/Kings Suicide Task Force, the department will seek
to lower the risks associated with suicide ideation and follow-through. As part of
the Prevention and Early Intervention Statewide programs, a suicide response
LOSS team will be implemented in Kings County to ensure any post-vention
services to family members.
8. Implement only new AOD Prevention, Treatment. or Mental Health Programs
which have been established as Evidenced-Based; remaining consistent with
the expectation that an evaluation and monitoring component accompany all
programs funded by the department. Continue to re-visit and adapt department
Strategic Plans and MHSA Plans to meet the State (CalOMS) and Federal
(NOMS) performance expectations and accountability standards.
9. Develop a QA/Systems lmplementation/HIPAA/Accountability/Safety function
within the department to meet the growing needs of data collection, IT
responsibilities, security and safety practices, and quality compliance and
consistency across all units within the department. 
DISCUSSION
The expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Administration budget unit
#422500 is cost applied across four budget units (420000, 420100, 422100, and
422200) in the amount of $750,000; Budget Unit #420000 is $7,434,449; Budget
Unit #420100 is $1,029,531; Budget Unit #422100 is $1,181,733; Budget Unit
#422200 is $6,050,782; Budget Unit #422400 is currently $0. The combined
total expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Department is $15,696,495
for FY 2012/2013. Revenues for FY 2012/2013 are $15,661,944. In addition, the
department has a mandated MHSA prudent reserve at the County level in the amount of $2, 138118. Net County Costs total is $34,551, which is the MOE total
for this department.
1. Implement 2012-2014 Strategic Plan to include services provided by the
Family Resource Initiative, and the School Readiness Initiative.
2. Continue to implement:
1. Linkages to Learning Program
ii. Backpack to Success Program
3. Provide site visits and technical assistance for all grantees.
4. Update on a regular basis the First 5 Kings County website.
5. Establish a Strategic Plan for FY 2014-2017.
6. Submit all necessary and required reports to State Commission.
7. Transition Commission Structure from a County department to an
independent public agency.
8. Successfully recruit and replace First 5 Kings County Executive Director.
DISCUSSION:
Post adoption of the 2012-2014 Strategic Plan (Version 1.0), the Commission adopted
the Elevating Earlycare & Education (E3) Initiative. This resulted in a revision to the
Strategic Plan and resulted in a 1.1 Version. That initiative invests $491,922 over the
two year period of time that the plan spans, of which, $175,000 has been leveraged
through a grant from First 5 California.
1. Implement the Quality Parenting Initiative (QPI) and Resource Family Approval (RFA)
process. Kings County applied to be included in the state's QPI and RFA projects and
was accepted. The QPI is a recruitment and retention project aimed at attracting
quality caregivers for county children in out of home placement. Kings County is one
of five counties accepted into the RFA pilot. Its goal is to develop a single, unified
approval process for resource families. Once approved, resource families will be
eligible for foster care placements, guardianships, or adoptions. Historically, there
have been separate approval processes for licensed foster parents, relatives and nonrelated
extended family members, legal guardianships, and adoptions. Kings County,
along with five other counties in the project will develop the standardized approval
regulations and process, which will then be followed by the rest of the state.
2. Implement case management software in the APS Division.
3. Continue to scan all hard files for soft storage and move to paperless open files across
the division, utilizing software to allow more flexible, user-friendly case management.
Moving from hard storage to this soft version will be a cost savings to the county, as
well as further protect confidential information within the building.
4. Continue to expand the department's clinical social work and psychotherapy program
while providing clinical supervision to the department's ACSWs while they work toward
licensure with the California Board of Behavioral Sciences (BBS).
5. Work with the Behavioral Health Administration and Kings View Counseling Services
to implement expanded mental health services to children served by CPS pursuant to
the Katie A. et al. v. Diana Bonta et al. Settlement Agreement.
6. Prepare Benefit Services staff for the implementation of Affordable Care Act (ACA) in
California, beginning with early enrollments in October 2013 and full implementation
beginning in January 2014. Funding for expansion is 90% Federal and 10% State.
This will involve expanded service hours and days of work for the Agency. During
peak enrollment periods (about 5 months each year), the Agency is required to
provide access to application processes from Monday thru Saturday, from 8:00AM to
8:00PM. During non-peak periods the Agency will be required to provide access to
services from Monday thru Saturday, from 8:00AM to 5:00PM.
7. Prepare for expansion of the Customer Services Center and lobby management
systems to address added hours/day of services implementation of ACA in October
2013.
8. Complete the re-engagement of exempt participants into the CalWORKs Welfare to
Work program. This will result in an increase in participants served in the program by
almost 600 individuals receiving CalWORKs.
9. Maintain confidentiality of records and office security as required by the Social
Security Administration to permit continued access to data sources provided by the
federal government.
10. Transition the Fiscal unit to a paperless electronic document storage system, utilizing
software for indexing and organization to allow more flexible, user-friendly information
and data retrievaf.
11. Improve administrative and fiscal electronic document organization and storage
throughout the Agency with an emphasis on enhancing financial management,
statistical reporting, and information retrieval.
12. Develop a technology oversight committee to assist in the development of Advanced
Planning Documents (APD), coordinate technology procurement, and implement a
technology refresh asset management and inventory control system.
DISCUSSION
Funding Background:
The requested expense budget for the administration of Social Services, CalWORKs, Cal
Fresh, Medi-Cal and CMSP is $33,287,406 for FY 13/14. This is an increase of $6,233,406
from the FY 12/13 adopted budget. This increase is the result of an increase in salaries and
benefits of $2,665,436, an increase in services and supplies of $1, 134,975, an increase in
other charges of $1,814,662, and an increase of $618,333 in fixed assets. The increase in
salaries and benefits reflects the additional positions requested for the Agency call center,
Healthy Families transition, and implementation of the Affordable Care Act. The increase in
contractual services reflects the potential for additional realigned programs for phase II of the
2011 Public Safety Realignment. The increase in professional and specialized services
reflects increased employment services/job training. The increase in fixed assets includes
costs for call center expansion. The net County cost for Administration is $75,928 and is the
required match for senior services including nutrition resulting from the contract with the
Kings/Tulare Area Agency on Aging. The budgets for departments 510000 and 520000
reflect the application of $14,934,705 in Realignment revenue. This includes the revenue
from the 2011 Public Safety Realignment. This also includes $350,000 in realignment funds
transferred from the Health realignment trust. This is $1,250,000 less than FY12/13.
The 510000 budget unit for Administration uses $3,765,485 of realignment. The remaining
$11, 169,220 of realignment is applied to the 520000 budget unit for Categorical Aid. Social
Services realignment is heavily dependent on State sales tax collections. We are anticipating
moderate growth in the state economy for FY 13/14 and have budgeted accordingly. The
unreimbursed cost for 520000, after the application of available revenues and realignment, is
$2,586,976, a decrease in requested County General Fund unreimbursed costs of $26,239 from FY 12/13. The requested FY 13/14 expense budget for Dept. 520000 is $1,316,629
more than FY 13/14. The largest expenditure increase is in foster care. This expense
increase reflects the recent court decision granting a 30% rate increase to group homes and
an increase in caseload. The decrease in IHSS costs reflects the preliminary maintenance of
effort (MOE) as a result of federal approval of the California Coordinated Care Initiative. The
expense budget request for department 540000 is $193,500, no change from FY 12/13. No
changes in service delivery are anticipated.
With the uncertainties surrounding FY 13/14 funding, particularly the Governor's proposals
for implementing the Affordable Care Act, it is possible that Human Services might not
receive funding necessary to support this budget as requested. In the current atmosphere of
change and uncertainty at the State and Federal level, the Agency will proceed with extreme
caution into the FY 13/14 budget year. Human Service Agencies in many counties have
suffered large funding shortages during the State budget crisis and have had to resort to
serious layoffs to compensate. Our Agency has, so far, weathered the storm without having
to sacrifice services or staff. This is because the Kings County Human Services Agency has
always operated conservatively. We did not build capacity unnecessarily simply because
funding was available; rather, the philosophy of this Agency has been to build staff and
service delivery capacity only to the levels necessary to adequately and reasonably meet the
needs of our residents and community.
1. Facilitate over 22,000 visits to the One-Stop Career Center. Provide case-managed
career technical training, On-the-Job Training, work experience and other
employment, training and placement services for 475 Kings County residents.
2. Implement and operate a pre-release program to deliver employment, training and
financial skills to over 1,000 inmates at two state correctional facilities in Kings
County.
3. Meet or exceed performance standards set forth by the U.S. Department of Labor.
4. Effectively respond to business closures impacting Kings County employers and
employees, placing at least 65% of the dislocated workers into jobs or vocational
training.
5. Serve as a primary point of contact for labor market and socio-economic data for
Kings County.
6. Manage the One-Stop Job Center, which includes the JTO/EDC offices, the
Employment Development Department, the State Department of Rehabilitation,
Youth Services, and other education, employment and training partners.
7. Administer the Kings County Enterprise Zone and other business incentive zones
for the benefit of local businesses.
DISCUSSION
Revenue for Workforce Investment Act (WIA) funded programs is subject to the receipt
of federal funding. Funding for economic development marketing is provided through a
$290,000 contract with the Kings County Economic Development Corporation (EDC).
JTO's role in coordinating economic development activities in Kings County has
resulted in strong relationships with existing businesses. Our involvement with the
California Central Valley Economic Development Corporation favorably positions Kings
County with real estate brokers and other decision makers across the U.S.
This Department will continue to oversee business incentive programs such as the
Enterprise Zone, Recycling Market Development Zone, Foreign Trade Zone and the
Federal HUB Zone through its association with the EDC.
JTO plans to continue the operation of a large work experience program in conjunction
with the Kings County Human Services Agency. Funding for this program is anticipated
at $1.8 million for the fiscal year, and has been included in anticipated revenues. The
objective of this strategy is to assist TANF public assistance recipients to gain work
experience, get hired, and become self-sufficient. The operation of this activity is
dependent upon available funding from the Kings County Human Services Agency.
Major programmatic changes for the 2013-2014 budget include the implementation of
the Institutional Transition Program with the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, the expanded marketing of the Kings County Enterprise Zone, and the
continual redoubling of efforts to support and attract new jobs and investment into Kings
County. Line item changes of significance from the previous budget include a reduction
of several categories such as Books and Periodicals, Postage and Freight and Travel
and Expense. Line items showing increases include Workers Comp, which increased
by 56% due to historical claims; Maintenance Office Equipment, which increased by
$1,857, or 46%, due to the expiration of copier leases which had more favorable rates;
and, the proposed purchase of one replacement vehicle at $23,000. Additional
requested equipment includes two replacement laptop computers, two replacement
printers and a $9,950 card swipe system to automate tracking of persons utilizing the
Career Center.
This budget anticipates the receipt of $5, 149,426 representing an increase of
$1,027,016 over 2012-2013 revenues. This increase is comprised of a new $400,000
grant from the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, an increase of
$382,000 from the Human Services Agency and a $133,000 Back 2 Work grant to
serve dislocated Workers. Formula allocated funds for adults and displaced workers are
projected to be stable from year to year, and funding to serve youth is projected to
decrease by $70,000. Funds carried forward from 2012-13 to 2013-14 to help ease the
impact of sequestration are anticipated at $443,765. Final revenues are likely to be
positively affected by competitive grant awards.
 Administrative Services
 Update the Library Card Policy by May, 2014.
 Develop a new volunteer, social media, and meeting room policy by May,
2014.
 Investigate grant opportunities for the Library's Local History Collection,
which will include preservation and digitalization by June, 2014.
 Complete marketing work with LibraryAware by February, 2014.
 Present findings and recommendations of the Library Facilities Master
Plan to the Board of Supervisors by September, 2013.
 As part of the Library Facilities Master Plan, analyze Library Community
Survey by July, 2013.
 Develop and implement the Library's Workforce Development Plan by
July, 2013.
 Conduct quarterly safety trainings for all library staff.
 Develop a system wide promotion/presentation strategy on library
programs and services to the community by February, 2014.
 Replace the chiller condensing tower at the Hanford Branch Library by
May, 2014.
 Branch Services
 Investigate Open Library's Digital Book Collection accessibility for library
customers by October, 2013.
 Create Family Place Library areas at Corcoran and Kettleman City Branch
Libraries by September, 2013.
 Will conduct the Library's 4th Annual County Wide Open House on
December 4, 2013.
 Conduct six community presentations of library databases to be
completed by May, 2Q14.
 Investigate the feasib~ity of portable electronic devices for mobile
reference, children's, and teen services. Share the findings with the
Library Advisory Board by January, 2014.
 Create a new marketing browse area at the Hanford Branch Library by
April 14, 2014.
 Collaborate with local high schools to establish an annual, "Teen Art in
Libraries", Exhibit.
620000
 Establish a staff workgroup to develop and assemble themed, "Story Time
in a Box", kits by December, 2013.
 Design, purchase and install new way-finding signage at all branch
libraries by June, 2014.
 Host a national traveling exhibit through Programminglibrarian.org.
 Coordinate and plan a Children's Author Showcase for all branch libraries.
Implementation to begin in June, 2014.
 Recruit five to six teens to pilot a Teen Advisory Group at the Hanford
Branch by April, 2014.
 Partner with Valley PBS in the development of a new Valley PBS web
channel, "Valley PBS by You", by August, 2013.
 IT Services
 Debut the Library's mobile application, "Library Anywhere", by October,
2013.
 Complete the library's website design by December, 2013.
 Participate with the California State Library's Edge Initiative Pilot by
August, 2013.
 Increase bandwidth from 3.0mb/sec to 10mb/sec at the Hanford Branch
Library and 1.5mb/sec at Corcoran and Lemoore Branch Libraries by
August, 2013.
 Materials Management
 Update the Collection Development Policy by May, 2014.
 Develop pre-processing profiles and procedures with library material
vendors by November, 2013.
 Expand media collections (CD's and DVD's) at all branch libraries by 15%.
DISCUSSION
The age of the HVAC chiller tower at the Hanford Branch Library has surpassed its
recommended lifespan and Public Works is proposing to replace the chiller condensing
tower unit. The budget reflects a decrease in the following services and supplies line
item: $25,000 in Professional and Specialized Services. To accommodate this
expenditure request, $55,000 will be placed in fixed assets for the HVAC upgrade at the
Hanford Branch Library. Replacing the HVAC unit will alleviate unplanned heating and
air conditioning emergencies. For 2012-2013, the Kings County Library did not receive any funding revenue from the
California State Library and for 2013-2014, will not include any funding revenue from
the California State Library.
1. Continue agricultural research to provide local science based information that will
help sustain economic stability in Kings County's major industry.
2. Assist local clientele in the adoption of new technologies for improved production
practices.
3. Develop updated educational tools for use in the dairy and forage programs. The
new extension materials may be produced in multiple media formats and will focus
on various aspects of modern dairy management and production practices.
4. Grow and structure the county 4-H program to allow more middle management
opportunities for volunteers to be engaged.
5. Provide nutrition education training, materials and support to classroom teachers in
low-income schools.
The requested budget for FY 2013-14 is $199,862 Net County cost. This amount
represents a $1,972 increase from FY12-13. Ag research support will require nondepartmental
grant funding. The department's overall requested budget is divided
between 58% ($112, 710) allocated to Salaries & Employee Benefits and 42%
($87, 152) to Services & Supplies and Other Charges. The requested budget includes a
$4,825 decrease in Salaries and Employee Benefits, and a $6,797 increase in Services
and Supplies to support cross county program efforts and a revenue line for
reimbursable grant and operational expenses of $4,000.
The Proposed 2013/2014 Budget includes General Fund contributions (Other
Charges) to the Park Budget in the amount of $1, 166,506, an increase of $34,806
from 2012/2013. This increase is due to the following factors: adding one Grounds
worker ($41,852), which is partially offset by a reduction in Extra Help of $25,000 as
well as slight reductions in both Services and Supplies, as well as Other Charges.
This budget request includes replacing two electric carts and a hydraulic concrete
breaker attachment for the Skidsteer.
Phase I of the Jail Facility construction was completed in the summer of 2006. In FY
2006/2007, the remaining budget was divided between the new Jail Facility and the
Branch Jail remodel. This project is complete and no further projects are scheduled
for this budget unit in FY 2013/2014.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 07/08, one project (with two components) was planned. The project involved
expanding the District Attorney's Office space to accommodate the growth in staff.
The expansion plan involved relocating the Minor's Advocate offices so that the District
Attorney could remodel and then take over the Minor's Advocate offices. In FY 07/08,
$50,000 on project# 82400222 was budgeted for the District Attorney to remodel the
existing Minor's Advocates offices. Also, $117,300 on project # 82400223 (Minor's
Advocate Remodel) was budgeted to move Minor's Advocate into a different location.
In FY 08/09, the remaining balances associated with these projects were rolled over
into FY 08/09. 82400222 - District Attorney Remodel - $48,210; 82400223 - Minor's
Advocate Remodel - $107,300
In FY 2010/11 this one budget unit was broken down into individual budget units that
are identified as follows:
187301 - Public Protection
187302 - Fire
187303 - Library
BUDGET NUMBER
187304 - Sheriff Patrol and Investigations (this unit is no longer collecting fees)
187305 -Animal Services (fees were suspended FY 11/12)
187306 - Administration
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
It was adopted in FY 2010/11 to fund a portion of the Morgue using $390,000 of these
impact fees. In FY 2011/12 the Board approved using $2,290,000 for the design of
the housing unit of the jail. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2013, and an
updated construction schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in
reserves. The balance in this fund for the Proposed Budget is $70,329.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2013, and an updated construction
schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance
in this fund for the Proposed Budget is $810,683.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2013, and an updated construction
schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The
balance in this fund for the Proposed Budget is $579,371.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 2010/11 it was adopted that these impact fees will no longer be collected. The
funds in the reserve were adopted to be used on the Sheriff's Evidence space
expansion. Those funds were not used, therefore Administration will be returning to
your Board at a new Impact Fee Hearing to be held mid-2013, with an updated
construction schedule for adoption. At this time all funds are set-aside in reserves.
The balance in this fund for the Proposed Budget is $123,660.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 2011 /12 the Board suspended collecting impact fees related animal control
facilities. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2013, and an updated
construction schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves.
The balance in this fund for the Proposed Budget is $5,398.
A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held mid-2013, and an updated construction
schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The
balance in this fund for the Proposed Budget is $12, 142.
In prior years, Administration recommended that your Board contribute the equivalent
amount of the Williamson Act ($2,413,014 in 08/09) to the Capital Projects budget unit
to help to pay for upcoming capital projects. However, due to the serious financial
difficulties at the state, Williamson Act revenues will not be budgeted in FY 09/10 or
10/11. FY 09/10 did not show any Williamson Act revenues in the capital budget, due
to the state not appropriating them in FY 09/10 and FY 10/11. In FY 11/12, $623,559
was received due to new revenue generated by revisions to the term for newly
renewed and new Williamson Act and Farmland Security Zone contracts related to
Assembly Bill 1265. It is estimated that the County will receive $339,000 in FY 12/13,
therefore $339,000 is projected for FY 13/14. 
Hazardous Waste Revenues have been budgeted in the capital projects budget in the
past because these revenues have historically been treated as one-time revenue. In
FY 11/12 it is estimated that we will receive only $288,000 of the $300,000 Budgeted
in Hazardous Waste funds, and all of that was recommended to be shown in the Fire
Fund revenues. No Hazardous Waste funds were included in the FY 11/12 capital
project budget. For FY 12/13 budget for Capital Projects, we are recommending that
this declining revenue source be moved out of the Fire Fund budget and back to
Capital Projects and once again treated as one-time revenue. The projection for FY
2012/13 is at $250,000.
Miscellaneous Revenue includes $25,593 related to the 101
h Ave Gateway Hanford
project.
NEW PROJECTS
For FY 2013/14, department requests for capital projects were reviewed by staff from
Public Works, Department of Finance and County Administration. All on-going projects
will be reviewed at year-end and will appear in the Final budget. The following are
projects which are recommended to be included in the FY 13/14 Capital Budget.
Project 82420020 - Repair/Replace Roof $185.000
This project is a roll over from FY 2012/13, and is a project to replace the Probation
Building's concrete shingle roof with a steel shingle roof. This project is estimated at
$130,000.
The southeast side of the roof at the Juvenile Academy will also be replaced. This
project is estimated to cost $55,000,
Project 82420057 - New Jail Construction $39,584,222
This project was originally budgeted in FY 2012/13 at $40,851,606, and is rolled over
to expand the jail to include a new housing unit, medical infirmary, central plant, and
expanded laundry, kitchen, booking, jail administration, and multi-purpose spaces.
This project is funding from the AB 900 Phase II grant, Public Protection Impact Fees,
and through additional financing.
Project 82420073 - Morgue $2,202,393
The Kings County Morgue is currently located in the old Kings Building. This location
presents several safety issues, and it is necessary to relocate the morgue as soon as
possible. A total of $2,000,000 was budgeted for this project in FY 10/11, and was
originally budgeted in FY 09/10. The project was funded from existing fund balance in
the Capital Project Fund as well as $390,000 of Public Protection Impact Fees.
Project 82420085 - Jail Tunnel $3,247,635
This project is needed to connect the new Jail to the proposed new Courthouse facility
and is intended to be part of the exchange with the State for the remaining Court
Buildings. This project was originally budgeted in FY 11/12 at $3,285,262.
Project 82450007 - Success Dam Enlargement $33,767
BUDGET NUMBER 700000
This project was originally budgeted in FY 08/09 and has rolled for the last five years.
Revenues:
 ST AID - AB900 - Kings County was conditionally awarded a $33,000,000
lease-revenue bond on March 8, 2012 for the expansion of its jail facility.
 Revenue Transfer In - Public Protection Impact Fees anticipated from FY
2013/14 are $170,000 and the match financing for the jail is anticipated to be
$6,000,000.
The scheduled payments for 2013/2014 total $1,200,200 and there is an expense for
the Trustee fee of $2,500, and service fees totaling $3,700. Revenue is generated
through charges to the Retirement accounts for County departments and interest on
deposits totaling $1,216,200. This reflects anticipated lower costs of borrowing, when
compared to PERS charges applied to departments.
We are approaching the 9 year anniversary of the POB issuance. At the time, it was
novel to issue these bonds using a variable rate of One Month Libor plus .30 basis
points. The good news is that the risk so far has paid off handsomely! Analysis
completed by Treasury Staff shows the actual saving through April 2013 compared to
the fixed rate POBs the County issued is $2, 170,580.17. The current annualized
monthly rate charged in April 2013 was .50%. This is very near the all time low of .49%
paid in June through August of 2011. Because we expect interest rates to begin slowly
rising again, we are currently evaluating the possible savings (if any) of refunding these
bonds at a fixed rate. However, we are very pleased with the success of this variable
rate issue, as we continue to borrow at less than 1.00%.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2013/2014 totals $781,425, and includes the Debt Service for the Jail Lease Revenue
Bonds.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2013/2014 totals $1,273,956, and includes the Debt Service for three areas where
lease payments are involved.
 The Cogeneration facility lease is budgeted at $250,835.
 The 2008 Chevron Energy Project is budgeted at $495,382.
 Covered Parking Solar Project (debt service payments begin in August of 2012)
at $527,739.
For these projects, revenue is generated by charging departments through their Utilities
account for the cost of making this annual payment.
No expenditures are shown in the "estimated columns" as funds are transferred from
the contingency budgets to operating budgets based on Board of Supervisors action
during the pertinent fiscal year.
The FY 2013-2014 Liability Self-Insurance Budget is requested at $1, 153,200, a
decrease of $106,039 from last year. This request includes funding of
administrative and claims costs as well as funding catastrophic reserves.
The Revenue Transfer In is from the General Fund, Budget Unit 141000, Insurance.
Effective July 1, 2004, the Board of Supervisors approved a self-funded health
insurance program for all medical benefits as opposed to only self-funding the vision
and dental components of the plan as in the past.
In December, 2005 a $900,000 loan from the General Fund was transferred to the
Health Insurance Fund for cash flow purposes. This loan was completely paid off in
the 2007/2008 Fiscal Year.
In July 2008, the County implemented a Wellness Program. There were a total of 481
participants in the blood draw portion of the Wellness Program in 2008. In 2009, there
were 462 participants, in 2010, there were 500 participants, and in 2011 there were
509 participants, which includes spouses and their over 18 year old dependents.
Currently the Health Insurance Fund is projecting a fully funded reserve. The costs for
Health Insurance will have no increase for the 2013/14 Plan Year.
The 2013/2014 Budget for the Self-Insured Insurance Plan is $11,083,952.
The Worker's Compensation Budget is recommended at $3,078, 106 for FY
2013/2014. $3,000,000 in costs are zeroed out because they are cost applied to
individual department budgets to reflect those departments' Worker's Compensation
insurance premiums. The majority of the remaining costs are offset by insurance
proceeds on former employees whose costs are borne by an excess insurance policy.
This Budget Unit is a summary showing the total cost Countywide for Worker's
Compensation insurance coverage.
 Administration:
1. Assist all divisions in securing grants to address some services/equipment that
cannot be provided currently due to funding shortages.
2. Continued involvement in the San Joaquin Valley Clean Energy Organization as
a means of keeping up- to-date on available grants and energy saving programs
3. Have each division prioritize the tasks/services/projects that need to be done by
identifying those tasks or projects that cannot be completed with current
available funding.
4. Continue to monitor all maintenance operations to ensure courteous, prompt,
and professional response to requests and complaints. Respond quickly to
comments and/or inquiries by members of the public or members of the Board of
Supervisors.
5. Continue to assist County Administration in the implementation of policies to
ensure cost effective use of vehicles; and to establish the most cost effective
fleet size.
6. Assist County Administration and represent the County's needs with respect to
the design and construction of the expansion of the County Jail.
7. Have divisions continue to work with the Human Resources department in the
preparation of evaluations and disciplinary procedures.
8. Continue to provide oversight on the various construction projects. Work closely
with other departments, Administration and outside agencies to ensure timely
and cost effective completion of each project.
9. Provide timely personnel, accounting, fiscal and administrative services to all
Public Works Divisions and County Departments.
Building Maintenance:
1. Start working on the inventory system and incorporate it into our work order system.
It will be tied into the Preventive maintenance program that is now 100%
implemented.
2. Utilize internet trainings on our TMA software system for all supervisors, Facility
Manager and Office Assistant in an effort to complete the inventory program.
3. We will continue scheduling webinar trainings in our training room as well as inservice
trainings for janitorial and building maintenance staff on a regular basis. We
will also offer the training lab to other divisions.
4. Continue the Preventative Maintenance program for the underground high voltage
system as well as all our electrical rooms and Central Plant. We will attempt to pull
more high Voltage cable replacing the existing aluminum cable.
5. We will also continue to service our transformers throughout the Government
center on a rotating schedule.
6. We also will set up a maintenance contract for the high voltage running to our
repeater site at Flat Top Mountain. We have a continuous issue with loose
connections, nesting birds and failing guide wires.
7. Start implementing more web training programs on specialized equipment and y
send staff to outside trainings.
8. Start a certification program thru Ernest Packaging for janitorial staff.
9. Send supervisory staff to more classes and trainings offered.
Engineering:
Begin using the Pavement Management System to analyze the maintenance
needs of the County road network.
Continue to provide contract management services to other departments.
Continue to maintain the traffic collision database and provide analysis and
maps to the County staff and other agencies in an effort to increase traffic safety
throughout the County.
Pursue the abandonment of minor roads where appropriate.
Provide construction project management on major and minor projects.
Provide engineering design comments on development projects being processed
by the Community Development Agency.
Continue to seek outside funding sources for major road construction and
maintenance projects. Our goal is to use as much Federal/State funds to pay for
as much of our design, right of way, environmental and construction costs as
possible.
Fleet Management:
Continue to search for the best available technology to ensure that all the
equipment continues to run as clean as practicable.
Continue to monitor equipment usage and made recommendations to
departments to ensure the best use of equipment.
Continue to promote compliance with State and Federal air pollution
requirements.
Take advantage of as many grant opportunities as practicable to provide
technology upgrades to various pieces of equipment to ensure compliance with
regulations.
Continue to add alternative fuel vehicles to the County fleet, while striving to find
grant funding that can assist in the purchasing of alternative fuel vehicles.
6. Continue to monitor diesel powered equipment, as well as preparing the fleet to
meet California Air Resources Board requirements for off road diesel powered
equipment by 2018.
 Parks:
1. Continue to provide safe and enjoyable parks that the public and schools may enjoy.
2. Continue to cooperate with the Burris Park Foundation with the goal of further
developing the Burris Park Outdoor learning center.
3. Encourage more special event use of the parks to generate revenue as well as
introduce the public to the Burris Park museum, wagon barn and the multi-purpose
room. Development of a Parks Division webpage through the County Information
Technology Department will assist in meeting this objective.
4. Continue performing quality maintenance while reducing quantity of services
wherever possible to match the staff levels of the Division. This is primarily in the
form of transformation of turf areas into low-maintenance bedding, replacement or
elimination of dying landscape at the Government Center, renovation of irrigation
systems, replanting climate-appropriate trees and dense groundcovers, and
installation of rubberized decorative bark. Reversion of the Juvenile Academy into
an adult inmate facility will result in an increased workload for the Division. Juvenile
Academy wards had been maintaining the yards and lawns except for the large
South yard of the Academy. As the necessary improvements are made to house
adult inmates the Division will attempt to make its own changes in the landscaping
to reduce this increased workload
5. Continue to search for grants and other opportunities, such as volunteers, to assist
in the goals of the Division. The State Beverage Container grant was applied for
and awarded to the County. This grant has been used to improve the recycling
opportunities within County buildings. Re-application will be made for future rounds
of this grant. Application to the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control Board for
various grants has, and will continue to be made.
6. Continue to execute and comply with grants received. Re-opening Kingston Park
will provide an additional revenue source and bring the County back into compliance
with the Land and Water Conservation Fund grant received many years ago.
 Roads:
1. Continue to maintain the roads and bridges in a safe condition. Complete the
annual centerline and edgeline striping by winter of 2013.
2. Continue the annual nighttime sign survey program.
3. Prepare Plans and Specifications to replace the bridge on 161
h Avenue at Tulare
Lake Canal. Road Fund will be reimbursed the design cost of $300,000 by FHWA.
4. Prepare Plans and Spec's for Federal and State Safe Route to School Projects in
Kettleman City. Road Fund will be reimbursed the design cost of $100,000 by
Federal and State funds.
5. Use $580,000 CMAQ Funding to seal 14 miles of gravel roads.
6. Place chip seal or thin overlays on select streets in Stratford, Home Gardens,
Armona and Kettleman City.
7. Construct patching and overlay on 13.6 miles of major roads for approximately $2.9
Million. These road segments to be overlayed will be selected from the following
list:
General Discussion:
The Department is maintaining the highest levels of service possible considering the
funds available. Since the new jail began operating there have been continuing
problems with some offices being overheated. These will continue to be addressed with
the designer and staff has been given some ideas to implement, which should resolve
the problem.
Administration:
The Administration Budget has increased from $414,003 to $464,675 due to small
increases by IT, Workers Compensation and the Fiscal Analyst position going full-time,
partly offset by the Account Clerk Ill going to 0.5 FTE. Our CAP charges will be $33,968
whereas last year we paid $16, 194 . Administration is cost applied to the other divisions
in the Public Works Department so there will be a small increase to those divisions.
Roads and Bridges:
The 2012/2013 budget anticipated the Road Fund Revenue at $5,880,000. The
estimated actual end of year revenues will be $6,559,000. The proposed 2013/2014
Roads Division Revenue totals $7,355,000 million dollars. The division proposes to use
$4.5 million from the road reserve to balance revenues with the proposed expenditure
total of $11,833,852.
The Governor's May revise of 2013 included a proposal to take funds from the Highway
User Tax Account for General Fund relief. Preliminary numbers indicate Kings County
will lose almost $250,000 collected in FYs 10-11 and 11-12 and $173,000 each year
through FY 14-15.
The Administration Allocation is distributed among the divisions of Public Works based
on that division's budget. Because Roads will be spending down the reserve, the pro
rata share of the Administration Allocation has increased by $100,000.
AB 720 will have an impact on the operation of the Roads Division. This law went into
effect on January 1 and limits the amount of road reconstruction work that can be done
with County forces. Roads Division will be forced to contract out more work at higher
costs. There are two specific issues about this statute that concern the division. First,
the State Controller's Office (SCO) determines which projects are labeled as
reconstruction. It is possible that our crews do work assuming it does not fall under AB
720 restrictions, only to have the SCO determine otherwise and thus being a technical
violation of AB 720. Secondly, AB720 requires a local agency to declare its intent to do
work by force account in advance of doing the work. It is not unusual for an opportunity
to arise whereby the Roads Division can acquire recycled material and only pay freight
costs. If the material is located such that it can be incorporated on a particular project,
and cannot be stored, we would want to make use of the offer of material. AB 720
would not allow this if time is a consideration. Therefore, to allow the maximum
flexibility to the Roads Division, and to avoid a technical violation of AB 720, Public
Works would like to use this budget to declare its intent to use force account labor to
the maximum extent allowed under AB 720.
Parks and Grounds:
The Division has continued in its attempt to make ends meet by utilizing the Sheriff's
Alternative Sentencing workers (Work In-Lieu's), AB 109 workers, Welfare-to-Work
employees, JTO employees, and summer youth workers. The reduction in FTE's has
put the Division at the tipping point for an inability to efficiently and safely perform its
responsibilities, objectives, and goals. The overtime line item has exceeded the
budgeted amount and will likely exceed the 2012/2013 budgeted amount for the same
reasons. The increase in one Groundsworker I/II will return the Parks Division to an
employment level that can accommodate the landscape maintenance workload,
adequately provide for maintenance of equipment, and allow for a discussion regarding
reopening of Kingston Park if approved by the Board.
Reliance on chemical herbicides and growth regulators is increasing. New landscape
technologies and modern equipment are assisting the Division, but funds will need to be
allocated in future budgets to fully acquire these benefits. The current budget affords
the Division with replacement of two electric utility carts ($23,650) and a breaker
attachment for the skid steer ($10,000). It is anticipated that the electric utility carts will
be funded via a San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District grant. If grant funding
is not awarded to the County then non-electric utility carts will be purchased.
The Equipment Maintenance line item will require an increase by $10,000 to
supplement contracted equipment repairs if the addition of one FTE Groundsworker I/II
is denied. With the addition of one Groundsworker I/II will be a reduction in Park Aide-Extra Help funds by $15,000. Maintenance Sl&G funding will also be reduced from
$43,000 to $20,000. Aside from minor adjustments there are budgetary line item
increases that are unavoidable, such as Utilities ($25,000) and Administrative Allocation
($4,000). Utilities have increased in part due to the recently completed energy project
which replaced two large wells for this division.
Fleet Management:
Fleet is requesting to spend $1, 764,500 in fixed asset purchases versus $881, 100
during FY 12-13. We will continue to replace equipment that has met or exceeded its
cost effective life. In general, we will need to replace equipment that is over ten years
old and/or has over 120,000 miles. The major increase in costs are for heavy Roads
Equipment totaling over $772,500.
The Engineering Division has requested that the Engineer Ill (Civil) be upgraded to a
Chief Engineer position. The cost applied to the Roads Department has increased to
$275,441 from the previous year of $240, 159 to cover this increase.
The Board of Supervisors was designated as the Successor Agency of the dissolved
Kings County Redevelopment Agency on January 31, 2012. On April 11, 2012 the first
meeting of the Oversight Board for the Successor Agency for the County of Kings was held. This Oversight Board is made up of seven members, three Board of Supervisor
appointments, two Superintendent of Schools appointments, one Community Service
District appointment and one Community College appointment.
This budget unit is included in the County budget for historical purposes only. The
Redevelopment Obligation Retirement Fund is no longer included as a County Budget
Unit.
