1. Continue implementation of County priorities in the following areas: Promote the
role of agriculture; communicate county goals and objectives to employees and the
public; develop a long range plan for meeting future infrastructure needs; maximize
financial resources and opportunities; ensure an efficient and productive work
force; manage information resources effectively; provide effective and efficient
delivery of county services; support economic development; and promote programs
for healthy children and families.
2. Continue discussions with city councils and other local government entities
regarding most efficient means of delivering mutually provided services.
DISCUSSION:
This years Requested expenditure budget of $787,789 is $21,996 more than last
year's Budget of $765,793. Increases in salaries and benefits as well as services and
supplies have added costs to our overall budget this year. The Board of Supervisors
and their staff work very hard to keep costs down and will continue to look for cost
saving measures in the future.
In FY 2016/17, the County is projecting to receive $1,823,095 more in discretionary
revenue than what was budgeted in FY 2015/16. This represents an overall 3.9%
increase in revenues. We are projecting FY 2016/17 taxes based on FY 2015/16
estimated actuals which includes an increase in Property Taxes of $30,000. Sales and
Use Tax is projected to end the 2015/16 fiscal year $400,000 higher than budgeted due
to increases in the sale of new alternate energy projects, as well as a one-time final
true-up of triple flip reimbursement. Sales and Use Taxes are only projected to be
$200,000 higher then FY 15/16 for the 16/17 fiscal year.
The Hazardous Waste taxes that were budgeted at $500,000, are projected to come in
at $1,200,000, and are estimated to be $1,300,000 for FY 2016/17. As set in the past,
the first $150,000 of these funds are committed toward a trust fund set up for building a
reserve for the Kettleman City Water Project.
Use of Money and Property decreases due to the continued record low interest rates.
The projected interest earnings are 35.7% lower than the Actual earnings in FY
2014/15.Intergovernmental Revenue is expected to decrease by 23.7% or by $304,392. This
decrease is due to a one-time State Mandate interest payment not reoccurring in FY
2016/17.
Charges for services, which are CAP charges, have increased by $466,862 from FY
2015/16, for a total of $2,615,386 per information from the Department of Finance.

1. Budget constraints, which have been exacerbated by the drought and cautious
optimism, are both realities as the continuing recession continue recovery.
While Administration was focused primarily on "living within our means" in FY
2016/2017, we are now faced with having to make recommendations regarding
funding the increases due to Affordable Care Act, Public Safety Realignment,
and the new facilities being brought on-line.
2. As we enter FY 2016/2017 the County is essentially at the end of their multi-year
contracts with their bargaining units. Administration will be recommending a
Total Compensation (Salary and Benefits) Study, which will provide where the
County's salary structure should be to maintain a competitive presence. The
study will also provide a review of the County's internal relationships among
benchmark classes and related classifications.
3. Along with the Compensation Study, Administration may have the opportunity to
participate in a County Financial Health Study through the County Administrative
Officers Association of California, which will provide another fiscal look of how
the County is doing.
4. Pursue with the Sheriff, District Attorney, Chief Probation Officer and the Courts,
the implementation of new State laws requiring the incarceration, treatment and
application of other means necessary to handle low-level criminals at the local
level and seek additional realignment funds.
5. Administration will lead an effort in working with its public safety partners to work
on evidence based practices and programs for rehabilitation of its criminal justice
population.
DISCUSSION:
For Administration, the Requested Budget totals $947,792. This is a decrease in
expenditures from the FY 2015/2016 Adopted Budget of $19,196, due to information
technology replacement (depreciation) costs rolling off this fiscal year. As discussed
above, it is requested to reclassify the current Risk Assistant to a Risk Technician
position due to additional responsibilities related to Workers' Compensation that the
position has taken on. The unreimbursed county cost for the department went from
$872,007 in the Adopted FY 2015/2016 budget to $852,811 in the Proposed FY
2016/2017. This is a decrease in unreimbursed cost of $19,196 as explained above.
 Completion of our audited Annual Financial Report by December 31st.
 Submit application and receive the GFOA Award for Financial Reporting.. Review and establish procedures to achieve monthly financial reporting.
 Continue and develop additional training sessions for County fiscal personnel.
 Develop and implement Internal Audit function.
 Create accounting policies and guidelines for countywide consistency.
 Monitor and timely file all State audits.
 Ensure all State/Federal mandatory reporting requirements are timely and accurate.
 Conduct May phone campaign for tax-defaulted properties.
 Conduct annual tax sale of tax-defaulted properties (if needed).
 Implementation of a third party vendor for county acceptance of credit/debit cards.
 Manage the Kings County Investment Pool in such a manner as to ensure safety,
liquidity and return a market rate.
 Assist agencies with debt issuance.
 Continue cross training of Finance Department staff.
 Provide responsive and courteous service to the public and other
departments/agencies.
 Provide input for best practices for implementing the Auditor and Tax Collector modules
of the new comprehensive Property Tax system (Aumentum).
 Complete implementation of PeopleSoft 9.2 and Time and Labor for time reporting and
payroll processing.
DISCUSSION:
The Department of Finance expects to complete fiscal year 2015/16 at a total cost of
$2,737,224. This is $255,003 less than the budgeted amount of $2,992,227. Our
actual un-reimbursed cost is estimated to be $1,845,269 or $237,853 less than the
budgeted cost of $2,083,122. Savings of $63,299 from Salaries and Benefits and
$187,704 from Services & Supplies helped boost our budget variance. We had a few
positions vacant for a good part of the year which helped us come under budget in
Salaries. Lower IT and Auditing costs make up the majority of our savings in Services
& Supplies. Revenues are estimated to be $17,110 under budget primarily due less
Audit Fees collected. For FY 2016/17, the Department of Finance is requesting a budget with a total cost of
$3,236,933, revenue of $895,105 and an unreimbursed cost of $2,341,828. This is up
from the FY 2015/16 Adopted Budget by $258,706. Salaries and Benefits are
requested to increase by $131,885 due to the request for new position and a staff
promotion. It costs are projected to increase by $158,584. This is due to the new
Property Tax and Payroll systems, as well as more allocated cost of the County
Mainframe.
Total Services and Supplies and Other Charges are requested at $1,555,813, up
$102,541 from last year's adopted amount. This increase is solely due to the increase
in IT costs. All other accounts remained consistent with the prior year.
Department Revenue is expected to decrease by $14,000 compared to last year's
budget. This decrease is mainly reflected in our Audit Fees account. There were fewer
major programs that needed to be audited in FY 2015/16 resulting is less fees that we
were able to charge out to other departments.
In FY 2006/07, the County purchased and installed the Neogov applicant tracking
software for Human Resources.
In FY 2008/09, the County's financial management system (FMS) was updated, and
costs associated with this project appeared in this budget unit. The upgrade was
completed in FY 2009/10.
Also in FY 2009/10, an upgrade to People Soft human resources management (HRM)
software was completed. Additionally, in FY 2015/16 PeopleSoft was upgraded from
version 9.0 to 9.2, and the County converted to an electronic timecard process with selfservice
applications. The County expects to expand the use of this system, therefore
has budgeted $260,000 in Prof & Spec Services, with an offset of 30% or $80,000
coming from the Human Services Agency.
The Contractual Services account shows $228,571 for consulting services to plan the
upgrade of the County's Property Tax System. In FY 2012/13 the County entered into a
lease-purchase agreement for the replacement of that system. The cost was
$3,422,435, and it is scheduled to be paid off in 2025. The lease payments are found
in the Finance Department and Assessor's budget units.
1. Continue to evaluate methods to enhance recruitment processing efficiencies to
ensure sufficient qualified candidates are available to fill department vacancies.
2. Conduct negotiations with the Detention Deputy Association for successor
agreement this fiscal year. Respond to any requests initiated by bargaining
units to reopen negotiations on compensation, which could include General
Unit, Supervisors Unit, Blue Collar Unit, Deputy Sheriffs Association, Probation
Officers Association, Firefighters Association and Prosecutors Association.
Continue labor-management discussions with the Supervisor's Unit.
3. Conduct reorganization, classification and compensation reviews, as needed, to
accurately reflect the changing needs of the departments and to increase the
efficiency of County government.
4. Continue mandated AB 1825 bi-annual training on sexual harassment
prevention.
5. Continue to review, evaluate, update and re-publish the County Personnel
Rules and Policies as conditions dictate.
DISCUSSION:
The industry standard for Human Resources staffing as a ratio to number of employees
supported is currently 1:100. With 1,361 FTE's employed as of February of 2015 and a
total of 1,471 allocated FTE's, the staffing level should be 14-15 employees in the
Human Resources Department. The current allocation of 8.5 FTE's in Human
Resources puts staffing at approximately 60% of standard at the 14 FTE level.
Services to both departments and the public are impacted. One of the areas greatly
affected by this shortage is the recruiting process. Recruiting demand continues to
increase. It is anticipated that justice realignment will continue to impact current
resource levels in the department in an adverse manner. The addition of one
Personnel Technician I position in the FY 15-16 budget has added to the ability to
process recruitments at the Technician level. Analysts continue to be impacted by the
need for related classification work and recruitment oversight. There also continues to
be a shortage of resources to perform basic administrative functions that support the department as a whole and particularly in the area of recruitment. As Human Services
continues to be impacted by federal and state requirements, the Human Services
Director has offered to increase their contribution toward the 1.0 FTE Personnel
Technician funding from 75% to 100% of the position cost. This will allow Human
Resources to fund increasing the Personnel Assistant II from .5 FTE to .75 FTE.
In addition to the request to increase the Personnel Assistant II from .50 FTE to .75
FTE, it is also requested to add 1.0 FTE Personnel Analyst I. The Human Services
Director has offered to pay 100% of a Personnel Analyst I position at 1.0 FTE. In an
attempt to assist Human Resources, the Human Services Agency had assumed
responsibility for meeting with employees regarding Family Medical Leave (FMLA) and
Pregnancy Disability Leave (POL) entitlements, the initial FMLA/PDL letter, and leave
processing. This position would allow the Human Services Agency to shift that
responsibility back to Human Resources. Department responsibilities, such as leave
tracking will remain with the Agency. The new Personnel Analyst will allow for
additional recruitment oversight, and will help Human Resources respond more quickly
to the recruitment related classification work and other Personnel Analyst work
associated with increased staff and recruitments.
Additional modifications have been made to various services and supplies accounts to
reflect our most recent expenditure experience primarily driven by the costs of
recruitment activity and additional staff.
The Budget for Insurance for FY 2016/2017 is 1,355,508, an increase of $56,312 over
FY 2015/2016.
1. Blanket Bond covers employees' faithful performance and honesty. All
2.
3.
4.
employees, including elected officials, are covered to $15,000,000. The
premium for FY 2016/2017 is $8,156.
Medical Malpractice insurance provides coordinated coverage with our general
liability policy to provide additional protection for services performed in County
facilities by County staff and outside contractors. The insurance is provided
through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority and the premium for FY
2016/2017 is estimated to be $13,000, a decrease of $3,000 from the FY
2015/2016 Adopted Budget.
General Liability excess insurance provides coverage to $25,000,000 for
personal injury or property damage caused by the County. The County selfinsures
the first $500,000 of any accident resulting in a damage award against
the County. The excess insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess
Insurance Authority. The cost of the program and the overall dollars necessary
to pay claims and fund reserves is $1,153,721.
Workers Compensation excess insurance provides coverage to $50,000,000 for
injuries to our County employees which occur while on duty. The County selfinsures
the first $300,000 of each workers compensation claim. The excess insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority. The costs
for this program have grown substantially, with over 40% increases in workers
compensation claims, in addition to distributing $4,100,000 of program costs to
all County departments, there is a General Fund contribution of $92,721, which
is transferred out to Budget Unit 869000, where all Workers' Compensation
expenditures are tracked.
5. Fire and Property Insurance provides protection for County owned buildings and
contents. The insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess Insurance
Authority and the premium for 2016/2017 is estimated at $96,083. This amount
includes coverage on the County's heavy equipment fleet including fire
apparatus. Heavy equipment and fire trucks will be insured for their replacement
value after a $20,000 deductible. This program also includes Sabotage &
Terrorism coverage, as well as Boiler & Machinery coverage.
6. Pollution Liability Insurance is for a three year term starting in FY 2015/2016
through FY 2017/2018, in the amount of $10,696, the premium is financed over
three years at $3,565 a year.
7. Fiduciary Insurance - provides protection to the Members of the Deferred
Compensation Oversight Committee. This premium of $10,149 paid for out of
the Human Resources Budget.
8. Cyber Insurance - this insurance provides coverage for up to $2,000,000 for
comprehensive electronic information and security liability coverage. The
premium for FY 2016/2017 is $1,900.
9. Cost Applied figures are those costs associated with insurance on leased
facilities not included in Countywide Cost Allocation Charges as well as
reimbursement from departments for medical malpractice and aircraft coverage.
There is $1,153,721 budgeted for liability claims administration and claims expense.
These moneys are transferred to Budget Unit 867000, Fund 2800, out of which all
expenditures are tracked. The Workers' Compensation operating budget is found in
Budget Unit 869000, Fund 2700. This is where the $4,100,000 budget is documented.
This Budget reflects a summary of the Employee Salaries and Benefit costs as
reflected in each department budget. Requested Expenditures for FY 2016/2017
total $32,075,520, an increase of $3,647,681 from the FY 2015/2016 Adopted
Budget. The increase is due to the additional staff added related to the Public Safety
Realignment, opening of the new Courthouse, and Human Services caseload growth
and the Affordable Care Act. The County Departments' requested budget includes
all employer costs associated with those requests.
This Budget is for display purposes and is zeroed out by cost applying these
charges to individual departmental budgets.
Cost per permanent employee is estimated at $100 per person. Costs are included
in each individual department budget and displaced in this budget unit to show the
overall cost of this.insurance. The projected costs for FY 2016/2017 are $221,000.
Implementation of the replacement property tax system and subsequent staff training
will take place through the entire FY 2016-17 budget year as scheduled under the
project's timeline, with final implementation estimated to occur during the second
quarter of the 2016-17 budget year.
An ongoing evaluation of products and services will continue to be done in an effort to
provide the most value to the public. Over the upcoming budget years, it is anticipated
that it will be necessary to replace the current Election's Systems and voting machines.
Requests have been made to review/study staff salaries for potential increases in the
2016/17 budget.
The Assessor-Clerk-Recorder-Elections budget is projected to increase overall by 6%,
which is a drop of 8% from the prior year. The Assessor Division is expected to
experience rather stagnate expenses with a modest increase in revenues, mainly due
to an increase in passports processed. The Elections Division shows a 13.6%
increase in total budget, due primarily to the election cycle for the 2016-17 budget
year.
The Elections Division budget is affected by the Presidential Election cycle beginning
in the spring of 2016. These larger elections bring with them larger costs to the county.
A new ballot tabulating system is not being requested at this time; however, a
replacement system will be required in the near future. The machines acquired in
2005, under the Help America Vote Act, were decertified by the California Secretary of
State shortly after implementation. Replacing them has been the Department's
objective but certification for a comparable system was delayed during the last few
years. A new system from our existing vendor has received conditional certification at
this time, and is working towards full certification. The Elections Division will be
requesting a replacement system once this certification is achieved and comparable
systems are reviewed and evaluated.
The Elections office struggles with current staffing shortages. There is a current
recruitment to fill a vacancy and we are also requesting that a supervisory position be
added to replace one of the vacant staff positions.
The expected recording fees have been reduced to more accurately reflect the actual
revenues received in this division over the last three years. While we are optimistic
that actual revenues will exceed this new prediction, in the interest of prudent fiscal
planning it was necessary to reflect this reduction in revenues.
Per the Mitigation Agreement with the Santa Rosa Rancheria, the County anticipates
receiving a total of $900,000 in revenue in this budget unit. Although the Mitigation
Agreement allows for any receipt of these funds to be an offset against the $900,000
payment from the Tribe, none is reflected here as they are currently unallocated at the
State.
As was the case in FY 10/11, FY 11/12, FY 12/13, FY 13/14, 14/15, and FY 15/16:
 $700,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Fire Fund in FY 16/17, going toward
operating costs at the South Lemoore Station, on the ladder truck purchased
by the Tribe and located at the Houston Avenue Station, and for service and
supply purchases.
 $200,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Sheriff's Department for the staffing
of deputy sheriff positions.
In FY 2015/2016 through a generous donation from the Tachi Yakut Tribe, the Kings
County Fire Department received a replacement fire apparatus for Station 7 located at
1285 181
h Avenue in South Lemoore. Along with the replacement of the engine, the
purchase of essential firefighting equipment will also be sponsored for a total contribution in the amount of $586,054. As a result of this gift, the Fire Department
will continue to serve the needs of the community and its citizens by providing swift
and effective services when called upon.
The proposed FY 16/17 budget includes General Fund contributions (Other Charges) to
Building Maintenance in the amount of $3,392,397, the County Engineer (Surveyor)
budget, whose title by State law is Surveyor, receives $220,502.
Other Financing Uses represent contributions to other funds funded by the AB 1265
Williamson Act and Farmland Security Zone payments and Hazardous Waste Taxes.
The former Williamson Act funds that come into General County Revenues State Aid -
Land Conservation are transferred out to the Capital Building Projects $37,350 through
this budget in the line item titled Contribution to AGO Fund, $225,000 to the Fire Fund
through the line item titled Contribution to Fire Fund, and $487,650 to the Jail Bond Fund
though the line item titled Contribution to Jail Bond.
Hazardous Waste Tax revenues are transferred out to other funds through this budget.
Those contributions include: $150,000 to the established trust/reserve for the Kettleman City Water Infrastructure Project Fund, $500,000 to the Fire Fund, and $550,000 to the
Capital Outlay Fund.
The Cost Applied of $915,580 is the amount of Building Maintenance costs that can be
charged out to other funds or departments, thereby reducing the net cost to the County.
This increased from the previous year due to additional janitorial and building
maintenance staff requested to work for and be funded by the Human Services Agency.
The requests in this budget reflect the Board's policy as stated in the program
description. All requests received are listed for consideration of the Board. The Board
may add to or delete any item during budget deliberations. Only those items which
were adopted in the prior fiscal year are included as expenses in the requested
budget. Each request received is reflected below:
Industrial Promotion: $53,000 is requested for the County share of the cost for Kings
County Economic Development Corporation which seeks to encourage business and
industrial development in the County. The County and cities share in the total cost for
the Economic Development Corporation on a population basis.
1. Maintain accreditation of the Veterans Services Office and Public
Guardian staff, as required by both State and Federal regulations. This
includes the initial accreditation of the new Deputy Public
GuardianNeterans Service Officer, a new Deputy Public Guardian and a
new Veterans Service Representative.
2. Expand veterans outreach efforts to focus on community senior-centers,
independent living facilities and retirement homes.
3. Increase outreach to both county and state incarcerated veterans.
4. Continue oversight and support of the KC Military and Veterans Coalition
and KC Veterans Employment Committee.
5. Continue to streamline and digitize applicable Public Guardian
conservatee and Representative Payee records.
DISCUSSION:
With the long-time director of this department having recently retired, the
department's primary focus during this budget year will be maintaining a high
level of productivity and quality clienUcustomer service.
In this budget this department is projecting a slight increase in Lanterman-PetrisShort
Conservatorships and a slight decrease in Probate Conservatorships, due
to an upward trend in losses of our aging Probate clients. The department is also
projecting an increase in Representative Payee clients. This projection is
consistent with the past several years of data. Revenue generated from court
approved fees will continue to decline this year. Lanterman-Petris-Short clients,
for the most part, have fewer assets available to collect fees from than the typical
Probate client.
For FY 16/17, this department will receive through the Behavioral Health
Administration, the increased amount of $259,260. This revenue will fund
Lanterman-Petris-Short lnvestigations/Conservatorships, Veteran's and
Representative Payee services for Behavioral Health consumers identified
through the County's Behavioral Health Plan. The department will continue to work very closely with Kings View and the Behavioral Health. Administration to
identify those conservatorship clients that are ready to be moved to a lower, less
expensive, level of care.
This department is projecting a slight increase in California Department of
Veterans Affairs Local Assistance Funds this year, due to an increase in
auditable claims processed. The department continues its outreach efforts, and is
currently handling services to veterans on both a walk-in basis and
appointments.
This department conducts speaking engagements at local retirement homes,
colleges, activity fairs, hospitals, service organizations, prisons, etc. A
representative from the office serves as the Service Officer for many of the
Veterans Service Organizations in the county. The office is also responsible for
updating and maintaining the Kings County Freedom Memorial. The office also
has a major support role for the KC Veterans Employment Committee. The
primary purpose of this committee is to collaborate with California Employment
Development Department veteran's representatives, veterans' service
organizations and other community members, to foster and promote
employment opportunities for county veterans. KC Veterans Employment
Committee meets monthly and also sponsors an annual job and resource fair.
The department continues to support the KC Military and Veterans Coalition,
whose main purpose is to distribute information of interest to our military and
veterans' community. As part of this effort the information email distribution list
has over 3000 that have signed up. The office issues 1.0. Cards to honorably
discharged veterans. These cards can be used as proof of military service for
discounts at many of our local businesses. Additionally, the office serves as
verification-authority for California veterans who apply for the "Veteran"
designation on their driver's license or state identification card, to be issued
through the OMV. Veterans that come into the office for an 1.0. Card or
verification of their service for a "Veterans" driver's license are also told about
the many other benefits for which they may be eligible. The office is also a
satellite office of the County Recorders Office and is able to assist veterans and
their families with recording and accessing documents. The office is also a
member of the treatment team and review board for the Veterans Treatment
Court.
By working with the California Department of Veterans Affairs, this department
identifies recently discharged county veterans and is sending "Welcome Home"
letters to each. These letters discuss the many services the office provides,
and invites the veteran and their family to come in and discuss benefits they
have earned. The department continues to use "Veterans Corner" newspaper
articles and numerous speaking engagements to reach out to county veterans.
The office also receives OMV information on all drivers' license applicants who
identify themselves as veterans.
Working with veterans and their families involves sensitive and complex issues
that are often very personal in nature, such as those related to combat or
sexual trauma. The clients represent all ages, ethnic and socio-economic
backgrounds. As such, the staff requires "Cultural Competency" awareness, as
well as "Geriatric" awareness of specific issues such as dementia, Alzheimer's,
stroke and profound hearing loss. The office endeavors to be alert, sensitive,
respectful and compassionate to the needs and concerns of the clients.
Additionally, all staff members undergo "Mental Health First Aid" training, which
prepares them to respond to clients who may be experiencing a mental heath
crisis.
The Veterans Service Office significantly impacts the lives of veterans and their
families in Kings County. In addition to benefit claims, the many other programs
that this office assists clients with such as VA and Department of Defense
TRICARE medical care access, VA and California Department of Veterans
Affairs home loans, burial benefits, survivor benefits, and education benefits all
contribute to the cost-effectiveness of this department.
The budget for the Law Library includes the following changes from last fiscal year: a
decrease of $610 for salaries and benefits; including a $416 decrease of Salary; and
increases for Retirement, Health Insurance, Workers Comp Insurance; a decrease of
$470 for IT costs. The expenditure for Books & Periodicals was reduced, again, in the
amount of $6500 due to having to cancel additional print subscriptions. This reduction
in Books and Periodicals is a direct impact of the projected reduction in revenues for
the Law Library.
Based on the trend for the past seven months, filing fee revenue is expected to
increase by approximately 1.75% in Fiscal year 2016/2017. Interest revenue remains
low due to the interest rates and deposits being lower, and is expected to stay low, and
copy machine revenue is estimated to decrease due to the move of the courts. At this
writing, civil filing figures are only available through January of 2016, so 12 months of
2015 were compared to 12 months of 2014. Mindful of the current economy, expected
filing fee revenue is based on a 6.5% decrease in the amount of filing fees paid during
FY 2015/2016 compared to FY 2014/2015. The amount of fees paid has decreased in the past due to more litigants qualifying for filing fee waivers, not necessarily because
of fewer filings.
As of March 2016, use of the Law Library by non-attorney patrons has increased by 8%
over 2015. Total number of non-attorney patrons for period 07/15 to 03/16 was 1534.
Total number of patrons, including attorneys, for period 07/15 to 03/16 is 1824.
The objective of the District Attorney's Office is to protect ALL people in our
community through the effective and efficient administration of criminal justice and to
redress the harm done to the victims of crime.
DISCUSSION:
Since 2010 there have been three major pieces of legislation that have completely
changed our judicial and correctional systems. Under our new and radically different
sentencing structure, a majority of convicted felons serve their time in county jail, in
alternative programs instead of prison, or are convicted of misdemeanors. Many
inmates are now supervised by probation officers and available custody sanctions
have been severely reduced.
Proposition 36, which became effective November 7, 2012 and applied retroactively,
has significantly limited the effect of our prior "Three Strikes" Law. Under our prior
"Three Strikes" Law a criminal convicted of any new felony after having been convicted
of two prior "serious" or "violent" felonies would receive a sentence of at least 25 years
to life. Under the changes mandated by Proposition 36, with limited exceptions, a
criminal with two prior "serious" or "violent" felonies whose new felony offence was a
"non- serious" or "non-violent" felony will be treated as if he or she had only one strike.
In summary, under Realignment and Proposition 36 career criminals have been and will
be spending less time in custody and more time on the street. Not surprisingly, felony
filings increased over FY15/16 in spite of Proposition 47.
However, as expected, impact of Realignment (AB109) has been an increase in filing in
the area of economic crimes and drug crimes. Drug and economic crimes are among
the most numerous crimes where sentencing under new Penal Code, section 1170(h)
and jail crowding has resulted in shorter sentences for all of these criminal offenders.
These changes, along with more generous time credits are introduced at a time when
nationally, small rural communities are overwhelmed with methamphetamine use and
when violent crime is dramatically increasing. Tliese Increases have occurred despite
the prior change in focus from punishment to treatment. When the focus is on how
drugs affect the meth addict rather than how the meth hurts the innocent - children,
spouses and citizens who are the victims of the increasing crime caused by
methamphetamine and when long sentences on serious crimes are to be served in
county jail, resulting in overcrowding, it was not unexpected that the early releases of
inmates resulting in an even greater increase in economic and drug crimes.
We expect this trend to continue and to be acerbated by the shorter sentences
mandated by Proposition 36. In addition, there are currently a minimum of 36 career
criminals sentenced from Kings County serving 25 years to life under the prior version
of "Three Strikes" law who will be applying for release back into Kings County pursuant
to Proposition 36. Although the court has discretion to deny release if it determines the
petitioner/inmate will pose an unreasonable risk of danger to the public safety, many of
these 36 lifers may be release back into Kings County.
Most recently, Proposition 47 will also impact local resources as many of the
aforementioned offenders who are generally anti-social individuals. These anti-social
personalities tend to increase their criminal behavior when not monitored. Proposition
47 has created a system of misdemeanors that would have been otherwise been felons;
therefore there would have been supervision and restrictions placed upon these
individuals. As a result, we expect more misdemeanor and more felony cases to be
filed.
In summary we expect felony filing to increase and our workload to increase due to the
continued impact of AB109, Proposition 36, and the additional impact of Proposition 47.
Given our expectation of an increased volume of misdemeanor and felony cases, we
believe emphasis on the most violent crimes and the most violent offenders with more
well-trained violent crime deputy district attorneys will be increasingly important in FY
2016-17.
Administration
During the FY 2016-2017 budget process, an additional Sheriff's Investigative Assistant
position is requested to ensure background investigations continue to meet the complex
requirements and guidelines of P.O.S.T. and the Sheriff's Office's staffing needs are
met in a timely manner. The jail expansion project has significantly increased the
workload of the Backgrounds Investigations unit. The Backgrounds Investigation unit
completes a mandated investigation for applicants to the Sheriff's Office: Jail,
Operations, support staff (Executive Secretary & Secretary), Animal Control,
dispatchers, contract employees (i.e. Jail medical applicants, construction workers,
etc.), as well as, all citizens applying for Concealed Weapons (CCW) Permits. More
recently, this Division has also been tasked with conducting background investigations
on Naphcare employees, Medcore employees and county department head candidates.
In the FY 15-16 the job specification for the Senior Records Clerk classification was
updated to broaden the minimum qualifications in an effort to encourage a larger
applicant pool. The Senior Records Clerk position has been under-filled for several
years due to lack of qualified applicants.
Operations & Support
The Kings County Gang Task Force and collaborative partners were awarded the multiyear
Edward Byrne Memorial Grant (JAG) totaling $660,000 for the period of March 1,
2015-December 31, 2017. The JAG program will prioritize suppression, prevention, and
intervention efforts to address the county's area of needs in gang initiatives, juvenile
delinquency, gang violence reduction, and problem solving courts. The JAG program
seeks to significantly diminish juvenile and young adult gang-related crimes, violence
and offenses, as well as high juvenile delinquency recidivism of moderate to high-risk
youth through a balance of proven traditional strategies and innovative non-traditional
solutions.
During FY 2016-2017, SWAT will continue to replace outdated equipment with newer
technologies such as firearms designed to increase safety and vision in areas of low
visibility.
Narcotics Task Force continues to collaborate with other law enforcement agencies to
suppress narcotic activities contributing one Sheriff's Deputy to the local Drug
Enforcement Agency (DEA). In FY 2015-2016, KCSO assigned an additional Sheriff's
Senior Deputy to the Central Valley Marijuana Investigation Team ran by Homeland
Security Investigations. In addition to continuing partnerships, Narcotics Task Force will
continue the efforts to:
1. Significantly diminish the availability and use of illegal drugs in Kings county by
aggressively pursuing and prosecuting those involved in illegal narcotics; and
2. Provide a safe and drug-free environment for the citizens of Kings County and
the State of California.
Rural Crimes Task Force Detectives will continue the efforts:
1. To provide responsive services and develop a strong working partnership with
the farming community;
2. To educate farmers and Sheriff's Office personnel to current trends and methods
of agriculture related thefts, and emphasizing the importance of marking their
equipment for the purposes of recovery and tracking; and
3. To aggressively investigate, recover, and return stolen property to the owners
and prosecute offenders involved in agricultural related crimes.
Court Security
We are requesting an increase in the Court Security Services staffing levels to meet the
demands of the new courthouse. Requested in the budget process are four Sheriff's
Deputy Bailiffs to cover the additional courtrooms and administer security at the
courthouse entrance; and two Detentions Technicians 1/11 to run the electronic command
center that connects the jail tunnel to the courthouse
Detentions
Goals outlined for Detentions staffing are to continue to expand in-house training with
Sheriff's Emergency Response Team (S.E.R.T.); range; Taser; Pepperball; baton;
weaponless defense; CPR/First Aid and chemical agents. In addition to the in-house
training, added courses such as Spillman Jail Management training, Specialty Munitions
and the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), which is Federally-mandated, are set in
place to ensure staff is fully trained. Detentions' Management will continue to work
closely with the College of the Sequoias Hanford Campus to provide courses such as
Force Options/Defensive Tactics and Transportation Training. We have completed 2
Manager's Core Courses (80 hour Core), 9 Supervisor's Core Courses (80 hour Core),
2 Supplemental Core Courses (56 hour Core), 9 Adult Corrections Officer Core Courses
(176 to 184 hours Cores), 9 PC832 Firearms and Laws of Arrest Courses (74 hour
Course). In addition to training and continuing partnerships which provide additional
courses for the Detentions' staff, Detentions will:
1. Continue the priority of reducing early releases from the jail.
2. Continue to aggressively recruit and hire custodial personnel to remain fully
staffed and compliant with Title 15 and 24 of the U.S. Government code
governing custodial facilities;
3. Continue to look at addressing Classification issues which result in facility
overcrowding; and
4. Continue to identify methods to diminish the amount of sick leave utilized and
maximize the efficiency of the jail staffing.
Kitchen
The Kitchen staff will continue to:
1. Meet all regulations in the preparation of meals for adult and juvenile inmates;
2. Hire two additional jail cooks to achieve full staffing level;
3. Prepare and plan for moving into the new jail kitchen scheduled for the next
phase of jail expansion;
4. Continue consulting with Dietary Directions for nutritional guidance and yearly
menu reviews; and .
5. Work with the jail medical provider (Naphcare) to streamline and standardize
procedure regarding medical/special diets.
Animal Services
Animal Services will:
1. Continue to obtain grant funding for spay/neuter services;
2. Expand the community's awareness of the programs KCAS provides for
microchipping and low/no-cost spay/neuter;
3. Continue the training for shelter as well as field staff to further their knowledge
and exposure to proactive sheltering and enforcement;
4. Continue to offer clinics throughout Kings County promoting responsible pet
ownership, animal leashing requirements and general animal care;
5. Continue to enforce county ordinances and investigate issues related to
animal cases in order to provide a safe community for citizens and animals.
6. Investigate options for the improvement of shelter site operations. This
includes either an overhaul of the existing shelter site or acquisition of a new
site/and or structure; and also includes implementing accepting credit/debit card
payments. This will also include an overhaul of the draining system in FY 16-17
that will allow for appropriate drainage and sanitation at the current shelter site.
7. Create and implement an Administrative Citation process in order to generate
revenue and increase ordinance compliance.
8. Create a task force that includes all three Animal Control agencies (Hanford
PD, Lemoore PD and Kings County Sheriff) to investigate un-permitted breeding
in their respective jurisdictions; and9. Assist the two agencies that operate independently from Kings County Animal
Services (Corcoran and Avenal) to enact similar ordinances in an attempt to unify
the County and promote responsible pet ownership.
Discussion:
The Sheriff and his staff have diligently managed overhead cost and sought and
obtained alternative funding sources such as asset forfeiture money and various grant
awards. The Sheriffs Office forecast continuous growth with realignment which
increases the urgency to staff the Sheriff's Office departments with skilled professionals
to provide adequate relief in the most critical divisions mandated for 24/7 coverage. For
FY 2016-2017, the Sheriff's Office is requesting a budget with a total cost of
$41,652,497 of which $865,810 are Capital Assets and $69,185 are capital
improvements. The estimated revenue is $19,414,583 leaving unreimbursed costs of
$21,016,578.
Administration: Due to the growth demands and requirements of completing
mandatory P.O.S.T. compliant background investigations for Sheriff's Office employees,
contract employees, and citizens applying for concealed weapons permits, it is
imperative to increase the staffing in the backgrounds investigation unit with one (1)
Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Sheriff's Investigative Assistant.
Communications: Based on the increased radio traffic, the additional secondary
channel primarily for Probation and Animal Services and providing service to Lemoore
Police Department, it is necessary to staff two dispatchers during periods of extremely
high radio traffic to control the law radio. Additional phone traffic is reassigned to the
Fire Dispatcher, as this position is the primary phone back-up. The Sheriff's Office
requests to increase 2 Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Dispatcher 1/11 to ensure the
continuation of shift coverage and the steady increase of radio traffic on two channels.
Operations: The current building utilized by the Operations/Patrol staff was constructed
in 1964 and is clearly outdated. This building is the true "Headquarters" for KCSO
Patrol, Detectives, Rural Crimes, Evidence, Fingerprint Analyst, Civil, etc. and we have
outgrown the usable space. The Detective Division is extremely cramped with six
detectives sharing a small office delineated by cubicles, with a very small interview
room. Rural Crimes Detectives are housed in small offices formerly used by jail staff
and the fingerprint analyst utilizes an office that has an external door and is difficult to
access.
The HVAC system for the Operations building is incredulous. The temperature cannot
be maintained in appropriate parameters. It is either too hot or too cold, never
moderate or comfortable. The temperature is controlled through a series of chillers and
boilers that are operated at the county's central plant. The thermostats mounted inside
the building do not properly moderate the temperature of the building. These issues
have frequently been addressed with the building maintenance division but very little can be done to properly resolve the climate issues associated with such an old
building.
As we move to the future, we must look towards innovate funding methods and plan for
a new building to properly house Operations and its subsidiaries.
Court Security: The court's expansion to 10 courtrooms as well as the facility's multilevel
design requires the addition of staffing in areas of transportation, Detentions, and
Sheriff's Deputy Bailiffs. The multi-level design of the new courtroom heightened the
need to increase safety measures for staff assigned to transport and in the courtrooms,
and the need to increase staffing to service the additional courtrooms, transporting &
guarding inmates in the facility, and controlling the elevators within the courthouse. The
request by the Sheriff's Office is to increase current staffing by 4 Full-Time Equivalent
(F.T.E.) Sheriff's Deputy Bailiffs and 2 Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Detentions
Technicians 1/11.
Detentions: With the opening of the newly constructed Hanford Superior Courthouse
and the AB900 project, we are requesting minimal additional staffing this year. The
staffing proposals are to delete the vacant Detentions Commander position and the
approved overfill of the Detentions Lieutenant position and add 1.0 FTE Detentions
Lieutenant. Additionally, the position allocations requested are 2.0 FTE Detentions
Deputies. After the full transition into the AB900 project, we will review and address any
additional staffing deficiencies and request those needs in the FY17 /18 budget process.
Jail Kitchen: Food costs have been and will continue to rise in the future. Jail food
costs are rising due to increasingly stringent regulations regarding the nutritional content
of the jail menus in areas such as fat and sodium content. Being compliant with the
latter necessitates purchasing more expensive food products. Medically prescribed and
religious diets are now accounting for 10-12% of the overall daily meal production and
are a major contributor to increasing meal costs.
Animal Services: Animal Service-Field requested $5,000 be allocated to spay and
neuter costs associated with enforcing new county ordinances in FY 16-17, but will
continue to seek other sources of funding for these programs. This was due to the restructuring
of current grant programs that make it less likely to obtain large-scale
funding, but does not mean that large-scale funding will not be obtainable from other
sources. Animal Services continues to develop outreach programs and seek alternative
funding solutions for these programs. No additional staff is requested, but there is great
need for additional program funding from both internal and external sources in order to
effectively enforce current ordinances.
1. Fully implement the "Courage to Change" Program in the Kings County Jail
Facility, to allow offenders the opportunity to begin their program prior to
release. Work in partnership with the Sheriffs Office to provide one
dedicated FTE Deputy Probation Officer to work solely with the in-custody
population.
2. Complete and update department Policy and Procedure manual.
3. Train additional staff members to facilitate evidence based programming
within the department.
4. Work to finalize planning on SB 81 Round 2 remodel project and establish
procedures for the new Juvenile detention and re-entry facility.
5. Develop curriculum and establish procedures for the Juvenile Day Reporting
Center to be constructed under SB 81 Round 2.
DISCUSSION
Highlights for 2015-2016 are:
Juvenile Treatment Center - (233000) The 2016/2017 Requested Budget reflects an
unreimbursed cost to the General Fund of $3,413,486 (a $170,855 increase over the
FY 2015/2016 Adopted Budget).
Probation AB109 - (233100) The Public Safety Realignment Act took effect October
1, 2011 and transfers responsibility for supervising specific low-level inmates and
parolees from the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) to
counties. The FY 2016/2017 Requested Budget reflects the cost of adding one (1)
new vehicle.
Probation SB678 - (233200) The FY 2016/2017 Proposed Budget reflects the same
staffing levels as last fiscal year. There is no general fund cost associated with this
budget unit.
OJJDP - (233300) This budget unit was added during fiscal year 2014/2015 due to
Probation being awarded a grant for the 2nd Chance Act Comprehensive Statewide
Juvenile Reentry System Reform Planning Program. This grant expired in September
30, 2015.
YOBG - (233600) The FY 2016/2017 Proposed Budget reflects the same staffing
levels as last fiscal year. This budget unit is fully funded by YOBG (SB81) and
requires no general fund dollars.
Probation - (234000) The FY 2016/2017 Probation Budget reflects deleting two
Deputy Probation Officers 1/11, adding one ( 1) FTE Probation Data Analyst, and the cost
of one (1) VoIP phone and (1) desktop computer for the Probation Data Analyst with
associated licenses and software.
JJCPA - (234800) The FY 2016/2017 Proposed Budget reflects the same staffing
levels as last fiscal year. There is no general fund cost associated with this budget unit.
 Continue to provide the highest level of professional response and emergency
services to our communities
 Continue to monitor and assess changes to the Insurance Services Office (ISO),
Fire Services rating Schedule in order to maintain our current Public Protection
Classification.
 Develop a staffing plan that provides for an effective response force and eliminates
single person fire stations. This plan would provide for a least two (2) firefighters in
each apparatus in a rural assignment.
 Continue to expand the Wellness and Fitness Program and continue the downward
trend of illnesses and injuries to department personnel.
 Continue to seek funding opportunities to update the Fire Fleet and reduce the age
of the department's apparatus.
 Actively pursue alternative/grant funding for department equipment needs (e.g.
Federal Fire Act grant, State Domestic Preparedness and Equipment Program, and
other Federal Homeland Security grants).
 Continue to seek opportunities and partnerships, in our operational area, to
improve and expand service and training capabilities.
 Continue to work with the Santa Rosa Rancheria/Tachi Palace Hotel and Casino
administration to address personnel, equipment, and apparatus needs that will
improve and/or enhance fire and life safety on tribal lands.
 Encourage and promote employee development through enhanced training
programs, new training, and formal education opportunities. Establish and support
a succession-training program to facilitate building future department managers
and leaders.
 Continue to improve and enhance our public education programs to address fire
and life safety education.
Fire Administration Objectives:
 Operational Area lead agency that has secured approximately $5,597,239 to date
from Homeland Security Grants program for the purchase of equipment and
training for the Operational Area. Agencies assisted by these grant opportunities
include the Fire Department, Law Enforcement, Public Works, Department of
Agriculture, and Public Health.
 Continue to seek opportunities and funding to replace and update aging Fire
Apparatus. The department has made substantial progress in purchasing and
replacing out-of-date and aging apparatus within its fleet.
 Identify and retain a consultative firm to complete a "Fire Station Distribution Study"
which examines our current station locations related the department workload and
makes strategic recommendations. This plan contemplates growth of the
community, impacts of workloads, and organizational structure. It provides
indicators in order to guide the responsible growth of fire services based on needs.
 Continue to improve our plan for management reorganization in order to enable
operational efficiency and improve span of control configuration for all divisions.
 Support the new "Automatic Aid Agreement" with the City of Hanford, review and
update the existing current agreements with surrounding agencies.
 Establish a system of succession for department staff to support promotional
opportunities and establish minimum qualification guidelines.
 Develop and present new web sites for both the Fire Department and Office of
Emergency Management. This objective will allow for increased information
sharing and notification.
 When available, continue to work with the Central Planning Area to secure funding
and resources to improve Interoperability Communications for the Operational
Area, Region and State.
 To provide high quality life safety and code compliance services to the County of
Kings.
 Ensure that the Public Education Program reaches all segments of our
communities regarding the preservation of life and property.
 Ensure that prompt contact is made with entities involved with construction
projects in order to prevent delay, undue cost and enhance completion of the
final fire inspection.
 Provide liaison and consultation services to the Cities of Avenal and Corcoran in
order to clarify California Fire Code and Fire Department requirements.
 Promote increased installation of fire sprinkler, fire alarms, and special hazard
systems as the first line of defense from fire losses.
 Investigate and determine the origin and cause of all fires occurring within our
jurisdiction.
 Ensure expedient fire cause determination service in order to analyze and affect
loss control.
 Provide fire code enforcement services that match the needs of the communities
we serve.
 Implement a program for the issuance of operational permits as identified in
Section 105 of the California Fire Code.
 Continue to develop the Fire Investigation Unit by completing required training
and continuing education for investigators.
 Completion of Peace Officer status for all FIU team members.
 Recruit and select two additional FIU members for integration during the 2016-
17 fiscal years.
 Plan for succession in the Fire marshal position through training and the
development of Standard Operating Guidelines for the division.
 Provide exceptional fire education programs and services to the public.
 Implement an iPad-based inspection program for the stations with the heaviest
inspection workload.
 Maintain a turnout time of 120 seconds, from receipt of emergency call.
 Maintain all equipment, apparatus, and personnel in a state of readiness to
ensure a rapid response to emergencies.
 To utilize response data and informational systems to enhance the quality of our
response to emergencies.
 Develop, identify, and update target hazards and preplans.
 To meet or exceed the minimum amount of training hours as determined by the
Training Division.
 Up-staff our single staffed stations for the safety of our personnel and increased
efficiency on initial attack operations.
 Initiate and employ the established Standards of Cover document for our Agency.
 To keep the costs of our operations commensurate to the values at risk.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Confined Space Operations training per year.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Emergency Medical Technician training and
implement a recertification program based on continuing educations credits.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Hazardous Materials First Responder
Operations training per year.
 To deliver a minimum of 186 hours of additional training to each member of the
career staff and a minimum of 100 hours to volunteer staff.
Continue to support the College of the Sequoias Basic Fire Academy with
instructors and participants,
 Continue to develop a Regional Type II Hazardous Materials Response Team in
conjunction with Hanford City Fire Department.
 Continue to support and provide assistance to the California Emergency
Management Agency with a Type II Urban Search and Rescue Team.
 The Office of Emergency Services Coordinator will participate in Statesponsored
meetings, workshops and training conferences to enhance
communications and operations between various State and local agencies.
 To continue OEM training activities. Training in SEMS, NIMS, RIMS, EOC
Operations and disaster preparedness is available to the Operational Area.
 To utilize State Homeland Security Grant Program funding to enhance the
interoperable communications systems throughout the Operational Area.
 To manage the current and pending State Homeland Security Grant Program
(SHSGP), Emergency Preparedness Grant Program (EMPG). Develop and
submit future Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG) and the Staffing for
Adequate Firefighter & Emergency Response (SAFER) grant.
 The Emergency Services Coordinator will serve as the Chair of the Kings County
Drought Task Force and maintain drought related programs while under a State
declared drought emergency.
 To continue to participate in State training, meetings and workshops in order to
expand skill level and to advise other agencies and the community of important
issues.
Office of Emergency Management Goals:
 To continue to apply for new grant opportunities to enhance capabilities
regarding disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery efforts
within the County of Kings.
 To continue to offer presentations and training to other departments and agencies
in SEMS, NIMS, RIMS, EOC/DOC operations, active shooter, and disaster
preparedness and other important issues.
 To conduct tabletop exercises, drills and seminars to enhance skill level and to
train additional key personnel in the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and
Department Operations Center (DOC) functions.
 To continue to work toward re-establishing the Kings County Disaster Council in
order to better serve the Operational Area.
 Develop and seek funding opportunities for the purchase and maintenance of an
interactive communication and mass notification system.
 To enhance the resourced tracking capabilities of grant funded equipment within
the Operational Area.
 To ensure that grant funded project meet or exceed Federal and State purchasing
policy requirements.
 To continue to support the operational area during times of emergency/disaster.
FIRE DEPARTMENT DISCUSSION
Currently four (4) of the department's ten (10) fire stations continue to be staffed by a
single person on a forty eight (48) hour duty cycle. These stations are located in the
areas of Burris Park, Hardwick, Island, and Stratford and represent some of our most
remote locations. This continued level of marginal staffing, impedes the effectiveness of
the department's emergency service operations, contributes to the workplace of our
firefighters, and decreases the overall safety of personnel stationed at these locations.
The Fire Department faces significant staffing issues in its efforts to provide public
safety. At the forefront is the lack of adequate daily staffing to provide an effective
force when dealing with emergency response and for providing for the overall safety of
personnel. Overtime continues to be a significant concern for the Fire Department. In
the FY 14/15 the department incurred approximately $871,041 in overtime costs
doubling the estimated amount budgeted. By incorporating the classification of
firefighter in the current multi-company stations, the department can reassign additional
staff to the relief positions in order to cover for personnel shortages without incurring
overtime. In FY 16/17, the Fire Department will be requesting an additional six (6)
firefighter positions as step one in this phased process of eliminating single person
stations.
Having recently finalized the evaluation from the Insurance Services Office (ISO) rating
schedule, the area of most negative impact was the credit for company personnel. The department only received 5.12 points out of 15 possible due to the lack of adequate
staffing. Deficiency in staffing coupled with not having a Deployment Analysis,
represented the primary reductions in available points from ISO. In the FY 15/16
budget, the department was able to adopt three (3) additional personnel that were
assigned to relief positions. This effort was undertaken in an attempt to control the
annual amount of overtime incurred as a result of staffing shortages, workers
compensation injuries, and vacation coverage. As previously stated the department
intends to present a phased approach to deal with this staffing challenge and will bring
forward the classification of firefighter as a method to increase staffing. This phased
approach will be needed in order to identify and increase available revenue for the Fire
Fund and meet the final need for permanent staffing at our remote stations.
In the proposed FY 16/17 budget, funding has been allocated to commission a "Station
Distribution Study" in order to determine impacts of geographical locations on current
and future workloads. This information will be beneficial in determining locations and
strategies needed to deploy resources effectively throughout the county.
Of continued concern is the age of our fire station facilities. As the backbone of our
geographical deployment, the need to maintain our fire stations is a primary issue.
Having limited funding available, the need to continue to update and repair these
facilities is paramount. Many of our older stations are in need of major remodeling and
updating in order to remain viable and to meet department current and future needs.
These undertakings are extremely costly and dedicating adequate revenue from the fire
fund is not possible. The department will seek to fund these types of projects through
opportunities from Community Development Block Grants and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture grant programs.
Additionally, the need for adequate and efficient working space at Fire Department
Headquarters has prompted the need for adding additional offices. In the FY 16-17
S.l.&G. account, the amount of $34,860 has been included in order the facilitate this
project which will include the development of two new office spaces. These offices will
be utilized by the Training and the Community Risk Reduction Divisions. This project
will enable the Fire Department to extend the use of our current facility and allow for
sufficient time to determine a new location for Fire Headquarters.
Another item of note is that in FY 2015/2016 through a generous donation from the
Tachi Yakut Tribe, the Kings County Fire Department received a replacement fire
apparatus for Station 7 located at 1285 18th Avenue in South Lemoore. Along with the
replacement of the engine, the purchase of essential firefighting equipment will also be
sponsored for a total contribution in the amount of $586,054. As a result of this gift,
the Fire Department will continue to serve the needs of the community and its citizens
by providing swift and effective services when called upon. The County is very grateful
for this donation from the Tribe.
1. Pest Detection - Surveillance for pests and diseases not known to occur within
Kings County or be established in the State by performing detection trapping
consistent with state and federal standards. Provide pest identification services
for the public.
2. Pest Eradication - Prevent the establishment and spread of high priority pests in
accordance with USDA and California regulations. The Pink Bollworm Cotton
Plowdown Program is one of our Eradication programs.
3. Pest Management - To assist in the mandated control of recognized economic
pests of agriculture, pests affecting the public health, and those causing
environmental harm; to enable the reduction of agricultural losses through
grower enabled control programs; and provide specific control materials, at
cost, and technical advice as needed.
4. Pest Exclusion - Protect and enable the commercial trade of Kings County
agriculture, pursuant to Federal, State and County regulations through the
inspection of incoming and outgoing shipments for quarantine compliance,
especially in high-risk environments or market pathways, therefore promoting
the high quality and cleanliness of Kings County export commodities.
5. Pesticide Use Enforcement - To enable people to succeed in the production of
commodities of optimum quality and yield while assuring the safety of their
partners, the public, and our environment.
6. Seed Law Enforcement - To assure the quality of seed and that it is properly
labeled as to its contents, treatment, and viability.
a. Seed Certification - Working with the California Crop Improvement
Association certification program to verify the purity and quality of seed
grown in Kings County.
7. Nursery Inspection - To ensure the production and sale of commercially clean,
pest-free, true-to-variety, vigorous and healthy nursery stock.
8. Fruit and Vegetable Quality Control - Protects the consumer, producer, and
shipper, through inspection programs for compliance with standards of the
California Food and Agricultural Code, federal regulations, marketing orders,
and other related enforcement activities; thus promoting the local Fruit and
Vegetable industry, including Farmers Market and Organic inspections of local
producers and venders.
9. Egg Quality Control - Inspect and certify eggs as required by the California Food
and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
10. Apiary Inspection - Maintain the identification of bee locations in the County for
the purpose of notification of pending pesticide applications and provide colony
strength and health certification inspections services upon request.
11. Crop Statistics - Maintain current and reliable agricultural production statistics,
as required by the California Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
Prepare and present an annual County crop report. Monitor and collect crop
disaster/loss statistics and report significant findings to CDFA, the USDA, and
the County Board of Supervisors.
12. Vertebrate Pest Control - Maintain a level of control sufficient to ensure the
protection of the health and safety of the public, food safety, crops, livestock,
and the environment from the detrimental impacts of physical damage or
diseases caused by such pests. The Department's rodent bait mixing program
is a resource used locally in addition to providing sales to numerous other
county programs around the state.
13. Emergency Animal Disposal - Provide guidance to efficiently and effectively
protect the health of the public, and the environment, while ensuring the
sustainability of the livestock industry through the use of safe and efficient
means of dead animal carcass disposal during times of emergency.
1. Service Agencies - Verify licensing and inspection of services performed by
service agents for accuracy and integrity.
2. Device Inspection - Assures equitable protection to all persons in the sale of
commodities (weighed, measured or counted) through enforcement of
prescribed device standards and specifications.
3. Quantity Control - Assures consumer protection against deception or
misrepresentation as to the quantity of products in package form, through
testing and undercover purchase programs; test purchases are made to discern
the accuracy of advertised price computations; investigations of all consumer
complaints relative to transactions utilizing units of weights and/or measures.
4. Weighmaster Enforcement - Assures that all licensed weighmasters are
performing in accordance with established state laws and regulations.
5. Petroleum Enforcement - Provides assurance that petroleum products offered
for sale in Kings County meet Federal and State quality specifications while
ensuring sale conditions are accurately and lawfully conducted.
DISCUSSION:
The Department of Agriculture and Measurement Standards [Department] projects
the current Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 unreimbursed cost to the County General Fund
to be approximately $57,737 less than was adopted. The 6.66% cost savings
projection is based on an anticipated net expenditure reduction of $91,119 coupled
with a projected $33,382 decline in revenue.
For FY 2016-17 the Department is requesting net expenditures of $2,841,767 which
is $189,420 (6.56%) more than was adopted in the 2015-16 FY budget. The
expenditure request includes a $163,278 (8.21 % ) increase in Salaries and Benefits,
a $22,794 (-3.60%) reduction in Services and Supplies. Factors contributing to the
increase in Salaries and Benefits are an $114,768 (8.19%) increase to department
salaries and a $32,773 (17.4%) increase in Retirement. The $22,794 decrease to the
Services and Supplies category is due to a $10,000 reduction to Computer
Hardware/Software account coupled with a $12,100 decrease in the Utilities line
items. However, a new Cost Applied Utility Bond expenditure of $25,047 is included
with the net expenditure increase. Information Technology Services line item is
requested to increase by $23,889 due to the Department joining the County's server
network.
The requested revenue, for FY 2016-17, totals $1,881,601 and is 6.68% ($123,694)
more than FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget Revenue. The State Aid for Agriculture
revenue account is requested at $122,319 more than FY 2015-16, representing
98.89% of the anticipated increase in revenues.
The Agriculture Department's requested FY 2016-17 budget will result in an
Unreimbursed Net Cost of $960,166 to the county's General Fund. This Requested
Budget is a net expenditure increase of $65,726 (6.85%) from the 2015-16 FY
adopted budget.
Building Division Objectives for Fiscal Year 2016-2017:
1. Insure that the Building Official, a Building Inspector, or the Permit Technician is
available one-hundred percent of the time for office consultation with builders on
construction requirements, provide for responsive plan check tum-a-round, issue
building permits, and to keep up with the latest technology in the building industry.
2. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year building activity reports for the
unincorporated area of Kings County.
3. Provide inspection services the next workday after the request for inspection is
received or the closest date and time available.
4. Carry out the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and ensure compliance with the
current FEMA maps in effect September 2015.
5. Work with Environmental Health Services (EHS) to ensure a seamless transition of
EHS taking over the implementation of the Water Well Ordinance.
6. Abate dangerous buildings.
7. Conduct Code Compliance programs including, but not limited to: vehicle
abatement, nuisance abatement, building compliance, and zoning compliance,
8. Insure that support staff is available to receive alleged code violations in the office
or over the phone during regular business hours.
9. Maintain and track active violation cases.
10. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year activity reports for the unincorporated
area of Kings County concerning resolutions of code violation cases and vehicle
and building abatements.
11. Provide initial investigation services generally five days a week, however depending
on the threat to the public health and safety and the workload of the Building Official
it may take a few days for the initial investigation after a complaint is received.
12. Carry out the Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Program.
13. Provide vehicle and building abatement to address health and safety issues.
14. Ensure new development meets the provisions of the Accessibility Standards
Compliance Act (SB 1608, Chapter 549 of the Statutes of 2008) and government
Code Section 4459.5, by retaining a Certified Access Specialist (CASp).
15. Ensure compliance with the 2016 California Building Standards Code which
becomes effective January 1, 2017.
16. Continue to provide an expedited plan review service for photovoltaic permits based
on requirements of AB 2188.
1. Continue the implementation of the Kings County Subdivision Ordinance. Ensure
that both divisions of the Advisory Agency for Parcel Maps and Subdivision
complete action on tentative maps within 50 days of the application being certified
complete, and/or completion of the environmental review. This review period
includes a required 20-day public review period for comments on proposed
negative/mitigated negative declarations. Continue the implementation of
streamlined procedures for administrative processing of lot line adjustments, parcel
map waivers, and certain minor divisions of land.
2. Ensure Planning Commission completes action on conditional use permit
applications within two (2) months of the application being certified complete, or
completion of the environmental review.
3. Process applications for site plan reviews within three (3) weeks of application being
certified complete.
4. Conduct environmental reviews for all projects within required time intervals: within
105 days after submittal of a complete application with approved negative/mitigated
negative declarations or within one year when an environmental impact report (EIR) is required. This includes the requirement for a 20-day public review (30 days for
state agencies comments) for proposed negative declarations.
5. Carry out grant application and management tasks assigned by the Board, for the
following programs: Community Development Block Grant (CDBG); HOME; BEGIN,
CalHome, and other grants as assigned by the Board.
6. Manage the National Flood Insurance Program, Local Flood Plain Management
Program through building and zoning permit reviews and environmental review
processes.
7. Carry out the policies of the Kings County Hazardous Waste Management Plan
through zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
8. Implement the Kings County General Plan in coordination with the cities and
unincorporated communities in Kings County.
9. Continue to review and update of the new Development Code to ensure
consistency with the 2035 Kings County General Plan.
10. Implement all of the elements of the General Plan.
11. Implement the mandated Integrated Waste Management Plan, (IWMP) through
zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
12. Continue the Countywide Regional implementation of the GIS system, and
automate the General Plan and Zoning maps, continue implementation of the GIS
System into the general plan, zoning, land division, and environmental assessment
procedures, and provide GIS information to the Board and Commissions, other
departments and agencies, and the public where and when appropriate.
13. Implement and maintain the County's GIS web application to provide increased
accessibility to planning information, and support Kings EDC, Kings County
Emergency Services and First Responding Agencies, and other County
Departments.
14. Provide GIS Services to the City of Avenal, City of Hanford, and other Cities or
Districts that contract with the County for such services.
15. Provide staff and administrative services for the Building Division (Budget Unit
279000) and LAFCO of Kings County (Budget Unit 280000).
16. Continue staff training and mentorship efforts to build and retain a strong foundation
of knowledgeable and experienced staff and decrease potential attrition.
17. Continue to provide staff support to the Agricultural Advisory Committee and
conduct studies as necessary.
18. Continue to provide staff support to the Kings County Water Commission and
conduct research as necessary.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AGENCY DISCUSSION COMBINED 279000 AND
270000:
The requested combined Budget for these two divisions for FY 2016-17 is $1,817,559 in
gross cost and $1,695,311 in net cost, which includes $7,063 Cost Applied from the
LAFCO (280000) budget for services provided by the Planning Division. The total is an
increase of $94,485 from FY 2015-2016 due largely to an increase in CAP charges. The
following is a breakdown by division.
The Requested Budget for the Building Division for 2016-17 is $647,401 with $323,335 in
revenue and $8,389 in Cost Applied Funds for services provided to the Planning (270000)
Division. This includes an un-reimbursed cost of $324,066. This is approximately a 59%
increase from last year's un-reimbursed cost. The increase in cost for this division is due
to estimated decrease in Licenses and Permits Revenue due to the request to move the
water well permits revenue of $80,000 to the Environmental Health Services (EHS) budget
unit within the Health Department.
Revenues are projected at $323,335, which is a decrease of about 19.9% in revenue from
what was estimated for FY 2015-16.
Planning Division Discussion:
The Requested Budget for the Planning Division for 2016-17 is for a total of $951,390 up
$16,525 from last year's approved budget. This includes an un-reimbursed cost of
$951,390. This is an approximate 2% increase from last year's un-reimbursed cost. Cap
charges represented the largest increase in the overall budget with an increase of
$107,152 which represents a 156% increase from last year.
Revenues are projected at $96,520, a 30.2% increase from estimated 2015-16 Revenue.
The Community Development Agency's annual dues payment to KCAG is estimated at
$6,571. No Fixed Assets are requested.
1. Continued training for LAFCO staff on operational procedures and processes.
2. Process all applications for reorganization, etc., within the prescribed time
limits.
3. Process all spheres of influence amendments for the cities, communities, and
special districts in Kings County and prepare resources for the next required
update.
4. Review and assist Cities and Districts with the preparation of detailed MSRs
for any Sphere of Influence Amendment application submitted to LAFCO to
ensure compliance with Government Code Section 56430.
5. Conduct studies and analysis to comply with new State law requirements.
6. Continue involvement in CALAFCO workshops and training events to keep
staff informed and knowledgeable of State Law changes and innovative
approaches to more effectively conduct LAFCO processes.
Kings County Department of Finance provides accounting services to LAFCO, and
this budget is included in the County's budget as a General Fund program for this
purpose. The County's portion of the LAFCO budget is shown under General Fund
Contribution. The cities' portion is shown as lntergovemmental Revenue.
LAFCO Discussion:
The 2016-17 Budget for LAFCO, which is proposed for adoption on May 25, 2016,
includes the day-to-day operations of LAFCO, including administration and
application processing activities. The General LAFCO Activities represents about
half of the overall effort in this budget.
The budget is for a total of $57,126, which is an increase of $4,835 from last year's
approved budget. The staff related costs are identified as Administrative Allocation
due to transfer of costs to Community Development Agency Budget 270000 in the
amount of $37,852 which is a 6.45% increase from last year. County CAP Charges
also increased this year by $1,916 and together these items represent the bulk of the
budget increase.
Revenues are projected at $30,063, up $2,864 from the 2015-2016 Budget. This
amount includes the estimated LAFCO Application Fees of $3,000 and City shares
for half of the remaining LAFCO budget. The County covers the remaining half of
the LAFCO Budget share of $27,063, which is a $2,863 increase from last FY and
shown as Unreimbursed Cost in the budget. The total budget estimate is $57, 126.
The budget is funded equally between the cities and the County, except for
estimated LAFCO Fee activity projected for LAFCO application processing. The total
cost of the budget, less any revenue, is divided evenly and the Kings County
Department of Finance collects the money and accounts for it in separate accounts.
Any money remaining from the previous year's budget will be carried over and
applied to this budget. Next year's funding support will include any carryover funds,
but the amount will not be known until the books are closed for the year.
The County is the recipient of fines, fees and forfeiture and other revenues that were
previously included in the Court's budget exclusively. An agreement was reached with
the Court that established a mechanism of revenue sharing for a long list of specific
fines and fees. It is out of the proceeds of these revenues and State Trial Court realignment funds that the County makes its contribution to the State, which then
dispenses funding back to the Courts in Kings County.
In place of a Public Defender's office, Kings County contracts with independent
attorneys to represent indigent defendants. Contracts are issued to 24 attorneys; 13
are assigned to represent felony defendants (three of those attorneys handle prison
cases), and seven are assigned to represent misdemeanor defendants, three are
full-time juvenile contract defense attorneys, and there is one misdemeanor contract
conflict attorney. Also included in this budget is the contract for the Coordinating
Attorney who oversees the activites of these 23 attorneys' between the Courts and
the County.
For multiple defendant cases, or conflicts among the attorneys and/or defendants,
the Court appoints counsel from a separate list. These attorneys, generally referred
to as "conflict attorneys," are paid on an hourly basis.
Also, included in this budget unit are the costs related to court appointed
investigative services. This budget unit anticipates that the court appointed hourly
rate will increase from $40 per hour to $45 per hour for investigative services.
 Provide quality customer service.
 Implement current Performance Measurement Plan over the course of five (5)
years.
 Maintain Annual Performance Indicators in the collection of current support and
collection on arrears.
 Maintain a zero net cost to the County of Kings.
 Remain in compliance.
 Improve inter-agency relations with Kings County Courts and Human Services
Agency.
In the requested 2016/17 budget, several assumptions are made. The first assumption
is that our department's administrative baseline funding will remain flat from the
2015/16 baseline funding.
Our preliminary planning allocation letter typically issued by the California Department
of Child Support Services in February has not been released as of March 4th, thus the
assumption listed above. We do not expect a decrease from the prior years funding of
$4,133,667. This amount does not include the Electronic Data Processing (EDP)
portion of the budget. The State EDP budget request will be $51,441.00 in 2016/17
which is included in our county budget, but is subject to state approval. A new
published pricing/billing model implemented by the County Office of Information
Technology in 2012/13 resulted in a new billing method, therefore our information
technology charges and EDP budget will vary from year to year.
The countywide budgeted 2% COLA is the second assumption. This 2% COLA
increased our Salaries, Retirement and Social Security/Medicare which in turn caused
us to delete 4.0 FTE positions. The annual negotiated COLA combined with the
increased CAP charges of $30,215 have combined to make budgeting a continuously
flat allocation very difficult.
Total anticipated revenue from the state is $4,185,108 contingent upon a state
approved budget. Additional revenue of $3,200 is anticipated from interest earnings.
We have left $80,000 unfunded. The unfunded money is the cost to pay out both
Attorneys. This $80,000 will draw down the Contingency fund in FY 2016-17.
For FY 16/17 the Department is not requesting to purchase fixed assets, or capital
improvements. The Department is requesting software maintenance renewals for Time
Clock Plus, Survey Monkey, and Appriss Justice Xchange - a total of $3,510.00.
This Department will attempt to foster an inter-agency relationship with the Kings
County Department of Human Services by housing a Child Support Specialist at their
location two days per week. This person is available to answer child support related
questions from potential clients.
Some of the changes of note for FY 16/17 in salaries and employee benefits are as
follows:
 The department is requesting to delete 3.0 vacant Child Support Specialist 1/11
positions. The potential implementation of a 2% COLA, as well as increased
CAP costs have combined to make eliminating the 3 vacant positions necessary.
 The department is requesting to delete 1.0 Paralegal position.
326000
 Extra Help - No funds are available to budget for this category as we have done
in the past. With so much of our costs dictated by contracts or based on fair
share costs, such as CAP, IT, Workers Comp, etc. that continue to rise each
year while our annual allocation has remained stagnant since 2002, areas such
as this begin to rely on salary savings to fund them. If salary savings are
realized then this expense may be able to be funded, if needed.
Some of the changes to note for FY 16/17 in services and supplies are as follows:
 Service Fees - With the retirement of our in-house Process Server the reliance
on our contracted vendor, ActionServ has increased.
 Maintenance SI & G - This category was increased from $13,500 to $20,000.
Effective 4/1/16 we have partnered with the Kings County Department of Public
Works to utilize their janitorial services. Our prior vendor has performed less
than satisfactory in most areas of their janitorial services which caused us to look
for an alternative.
The Requested and Recommended Budget have been prepared by the County
Administrative Office and reviewed with the assigned member of the Grand Jury.
Meeting reimbursement has traditionally been paid to Grand Jurors at the rate of $10
per meeting. In FY 01-02, an increase to $11 per meeting was adopted. Since FY
2002-03, the Requested Budget includes a $15/meeting day, State-mandated minimum
rate.
1) Maintain quality legal representation

2) Cooperate with Probation, Human Services and District Attorney's offices to
resolve issues whenever possible so as:
a. To better ensure the clients' best resolution to their case and/or
problems.
b. To assist in judicial economy whenever possible
c. To participate and assist any organization whose purpose is to offer
services to aid in the protection of children.
d. To assist in the gathering of information to provide for proper
recommendations pertaining to emotionally disturbed juveniles.
DISCUSSION:
There is continued need in the budget for psychological evaluations and an investigator
for the Minor's Advocates Department.
1) There is a continued need for the professional services of a psychologist. Due to
change in court funding, it is necessary for the Minor's Advocates Department to
provide for a psychologist who will complete thorough psychological evaluations
for juveniles with serious emotional and mental health disorders. Such
evaluations will provide diagnosis and recommendations for treatment, which are
necessary for determining appropriate dispositions for juveniles before the court
due to criminal offenses, but who are also emotionally disturbed. This
department is dedicated to providing the best of legal representation. However,
the court must be made especially aware of the problems and recommendations
for those children suffering from emotional disorders. This appears to be an
ongoing problem with minors who have serious mental health problems.
2) The department is responsible for the billing of interpreting services for out-ofcourtroom
interviews to maintain quality legal representation for Non-English
speaking clients, hearing impaired clients and their parents.
3) There is a continuing need for an experienced bilingual investigator due to the
complexity and seriousness of delinquency cases, including, but not limited to
gang cases.
4) There is a continuing need for expert witness fees to assist with investigation of
gang related cases.
5) Due to the current caseload a request for an Extra Help Attorney Ill is included in
the FY 16/17 budget. The Extra Help Attorney will assist with the increase in
juvenile dependency and delinquency cases court appearances and client
interviews.
Court Charges and Billing
1) The department's procedure for billing the courts for legal representation of
parties before the court on a dependency case, (Welfare and Institutions Code
300) continues to remain unchanged. Dependency case attorneys include
attorneys from this department, three (3) juvenile contract attorneys and list of
conflict attorneys.
The number of dependency cases has increased substantially from the previous
year. This is directly reflected in the amount of investigation cost incurred. [State
law requires any child over four (4) to be interviewed.] The "recovery" costs have
drastically increased to the volume of dependency cases and the increase in
conflict attorney case billing. However, if the number of filings tapers off, the
recovery from the State will also decrease.
Billing to the courts includes:
a) Services of the Minor's Advocates Department, including attorneys,
support staff, and investigator.
b) Services of the contract attorneys for dependency cases
c) Services of the conflict attorneys for dependency cases
2) Conflict Attorneys billing to the County for legal representation on delinquency
and dependency cases is also processed through this department.
The requested FY 2016/2017 budget includes only $2,250 in expenses and $1,870 in
revenues. These specific projects will be taken to the Fish & Game Commission and
the Kings County Board of Supervisors this fiscal year for approval.
The Proposed 2016/2017 Budget includes contributions (Other Charges) to the Road
budget (925100) from the Road Fund in the amount of $12,103,362. This is a
decrease of $478,414 from the Adopted 2014/2015 Budget of $12,581,776. This
decrease is due to less State revenue; therefore the Public Works Department
reduced its expenses in roads. The projected $2,696,362 of unreimbursed costs will
come from the Road Fund beginning fund balance for FY 2016/2017 which is
projected to be $7,310,082.
1. Continue the on-going assessment of department organization and staffing to
assure community effectiveness and operational efficiencies using the Criteria for
Performance Excellence adopted by the Baldrige Performance Excellence
Program.
2. Provide input to the Board, the CAO, state agencies and local legislators on the
state budget, federal health care reform and other issues that could affect Health
Department programs as well as other health care services available to Kings
County residents.
3. Implement the goals identified in the Departmental Strategic Plan for achievement
in FY 2016-17, including:
a. Update at least 50% of the Departments' policies, procedures and
protocols.
b. Develop duty statements and competency checklists for each position.
c. Develop and implement a comprehensive employee wellness plan that
includes healthy eating and active living components.
d. Develop a department-wide communications tool to provide information to
employees.
e. Develop a department-wide orientation for new employees.
f. Develop a Business Continuity Plan that includes the provision of
necessary services and alternate service locations.
g. Work with collaborative partners to assist in implementin~ the staterequired
reproductive/sexual health education for all ih and gt graders.
h. Include a climate and health perspective in the Department's health
education and promotion efforts.
i. Serve a minimum of 150 families annually through the Child Passenger
Safety Program.
j. Establish a Healthy Homes program that provides in-home education and
environmental changes to support healthy environments for Kings County
families.
1. Continue to strengthen and prioritize services for children and their families;
meeting the demand for National and State-driven outcome measures and
mandates. A partnership with Kings County Child Welfare Services resulted in
the implementation of the State mandated program, "Katie A." and provides
Behavioral Health entitlement and access to care services for foster children.
Other services that are expanding are Foster Care System reform, Parent-Child
Interactive Therapy (early-age mental health program), mental health
screenings for children up to the age of 17, Truancy Intervention and Prevention
Program (TIPP) and further outreach through the Prevention and Early
Intervention (PEI) plan of the Mental Health Services Act and other evidencedbased
pilots to address early on-set behavioral problems that continue to
impact the developmental school years.
2. Continue the Development and Collaboration of the SB1022 and SB81
framework with Kings County Sheriff's Office. Probation. and providers;
establishing program plans and outcomes for the full implementation of a Day
Treatment Center, vocational, SUD and mental health services for inmates
transitioning back into their communities. This program is slated for FY
2016/2017 implementation with planning already ramping up in current FY.
3. Establish Mental Health Residential Crisis Beds; with the approved California
Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA) grant under SB82 for 8 crisis beds, a
clinical and medical provider, and strengthens Behavioral Health, Kings View Crisis Services, Adventist Health, Kings County Law Enforcement, and other
community stakeholders to ensure the safety, security, and minimization of
county resources in dealing with psychiatric emergencies. Request for
Proposal for this service to the community has been released.
4. Expand the Collaborative Justice Treatment Court (CJTC); with the approval of
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)
Grant funding and establishing a Memorandum of Understanding between
Behavioral Health and Kings County Courts. With Courts and other County
Agency partners, the Department will continue to advocate for the least
restrictive environment for individuals suffering from substance abuse disorders,
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and mental illnesses who are
incarcerated or face incarceration, or face an imminent release into the
community without resources. The pilot for this combined Veteran's, Drug, and
Behavioral Health Court has moved from a pilot project into a permanent
program as of July, 2014. In FY 2015/2016, an evaluation, expanded outcome
measures, and increased participation (more slots) will be added.
5. Completely convert and implement the protocols of all service related activities
into the department's new Data Management System; Anasazi. With this
automated system, reporting outcomes and creating performance based
measures will help the department track effectiveness, access to care and
service gap areas to be addressed. Ensure that data collected at local level is
interfaced with State data management system-DRC on an on-going basis.
6. Continue to Improve and Monitor HIPAA practices, and structural and policy
safeguards that ensure the protection of all private health information for the
department. Re-vamp and/or improve encryption mechanisms and monitor
ongoing risks to breaches in security in partnership with Information Services
Department.
7. Create goals, objectives, and strategies that serve to prevent Suicide in Kings
County. Through the Tulare/Kings Suicide Task Force, the department will seek
to lower the risks associated with suicide ideation and follow-through. As part of
the Prevention and Early Intervention Statewide programs, a suicide response
Local Outreach to Suicide Survivors (LOSS) team was implemented in Kings
County and will need to be strengthened and the volunteer base expanded to
ensure the availability of post-prevention services to family members in Kings
County. In June, 2014, the Statewide PEI plans sunset, however Kings will
continue to fund and partner with Tulare County toward Suicide Prevention,
Student Mental Health, and Stigma reduction.
8. Establish a Medi-Cal/EPSDT billing component with Department; ensuring that
funding is being maximized for the County and increasing access to care for children and youth; creating sustainability and growth toward community
services.
9. Contribute to provide for the sustainability of CalMHSA efforts; shifting a
percentage of local County PEI funds to this governing board (through
stakeholder process) for the benefit of capacity building and leveraging their
resources for Kings County.
10. Implement only new AOD Prevention, Treatment, or Mental Health Programs
which have been established as Evidenced-Based; remaining consistent with
the expectation that an evaluation and monitoring component accompany all
programs funded by the department. Continue to re-visit and adapt department
Strategic Plans and MHSA Plans to meet the State (CalOMS) and Federal
(NOMS) performance expectations and accountability standards.
11. Develop a QA/Systems lmplementation/HIPAA/Accountability/Safety function
within the department to meet the growing needs of data collection, IT
responsibilities, security and safety practices, and quality compliance and
consistency across all divisions within the department.
12. Establish a memorandum of understanding (MOU) between NaphCare and
Kings View Corporation to further delineate the provisions of WIC 5150
assessments and transitional and aftercare services to assist an individual
released from incarceration back into the community.
DISCUSSION
The expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Administration budget unit
#422500 is cost applied across four budget units (420000, 420100, 422100, and
422200) in the amount of $1,570,952; Budget Unit #420000 is $7,640,930;
Budget Unit #420100 is $1,421,274; Budget Unit #422100 is $2,780,262; Budget
Unit #422200 is $10,923,465; and Budget Unit #422400 is 0. The combined
total expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Department is $22,765,931
for FY 2016/2017. Revenues for FY 2016/2017 are $22,917,011. In addition, the
department has a mandated MHSA prudent reserve at the County level in the
amount of $2, 138, 118. Net County Costs total is $34,551, which is the MOE total
for this department.
1. Implement 2015-2020 Strategic Plan to include services provided by the
Family Resource Initiative, the School Readiness Initiative, and the
Elevating Early Care and Education (E3) Initiative
2. Continue to implement:
i. Linkages to Learning Program
ii. Backpack to Success Program
iii. New Parent Kit Distribution
3. Provide site visits and technical assistance for all grantees.
4. Update on a regular basis the First 5 Kings County website.
5. Review and revise Strategic Plan for FY 2015-2020 as required by
Proposition 10.
6. Submit all necessary and required reports to State Commission.
7. Develop and begin implementation of Voluntary Home Visitation project to
address the unmet need in Kings County based on the "Voluntary Home
Visiting Data Book: Assessing Need and Access in California" published in
May 2015.
DISCUSSION:
The requested expense budget for the First 5 Unit at the Kings County Health
Department is $2,175,042 for FY 2016/17. This is a increase/decrease of $368,403
from the FY 2015/16 Adopted Budget. The increase/decrease includes increase of
$20,440 in salaries and benefits and $22,520 in operational costs and $325,443 in
program costs from FY 2015/16:
1. Continue with development and implementation of an automated time study system to
reduce current processing time and increase accuracy in the existing manual time
study system.
2. Continue to implement the Fortis document imaging and electronic file system in the
Fiscal and CWS unit. Move towards paperless workflows throughout Fiscal and CWS.
3. Continue to implement a SharePoint Server system to facilitate collaboration and allow
staff to use familiar applications and web-based tools to create, access, store, and
track documents and data in a central location.
4. Implement AB 403 Continuum of Care Reform (CCR): CCR is a comprehensive
reform effort to make sure that youth in foster care have their day-to-day physical, mental, and emotional needs met. The bill also advances California's long-standing
goal to move away from the use of long-term group home care by increasing youth
placement in family settings and by transforming existing group home care into places
where youth who are not ready to live with families can receive short term, intensive
treatment. The county will be preparing for the first phase which is scheduled for
rollout January 1, 2017
5. Fully implement new programs Housing Support Program (HSP), Family Stabilization
Services (FSS), Expanded Subsidized Employment (ESE), Foster Parent Recruitment,
Retention And Support Program (FPRRS), Child and Family Services Review (CFSR),
and Resource Family Approval (RFA).
6. Continue with the aquistion of the new HSA building. The Kings County Commission
on Aging (COA) will be co-located with HSA in this new building.
7. Continue to implement the Linkages program between CWS and ETS.
DISCUSSION
Funding Background:
The requested expense budget for the administration of Social Services, CalWORKs, Cal
Fresh, and Medi-Cal is $46,805,664 for FY 16/17. This is an increase of $5,411,740 from the
FY 15/16 adopted budget. This increase is primarily the result of an increase in salaries and
benefits for the requested positions, an increase in child care, and increases in maintenance
Sl&G for office remodeling. The increase in contract services is due to increases in job
training and outreach and enrollment. The net County cost for Administration is $120,381 and
includes the required match for senior services including nutrition resulting from the contract
with the Kings/Tulare Area Agency on Aging, and the Corcoran modular lease payment. The
budgets for departments 510000 and 520000 reflect the application of $27,178,854 in
Realignment revenue. This reflects the revenue from the 2011 Public Safety Realignment
and the 1991 realignment. No transfers from the Health Realignment trust are planned. The
510000 budget unit for Administration uses $5,033,283 of realignment. The remaining
$22,145,571 of realignment is applied to the 520000 budget unit for Categorical Aid. Social
Services realignment is heavily dependent on State sales tax collections. We are anticipating
similar economic conditions to FY17 and have budgeted accordingly. The unreimbursed cost
for 520000, after the application of available revenues and realignment, is $2,701,432, an
increase in requested County General Fund unreimbursed costs of $307,207 from FY 15/16.
The requested FY 16/17 expense budget for Dept. 520000 is $115,797 less than FY 15/16.
Foster care reform will increase Foster Family Agency (FFA) costs approximately 15%.
These cost increases will be offset by reduced group home placements. The expense budget
request for department 540000 is $193,500, no change from FY 15/16. No changes in
service delivery are anticipated.
With the uncertainties surrounding FY 16/17 funding, it is possible that Human Services
might not receive funding necessary to support this budget as requested. Although the State
budget appears stable, our Agency will proceed with extreme caution into the FY 16/17 budget year. Kings County Human Services Agency has always operated conservatively.
The philosophy of our Agency has been to build staff and service delivery capacity only to the
levels necessary to adequately and reasonably meet the needs of our residents and
community.
1. Facilitate over 25,000 visits to the One-Stop Career Center. Provide case-managed
career technical training, On-the-Job Training, work experience and other
employment, training and placement services for 425 Kings County residents.
2. Exceed performance standards set forth by the U.S. Department of Labor.
3. Effectively respond to business closures impacting Kings County employers and
employees, placing at least 78% of the dislocated workers into jobs or vocational
training.
4. Serve as a primary point of contact for labor market and socio-economic data for
Kings County.
5. Manage the One-Stop Job Center, which includes the JTO/EDC offices, the
Employment Development Department, the State Department of Rehabilitation,
Youth Services, and other education, employment and training partners.
6. Coordinate and administer local, state and federal business incentives which benefit
local businesses and help to attract new jobs and investment into Kings County.
7. Complete the initial Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) strategic plan
for Kings County, and participate in developing the regional workforce development
plan for the Central Valley.
DISCUSSION
Revenue for Workforce Investment Act (WIA) funded programs is subject to the receipt
of federal funding. That funding is anticipated to remain stable through FY '16. Funding
for economic development marketing is provided through a $246,000 contract with the
Kings County Economic Development Corporation (EDC).
JTO's role in coordinating economic development activities in Kings County has
resulted in strong relationships with existing businesses. Our involvement with the
California Central Valley Economic Development Corporation favorably positions Kings
County with real estate brokers and other business location decision makers across the
U.S.
This Department will continue to oversee business incentive programs such as the
Recycling Market Development Zone, the Governor's Economic Development
Incentives, Foreign Trade Zone and the Federal HUB Zone through its association with
the EDC. JTO will continue the operation of a large work experience program in conjunction with
the Kings County Human Services Agency. Funding for this program is anticipated at
$2 million for the fiscal year, and has been included in anticipated revenues. The
objective of this strategy is to support public assistance recipients in gaining work
experience, getting hired, and becoming self-sufficient. The operation of this activity is
dependent upon available funding from the Kings County Human Services Agency.
The major programmatic change for the FY 2016/2017 budget includes fully
transitioning from the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) legislation to the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA).
Changes of significance from the previous budget include the reduction of an Eligibility
Worker and an addition of an Employment and Training Worker in response to more
trainees in the Human Services Agency work experience program. Minor line item
changes include slight increases in rent, adjustments in overhead costs for the OneStop
Job Center, moving a higher percentage to our partner agencies, and adjustments
to internal County services such as Motor Pool and CAP charges. Requested
equipment includes a card swipe system to automate tracking of persons utilizing the
Career Center.
This budget anticipates the receipt of $4,697,865, representing a decrease of roughly
$157,000 from planned 2015-2016 revenues. The FY 2016/2017 budget includes a $2
million work experience program funded through the Kings County Human Services
Agency. Actual funds available to serve Kings County residents are almost identical to
the previous year, due to lower planned carry forward of unexpended funds into FY
2017/2018.
In 2016-2017 the Library plans to complete the following:
 Administrative Services
 Establish a cross-functional team with the librarians by attending the
California State Library, Harwood Institute for Public Innovation -
Innovation Lab for Public Libraries in Sacramento in July 2016.
 Develop a Fund Development Strategy with emphasis on the Lemoore
Branch Library by June 2017.
 Update Library Card and Meeting Room Policy by October 2016.
 Create new baby library Card by December 2016.
 Develop library marketing audit and plan by December 2016.
 Investigate the costs to contract for a security guard at the Hanford Branch
Library by July 2016.
 Branch Services
 Investigate the feasibility of portable electronic devices for mobile
reference, children's and teen services, customer circulation. Share
findings with the Library Advisory Board by October 2016.
 Investigate the feasibility of security cameras at the Hanford Branch
Library. Report findings to the Library Advisory Board by May 2016.
 Purchase and install changing stations at all branch libraries by October
2016.
 Begin "Library Night" at the Thursday Night Market Place from May 2016
through September 2016.
 Collaborate with Sierra Pacific High School and Hanford High School to
present the "Library Road Show" on library resources in Fall 2016 and
Spring 2017.
 Coach and monitor students who are enrolled in the Career Online High
School. Complete by April 2017.
 IT Services
 Explore the possibility of self-service LPTONE printing stations at
Lemoore and Corcoran branch libraries by May 2017.
 Purchase laptops with funds provided by the California State Library for
the Career Online High School program by July 2016.
 Train staff on seven mobile hotspot devices provided by the California
State Library by November 2016.
 Establish Wi-Fi hotspot with the purchase of library furniture and electrical
upgrades at the Avenal Branch Library by November 2016. Funds
provided by the Friends of the Library.
 Through San Joaquin Valley Library System (SJVLS) Lemoore, Stratford,
Hanford, and Kettleman City will transition to the CENIC network, which
will also require the purchase of new routers by June 2017.
 Upgrade all public PC's from Office 2010 to Office 365 by June 2017.
 Materials Management
 Weed the print collections using the system wide weeding process at all
branch libraries by May 2016.
 Update the Collection Development Policy by June 2017.
 Continue to organize and inventory historical photograph collection by
June 2017.
 Attach RFID tags to the library materials that were missed during the initial
RFID installation due to the library materials being checked out by the
public by June 2017.
DISCUSSION
This year's 2016-2017 budget reflects the following major changes:
Services & Supplies
For this fiscal year, the Kings County Library professional and special services will
increase by $56,000 to $205,000. The library is requesting to expend funds for the
following professional and special services. $11,000 increase in membership dues to
San Joaquin Valley Library System for CENIC network installation and new routers for
Lemoore, Kettleman City, and Stratford Branch Libraries; $15,000 for consulting
services to assist in developing a Fund Development/Fundraising Plan with emphasis
on the Lemoore Branch Library; and $30,000 for Security Guard services at the Hanford
Branch Library.
California State Funding
For 2015-2016, the Kings County Library did not receive any Public Library funding
revenue from the California State Library. The 2016-2017 budget year will not include
any Public Library funding revenue from the California State Library.
1. Continue agricultural research to provide local science based information that will
help sustain economic stability in Kings County's major industry.
2. Assist local clientele in the adoption of new technologies for improved production
practices.
3. Develop updated educational tools for use in the Agronomy program. The new
extension materials may be produced in multiple media formats and will focus on
various aspects of Agronomy and nutrient management. Research needs will be
developed to address clientele agronomic problems and needs.
4. Grow and structure the county 4-H program to allow more middle management
opportunities for volunteers to be engaged.
5. Provide nutrition education training, materials and support to classroom teachers in
low-income schools. Develop a School Lunchroom program through new Cal-Fresh
position.
DISCUSSION:
The requested budget for FY 2015-16 is $227,363 unreimbursed County cost. This
amount represents a reduction from 2014-2015 of $11,141. This is the net result of
reducing Clerical staff from the current Executive Secretary, to an Office Assistant 11/111
($13,425), a replacement computer for $1,625 and $3,600 for new vehicle lease for an
Agronomy Advisor. During this year, UC Cooperative Extension will add on a
professional Agronomy Advisor and 4-H Advisor.
The Proposed FY 2016/2017 Budget includes General Fund contributions (Other
Charges) to the Park Budget in the amount of $1,334,507, an increase of $80,396
from FY 2015/2016 Adopted Budget. The increase is due to higher cost in salaries
and benefits as well as cost allocation plan (CAP) charges.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 2007/08. These fees have been
collected since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate
before project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this
budget unit, as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
It was adopted in FY 2010/11 to fund a portion of the Morgue using $390,000 of these
impact fees. In FY 2011/12 the Board approved using $2,290,000 for the housing unit
of the jail. The Board of Supervisors authorized an Impact Fee Justification Study in
FY 2014/15. The study and a construction schedule were presented and adopted by
the Board of Supervisors in January 2016.
At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund for the
proposed budget was $719,818 as of June 30, 2015.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 2007 /08. These fees have been
collected since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate
before project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this
budget unit, as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
The Board of Supervisors authorized an Impact Fee Justification Study in FY 2014/15.
The study and a construction schedule were presented and adopted by the Board of
Supervisors in January 2016. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The
balance in this fund for the proposed budget was $908,757 as of Jun 30, 2015.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 2007/08. These fees have been
collected since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate
before project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this
budget unit, as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
The Board of Supervisors authorized an Impact Fee Justification Study in FY 2014/15.
The study and a construction schedule were presented and adopted by the Board of
Supervisors in January 2016. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The
balance in this fund for the proposed budget was $861,577 as of Jun 30, 2015.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 2007/08. These fees have been
collected since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate
before project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this
budget unit, as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 2010/11 it was adopted that these impact fees will no longer be collected. The
funds in the reserve were adopted to be used on the Sheriffs Evidence space
expansion. Those funds were not used.
The Board of Supervisors authorized an Impact Fee Justification Study in FY 2014/15.
The study and a construction schedule were presented and adopted by the Board of
Supervisors in January 2016. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The
balance in this fund for the proposed budget was $100,496 as of June 30, 2015.
Impact fees first appeared in the budg t in FY 2007/08. These fees have been
collected since 2005, however, time wa needed for sufficient funds to accumulate
before project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this
budget unit, as the construction schedule nd funding levels permit.
In FY 2011/12 the Board suspended c llecting impact fees related animal control
facilities. The Board of Supervisors authorized an Impact Fee Justification Study in FY
2014/15. The study and a construction schedule were presented and adopted by the
Board of Supervisors in January 2016. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves.
The balance in this fund for the proposed budget was $5,337 as of Jun 30, 2015.
On March 17, 2015, the Board of Supervisors authorized an Impact Fee Justification
Study in FY 2014/15. The study and a construction schedule were presented and
adopted by the Board of Supervisors in January 2016. At this time, all funds are setaside
in reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed budget was $29,604 as of
Jun 30, 2015.
In prior years, Administration recommended that your Board contribute the equivalent
amount of the Williamson Act ($2,413,014 in 08/09) to the Capital Projects budget unit
to help to pay for upcoming capital projects. However, due to the serious financial
difficulties at the state, Williamson Act revenue was not budgeted in FY 2009/2010 or
2010/2011, therefore FY 2009/2010 did not show any Williamson Act revenues in the
capital budget, due to the state not appropriating them in FY 2009/2010 and FY
2010/2011. In FY 2011/2012, $623,559 was received due to new revenue generated
by revisions to the term for newly renewed and new Williamson Act and Farmland
Security Zone contracts related to Assembly Bill 1265. It is estimated that the County
will receive $37,350 in FY 2016/2017 for capital projects.
Hazardous Waste Revenues have been budgeted in the capital projects budget in the
past because these revenues have historically been treated as one-time revenue. In
FY 2011/2012 the County received only $211,786 of the $300,000 Budgeted in
Hazardous Waste funds, and all of that was budgeted in the Fire Fund revenues. No
Hazardous Waste funds were included in the FY 2011/2012 or FY 2012/2013 for the
capital project budget. In FY 2012/2013 and FY 2013/2014 it was adopted to budget
the Hazardous Waste Revenues showing a contribution to the Kettleman City Water
project. The projection for FY 2015/2016 is at $350,000, which $150,000 is also
recommended to go towards the Kettleman City Water project.
Other Revenue in the amount of $3,700,000 represents a loan to cover the Human
Services modular building.
Revenue Transfer In of $600,000 includes funding transferred in from the Human
Services Agency for their Lobby/Reception Remodel $75,000, Parking Lot
Improvements of $350,000, and the Avenal Office Expansion $175,000 projects. There is also $29,500 transferred in from the Fleet Fund to cover the Vehicle Lift
project.
The contribution from the General Fund for FY 2015/2016 is a total of $1,908,821.
This includes $39,400 in the AB 1265 Williamson Act/Farmland Security Zone
revenue, $350,000 in hazardous waste taxes, and $1,519,421 in one-time State
Mandate reimbursement funds. For FY 2016/2017 this includes $550,000 in
hazardous waste taxes and $37,300 in AB 1265 Williamson Act/Farmland Security
Zone revenue.
For FY 2016/2017, department requests for capital projects were reviewed by staff
from Public Works, Department of Finance, and County Administration. All on-going
projects will be reviewed at year-end and will appear in the Final budget. The following
are projects which are recommended to be included in the FY 2016/2017 Capital
Budget.
Project 82420015 - Fire System $85,000
This project is a rollover for a Sapphire fire suppression system that will replace the
current Halon fire suppression system in Sheriff's Communications Center.
Project 82420018 - Lobby/Reception Remodel $75,000
This project is to redesign and remodel the customer lobby in Human Services Agency
building #8 in order to improve customer access and improve service.
Project 82420020 - Repair/Replace Roof $100,000
This project is a placeholder for miscellaneous roof projects that are needed around
the county.
Project 82420025 - Disconnect Switch Health $24,000
This project is to move existing water system into a prefabricated building on a slab or
finished floor of the outside of the building at the main health utility closet.
Project 82420028 - Facility Improvement $100,000
This project is for prioritizing in addressing changes in the campus relating to the
American Disability Act (ADA) compliance.
Project 82420032 - Parking Lot/Improvements $350,000
This project is a roll over from FY 15/16, and is a project related to Human Services
Agency improvements.
Project 82420056 - Muffin Monster Grinder $206,000
This project is for replacing the Jail's current muffin monster grinder automatic valve
shutdown; installation of new muffin monster grinder towards the Morgue from the east end of and for the jail; and installation of new muffin monster grinder at the Animal
Services building.
Project 82420059 - Office Expansion $21,500
This project is for an installation of a new doorway at County Counsel, and installation
of a countertop at the Finance building.
Project 82420100 - Staff Parking Lot $43,000
This project is for Jail parking lot to increase parking for staff.
Project 82420101 -Avenal HSA Office Expansion $175,000
This project is to provide office space for six to eight staff interview booths.
Project 82420104- HSA Modular Building $3,700,000
This project is to provide a modular building for Adult Services for the Human Services
Agency.
Project 82440395 - Vehicle Lift - $29,500
This project is for installation of a hoist in order to lift the newer trucks.
Project 82450007 - Success Dam Enlargement $66,000
This project was originally budgeted in FY 2008/2009 and has rolled for the last eight
years.
Project 82420091 - SB 1022 Project $19,239,192
This project is related to the Jail Phase Ill expansion project, and is a rollover from FY
2015/2016. The project was originally budgeted at $20,654,233. It is shown in a
separate budget unit - 700001 KC SB 1022 project but is rolled up into the total
Accumulated Capital Outlay Fund 2000.
Revenues:
 ST Aid - SB 1022 - Kings County was conditionally awarded $20,000,000 in
State SB 1022 funds January 16, 2014, which will be rolled over for FY
2016/2017.
Project 82420057 - New Jail Construction $7.161,789
This project was originally budgeted in FY 2012/2013 at $40,851,606, and is rolled
over to expand the jail to include a new housing unit, medical infirmary, central plant,
and expanded laundry, kitchen, booking, jail administration, and multi-purpose spaces.
This project is funding from the AB 900 Phase II grant, Public Protection Impact Fees,
and through additional financing. This project is now shown in a separate budget unit,
Budget Unit 700002 KC AB 900 Project but is rolled up into the total Accumulated
Capital Outlay Fund 2000. 
Revenues:
BUILDING PROJECTS BUDGET NUMBER 700000 - 700003
 ST Aid -AB 900 - $6,751,636 for FY 2016/2017, Kings County was awarded
a $33,000,000 lease-revenue bond on March 8, 2012 for the expansion of its
jail facility.
Project 82420095 - SB 81 Project $11,493,672
This project is related to the Juvenile Detention Remodel project. The project is
budgeted at $11,663,000. It is shown in a separate budget unit - 700003 KC SB 81
project but is rolled up into the total Accumulated Capital Outlay Fund 2000.
Revenues:
 ST Aid - SB 81 - Kings County was conditionally awarded $9,600,000 in State
lease-revenue bond funding for the project on April 9, 2015, which will be rolled
over for FY 16/17.
 Revenue Transfer In - Behavioral Health contribution anticipated for FY
2016/17 is $600,000 for its program requirements of juveniles in detention.
The scheduled payments for 2016/2017 total $1,371,200 and there is an expense for
the Trustee fee of $2,500, and service fees totaling $3,700. Revenue is generated
through charges to the Retirement accounts for County departments and interest on
deposits totaling $1,377,400. This reflects anticipated lower costs of borrowing, when
compared to PERS charges applied to departments. We are approaching the 12 year
anniversary of the POB issuance. At the time, it was beneficial to issue these bonds
using a variable rate of "One Month Libor plus .30 basis points". The good news is that
the risk continues to pay off in a positive way. Analysis completed by Treasury Staff
shows the actual savings through March 2016 compared to the fixed rate POBs the
County issued is $2,992,227. The current annualized monthly rate charged in March
2016 was at .47%. Because we expect interest rates to begin slowly rising again, we
are continually evaluating the possible savings (if any) of refunding these bonds at a
fixed rate. However, we are very pleased with the success of this variable rate issue,
as we continue to borrow at less than 1.00%.
Since this debt was refinanced at a lower rate a new Budget Unit 900500 was created.
Budget Unit 900200 was eliminated and replaced by 900500.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2016/2017 totals $1,187,779 and includes the Debt Service for three areas where lease
payments are involved:
 The Cogeneration facility lease is budgeted at $284,080, scheduled to be paid
off in January of 2020.
 The 2008 Chevron Energy Project is budgeted at $552, 139, scheduled to be
paid off in July of 2028.
 Covered Parking Solar Project is budgeted at $351,560, scheduled to be paid off
in July of 2027.
For these projects, revenue is generated by charging departments through their "Cost
Applied-Energy Proj" account for the cost of making this annual payment.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2016/2017 totals $487,650 and includes the principal payment of $275,000, interest of
$203, 150, plus service fees of $9,500. The AB 1265 Williamson Act and Farmland
Security Zone payments fund this payment. This bond is scheduled to be paid off in
June of 2029.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2016/2017 totals $676,765 and includes the Debt Service of $470,000 for the principal
payment and $206,765 for the interest. This debt is scheduled to be paid off in June of
2028.
1. PeopleSoft Upgrade - Phase II
The County leverages a software application from PeopleSoft in support of Human
Resources and Finance (payroll) functions. An upgrade from version 9.0 to 9.2 occurred
in FY 15/16, including the activation of the Time and Labor module. In phase II the
County will be adding activity tracking capability, the ability to track recorded time
against specific grants and work assignments.
2. eBenefits System
The employee management system in use by Human Resources and Finance does not
provide the capability for employees to self-service their payroll and benefit needs. ITD
will continue installation of enhancements to the existing system necessary to provide
this self-service capability.
3. Credit Card Clearing System
Currently the County restricts methods of public payment for departmental charges
(taxes, fees, fines, etc.) to checks and cash. ITD will continue the process of adding
technology necessary in support of the Finance Department's effort to add credit cards,
debit cards and electronic checks, including via our Website and the Internet, to the list
of available payment options.
4. HIPAA Data Tracking Compliance
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) requires specific
protections be maintained over all health information which is stored electronically. ITD
will continue deploying controlling technology, which monitors the location and use of
restricted information and helps ensure compliance with related HIPAA regulations.
5. Telephony Features
During the Fiscal Year 2016 / 2017 ITD will continue deploying phase II and phase Ill
advanced features which will allow the County to fully realize the promise of advanced
telephony services.
6. Assessor/Clerk/Recorder Record Management System
The ITD is working closely with the Assessor, Tax Collector, and Auditor Departments
to replace current legacy applications (Property and Clerk/Recorder management
systems) with a new state-of-the-art system provided by the Thomson Reuters
Corporation. Go-live with the new system is scheduled for FY 16/17.
7. Wi-Fi Deployment
The need for WIFI connectivity of handheld devices is growing rapidly. The wireless
infrastructure supporting these mobile devices is undergoing expansion, in terms of
security, availability (number of County office locations) and resiliency from failure.
8. Microsoft SharePoint
The Human Services Agency has requested implementation of the SharePoint System
from Microsoft. The solution advantages employees and the clients they serve by
supporting enhanced collaboration, better case management functionality and the
implementation of a workflow toolset.
9. Application Software Upgrades
Several County support systems take advantage of the computing capability of the
County's mainframe system. Since decommissioning of the mainframe system is
underway, transitioning these functions to more modern software and hardware
environments is a major ITD focus. We will continue working with departmental users of
the various systems involved to eliminate the County's dependency.
10. Server Environment Version Upgrade
A virtual server operating environment upgrade from version 2012 to 2016 is scheduled.
The options available through the new version will add numerous important features
and greatly streamline management of the server hosting system.
11. Telephone System Upgrade
Upgrading the County's telephone system to a virtual environment will reduce the
hardware footprint from 13 servers to 5. This improvement will support the ability to
more fully leverage the County's Storage Area Network.
12. Telephony System Enhancement
Implementation of Avaya Communicator for Lyne; This will give departments the ability
to control telephone functions directly from their computer.
13. Server Attached Network (SAN) Storage
Replacing the County's Storage Area Network, and not continuing to pay maintenance
for our current SAN, will save the County nearly $125,000 over the next 5 years.
14. Email Upgrade
Upgrade to Microsoft Exchange 2016, which is projected to save the County $500,000+
over the next 7 -8 years.
15. Threat Behavior Analysis
McAfee Network Threat Behavioral Analysis Deployment - Inspection and Security of
East-West traffic that doesn't currently touch our boundary security.
16. Secondary Internet Connection
The county currently connects to the internet through the Kings County Office of
Education on a 100MB connection. A second 100MB internet connection will be put in
place for redundancy and use of additional bandwidth to support our growing
requirements.
17.Active Directory
Beginning the upgrade of the Kings County Active Directory Domain to 2012 r2
18. Operating System Upgrade
Planning upgrade of the County's Virtual Server Farm to Microsoft operating system
version 2016
19. Windows 10
Preparing for the upgrade of workstation operating systems to Windows 10
SPECIAL DISCUSSION NOTE:
While the focus of effort is customer service, the Information Technology Department
must plan for keeping the County's technology infrastructure current and secure.
Ongoing Federal and State audits focused on data security will continue intensifying
over the next several of years. We expect the increased attention to result in additional
requirements that ultimately change how the County leverages technology. The County,
through efforts of the ITD, is currently ahead of many other Central Valley counties -
however, the new rules will result in even more restrictions on how we protect
technology assets and how they are used.
The FY 2016/2017 Liability Self-Insurance Budget is requested at $1,161,721, a
decrease of $19,861 from last year. This request includes funding of administrative
and claims costs as well as funding catastrophic reserves.
The Revenue Transfer In is from the General Fund, Budget Unit 141000, Insurance.
Effective July 1, 2004, the Board of Supervisors approved a self-funded health
insurance program for all medical benefits as opposed to only self-funding the vision
and dental components of the plan as in the past.
In December, 2005 a $900,000 loan from the General Fund was transferred to the
Health Insurance Fund for cash flow purposes. This loan was completely paid off in
the 2007 /2008 Fiscal Year.
In July 2008, the County implemented a Wellness Program. In 2008 we began the
Wellness Program with 481 participants. This number has increased over the years
and in FY 2015/2016, there were 503 participants, which included employees, their
spouses and their over 18 year old dependents as well as retirees and COBRA
participants.
Currently the Health Insurance Fund is projecting a fully funded reserve. The County
agreed to absorb the employee's increase in premium up to $500,000 over two fiscal
years, 2014/15 and 2015/16. The amount contributed from reserves in the first two
fiscal years totaled approximately $280,000, leaving a balance of $220,000 for Health
Insurance premium increases in FY 2016/2017. Offsetting the employee portion of
increases with this $220,000 will end the obligation of the County to utilize any portion
of reserves, but it is an ongoing obligation of the County to assume these reserve
contributions as part of the County's share of future contributions. Rolling forward last year's contribution from reserves into the County's share of the premiums, together
with the cost of fully paid premiums for Management employees, results in an
increased cost to the County of approximately $563,000 in FY 2016/2017.
In April, 2014, the County approved the on-site Kings County Employee Health Center.
The facility opened on October 1, 2014 and is available to employees who are in the
Kings County Health Plan as well as their spouses, dependents, retirees and Cobra
participants. The costs for the Health Facility will be funded out of the Health
Insurance Reserve account.
The 2016/2017 Budget for the Self-Insured Insurance Plan is $14,242,426. This is an
increase from the 2015/2016 budget of $997,828 due to claims running approximately
13% over the same period last year and the renewal impact o the current rate matrix is
4.5% overall. This increase will result in the employees' share increasing by $220,000,
but totally offset by utilizing excess reserves consistent with Labor Agreements, and
the County's share increasing by $563,000.
Kings County opened this on-site Health Center on October 1, 2014. Insurance
Advisory Members recommended that Kings County open an on-site health facility to
the Board of Supervisors. In April, 2014, the Board of Supervisors approved the health
facility, with Medcor as the vendor. The Health Center has been widely accepted by the
employees and their dependents as well as retirees and Cobra participants. The facility
is averaging 390 patients per month and those numbers continue to increase.
The health facility is located in Building 5 at the Kings County Health Department. The
facility is open Monday through Friday and the last Saturday of the month, with varying
hours to accommodate the employees' work schedules. The employees are not
required to use their sick time for their own appointments, do not have to pay a copay,
and do not have to meet the insurance deductible for services provided by the health
facility.
The contractual cost for FY 2016/2017 is $590,135 which includes a 3% increase from
2015/2016 contract and some additional hours if necessary. Other costs associated
with the Health Center are as follows: miscellaneous charges budgeted at $1,000,
Medical supplies which include labs, some prescription drugs and medical supplies
budgeted at $45,000, office supplies budgeted at $2,000; Janitorial budgeted at $9,000;
and Utilities budgeted at $8,000. The requested budget for FY 2016/2017 is $655,135.
This is a reduction from the Adopted 2015/2016 Budget of $39,365 because costs did
not reach budgeted figures.
Based on the figures that our Health Insurance Broker/Consultants are estimating, we
will see a reduction in claims costs in the Health Insurance Fund in FY 2015/2016. There will be a report on return of investment produced during the 2016/2017 fiscal
year.
Workers' Compensation claims have continued to increase over the past several
years. The total cost for claims for FY 2013/2014 were $2,542,702, FY 2014/2015
cost for claims was $3,447,104, and for FY 2015/2016 year to date, claims costs are
$2,893,131. We are working diligently to try and keep claims to a minimum, however,
the costs associated with the claims continue to rise due to new legislation and the
costs associated with the more severe injuries. The Workers' Compensation Budget
is recommended at $4,265,371 for FY 2016/2017. There is $4,100,000 in costs that
are zeroed out because they are cost applied to individual department budgets to
reflect those departments' Workers' Compensation insurance premiums. The majority
of the remaining costs are offset by insurance proceeds on former employees whose
costs are borne by an excess insurance policy and a projected transfer from the
General Fund of $92,721.
This Budget Unit is a summary showing the total cost Countywide for Workers'
Compensation insurance coverage.
Administration:
1. Assist all divisions in securing grants to address services/equipment that cannot
be provided currently due to funding shortages.
2. Continued involvement in the San Joaquin Valley Clean Energy Organization as
a means of keeping up- to-date on available grants and energy saving programs
3. Have each Division prioritize the tasks/services/projects that need to be done by
identifying those tasks or projects that cannot be completed with current
available funding.
4. Continue to monitor all maintenance operations to ensure courteous, prompt,
and professional response to requests and complaints. Respond quickly to
comments and/or inquiries by members of the public or members of the Board of
Supervisors.
5. Continue to assist County Administration in the implementation of policies to
ensure cost effective use of vehicles; and to establish the most cost effective
fleet size.
6. Assist County Administration and represent the County's needs with respect to
the design and construction of County facilities.
7. Have divisions continue to work with the Human Resources department in the
preparation of evaluations and disciplinary procedures.
8. Continue to provide oversight on various construction projects. Work closely with
other departments, Administration and outside agencies to ensure timely and
cost effective completion of each project.
9. Provide timely personnel, accounting, fiscal and administrative services to all
Public Works Divisions and County Departments.
10. Direct the implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act Transition and
Self-Evaluation Plans.
Roads & Bridges:
1. Continue to maintain the roads and bridges in a safe condition. Continue to
provide a timely response to all road complaints and call back issues.
2. Complete the annual centerline and edge line restriping prior to onset of winter.
3. Complete the annual night time sign survey program.
4. Implement the transition plan for ADA compliance. Use approximately $100,000
from Road Fund to design and construct improvements within the road system to
comply with ADA requirements.
5. Sweep debris from bicycle routes when needed. Place additional warning signs
along roadways with bicycle routes.
6. Replace the bridge on 16th Ave. at the Tulare Lake Canal. The existing timber
bridge will be replaced with a multi cell box culvert. The project is 100% funded
thru FHWA. The project should begin in fall/winter 2016. The project will cost
approximately $1.4 million. The Road Fund will front the funding of progress
payments and then be reimbursed by FHWA thru Cal Trans.
7. Reconstruct five road segments associated with the Kettleman City Safe Route
to Schools Projects. Inspection and management so the project will be provided
by the Engineering Division. Roads Division will fund the approximate $600,000
of the road construction portion of the project. The SRTS grants will fund the
approximate $500,000 of the construction of curb, gutters, and sidewalks. The
Road Fund will cover the monthly progress payments with reimbursement from
the State and Federal grants for the SRTS improvements. Construction is
scheduled to start in June of 2016.
8. Construct road improvements at 13th Ave. and Lacey Blvd. The project consists
of bridge widening and the construction of traffic signals with new road
approaches. The construction costs are estimated at $1.1 million. The Road
Fund will pay approximately $200,000 of project costs and will also front the
money for progress payments and then seek reimbursement from FHWA thru
Cal Trans for the bulk of the costs. The project should begin construction phase
circa Jan. 2017.
9. Reconstruct Shaw Place along the new Home & Garden Park. The Road Fund
will cover the cost of the road project estimated at $125,000.
10. Prepare the plans and specifications for the rehabilitation of asphalt surfacing on
the Avenal Cut-off Road at various locations. Construction is proposed for
summer 2017. The estimated cost will be $1.5 million.
11. Construct road improvements at various locations per the plans & specs of the
Highway Safety Improvement Projects (HSIP). The construction cost will total
approximately $700,000 and will be 100% reimbursable thru FHWA and Cal
Trans. Roads will front the money to cover progress payments. The project will
be constructed in late fiscal year 2016/2017.
12. The Roads Division will construct chip seals on 50 miles of County Roads. The
project cost is estimated at $750,000.
13. Reconstruct (A) Home Ave. between 10th Ave. and 4th Place (B) 1st Place
between Home Ave. and Garden Dr. The road reconstruction will cost $300,000
to the Road Fund. The construction of curb, gutters, and sidewalk will be funded
by the Community Development Block Grant at a cost of $500,000. The Road
Fund will front the CDBG portion of monthly progress payments and then seek
reimbursement from the State. The project must be built in the spring/summer of
2016.
14. Prepare the plans and specifications and construct the Hot Mix Asphalt overlay
on (A) Jersey between 17th and 18th (B) 18th Ave. between Jersey and Central
Union School. Project costs are estimated at $1.2 million dollars and will be
funded from the Road Fund. The project will be constructed in Sept. 2017.
15. Prepare plans and spec's for 1st phase of the Bridge Preventative Maintenance
Program.
16. Construct the Section 130 Safety Improvements to the BNSF crossings on
Kansas Ave.
17. Prepare plans and spec's and constructs slurry seal or micro surfacing seal on
various residential streets. The project cost will be approximately $350,000.
Construction will be in Sept. 2016.
Parks & Grounds:
1. Carry on with our provision of safe and enjoyable parks that the public and
schools can enjoy while maintaining cooperation with the Burris Park Foundation and our common goal of further developing the Burris Park Outdoor Learning
Center.
2. Continue to develop the Parks Division web page by activating online reservation
software and posting images of museum artifacts for the purpose of drawing in
more visitors to the park and generating revenue.
3. Continue to perform quality maintenance on County grounds while focusing our
efforts on water conservation by transforming inefficient turf areas to a more
drought tolerant landscape. This will be accomplished by planting climate
appropriate trees and plants watered by drip line and deep-root bubblers instead
of pop up sprays.
4. Continue to search for grant opportunities and comply with grants received.
5. Surrounding the recently installed play equipment at the north end of Burris Park
will be two additional picnic areas. This will be accomplished by splitting one
large 18 table area that is rarely used into 3, 6 table areas making the north end
of Burris Park more inviting and financially accessible.
Fleet Management:
1. We will continue to provide the best available technology on our over the road
diesel trucks.
2. Continue monitoring equipment usage and em1ss1on standards of fleet to
maintain an environmentally friendly and mechanically sound inventory of
equipment and vehicles.
3. Continue to meet State and Federal air pollution requirements and look at the
most beneficial areas to improve with regards to making every dollar spent
improve our environmental impact.
4. Take advantage of as many grant opportunities as practicable to provide
technology upgrades to equipment to ensure compliance with regulations.
5. Continue to add alternative fuel vehicles to the County fleet, while striving to find
grant funding that can assist in the purchasing of alternative fuel vehicles.
Building Maintenance:
1. Building Maintenance will continue to perform interior and exterior repairs to
county buildings and structures. 
2. Continue to perform preventative maintenance to all equipment and tools used to
maintain county buildings.
3. Maintenance to building utility rooms and main switchgear will continue.
4. Flat Top Mountain repeater station will continue with preventative maintenance
agreement.
5. Office staff will continue inputting and tracking of work orders through the TMA
system.
6. Office staff will implement keying inventory by electronic method into TMA.
7. Ongoing janitorial duties will continue to include dusting, vacuuming and
sanitization of all buildings.
8. In house training of janitorial staff will continue.
9. Preventative maintenance of all HVAC equipment will continue.
10. Solar array wash down and preventative maintenance will continue.
11. Maintenance managers and supervisors will continue training and obtaining
certificates in asbestos abatement and insecticide spraying techniques.
12. Building maintenance management and supervisors will continue to write job
specifications for related remodel projects and will continue to apply the design,
bid and build method.
13. Expand the Central Plant office area to allow for better work spaces for staff and
allow an area for all blueprints to be stored and easily accessible.
14. Look at other energy programs that may offer future savings for the County.
Engineering (Surveyor):
1. Provide training to the new engineers to manage the Pavement Management
System database in order to analyze the maintenance needs of the County road
network to a greater extent.
2. Continue to provide contract management services to other departments.
3. Continue to maintain the traffic collision database and proactively use the program to provide analysis and recommend corrective action when warranted to
improve traffic safety on County roads.
4. Pursue the abandonment of minor roads where appropriate and as time allows.
5. Provide construction project management on major and minor projects.
6. Provide engineering design comments on land development projects being
processed by the Community Development Agency.
7. Continue to seek outside funding sources for major road construction and
maintenance projects. Our goal remains to utilize Federal/State funds to pay for
our design, right of way, environmental, construction, and County staff costs to
the greatest extent possible.
8. Administer two (2) Highway Safety Improvement Program (HSIP) project grants
which are currently at 30% design.
9. Administer the Bridge Preventative Maintenance Program (BPMP) which has
been recently approved. The current task at hand is to prepare plans and
specifications to implement the maintenance activities as defined in the BPMP.
10.Administer Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) project for curb,
gutter, and sidewalk on the south side of Home Avenue in Home Gardens which
is currently under construction.
11.Administer the 13th Avenue and Lacey Boulevard Signalization project which is
currently at 100% design with Right of Way acquisition in process. Construction
is anticipated for summer of 2016.
12. Administer the Kettleman City Safe Routes to School Project which is currently at
100% design with Right of Way Certification in process.
13.Administer the 16th Avenue Bridge at Tulare Lake Canal replacement project
which is currently at 100% design with Right of Way acquisition in process.
Construction is anticipated for fall of 2016.
14.Administer the Kansas Avenue at BNSF Section 130 Safety Enhancement
project which is currently at 30% design. Construction is anticipated for fall of
2016.
Administration:
Salaries and retirement costs are increased this year due to step increases. The CAP
charge has increased significantly.
Roads & Bridges:
The reduction in the State Excise Tax on fuel (HUTA 2013) has resulted in a revenue
decrease of approximately $1.2 million to Kings County Roads Fund. The 2015/2016
budget anticipated this loss and estimated the Roads Revenue at $7.6 million. The
Division planned to use almost $5.0 million from Roads Revenue to meet the estimated
expenditures of $12,103,362. However, many large and costly projects were not
constructed in 2015/2016. Their revenue and corresponding expenditures were not
realized. The actual revenue is estimated at $6,275,778. Roads estimates that it spent
$2,219,151 from the Roads Fund reserve to cover the estimated total expenditures of
$8,494,929.
The proposed 2016/2017 Roads budget must show an additional loss of $500,000 in
the State Excise Tax component of the Highway Users Tax Account (HUTA Section
2103). The proposed 2016/2017 Budget for the Roads Division estimates Revenue at
$9,407,000. The Division will use approximately $2,696,362 from the Road Fund
Reserve to meet the estimated expenditures of $12,103,362.
AB 720 continues to have an impact on the operation of the Roads Division. This law
went into effect on Jan. 2013 and limits the amount of road reconstruction work that can
be done with County forces. Roads Division has been forced to contract out more work
at higher costs. There are two specific issues about this statute that concern the
division. First, the State Controller's Office (SCO) determines which projects are
labeled as reconstruction. It is possible that our crews do work assuming it does not fall
under AB 720 restrictions, only to have the SCO determine otherwise and thus being a
technical violation of AB 720. Secondly, AB720 requires a local agency to declare its
intent to do work by force account in advance of doing the work. It is not unusual for an
opportunity to arise whereby the Roads Division can acquire recycled material and only
pay freight costs. If the material is located such that it can be incorporated on a
particular project, and cannot be stored, we would want to make use of the offer of
material. AB 720 would not allow this if time is a consideration. Therefore, to allow the
maximum flexibility to the Roads Division, and to avoid a technical violation of AB 720,
Public Works would like to use this budget to declare its intent to use force account
labor to the maximum extent allowed under AB 720.
Parks & Grounds:
The Division continues to recognize the State of California water crisis and has gone
above and beyond requirements set forth by the governor to reduce water usage.
Irrigation timers have been cut back 33% to 75% and turf areas such as medians have
been cut back all-together to make way for a more water-wise landscaping. Having
saved approximately1 ,000 gallons of water per week last summer by removing the turf
adjacent to the entrance to the county Government Center and replacing it with three
Chinese Pastiche trees and rubberized decorative bark the County Parks Division
saved approximately 18,000 gallons of water during the summer months in an area
approximately 2,600 square feet.
In a continuing effort to stretch our budget dollars, the Division utilized the Sheriffs
Alternative Sentencing Workers, AB 109 program and Proteus Temporary Work
Services to help maintain our areas. The addition of a Museum Curator at the Kings
County Museum at Burris Park has been instrumental in making the Museum available
for park visitors. The 500 hours allocated to this position proved adequate for the 2015
park season. The Parks Division is requesting an increase of $60,793 for fiscal year
16/17 due to an increase in Health Insurance, Workers Compensation, and Capital
charges. The Division has maintained great relationships with members of the public
that resulted in more special event use and attention for the County Parks and its
amenities. Future events considered include hosting high school proms, car shows, and
Jazz Festivals, in addition to the ongoing programs with the Sheriffs Posse, Burris Park
Foundation, Kings County Commission On Aging, and other groups.
Fleet Management:
The Fleet Division has completed the Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) station upgrade
to help meet its goals for clean fuel. Motor pool is adding (3) new electric vehicles this
budget year with funding from San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District. They
are also planning to send staff to training to stay current on the maintenance and
repairs of the new environmentally friendly vehicles. We will be sending staff to training
on CNG fuel systems and on all electric and hybrid electric vehicles. Staff is actively
looking for grants or any funding available for Electric Vehicle Charging Stations to
install at Motor pool. The Division is planning to meet with each County Department
individually in January to discuss their future needs. We were able to meet with all
departments last December and were able to provide two departments with vehicles for
transportation to and from the new courthouse at a minimal cost to those departments.
Building Maintenance:
The Division's objectives and goals are to provide exceptional Janitorial as well as
Building Maintenance for all County locations and facilities. The division will continue to
supply a conditioned air supply during hot and cold seasons to ensure a comfortable
working environment. This year $50,000 has been allocated towards ADA repairs and
compliances as well as the equivalent of % time building maintenance position. Due to
an increase in added square footage to be maintained additional staffing has been
requested. The revitalizing of carpet and tile has been implemented and the janitorial staff will implement a floor care crew which will maintain both carpet and tile. In doing
so, this will eliminate external contractor cost.
Engineering (Surveyor):
The Engineering Division has seen a steady increase in work load over the last couple
budget years in the form of Capital Improvement projects, State and Federally funded
projects, Roads Division projects, Building Maintenance projects, Parks and Grounds
projects, and various grants. The Division currently has seventeen (17) active projects
in various stages of development with an additional seven (7) in the pre-programming
stage. Approximately 85% of these projects are supported by outside government
funding either from the State of California (Caltrans), Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA), or grant funding such as the Community Development Block Grant. The
reimbursement rates for these grants and funds ranges between 20%-100% with the
overwhelming majority qualifying for 88.53% reimbursement. Included in the eligible
reimbursable tasks are; consultant acquisition costs, consultant fees, Right of Way
acquisition costs, construction costs, and County staff time required to initiate, manage,
and administer the public contracts from inception to completion. As such, a significant
portion of staff costs when working on these projects is bourn by sources outside of the
County.
The Engineering Division is currently staffed with five individuals; 1) Chief Engineer
managing the division's work load and work product, project initiation and programming,
project funding acquisition, project design, and project management, 2) & 3) two newly
hired Engineer I (Civil) performing project management, fund reimbursement, and
training, 4) Engineering Technician II performing construction inspection, and managing
the traffic data base including stop warrant analysis for intersections, 5) Engineering
Technician II administering Right of Way maps, performing development permit review,
performing survey map review for technical accuracy and statutory compliance,
assisting the public when researching Right of Way maps, processing encroachment
permit applications, and performing encroachment permit field inspections.
A quick survey of public agencies adjacent to or in the proximity of Kings County
includes City of Hanford, City of Lemoore, City of Visalia, City of Fresno, City of Clovis,
Fresno County, Tulare County, and Kern County shows Kings County's rate of
compensation between 10% to 30% less than its competitors depending on position
and agency when comparing job titles and descriptions. In order to recruit, train, and
maintain quality professionals and sub-professional whom will provide a link to the
future and enable succession planning, the Division respectfully requests a parity study
or salary study for both the engineering class and the technician class to take place
within the 2016/17 Fiscal budget year.
As the Engineering Division has changed and project levels have increased so have our
needs for equipment. Over a decade ago, the Engineering Division acquired a
Chevrolet S-10 mini-truck to be utilized for construction, construction inspection, and encroachment permit inspection work. This vehicle has served the department well
however it has become increasingly expensive to maintain due to its age, high mileage,
and extensive use in the field. Consequently, the Public Works Department has spent
over $15,000.00 on maintenance for this vehicle over the course of ownership. As
such, the vehicle bears reduced functionality and diminished reliability. The Department
respectfully requests to replace the inspector's vehicle with a mid-size or full-size quad
cab truck with a short bed sufficient to carry three or more individuals. The new truck
would be utilized for project site reviews, construction, construction inspection,
encroachment permit inspection, and the annual night time sign survey.
