1. Continue implementation of County priorities in the following areas: Promote the
role of agriculture; communicate county goals and objectives to employees and the
public; develop a long range plan for meeting future infrastructure needs; maximize
financial resources and opportunities; ensure an efficient and productive work
force; manage information resources effectively; provide effective and efficient
delivery of county services; support economic development; and promote programs
for healthy children and families.
2. Continue discussions with city councils and other local government entities
regarding most efficient means of delivering mutually provided services.
DISCUSSION:
This years Requested expenditure budget of $761,094 is $39,612 more than last
year's Budget of $721,482. The Board of Supervisors had two long term employees
retire and an increase in travel to continue to monitor the California High Speed Rail
project and current drought conditions with Board members attending meetings in
Sacramento and Washington, D.C. to meet with Legislators on those topics. The
Board of Supervisors and their staff work very hard to keep costs down and will strive
to continue that effort in the future.
In FY 15/16, the County is projecting to receive $2,935,082 more in discretionary
revenue than what was budgeted in FY 14/15. This represents an overall 6.3%
increase in revenues. We are projecting FY 15/16 taxes based on FY 14/15 estimated
actuals which includes an increase in Property Taxes of $500,000. Sales and Use Tax
is projected to end the 14/15 'fiscal year $550,000 higher than budgeted due to
increases in the sale of Solar and are projected to be $700,000 higher then FY 14/15
for the 15/16 fiscal year. With the approval of the permits for the Waste Management
Facility, the Hazardous Waste taxes that were budgeted at $150,000, are now
estimated to be $500,000 for FY 15/16. The first $150,000 of these funds are still
committed toward a trust fund set up for building a reserve for the Kettleman City Water
Project.
Use of Money and Property increases only slightly due to the continued record low
interest rates. The projected interest earnings are still 3.6% lower than the Actual
earnings in FY 13/14.
Intergovernmental Revenue is expected to increase by 10.6%, or $103,875. This
increase is due to a projected $100,000 increase in reimbursement of State Aid - Land
Conservation or Williamson Act fees. Charges for services, which are CAP charges, have increased by $600,007 from FY
14/15, for a total of $2,935,082 per information from the Department of Finance.
1. Budget constraints, which have been exacerbated by the drought and cautious
optimism, are both realities as the continuing recession continue recovery.
While Administration was focused primarily on "living within our means" in
2014/2015, we are now faced with having to make recommendations regarding
funding the increases due to ACA, AB 109 and the new facilities being brought
on-line.
2. Continue to pursue funding for the Kettleman City Water project jointly with the
Kettleman City Community Services District. A Letter of Dissolution was sent to
the State Department Redevelopment Agency as all debts have been paid off
through the Successor Agency to the County Redevelopment Agency, also known as the former Kings County Redevelopment Agency. Final approval was
received in 2014/15.
3. Pursue with the Sheriff, District Attorney, Chief Probation Officer and the Courts,
the implementation of new State laws requiring the incarceration, treatment and
application of other means necessary to handle low-level criminals at the local
level and seek additional realignment funds.
DISCUSSION:
For Administration, the Requested Budget totals $962,597. This is an increase in
expenditures from the 2014/2015 Adopted Budget of $82,329. The increases are due
to Salaries and Benefit increases of $53,212, of which $13,332 is for the requested
reclassification of the Risk Analyst to Risk Manager and a total of $34,101 in Other
Charges, which are the charges to our department for replacement computers and ongoing
contracts. The unreimbursed county cost for the department went from $785,287
in the Adopted FY 14/15 budget to $867,616 in the Proposed FY 15/16. This is an
increase in unreirnbursed cost of $82,329 as explained above.
 Completion of our audited Annual Financial Report by December 31 st.
 Submit application and receive the GFOA Award for Financial Reporting.
 Review and establish procedures to achieve monthly financial reporting.
 Continue and develop additional training sessions for County fiscal personnel.
 Develop and implement Internal Audit function.
 Create accounting policies and guidelines for countywide consistency.
 Monitor and timely file all State audits.
 Ensure all State/Federal mandatory reporting requirements are timely and accurate.
 Conduct May phone campaign for tax-defaulted properties.
 Conduct annual tax sale of tax-defaulted properties (if needed).
 Implementation of a third party vendor for county acceptance of credit/debit cards.
 Manage the Kings County Investment Pool in such a manner as to ensure safety,
liquidity and return a market rate.
 Assist agencies with debt issuance.
 Continue cross training of Finance Department staff.
 Provide responsive and courteous service to the public and other
departments/agencies.
 Provide input for best practices for implementing the Auditor and Tax Collector modules
of the new comprehensive Property Tax system (Aumentum).
 Complete implementation of PeopleSoft 9.2 and Time and Labor for time reporting and
payroll processing.
DISCUSSION:
The Department of Finance expects to complete fiscal year 2014/15 at a total cost of
$2,765,480 a decrease of $176,696 from the budgeted amount of $2,942,176. Our
actual un-reimbursed cost is estimated to be $1,945,768 or $178,408 less than the budgeted cost of $2,124,176. Savings of $105,364 from Salaries and Benefits and
$71,182 from Services & Supplies helped boost our budget variance. We had a few
positions vacant for a good part of the year which helped us come under budget in
Salaries. Lower IT costs as well as underused professional services make up the
majority of our savings in Services & Supplies. Revenues are estimated to be $1,712
over budget primarily due to the receipt of rebates for our E-Payables program.
For FY 2015/16, the Department of Finance is requesting a budget with a total cost of
$2,982,304, revenue of $909,105 and an unreimbursed cost of $2,073,199. This is
down from the FY 2014/15 Adopted Budget by $100,977. Salaries and Benefits are
requested to decrease by $46,759 due the elimination of $50,000 in extra help, which
was appropriated in FY 14-15 for assistance with the PeopleSoft upgrade.
Total Services and Supplies and Other Charges are requested at $1,455,022, up
$24,187 from last year's adopted amount. The majority of this increase is due to the
elimination of $18,000 in Cost Applied received in FY 14/15 from HSA for the
PeopleSoft project. All other accounts remained consistent with the prior year.
Department Revenue is expected to increase by $95,605 compared to last year's
budget. This increase is mainly reflected in our Other Revenue account as a result of
our E-Payable rebates as well as Audit Fees and a projected increase on the Cost on
Delinquent Tax.
The specific projects that were originally budgeted in the 2006/07 fiscal year included
$100,000 for an applicant tracking software program for Human Resources and
$500,000 toward replacement of the County's Financial and Budget systems, as well as
a security evaluation.
During the 2006/07 fiscal year, the applicant tracking software was purchased and
installed at Human Resources.
In FY 2008/09, the FMS (Financial Management System) was updated, and costs
associated with this project appeared in this budget unit. The upgrade was completed
in 2009/2010. Also in FY 2009/10, an upgrade to People Soft software was completed.
Both of these projects were completed, but this budget unit is now being used again for
upgrades to the County's PeopleSoft system from 9.0 to 9.2 and for the implementation
of the Time and Attendance modules. This represents the General Fund cost of the
projects and shows the offset of revenues from Human Services, where applicable.
The Professional and Specialized Services line is for the 21 Tech consulting for the
Property Tax system data conversion and the Contractual Services line is for projected
costs associated with implementation, above the on-going maintenance needed, to be contracted for with LCS Consultants for the PeopleSoft Upgrade. This is able to be
charged to Human Services at 36% which is the ($54,000) in Cost Applied.
1. Implement negotiated agreements with each bargaining unit as they expire in
the coming fiscal year. Continue discussions on various issues that arise
throughout the year that are mandatory subjects of bargaining.
2. Maintain and update as necessary the County Salary Resolution, which
includes details on unrepresented management benefits.
3. Conduct reorganization, classification and compensation reviews, as needed, to
accurately reflect the changing needs of the departments and to increase the
efficiency of County government.
4. Continue mandated AB 1825 bi-annual training on sexual harassment
prevention.
5. Develop and administer additional training for supervisors and staff on everyday
administration of personnel policies and procedures in order to expand the
effective understanding of these policies and procedures. This will include an
evaluation of the manner in which training is and can be delivered.
6. Continue to review, evaluate, update and re-publish the County Personnel
Rules and Policies as conditions dictate.
7. Update the County's pre-employment physical standards in cooperation with the
County Health Officer. These changes will be reviewed with the impacted
unions prior to being brought to the Board for approval. This was a planned
activity in the prior fiscal year, but priorities dictated that it be put off until this
coming fiscal year.
8. Complete the PeopleSoft upgrade and implementation of the Time and Labor
system discussed above.
9. Perform a solicitation process intended to lead to formal contracts for preemployment
and DOT drug and alcohol testing vendor(s).
10. Evaluate current agreements with external agencies that are currently receiving
services from Human Resources and initiate new contracts where appropriate.
11. Continue to evaluate methods to enhance recruitment processing efficiencies.
This will include assessing alternative screening methods and leveraging the
tools in the NEOGOV system not currently being used to full capacity. This
process will be augmented by sending Technician Staff to the annual NEOGOV
conference, which will facilitate training and networking opportunities in the
community of system users.
DISCUSSION:
The industry standard for Human Resources staffing as a ratio to number of employees
supported is typically 1:100. With 1298 FTE's employed as of February of 2015 and a
total of 1405 allocated FTE's, the staffing level should be 13-14 employees in the
Human Resources Department. The current allocation of 7.5 FTE's in Human
Resources puts staffing at 57% of standard at the 13 FTE level. Services to both
departments and the public are impacted. One of the areas greatly affected by this
shortage is the recruiting process. Recruiting needs are increasing. As ancillary
impacts of AB 109 and the passage of Proposition 47 continue to require the
development of new services and increasing of existing services, it is antiCipated that
justice realignment will continue to impact current resource levels in the department in
an adverse manner. Currently, Analysts have to assist in administering recruitments in
order to keep requisitions moving through the queue and get positions filled. This takes
away from their ability to complete complicated and critical classification, compensation,
and job specification work. It also affects their ability to respond to departmental
requests for assistance in areas such as disciplinary action and interactive process activities. In essence, it takes away from the Analysts' ability to be effective
professional level staff.
As the recruiting process is such a key element to servicing both departments and the
work seeking public, it is requested that a full-time Personnel Technician 1111 position be
allocated to the Human Resources Department, to be recruited and filled at the
Technician I, Step I level. As Human Services continues to be impacted by justice
realignment and continues to seek to expand to meet these unanticipated impacts, the
Human Services Director has offered to pay 75% of the cost for the requested position,
including the provision of office furnishings. The new Technician would be dedicated to
Human Service Agency recruiting activities 75% of the time and it is anticipated that this
is a conservative estimate of time allocation.
Until the fiscal emergency in 2008, there were 2 full-time Personnel Assistants in the
Human Resources Department. The department worked with 1.0 FTE in this position
until some AB109 funding was allocated to restore the position to .5 FTE. Current
staffing for these positions is 1.5 FTE's. As discussed above, recruiting activity
continues to increase and next year is expected to see additions of positions because
of justice realignment. The recruitment volume has intensified the impact to the front
desk.
Many positions recruited require the scheduling of screening committees, oral panels,
and written examinations due to the large number of applicants. The 1.5 FTE
Personnel Assistant positions schedule appointments for screening committee
members and oral board panel members, schedule applicants and greet them as they
arrive for a particular process. They field questions from the public regarding
recruitments. They set up rooms for oral panels and testing events. The Personnel
Assistants enter results of each step of the recruitment process (Le., written test results,
oral exam scoring, screening committee exam scores) into the NEOGOV system. They
send all notifications to applicants at various steps of the recruitment process relative to
whether or not they are continuing in the process. They screen to ensure all
documentation is included from each applicant and prepare them for the Personnel
Technicians that are processing the recruitments. These documents include typing
certificates, POST certificates, documents that verify education, licensure verification,
and specific skill certifications. All documents need to be filed or otherwise attached to
each individual applicant file, physically and/or electronically. This increased volume of
applicants and processing the associated application documents has become
problematic. Even though applications are predominantly done online, many applicants
do not scan and include supplemental documents with their electronic application. This
marrying of documents to electronic application is ideally done early in the process to
facilitate more efficient screening of minimum qualifications. There are inefficiencies
that are inherent with the current conditions. Included in the budget request this year is
an increase in public safety realignment funding in order to pay for the .5 FTE increase.
Additional modifications have been made to various services and supplies accounts to
reflect our most recent expenditure experience primarily driven by the costs of
recruitment activity discussed above. Notable changes in this budget category include an increase of $5,000 to Fitness Examinations due to recruitment testing budget costs
in the current Fiscal Year and projections for next Fiscal Year. An increase of $20,000
to Contract Employee Relations as all Memorandums of Understanding with the
County's eight unions will require negotiation in the next fiscal year. An increase of
$5,000 is requested in the Personnel Testing, again related to current year
expenditures and projections for next Fiscal Year based on recruiting activity.
The Budget for Insurance for FY 2015/16 is 1,299,196, an increase of $103,787 over
FY 2014/2015.
1. Blanket Bond covers employees' faithful performance and honesty. All
employees, including elected officials, are covered to $15,000,000. The
premium for 2015-2016 is $8,800.
2. Medical Malpractice insurance provides coordinated coverage with our general
liability policy to provide additional protection for services performed in County
facilities by County staff and outside contractors. The insurance is provided
through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority and the premium for 2015/2016 is
estimated to be $16,000, a decrease of $3,000 from the FY 2014-2015 Adopted
Budget.
3. General Liability excess insurance provides coverage to $25,000,000 for
personal injury or property damage caused by the County. The County selfinsures
the first $500,000 of any accident resulting in a damage award against
the County. The excess insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess
Insurance Authority. The cost of the program and the overall dollars necessary
to pay claims and fund reserves is $1,173,582.
4. Workers Compensation excess insurance provides coverage to $50,000,000 for
injuries to our County employees which occur while on duty. The County selfinsures
the first $300,000 of each workers compensation claim. The excess
insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority. The costs for this program have grown substantially, with over 40% increases in workers
compensation claims, in addition to distributing $4,100,000 of program costs to
all County departments, there is a General Fund contribution of $25,446 which is
included in this budget, along with the General Liability costs in the Operating
Transfers Out expense line item.
5. Fire and Property Insurance provides protection for County owned buildings and
contents. The insurance is provided through the CSAC Excess Insurance
Authority and the premium for 2015/2016 is estimated at $84,463. This amount
includes coverage on the County's heavy equipment fleet including fire
apparatus. Heavy equipment and fire trucks will be insured for their replacement
value after a $20,000 deductible. This program also includes Sabotage &
Terrorism coverage, as well as Boiler & Machinery coverage.
6. Pollution Liabilitv Insurance is for a three year term starting in FY 2012/2013
through FY 2014/2015, in the amount of $18,099, the premium is financed over
three years at $6,033 a year.
7. Fiduciary Insurance - provides protection to the Members of the Deferred
Compensation Oversight Committee. This premium of $10,149 paid for out of
the Human Resources Budget.
8. Cyber Insurance - this insurance provides coverage for up to $2,000,000 for
comprehensive electronic information and security liability coverage. The
premium for FY 2015/2016 is $1,600.
9. Cost Applied figures are those costs associated with insurance on leased
facilities not included in Countywide Cost Allocation Charges as well as
reimbursement from departments for medical malpractice and aircraft coverage.
$1,173,582 is budgeted for liability claims administration and claims expense. These
moneys are transferred to Budget Unit 867000, Fund 2800, out of which all
expenditures are tracked. The Workers Compensation operating budget is found in
Budget Unit 869000, Fund 2700. This is where the $4,100,000 budget is documented.
This Budget reflects a summary of the Employee Salaries and Benefit costs as
reflected in each department budget. Requested Expenditures for 20152016 total
$29,116,444, an increase of $3,563,558 from the 20142015 Adopted Budget. The
increase is due to the additional staff added related to the Public Safety Realignment
and Human Services caseload growth. The departments' requested budget includes
all employer costs associated with those requests.
This Budget is for display purposes and is zeroed out by cost applying these
charges to individual departmental budgets.
Cost per permanent employee is estimated at $100 per person. Costs are included
in each individual department budget and displaced in this budget unit to show the
overall cost of this insurance. The projected costs for FY 2015-2016 are $221,000.
Implementation of the replacement property tax system and subsequent staff training
will take place through the entire 2015-16 budget year as scheduled under the project's
timeline, with final implementation occurring during the first part of the 2016-17 budget
year.
An ongoing evaluation of products and services purchased by the department will
continue to be done in an effort to provide the most value to the taxpayers as well.
DISCUSSION:
The Assessor-Clerk-Recorder-Elections budget is projected to increase by 14%. The
Assessor Division is experiencing a 6% decrease in costs, due in large part to a
decrease in projected IT costs and an increase in PTAF funding. The Elections
Division shows a 26% increase, due primarily to the election cycle for the 2015-16
budget year including a presidential primary election. The most significant impact on
the departmental budget is changes in IT costs. With the shift in IT cost allocations
from a user license based charge to a utilization based charge, the IT costs in the
Clerk-Recorder Division are scheduled to increase by 175%.
The Elections Division budget is expected to increase, primarily due to the Presidential
Election cycle beginning in the spring of 2016. These larger elections bring with them
larger costs to the county. A new ballot tabulating system is not being requested at
this time; however, a replacement system will be required in the near future. The
machines acquired in 2005, under the Help America Vote Act, were decertified by the
California Secretary of State shortly after implementation. Replacing it has been the
Department's objective but certification for a comparable system has not been
accomplished during the last few years. A new system from our existing vendor has
received conditional certification at this time, and is working towards full certification.
The Elections Division will be requesting a replacement system once this certi'fication
is achieved. .
The Clerk-Recorders office continues to struggle with chronic staffing shortages. An
additional position has been requested to help alleviate this issue, contributing to the
increase in unreimbursed costs in this division. As previously mentioned, the shift in IT
billing allocations has also caused an increase in the IT related charges to this division.
Coupled with the 17.5% increase in IT costs, the division revenues for the ClerkRecorder's
Office have also been revisited. The expected recording fees have been
reduced to more accurately reflect the actual revenues received in this division over the last three years. While we are optimistic that actual revenues will exceed this new
prediction, in the interest of prudent fiscal planning it was necessary to reflect this 17%
reduction in revenues.
Per the Mitigation Agreement with the Santa Rosa Rancheria, the County anticipates
receiving a total of $900,000 in revenue in this budget unit. Although the Mitigation
Agreement allows for any receipt of these funds to be an offset against the $900,000
payment from the Tribe, none is reflected here as they are currently unallocated at the
State.
As was the case in FY 10/11, FY 11/12, FY 12/13, FY 13/14 and FY 14/15:
 $700,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Fire Fund in FY 15/16, going toward
operating costs at the South Lemoore Station, on the ladder truck purchased
by the Tribe and located at the Houston Avenue Station, and for service and
supply purchases.
 $200,000 is proposed to be utilized by the Sheriffs Department for the staffing
of deputy sheriff positions.
The proposed 2015-16 budget includes General Fund contributions (Other Charges) to
Building Maintenance in the amount of $3,231,725, the County Engineer (Surveyor)
budget, whose title by State law is Surveyor, receives $191,155. The former Williamson
Act funds that come into General County Revenues State Aid - Land Conservation are
transferred out to the Capital Building Projects $39,400 through this budget in the line
item titled Contribution to ACO Fund, $225,000 to the Fire Fund through the line item
titled Contribution to Fire Fund, and $485,600 to the Jail Bond Fund though the line item
titled Contribution to Jail Bond.
The Contribution to ACO Fund account also includes $350,000 of Hazardous Waste
fees and $1,519,421 in one-time State Mandate Reimbursements.
The Cost Applied of $700,000 is the amount of Building Maintenance costs that can be
charged out to other funds or departments, thereby reducing the net cost to the County.
The 12/13 Adopted Budget included transferring $1,000,000 out from the General Fund
to the Workers Compensation and General Liability funds. Those transferred happened
in 12/13, but were not repeated for 13/14 or 14/15 and are not recommended at this time
for 15/16, although we are recommending an overall increase in the Workers
Compensation program budget of 33% or $1.1 million dollars. The transfer out titled Contribution to Kettleman Water of $150,000 is the established annual transfer of
Hazardous Waste fees to the established trust/reserve for the Kettleman City Water
Project.
The requests in this budget reflect the Board's policy as stated in the program
description. All requests received are listed for consideration of the Board. The Board
may add to or delete any item during budget deliberations. Only those items which
were adopted in the prior fiscal year are included as expenses in the requested
budget. Each request received is reflected below:
Industrial Promotion: $53,000 is requested for the County share of the cost for Kings
County Economic Development Corporation which seeks to encourage business and
industrial development in the County. The County and cities share in the total cost for
the Economic Development Corporation on a population basis.
Homecoming Parade: $2,500 is requested for the Kings County Pioneer Days and
related events for FY 2015/2016. There has been a grant identified from PG & E to
cover these costs, so this is shown as both expense and revenue, with the revenue
coming from the PG & E grant.
In Home Support Services Public Authority (lHSS PAl: In the Proposed State Budget,
the IHSS MOE is projected at $47,846 and will be billed through the Human Services,
Welfare department for a total IHSS MOE of $2,729,650. So we are removing the
County General Fund contribution from this budget unit which was previously shown
as $65,443.
1. Maintain accreditation of the Veterans Services Office and Public
Guardian staff, as required by both State and Federal regulations. This
includes the initial accreditation of the new Deputy Public
GuardianNeterans Service Officer, and the new Deputy Public
Guardian.
2. Create a partnership with the Naval Air Station Lemoore, Retired
Activities Office, in order to provide satellite services in the Kings County
Veterans Services Office.
3. Establish an outreach office onboard Naval Air Station Lemoore.
4. Continue oversight and support of the Kings County Military and
Veterans Coalition and Kings County Veterans Employment Committee.
5. Digitize applicable Public Guardian conservatee and Representative
Payee records.
DISCUSSION:
In this budget this department is projecting a slight increase in both Probate and
LPS Conservators hips. The department is also projecting an increase in
Representative Payee clients. This projection is consistent with the past several
years of data. Revenue generated from court approved fees will continue to
decline this year. LPS clients, for the most part, have fewer assets available to
collect fees from than the typical Probate client.
For FY 15/16, this department will receive through the Behavioral Health
Administration the amount of $180,000, a slight increase from the previous year.
This revenue will fund LPS Investigations/Conservatorships, and Representative
Payee services for Behavioral Health consumers identified through the County's
Behavioral Health Plan. The Behavioral Health Administration continues to fund
a full time Public Guardian Technician for additional Representative Payee
services. As Mental Health Services Act funding continues to be reduced, the
department continues to work very closely with Kings View and the Behavioral
Health Administration to identify those conservatorship clients that are ready to
be moved to a lower, less expensive, level of care. The Behavioral Health
Administration also partially funds one Veterans Service Representative position.
This department is projecting a slight increase in California Department of
Veterans Affairs Subvention Funds this year, due to an increase in auditable
claims processed. The department continues its outreach efforts, and is currently
handling services to veterans on both a walk-in basis and appointments.
This department conducts speaking engagements at local retirement homes,
colleges, activity fairs, hospitals, service organizations, prisons, etc. A
representative from the office serves as the Service Officer for many of the
Veterans Service Organizations in the county. The office is also responsible for
updating and maintaining the Kings County Freedom Memorial. The office also
has a major support role for the Kings County Veterans Employment Committee
(KCVEC). The primary purpose of this committee is to collaborate with
California Employment Development Department (EDD) veteran's
representatives, veterans' service organizations and other community
members, to foster and promote employment opportunities for county veterans.
KCVEC meets monthly and also produces an annual job and resource fair.
The department continues to support the Kings County Military and Veterans
Coalition, whose main purpose is to distribute information of interest to our
military and veterans community. As part of this effort the information email
distribution list has over 3000 that have signed up. The office issues I.D. Cards
to honorably discharged veterans. These cards can be used as proof of military
service for discounts at many of our local businesses. Veterans that come into
the office for an I.D. Card are also told about the many other benefits they may
be eligible for. Additionally, the office will serve as verification authority for
California veterans who apply for the "Veteran" designation on their driver's
license or state identification card, to be issued through the Department of
Motor Vehicles in late 2015. The office is also a satellite office of the County
Recorders Office and is able to assist veterans and their families with recording
and accessing documents. The office is also a member of the review board for
the newly established Veterans Treatment Court.
By working with the California Department of Veterans Affairs, this department
identifies recently released county veterans and is sending "Welcome Home"
letters to each. These letters discuss the many services the office provides,
and invites the veteran and their family to come in and discuss benefits they
have earned. The department continues to use "Veterans Corner" newspaper
articles and numerous speaking engagements to reach out to county veterans.
The office also receives Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) information on all
drivers license applicants who identify themselves as veterans.
Working with veterans and their families involves sensitive and complex issues
that are often very personal in nature such as those related to combat or sexual
trauma. The clients represent all ages, ethnic and socio-economic
backgrounds. The staff requires "Geriatric" awareness of specific issues such
as dementia, Alzheimer's, stroke and profound hearing loss. The office
endeavors to be alert, sensitive, respectful and compassionate to the needs
and concerns of the clients.
The Veterans Service Office significantly impacts the lives of veterans and their
families in Kings County. In addition to benefit claims, the many other programs
that this office assists clients with such as VA and Department of Defense
(DOD) TRICARE medical care access, VA and CALVET home loans, burial
benefits, survivor benefits, and education benefits all contribute to the costeffectiveness
of this department.
The budget for the Law Library includes the following changes from last fiscal year: a
decrease of $2,413 for salaries and benefits; including a $3544 decrease for Health
Insurance; a $632 increase of Salary, a $488 increase for Retirement; an increase of
$714 for IT costs. The expenditure for Books & Periodicals was reduced, again, in the
amount of $2,000 due to having to cancel additional print subscriptions. This reduction
in Books and Periodicals is a direct impact of the projected reduction in revenues for
the Law Library.
Based on the trend for the past 7 months, filing fee revenue is expected to decrease by
approximately 4.8% in Fiscal year 2015/2016. Interest revenue remains low due to the
interest rates and deposits being lower, and is expected to stay low, and copy machine
revenue is estimated to remain the same. At this writing, civil filing figures are only
available through January of 2015, so 12 months of 2014 were compared to 12 months
of 2013. Mindful of the current economy, expected filing fee revenue is based on a
8.6% decrease in the amount of filing fees paid during FY 2014/2015 compared to FY
2013/2014.The amount of fees paid has decreased in the past due to more litigants
qualifying for filing fee waivers, not necessarily because of fewer filings. As of March 2015, use of the Law Library by non-attorney patrons has increased by
15% over 2014, mainly due to a continual increase in Unlawful Detainer (Eviction)
actions. There are approximately 70% more clients for Unlawful Detainers than for
Small Claims, which has been beneficial because rental property owners filing Unlawful
Detainer lawsuits are less likely to be eligible for a filing fee waiver, and they have to
pay the filing fees, which increases the filing fee revenue for the Law Library. Total
number of non-attorney patrons for period 07/13 to 03/14 was 1421. Total number of
patrons, including attorneys, for period 07/14 to 03/15 is 1658.
The objective of the District Attorney's Office is to protect ALL people in our
community through the effective and efficient administration of criminal justice
and to redress the harm done to the victims of crime.
DISCUSSION:
Since 2010 there have been three major pieces of legislation that have
completely changed our judicial and correctional systems. Under our new and
radically different sentencing structure, a majority of convicted felons serve
their time in county jail, in alternative programs instead of prison, or are
convicted of misdemeanors. Many inmates are now supervised by probation
officers and available custody sanctions have been severely reduced.
Proposition 36, which became effective November 7, 2012 and applied
retroactively, has significantly limited the effect of our prior 'Three Strikes" Law.
Under our prior 'Three Strikes" Law a criminal convicted of any new felony after
having been convicted of two prior "serious" or "violene felonies would receive a
sentence of at least 25 years to life. Under the changes mandated by
Proposition 36, with limited exceptions, a criminal with two prior "serious" or
"violent" felonies whose new felony offence was a "non- serious" or "non-violene
felony will be treated as if he or she had only one strike.
In summary, under Realignment and Proposition 36 career criminals have been
and will be spending less time in custody and more time on the street.
Not surprisingly, felony filings are estimated to increase over FY15/16 in spite of
Proposition 47.
However, as expected, impact of Realignment (AB109) has been an increase in
filing in the area of economic crimes and drug crimes. Drug and economic
crimes are among the most numerous crimes where sentencing under new Penal
Code, section 1170(h) and jail crowding has resulted in shorter sentences for all
of these criminal offenders. These changes, along with more generous time
credits are introduced at a time when nationally, small rural communities are
overwhelmed with methamphetamine use and when violent crime is dramatically
increasing. These Increases have occurred despite the prior change in focus
from punishment to treatment. When the focus is on how drugs affect the meth
addict rather than how the meth hurts the innocent - children, spouses and
citizens who are the victims of the increasing crime caused by methamphetamine
and when long sentences on serious crimes are to be served in county jail,
resulting in overcrowding, it was not unexpected that the early releases of
inmates resulting in an even greater increase in economic and drug crimes. We expect this trend to continue and to be acerbated by the shorter sentences
mandated by Proposition 36. In addition, there are currently a minimum of 36
career criminals sentenced from Kings County serving 25 years to life under the
prior version of "Three Strikes" law who will be applying for release back into
Kings County pursuant to Proposition 36. Although the court has discretion to
deny release if it determines the petitioner/inmate will pose an unreasonable risk
of danger to the public safety, many of these 36 lifers may be release back into
Kings County.
Most recently, Proposition 47 will also impact local resources as many of the
aforementioned offenders who are generally anti-social individuals. These antisocial
personalities tend to increase their criminal behavior when not monitored.
Proposition 47 has created a system of misdemeanors that would have been
otherwise been felons; therefore there would have been supervision and
restrictions placed upon these individuals. As a result, we expect more
misdemeanor and more felony cases to be filed.
In summary we expect felony filing to increase during FY15/16 and our workload
to increase due to the continued impact of AB 109, Proposition 36, and the
additional impact of Proposition 47. Given our expectation of an increased
volume of misdemeanor and felony cases, we believe emphasis on the most
violent crimes and the most violent offenders with more well-trained violent crime
Deputy district attorneys will be increasingly important in FY 205/16.
Administration
During the FY 2015-2016 budget process, an additional Senior Deputy Sheriff is
requested to ensure background investigations continue to meet the requirements and
guidelines of P.O.S.T. and the Sheriff's Office's staffing needs are met in a timely
manner. The jail expansion project in FY 20142015 continued into FY 20152016 and
Significantly increased the workload of the Backgrounds Investigations unit. The
additional position of a Senior Deputy Sheriff provides the manpower to meet the
demands and requirements in the hiring process for the Sheriff'S Office as well as those
services rendered to the general public such as background investigations for
Concealed Carry Weapons permits.
In the FY 2014-2015 budget process a salary study was approved to evaluate the
salaries of the Sheriff's Records Clerks in efforts to reduce the high rates of turn over.
The salary study will continue into FY 2015-2016.
Operations & Support
The Kings County Gang Task Force and collaborative partners were awarded the multiyear
Edward Byrne Memorial Grant (JAG) totaling $660,000 for the period of March 1,
2015-December 31,2017. The JAG program will prioritize suppression, prevention, and
intervention efforts to address the county's area of needs in gang initiatives, juvenile
delinquency, gang violence reduction, and problem solving courts. The JAG program
seeks to signi'f!cantly diminish juvenile and young adult gang-related crimes, violence
and offenses, as well as high juvenile delinquency recidivism of moderate to high-risk
youth through a balance of proven traditional strategies and innovative non-traditional
solutions.
During FY 2015-2016, SWAT will continue to replace out dated equipment with newer
technologies such as firearms designed to increase safety and vision in areas of low
visibility .
Narcotics Task Force continues to partner with other law enforcement agencies to
suppress narcotic activities contributing one Sheriff's Senior Deputy to the local Drug
Enforcement Agency (DEA). In FY 2015-2016, KCSO has assigned an additional
Sheriff's Senior Deputy to Regional Methamphetamine Task Force, Fresno ran by
California Department of Justice (CADOJ). In addition to continuing partnerships,
Narcotics Task Force will continue the efforts to:
1. Significantly diminish the availability and use of illegal drugs in Kings county by
aggressively pursuing and prosecuting those involved in illegal narcotics; and
2. Provide a safe and drug free environment for the citizens of Kings County and
the State of California.
Rural Crimes Task Force Detectives will continue the efforts:
1. To provide responsive services and develop a strong working partnership with
the farming community;
2. To educate farmers and Sheriff's Office personnel to current trends and methods
of Ag related thefts, and emphasizing the importance of marking their equipment
for the purposes of recovery and tracking; and
3. To aggressively investigate, recover, and return stolen property to the owners
and prosecute offenders involved in Ag related crimes.
It is anticipated Court Security Services will increase the staffing levels to meet the
demands of the new court facility. Requested in the budget process are six Sheriffs
Deputy Bailiffs, two Detention Deputy 1/11, and two Detentions Technicians 1/11.
Detentions
Goals outlined for Detentions staffing are to continue to expand In-House training with
Sheriffs Emergency Response Team (S.E.R.T.); range; Taser; Pepperball; baton;
weaponless defense; CPR/First Aid; and chemical agents. In addition to the in-house
training, added courses such as Spillman Jail Management training, Specialty Munitions
and the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), which is Federally-mandated, are set in
place to ensure staff is fully trained. Detentions' Management will continue to work
closely with the College of the Sequoias Hanford Campus to provide courses such
Crime Scenes in Detentions and Force Optionsl Defensive Tactics. We have completed
8 Supervisor's Core (80 hour Core), 6 Supplemental Core (56 hour Core) and 14 Adult
Corrections Officer Core Course (176 to 184 hours Cores). In addition to training and
continuing partnerships which provide additional courses for the Detentions' staff,
Detentions will:
1. Pursue more jail expansion funding under Senate Bill 863 passed in 14/15
FY.
2. Continue the priority of reducing early releases from the jail.
3. Continue to aggressively recruit and hire custodial personnel to remain fully
staffed and compliant with Title 24 of the U.S. Government code governing
custodial facilities;
4. Continue to look at addressing overcrowding issues; and
5. Continue to identify methods to diminish the amount of sick leave utilized and
maximize the efficiency of the jail staffing.
Kitchen
The Kitchen staff will continue to:
1. Meet all regulations in the preparation of meals for adult and juvenile inmates;
2. Hire two additional Jail Cooks due to increases in inmate population;
3. Continue meeting with architects in the design of the new jail kitchen; and
4. Consult with contract services to provide nutritional guidance.
Animal Services will:
1. Continue to obtain grant funding for spay/neuter services;
2. Expand the community's awareness of the programs KCAS provides for
microchipping and low/no cost spay/neuter;
3. Continue the training for shelter as well as field staff to further their
knowledge and exposure to proactive sheltering and enforcement;
4. Continue to offer clinics throughout Kings County promoting responsible
pet ownership, animal leashing requirements and general animal care;
5. Investigate options for the improvement of shelter site operations. This
includes either an overhaul of the existing shelter site or acquisition of a new
site/and or structure; and also includes implementing accepting credit/debit
card payments.
6. Create a task force that includes all three Animal Control agencies
(Hanford PO, Lemoore PO and Kings County Sheriff) to investigate unpermitted
breeding in their respective jurisdictions; and
7. Assist the two agencies that operate independently from Kings County Animal
Services (Corcoran and Avenal) to enact similar ordinances in an attempt to unify
the County and promote responsible pet ownership.
Discussion:
The Sheriff and his staff have diligently managed overhead cost and sought and
obtained alternative funding sources such as asset forfeiture money and various grant
awards. The Sheriffs Office forecast continuous growth with realignment which
increases the urgency to staff the Sheriffs Office departments with skilled professionals
to provide adequate relief in the most critical divisions mandated for 2417 coverage. To
successfully manage the growth and expansions, the Sheriffs Office has proposed
restructuring the roles and responsibilities in Management for Administration,
Operations, and Detentions, as well as requested additional position allocations to
adequately support the growing needs of the Sheriffs Office.
Administration: Due to the growth demands and requirements of completing
mandatory P.O.S.T. compliant background investigations for Sheriffs Office employees,
contract employees, and citizens applying for concealed weapons permits, it is imperative to increase the staffing in the backgrounds investigation unit with one (1)
"sworn" Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Senior Deputy Sheriff.
Communications: Based on the increased radio traffic and the additional secondary
channel primarily for Probation and Animal Services, it is necessary to staff two
dispatchers during periods of extremely high radio traffic to control the law radio.
Additional phone traffic is reassigned to the Fire Dispatcher, as this position is the
primary phone back-up. The Sheriff'S Office requests to increase 2 Full-Time
Equivalent (F.T.E.) Dispatcher 1/11 to ensure the continuation of shift coverage and the
steady increase of radio traffic on two channels.
Operations: With the evolving needs and growth of the Kings County Sheriff's Office,
several discussions have taken place, and a plan has been developed, to greatly
increase the effectiveness of the Sheriff's Management staff with the proposal to
eliminate 1 Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Sergeant currently assigned to the Kettleman
City area and augment this area with two Deputy Sheriffs 1111. The purpose of the
additional personnel request is to increase the patrol staffing assigned to the substations
in the southern most region of the county, Kettleman City and Corcoran. These
sub-stations are important farming and consumer goods transportation corridors and, if
left with insufficient patrol coverage, will frequently fall victim to crime. The patrolling
functions will be more effective and efficient with two Deputy Sheriffs opposed to one
Sergeant. The Management staff disbursement of duties will add a fourth "sworn"
Support Commander to oversee the services and divisions that support the mission
critical needs of Operations such as: departmental-wide training, maintaining policy
updates in Lexi-pol, vehicle and eqUipment inventory and tracking, and dealing with
Public Records Requests (PRA's) and Pitches' motions. The Records Manager
(civilian) and Emergency Communications Manager (civilian) will report to this
Commander.
Court Security: The court's expansion to 9 courtrooms as well as the facility's multilevel
design requires the addition of staffing in areas of transportation, Detentions, and
Sheriff's Deputy Bailiffs. The multi-level design of the new courtroom heightened the
need to increase safety measures for staff assigned to transport and in the courtrooms,
and the need to increase staffing to service the additional courtrooms, transporting &
guarding inmates in the facility, and controlling the elevators within the courthouse. The
request by the Sheriff's Office is to increase current staffing by 5 Full-Time Equivalent
(F.T.E.) Sheriff's Deputy Bailiffs, 2 Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Detentions Deputy 1111,
and 2 Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Detentions Technicians 1111.
Detentions: It has become time-sensitive to increase the staffing as the jail expansion
project nears completion at the beginning of 2016. In consideration of the increased
staffing requirements, the Sheriff's Office also developed a plan to streamline
Managerial effectiveness and efficiency similar to the Sheriff's Administration and
Operations Divisions. The staffing proposals are to add one Full-Time Equivalent
(F.T.E.) Captain with responsibility to oversee Jail Operations such as a Sheriff's Commander and replace the two current Commander positions with two Full-Time
Equivalent (F.T.E.) Lieutenants. Additional position allocations were due to the jail's
expansion; to increase 25 Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Detentions Deputy 1111 and 6
Full-Time Equivalent (F.T.E.) Detentions Technicians 1111.
Jail Kitchen: In the 2014/2015 budget, an additional Senior Jail Cook position was
requested to provide supervision for the seven days per weekl365 days per year
schedule. The position was filled in during the budget year 2014/2015. The Kitchen's
workload is forecast to continuously increase due to the jail's expansion with total
annual meals of 726,876 for 2015/2016. Due to the workload increases, an extra-help
Jail Cook was requested.
Animal Services: Animal Service-Field requested an additional Field Officer in the
2014/2015 budget. This position was filled and provides the added coverage and
staffing to maintain the State-mandated requirements and to enforce County
Ordinances. An extra-help Animal Control Officer was requested in the 2015/2016
budget to provide additional shift coverage and assistance with the duties in the Shelter
currently assigned to Field Officers. Animal Services continues to develop outreach
programs and seek alternative funding solutions for these programs. Animal Services
will continue to seek grant awards from PetSmart Charities and ASPCA to offset cost
associated with spay and neuter programs and vaccination clinics.
As part of the 2015-2016 budget process changes to various account lines from other
County departments reflect increases from the budget year 2014-2015 in part due to the
projected actual costs significantly exceeding the estimated costs.
From the Motor Pool Department estimates for 221000-NTF, 222100-Rural Crimes, and
222300-Court Security in the 2014-2015 budget were well below actual creating a
prOjected over budget in the amounts of $17,441 for 221000-NTF, $14,000.00 for
222100-Rural Crimes, and $27,278.00 for 222300-Court Security. Estimates for FY
2015-2016 budget were increased due to end of year projections for budget 2014-2015.
From Maintenance S.1. &G., estimates for 227710-Animal Services Shelter were below
actual and resulted in a projected over budget in the amount of $17,421.00. Due to the
conditions of the facility, these were needed repairs and FY 2015-2016 budget
estimates were adjusted to include unexpected repair costs.
The rise in food costs for the Jail Kitchen continues into FY 2015-2016. Specific food
vendors have advised of increased pricing and the Jail Kitchen estimates the increase
of food costs of 7.5% more than FY 2013-2014.
Kings County Gang Task Force and partners were awarded the Edward J. Byrne
Memorial Grant in the amount of $220,000.00 for FY 2015/2016, with a total award of
three years of $660,000. A separate Project was created to monitor grants usages of the funds. The project is within the budget 221100-Gang Task Force as project
221101-JAG.
For FY 2015-2016, the Sheriffs Office is requesting a budget with a total cost of
$40,063,552.00, of which $2,956,376.00 are Capital Assets. The estimated revenue is
$19,430,375.00 leaving unreimbursed costs of $18,993,726.00 a 10.18% increase from
FY 2014-2015.
1. Integrate our case management system and Assessments.com on the
adult side, ensuring all probationers have been given a risk/needs
assessment to properly direct the probationer to services.
2. Continue to seek grant funding through the PRIDE Project to enhance
juvenile service delivery to the members of the community.
3. Fully implement the "Courage to Change" Program into the Branch Jail to
start before the offenders are released. Work in concert with the Sheriffs
Office to provide one dedicated FTE Deputy Probation Officer to work
solely with this in custody population.
4. Complete department reorganization to more equitably distribute job
duties. Including elimination of one FTE Deputy Chief to be replaced with
one FTE Supervising Probation Officer and transfer operations of the
Victim Witness Assistance Center to the Kings County District Attorney's
Office.
5. Continue to work with Justice Benefits Incorporated (JBI) to maximize Title
IV-E reimbursement.
DISCUSSION
Highlights for 20152016 are:
Juvenile Treatment Center - (233000) The 2015-2016 Requested Budget reflects an
unreimbursed cost to the General Fund of $3,493,542 (a $87,093 increase over the FY 2014-2015 Adopted Budget), This increase is associated with the addition of two
(w) FTE Juvenile Correction Officers, books and reference materials for confine youth
for crimonegenic needs, and a web based scheduling program for institution staff.
Probation AB109 - (233100) The Public Safety Realignment Act took effect October
1, 2011 and transfers responsibility for supervising specific low-level inmates and
parolees from the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) to
counties, The 2015-2016 Requested Budget reflects a reduction in replacement
desktop computers from one to zero, an increase in overtime to reflect the required
overtime needed by the Narcotics Task Force, and, due to the transfer of the Victim
Witness Assistance Center to the District Attorney's Office, the deletion of 1.75
VictimlWitness Advocate 1111 and the deletion of 1.0 Office Assistant 1/11.
Probation SB678 - (233200) The 2015-2016 Proposed Budget reflects an increase
in Books & Periodicals to provide evidence-based programming to offenders in
custody, the addition of testing for tuberculosis and pregnancy for probationers to
qualify for evidence-based programs, and the transfer of the cost of hotspots to the
appropriate budget units.
OJJDP - (233300) This budget unit was added during fiscal year 20142015 due to
Probation being awarded a grant for the 2nd Chance Act Comprehensive Statewide
Juvenile Reentry System Reform Planning Program. This budget unit is fully funded
by this grant and requires no general fund dollars.
YOBG - (233600) The 2015-2016 Proposed Budget reflects the same staffing levels
as last fiscal year. The budget re'flects the deletion of a car radio and mobile radio
that were budgeted and purchased in fiscal 2014-2015. This budget unit is fully
funded by YOBG (SB81) and requires no general fund dollars.
Probation - (234000) The FY 20152016 Probation Budget reflects an additional FTE
Supervising Probation Officer which is in lieu of a third Deputy Chief Probation Officer,
an increase due to the large number of bullet proof vests requiring replacement, a
decrease in the number of hard copy periodicals needed, a decrease in Computer
Hardware due to computers anticipated not needing replacement, in increase in Sims
training, and an increase in the Program Expense account to pay Justice Benefits
Incorporated for their services in Title IV-E.
Victim Witness - (234200) The FY 20152016 budget reflects the transfer of Victim
Witness to the District Attorney's Office for oversight. As of July 1, 2015, all functions
will be under the supervision of the District Attorney's Office. There is no general fund
cost associated with this budget unit.
Victim Witness Assistant Program - (234700) The FY 20152016 requested budget
funds staffing levels that include one Victim Witness Advocate II position that will work
with the District Attorney's Office. This budget also reflects the transfer of Victim Witness Assistant Program to the District Attorney's Office for oversight. There is no
general fund cost associated with this budget unit.
JJCPA - (234800) The FY 2015-2016 Proposed Budget reflects the same staffing
levels as last fiscal year. There is no general fund cost associated with this budget unit.
 Continue to provide the highest level of professional response and emergency services to our
communities
 Continue to monitor and assess the expected changes to the Insurance Services Office (ISO),
Fire Services rating Schedule in order to maintain our current Public Protection Classification.
 Develop a staffing plan that meets the requirements of an expected ISO review and eliminates
single person stations. This plan would provide for a least two (2) firefighters in each apparatus
in a rural aSSignment.
 Continue to expand the Well ness and Fitness Program and continue the downward trend of
illnesses and injuries to department personnel.
 Continue to seek funding opportunities to update the Fire Fleet and reduce the age of the
department's apparatus.
 Actively pursue alternative/grant funding for department equipment needs (e.g. Federal Fire Act
grant, State Domestic Preparedness and Equipment Program, and other Federal Homeland
Security grants).
 Continue to seek opportunities and partnerships, in our operational area, to improve and expand
service and training capabilities.
 Continue to work with the Santa Rosa Rancheriarrachi Palace Hotel and Casino administration to
address personnel, equipment, and apparatus needs that will improve and/or enhance fire and life
safety on tribal lands.
 Encourage and promote employee development through enhanced training programs, new
training, and formal education opportunities. Establish and support a succession-training
program to facilitate building future department managers and leaders.
 Continue to improve and enhance our public education programs to address fire and life safety
education.
Fire Administration Objectives:
 Operational Area lead agency that has secured approximately $5,369,239 to date from
Homeland Security Grants program for the purchase of equipment and training for the
Operational Area. Agencies assisted by these grant opportunities include the Fire Department,
Law Enforcement, Public Works, Department of Agriculture, and Public Health.
 Continue to seek opportunities and funding to replace and update aging Fire Apparatus. The
department has made substantial progress in purchasing and replacing out-of-date and aging
apparatus within its fleet.
 Identify and retain a consultative firm to complete a Fire Department Master Plan which
establishes short, medium and long range goals for the department. This is the road map that
contemplates growth of the community, impacts of workloads, organizational structure and
establishes milestones in order to guide the responsible growth of fire services based on needs.
 Continue to improve our plan for management reorganization in order to enable operational
efficiency and improve span of control configuration for all divisions.
 Establish an "Automatic Aid Agreement" with the City of Hanford, review and update the existing
current agreements with surrounding agencies.
 Establish a system of succession for department staff to support promotional opportunities and
establish minimum qualification guidelines.
 Develop and present new web sites for both the Fire Department and Office of Emergency
Management. This objective will allow for increased information sharing and notification.
 When available, continue to work with the Central Planning Area to secure funding and
resources to improve Interoperability Communications for the Operational Area, Region and
State.
 To provide high quality life safety and code compliance services to the County of Kings.
 Ensure that the Public Education Program reaches all segments of our communities regarding
the preservation of life and property.
 Ensure that prompt contact is made with entities involved with construction projects in order to
prevent delay, undue cost and enhance completion of the final fire inspection.
 Provide liaison and consultation services to the Cities of Avenal and Corcoran in order to
clarify California Fire Code and Fire Department requirements.
 Promote increased installation of fire sprinkler, fire alarms, and special hazard systems as the
first line of defense from fire losses.
 Investigate and determine the origin and cause of all fires occurring within our jurisdiction.
 Ensure expedient fire cause determination service in order to analyze and affect loss control.
 Provide fire code enforcement services that match the needs of the communities we serve.
Fire Prevention Division Goals:
 Review and update the current fee schedule that supports the mission of the Fire Prevention
Division and expedites the processing of permits and plan checking.
 Implement a program for the issuance of operational permits as identified in Section 105 of
the California Fire Code.
 Continue to develop the Fire Investigation Unit by completing required training and continuing
education for investigators.
 Completion of Peace Officer status for all FlU team members.
 Recruit and select two additional FlU members for integration during the 2016-17 fiscal years.
 Plan for succession in the Fire marshal position through training and the development of
Standard Operating Guidelines for the division.
 Provide exceptional fire education programs and services to the public.
Ol2erations Division Objectives:
 To develop and maintain a turnout time of 120 seconds, from receipt of emergency call.
 To develop and establish a minimum response time based on geographical and resource
availability factors.
 Maintain all equipment, apparatus, and personnel in a state of readiness to ensure a rapid
response to emergencies.
 To utilize response data and informational systems to enhance the quality of our response to
emergencies.
 Develop, identify, and update target hazards and preplans.
 To meet or exceed the minimum amount of training hours as determined by the Training
Division.
 Up-staff our single staffed stations for the safety of our personnel and increased efficiency on
initial attack operations.
 Establish and maintain a Standards of Cover document for our Agency.
 To keep the costs of our operations commensurate to the values at risk.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Confined Space Operations training per year.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Emergency Medical Technician training and implement a
recertification program based on continuing educations credits.
 To deliver a minimum of 8 hours of Hazardous Materials First Responder Operations training
per year.
 To deliver a minimum of 186 hours of additional training to each member of the career staff
and a minimum of 48 hours to volunteer staff.
 Develop and implement a web based training and education system for Emergency Medical
and Hazardous materials recertification.
 Continue to support the College of the Sequoias Basic Fire Academy with instructors and
participants,
 Continue to develop a Regional Type II Hazardous Materials Response Team in conjunction
with Hanford City Fire Department.
 Continue to support and provide assistance to the California Emergency Management Agency
with a Type II Urban Search and Rescue Team.
 The Office of Emergency Services Coordinator will participate in State-sponsored meetings,
workshops and training conferences to enhance communications and operations between
various State and local agencies .
 To continue OEM training activities. Training in SEMS, NIMS, ICS, EOC Operations and
disaster preparedness is available to the OpftC:ltional Area.
 To enhance public notification of critical incidents and disasters.

 To assist in the implementation and administration of the current, and pending, State
Homeland Security Grant Program (SHSGP) and Emergency Management Preparedness
Grant Program (EMPG).
 To continue to participate in State training, meetings and workshops in order to expand skill
level and to advise other agencies and the community of important issues.
 To increase the visibility and effectiveness of the Office of Emergency Management by
building reliable relationships with municipalities, special districts, private businesses and
volunteer organizations within the Operational Area.
 Maintenance of the Office of Emergency Management webpage. Necessary to provide up-todate
information related to current disasters, emergency preparedness goals, and links to
state and federal resources.
Office of Emergency Management Goals:
 To continue to apply for new grant opportunities to enhance capabilities regarding disaster
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery efforts within the County of Kings.
 To continue to offer presentations and training to other departments and agencies in SEMS,
NIMS, ICS, EOC/DOC operations, disaster preparedness and other important issues.
 To conduct tabletop exercises, drills and seminars to enhance skill level and to train additional
key personnel in the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and Department Operations Center
(DOC) functions.
 To continue to work toward re-establishing the Kings County Disaster Council in order to better
serve the Operational Area.
 To continue the development of the mass notification system and expand its use to other
agencies within the Operational Area.
 Creation of the Office of Emergency Management webpage, which will provide valuable
information related to current disasters, emergency planning and preparedness, community
events, and links to state and federal resources.
Currently four (4) of the department's ten (10) fire stations continue to be staffed by a single person
on a forty eight (48) hour duty cycle. These stations are located in the areas of Burris Park,
Hardwick, Island, and Stratford and represent some of our most remote locations. This continued
level of marginal staffing, impedes the effectiveness of the department's emergency service
operations, contributes to the workplace of our l~fighters, and decreases the overall safety of personnel stationed at these locations. The Fire Department faces two significant staffing issues in
its efforts to provide public safety. First, is the lack of adequate daily staffing to provide an effective
force when dealing with emergency response and for providing for the overall safety of personnel.
The second is insufficient relief staffing to provide for coverage related to vacations, sick leave, and
workman's compensation events, resulting in increase use of overtime. Overtime continues to be a
significant concern for the Fire Department. In the FY 13/14 the department incurred approximately
$809,909 in overtime costs doubling the estimated amount budgeted. By incorporating the
classification of firefighter in the current mUlti-company stations, the department can reassign
additional staff to the relief positions in order to cover for personnel shortages without incurring
overtime. In FY 15/16 the Fire Department will be requesting an additional six (6) firefighter positions
as step one in this phased process of eliminating single person stations.
Having recently finalized the evaluation from the Insurance Services Office (ISO) rating schedule, the
area of most negative impact was the credit for company personnel. The department only received
5.12 points out of 15 possible due to the lack of adequate staffing. Deficiency in staffing coupled with
not having a Deployment Analysis, represented the primary reductions in available points from ISO.
The current FY 14/15 budget has funding allocated to complete the Deployment Analysis since an
RFQ has been released and proposals have been received by the Fire Department. Additionally, the
department will continue to embrace and apply new technology to the completion of our stated
mission. This year, the application of Automatic Vehicle Locator (AVL) will allow for the dispatching
of the closest available unit to emergencies within the county. This is an effort to reduce response
times of responding resources and change from vicinity based to a Geographic Information System
(GIS) type mapping method. The remaining component is the staffing question which will be
addressed in the FY 15/16 budget. The department intends to present a phased approach to deal
with this staffing challenge and will bring forward the classification of firefighter as a method to
increase staffing. This phased approach will be needed in order to identify and increase available
revenue for the Fire Fund and meet the final need for permanent staffing at our remote stations.
Another area of concern is the age of our facilities. As the backbone of our geographical
deployment, the need to maintain our fire stations is a primary issue. Having limited funding
available, the need to continue to update and repair these facilities is paramount. Many of our older
stations are in need of major remodeling and updating in order to remain viable and to meet
department current and future needs. These undertakings are extremely costly and dedicating
adequate revenue from the fire fund is not possible.
The Office of Emergency Management (OEM) continues to develop and support emergency
preparedness in the operational area. The development of partnerships and collaborated efforts has
been the focal point of OEM this fiscal year. Additionally, the development and delivery of relevant
and relatable training to the County and surrounding Cities in order to ensure emergency
preparedness has been a high priority for OEM this year. OEM will continue to seek out these
opportunities to support emergency preparedness in the operational area and ensure compliance
with all state and federal requirements.
To date, the required update to the Local Hazard Mitigation Plan has been completed. The task of
updating the Emergency Response Plan for Kings County and all of the cities is in process and is
expected to be complete by years end. This update will ensure that the Kings Operational Area remains compliant with federal and state prerequisites in order to maintain eligibility for federal
assistance should the need arise.
1. Pest Detection - Surveillance for pests and diseases not known to occur
within Kings County or be established in the State by performing detection
trapping consistent with state and federal standards. Provide pest
identification services for the public.
2. Pest Eradication - Prevent the establishment and spread of high priority pests
in accordance with USDA and California regulations. The Pink Bollworm
Cotton Plowdown Program is one of our Eradication programs.
3. Pest Management - To assist in the mandated control of recognized economic
pests of agriculture, pests affecting the public health, and those causing
environmental harm; to enable the reduction of agricultural losses through
grower enabled control programs; and provide specific control materials, at
cost, and technical advice as needed.
4. Pest Exclusion - Protect and enable the commercial trade of Kings County
agriculture, pursuant to Federal, State and County regulations through the
inspection of incoming and outgoing shipments for quarantine compliance,
especially in high-risk environments or market pathways, therefore promoting
the high quality and cleanliness of Kings County export commodities.
5. Pesticide Use Enforcement - To enable people to succeed in the production
of commodities of optimum quality and yield while assuring the safety of their
partners, the public, and our environment.
6. Seed Law Enforcement - To assure the quality of seed and that it is properly
labeled as to its contents, treatment, and viability.
a. Seed Certification - Working with the California Crop Improvement
Association certification program to verify the purity and quality of seed
grown in Kings County.
7. Nursery Inspection - To ensure the production and sale of commercially
clean, pest-free, true-to-variety, vigorous and healthy nursery stock.
8. Fruit and Vegetable Quality Control - Protects the consumer, producer, and
shipper, through inspection programs for compliance with standards of the
California Food and Agricultural Code, federal regulations, marketing orders,
and other related enforcement activities; thus promoting the local Fruit and
Vegetable industry, including Farmers Market and Organic inspections of local
producers and venders.
9. Egg Quality Control - Inspect and certify eggs as required by the California
Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
10. Apiary Inspection - Maintain the identification of bee locations in the County
for the purpose of notification of pending pesticide applications and provide
colony strength and health certification inspections services upon request.
11. Crop Statistics - Maintain current and reliable agricultural production statistics,
as required by the California Food and Agricultural Code and the USDA.
Prepare and present an annual County crop report. Monitor and collect crop
disaster/loss statistics and report significant findings to CDFA, the USDA, and
the County Board of Supervisors.
12. Vertebrate Pest Control - Maintain a level of control sufficient to ensure the
protection of the health and safety of the public, food safety, crops, livestock,
and the environment from the detrimental impacts of physical damage or
diseases caused by such pests. The Department's rodent bait mixing program
is a resource used locally in addition to providing sales to numerous other
county programs around the state.
13. Emergency Animal Disposal - Provide guidance to efficiently and effectively
protect the health of the public, and the environment, while ensuring the
sustainability of the livestock industry through the use of safe and efficient
means of dead animal carcass disposal during times of emergency.
The Department of Agriculture and Measurement Standards [Department] projects
the current Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 unreimbursed cost to the County General
Fund to be approximately $38,439 less than was adopted. The cost savings (5.2%)
projection is based on the anticipated decline of $82,303 in revenue coupled with
overall projected expenditure reductions of $120,742. In mid-fiscal year, the
Department received approval to transfer one of its half-time employees from the
Ag Computer Systems Coordinator classification into a full-time Ag & Standards
Inspector classification that was previously allocated and not funded. Funding for
this change was made possible with the balance remaining in the Ag Computer
Systems Coordinator allocation plus an overall Salary and Benefits expenditure
savings experienced by the department in FY 2014-15.
For FY 2015-16 the Department requests a net expenditure of $2,645,455 which is
$149,925 (6.31%) more than was adopted in the 2014-15 FY budget. The
expenditure request includes a $143,891 (7.83%) increase in Salaries and
Benefits, a $42,034 (6.83%) increase in Services and Supplies. Factors
contributing to the increase in Salaries and Benefits are a $101,766 (7.83%)
increase to department salaries, and a $30,215 (19.1%) increase in Retirement. The $42,034 increase to the Services and Supplies category, is due to a $38,704
to the Motor Pool account coupled with a $2,730 increase in Utilities. The
Department also requests the deletion of the Ag Computer Systems Coordinator
position.
The requested revenues, for FY 2015-16, total $1,732,907 and is 1.1% ($19,350)
less than the 2014-15 Adopted Budget. The State Aid for Agriculture revenue
account is requested at $10,550 more than FY 2014-15 coupled with a 16.6%
decline in Ag Services fees, due to drought impacts on crops.
The Agriculture Department's requested FY 2014-15 budget will result in the
Unreimbursed Net Cost of $912,548 to the county's General Fund. This Requested
Budget is a net expenditure increase of $176,275 (24%) from the 2014-15 FY
adopted budget.
1. Insure that the Building Official, a Building Inspector, or the Permit Technician is
available one-hundred percent of the time for office conSUltation with builders on
construction requirements, provide for responsive plan check turn-a-round, issue
building permits, and to keep up with the latest technology in the building
industry.
2. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year building activity reports for the
unincorporated area of Kings County.
Provide inspection services the next workday after the request for inspection is
received or the closest date and time available.
4. Carry out the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and ensure compliance with
the new FEMA maps in effect September 2015.
5. Carry out the Water Well Ordinance.
6. Abate dangerous buildings.
7. Conduct Code Compliance programs including, but not limited to: vehicle
abatement, nuisance abatement, building compliance, and zoning cOlTlpliance,
8. Insure that support staff is available to receive alleged code violations in the
office or over the phone during regular business hours.
9. Maintain and track active violation cases.
10. Provide monthly, quarterly, and fiscal year activity reports for the unincorporated
area of Kings County concerning resolutions of code violation cases and vehicle
and building abatements.
11. Provide initial investigation services generally five days a week, however
depending on the threat to the public health and safety and the workload of the
Building Official it may take a few days for the initial investigation after a
complaint is received.
12. Carry out the Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Program.
13. Provide vehicle and building abatement to address health and safety issues.
14. Ensure new development meets the provisions of the Accessibility Standards
Compliance Act (SB 1608, Chapter 549 of the Statutes of 2008) and government
Code Section 4459.5, by retaining a Certified Access Specialist (CASp).
15. Ensure compliance with the 2013 California Building Standards Code.
16. Implement an expedited plan review service for photovoltaic permits based on
requirements of AB2188 in effect September 2015.
1. Continue the implementation of the Kings County Subdivision Ordinance.
Ensure that both divisions of the Advisory Agency for Parcel Maps and
Subdivision complete action on tentative maps within 50 days of the application
being certified complete, or completion of the environmental review. This review
period includes a required 20-day public review period for comments on
proposed negative/mitigated negative declarations. Continue the implementation
of streamlined procedures for administrative processing of lot line adjustments,
parcel map waivers, and certain minor divisions of land.
2. Ensure Planning Commission completes action on conditional use permit
applications within two (2) months of the application being certified complete, or
completion of the environmental review.
3. Process applications for site plan reviews within three (3) weeks of application
being certified complete.
Conduct environmental reviews for all projects within required time intervals:
within 10S days after submittal of a complete application with approved
negative/mitigated negative declarations or within one year when an
environmental impact report (EIR) is required. This includes the requirement for
a 20-day public review (30 days for state agencies comments) for proposed
negative declarations.
S. Carry out grant application and management tasks assigned by the Board, for
the following programs: Community Development Block Grant (CDBG); HOME;
BEGIN, and CalHome.
6. Manage the National Flood Insurance Program, Local Flood Plain Management
Program through building and zoning permit reviews and environmental review
processes.
7. Carry out the policies of the Kings County Hazardous Waste Management Plan
through zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
8. Implement the Kings County General Plan in coordination with the cities and
unincorporated communities in Kings County.
9. Continue to review and update of the new Development Code to ensure
consistency with the 2035 Kings County General Plan.
10. Implement all of the elements of the General Plan.
11. Complete the update of the Kings County Housing Element.
12. Implement the mandated Integrated Waste Management Plan, ~WMP) through
zoning permit review and environmental assessment process.
13. Continue the Countywide Regional implementation of the GIS system, and
automate the General Plan and Zoning maps, continue implementation of the
GIS System into the general plan, zoning, land division, and environmental
assessment procedures, and provide GIS information to the Board and
Commissions, other departments and agencies, and the public where and when
appropriate.
14. Implement and maintain the County's GIS web application to provide increased
accessibility to planning information, and support KinQ$ EDC, Kings County
Emergency Services and First Responding Agencies, and other County
Departments.
15. Provide GIS Services to the City of Avenal, City of Hanford, and other Cities or
Districts that contract with the County for such services.
16. Provide staff and administrative services for the Building Division (Budget Unit
279000) and LAFCO of Kings County (Budget Unit 280000).
17. Continue staff training and mentorship efforts to build and retain a strong
foundation of knowledgeable and experienced staff and decrease potential
attrition.
18. Continue to provide staff support to the Agricultural Advisory Committee and
conduct studies as necessary.
19. Continue to provide staff support to the Kings County Water Commission and
conduct research as necessary.
The requested combined Budget for these two divisions for 201516 is $1 ;815,878 in
gross cost and $1,198,832 in net cost, which includes $24,227 Cost Applied from the
LAFCO (280000) budget for services provided by the Planning Division. The total is a
increase of $98,757 from 2014-2015 due largely to an increase in IT charges resulting
from their new billing charge based upon data usage on County servers. The following
is a breakdown by division.
The Requested Budget for the Building Division for 2014-15 is $604,374 with $403,655
in revenue and $8,041 in Cost Applied Funds for services provided to the Planning
(270000) Division. This includes an un-reimbursed cost of $192,510. This is
approximately a 22% decrease from last year's un-reimbursed cost. The decrease in
cost for this division is due to estimated increase in Licenses and Permits Revenue.
Revenues are projected at $403,655, which is an increase of about 22.45% in revenue
from what was estimated for FY 2014-15.
The Requested Budget for the Planning Division for 2015-16 is for a total of $1,741,029
up $26,275 from last year's approved budget. This includes an un-reimbursed cost of
$931,473. This is an approximate 3% increase from last year's un-reimbursed cost. IT
charges represented the largest increase in the overall budget with an increase of
$51,536 attributed to new billing based upon data used on IT servers which represents
a 156% increase from last year. This budget also includes an increase of consultant
expenses of $50,000 to pay for the consultant expenses associated with the Housing
Element Update which is mandated by the State of California and also the match
requirement associated with the Caltrans Sustainable Transportation Planning Grant to
study the Kettleman City area Circulation.
Revenues are projected at $86,136, a 28.33% increase from estimated 2014-15
Revenue. The Community Development Agency's annual dues payment to KCAG is
estimated at $5,356. No Fixed Assets are requested.
1. Continued training for LAFCO staff and counsel on operational procedures
and processes.
2. Process all applications for reorganization, etc., within the prescribed time
limits.
3. Process all spheres of influence amendments for the cities, communities, and
special districts in Kings County and prepare resources for the next required
update.
4. Review and assist Cities and Districts with the preparation of detailed MSRs
for any Sphere of Influence Amendment application submitted to LAFCO to
ensure compliance with Government Code Section 56430.
5. Conduct studies and analysis to comply with new State law requirements.
6. Continue involvement in CALAFCO workshops and training events to keep
staff informed and knowledgeable of State Law changes and innovative
approaches to more effectively conducting LAFCO practices.
Kings County Department of Finance provides accounting services to LAFCO, and
this budget is included in the County's budget as a General Fund program for this
purpose. The County's portion of the LAFCO budget is shown under General Fund
Contribution. The cities' portion is shown as Intergovernmental Revenue.
LAFCO Discussion:
The 2015-16 Budget for LAFCO, which is proposed for adoption on May 22, 2015,
includes the day-to-day operations of LAFCO, including administration and
application processing activities. The General LAFCO Activities represents about
half of the overall effort in this budget.
The budget is for a total of $51,453, which is an increase of $37 from last year's
approved budget. The staff related costs are identified as Administrative Allocation
due to transfer of costs to Community Development Agency Budget 270000 in the
amount of $35,560 which is a 3.68% increase from last year. Revenues are
projected at $27,227, up $21 from the 2014-2015 Budget. This amount includes the
estimated LAFCO Application Fees of $3,000 and City shares for half of the
remaining LAFCO budget. The County covers the remaining half of the LAFCO
Budget share of $24,227, which is a $17 increase from last FY and shown as
Unreimbursed Cost in the budget. The total budget estimate is $51,453.
The budget is funded equally between the cities and the County, except for
estimated LAFCO Fee activity projected for LAFCO application processing. The total
cost of the budget, less any revenue, is divided evenly and the Kings County Department of Finance collects the money and accounts for it in separate accounts.
Any money remaining from the previous year's budget will be carried over and
applied to this budget. Next year's funding support will include any carryover funds,
but the amount will not be known until the books are closed for the year.
The County is the recipient of fines, fees and forfeiture and other revenues that were
previously included in the Court's budget exclusively. An agreement was reached with
the Court that established a mechanism of revenue sharing for a long list of specific fines and fees. It is out of the proceeds of these revenues and State Trial Court
realignment funds that the County makes its contribution to the State, which then
dispenses funding back to the Courts in Kings County.
In place of a Public Defender's office, Kings County contracts with independent
attorneys to represent indigent defendants. Contracts are issued to twenty
attorneys; eleven are assigned to represent felony defendants (three of those
attorneys handle prison cases), and five are assigned to represent misdemeanor
defendants, three are full-time juvenile contract defense attorneys, and there is one
misdemeanor contract conflict attorney. Also included in this budget is the contract
for the Coordinating Attorney who oversees the activites of these twenty attorneys'
between the Courts and the County.
For multiple defendant cases, or conflicts among the attorneys and/or defendants,
the Court appOints counsel from a separate list. These attorneys, generally referred
to as "conflict attorneys," are paid on an hourly basis.
Contract increases of 2.0% for all contracted attorneys are recommended to be
included for FY 15/16.
 Provide quality customer service.
 Implement current Performance Measurement Plan over the course of five (5)
years.
 Maintain Annual Performance Indicators in the collection of current support and
collection on arrears.
 Maintain a zero net cost to the County of Kings.
 Remain in compliance.
 Improve inter-agency relations with Kings County Courts and Human Services
Agency.
In the requested 2015/16 budget, several assumptions are made. The first assumption
is that our department's administrative baseline funding will remain flat 'from the
2014/15 baseline funding.
Our preliminary planning allocation letter issued by the California Department of Child
Support Services on February 25,2015 indicated funding of $4,133,667. This amount
does not include the Electronic Data Processing (EDP) portion of the budget. The
State EDP budget request will be $51,312.00 in 2015/16 which is included in our county
budget, but is subject to state approval. This increased EDP request is a result of a
new published pricing/billing model implemented by the County Office of Information
Technology in 2012/13. As a result of this new billing method, our information
technology charges and EDP budget will vary from year to year.
The countywide budgeted 2% COLA is the second assumption. This 2% COLA
increased our salaries by $59,000 over our original 2014/15 budget. This increase
coupled with increased CAP charges of $28,000 and a substantial increase of $49,000
in employees choosing to purchase Health Insurance have combined to make
budgeting a continuously flat allocation very difficult.
Total anticipated revenue from the state is $4,184,979 contingent upon a state
approved budget. Additional revenue of $4,000 is anticipated from interest earnings. In
years past we budgeted $11,000 from the Human Services Agency, going forward we
will eliminate this inter-agency revenue per state direction.
For FY 15/16 the Department is not requesting to purchase fixed assets, or capital
improvements. The Department is requesting software maintenance renewals for
Quest, Time Clock Plus, Survey Monkey, and Appriss Justice Xchange as well as
Single Sign-On - a total of $5,515.00.
This Department will continue to foster an inter-agency relationship with the Kings
County Family Law Facilitator by housing a Child Support Specialist at the courts one
day per week. This person is available to answer child support related questions from
potential clients as well as assist court staff assigned to child support cases, as needed.
In turn, the Family Law Facilitator is at the Child Support office one day per week
providing expertise and a one-stop location for parents who need help with legal forms,
to establish, modify or terminate child support orders; explain the process of
establishing paternity as well as provide draft calculations for child support amounts.
We are making efforts to have a similar relationship with the Human Services Agency.
Some of the changes of note for FY 15/16 in salaries and employee benefits are as
follows:
 The department is requesting to delete 2.0 vacant Child Support Specialist 1111
positions. The potential implementation of a 2% COLA, which results in $59,000
more in employee costs than in the previous year, as well as increased CAP and
Information Technology (I.T.) costs have combined to make eliminating the 2
vacant positions necessary.
 The department is requesting to delete 1.0 Process Server position. Our Process
Server will retire June 30, 2015 and with a contract already in place with
ActionServ to provide out of county services, the vendor will now be utilized to
provide the in-county services as well.
 The department is requesting to add 1.0 Child Support Specialist III. This
position will be a lead worker for the training team. Due to our small size, the
imbalance between the Child Support Specialist and that of an Eligibility Worker
at the Human Services Agency is very limiting regarding the upward mobility of
Child Support staff. Over the course of the last fiscal year between retirements,
staff transferring to Human Services and general career changes by employees,
Child Support employee turnover rate is 25%. With turnovers of that magnitude
a training team was formed to train all new hires. The training is a full 8 weeks
and during the time that the Training Team is working with new hires their
everyday full case load remains a part of their job duties. In order to eliminate
some of the stress of performing both functions, a Lead Worker position is
requested to be created. This person will be responsible for organizing and
leading all the trainings of new hires, ensuring the Compliance Training is
completed by all staff annually, completing documentation related to mandatory
State trainings as well as a thorough review of the policy and procedures
documents and verifying the documents are up to date for all case workers. This
lead position may also fill in for employees on protected leaves to ensure Child
Support cases are processed timely in an employee absence. As a courtesy, if
room permits, the Training Team also invites Business Technology Center
(BTC) students to attend. This allows students attending the class at the Adult
School to receive employable skills that are beneficial to them as well as the
community.
 Extra Help - No funds are available to budget for this category as we have done
in the past. With so much of our costs dictated by contracts or based on fair
share costs, such as CAP, IT, Workers Comp, etc. that continue to rise each
year while our annual allocation has remained stagnant since 2002, areas such
as this begin to rely on salary savings to fund them. If salary savings are
realized then this expense may be able to be funded, if needed.
 Health Insurance - Increased by $56,700. The vacant positions are budgeted
with health insurance costs for a family of two (2). Once these positions are filled
they may decline health insurance. There were also a couple of employees who
plan to add insurance and/or add family members.
Some of the changes to note for FY 15/16 in services and supplies are as follows:
 Service Fees - Although no change in budgeted amounts, our in-house Process
Server will retire on June 30, 2015. Therefore the reliance on our contracted
vendor, ActionServ will increase. Our contract already specifies an in county
charge for successful service or non-service which makes the transition that
much smoother. Also, in April 2015 we will become an electronic process
service county. This gives us the ability to send the needed documents
electronically to ActionServ. This will save on paper and toner, although how
significant remains to be seen.
 In-Service Training - This category was decreased from 6,000 to O. With very
few accounts that are discretionary in nature, In-Service Training will remain at
zero, until we have salary savings, if any.
 Travel & Expense - This category was decreased from 30,000 to 19,000. With
very few accounts that are discretionary in nature, Travel & Expense will be
monitored closely until salary savings are achieved to transfer more funds into
this account. On average this expense has been 20,000 - 25,000 annually.
The Budget for Court Reporters is requested at $24,836. Costs include $24.836 for
Social Security & Retirement costs.
The Requested and Recommended Budget have been prepared by the County
Administrative Office and reviewed with the assigned member of the Grand Jury.
Meeting reimbursement has traditionally been paid to Grand Jurors at the rate of $10
per meeting. In FY 01-02, an increase to $11 per meeting was adopted. Since FY
2002-03, the Requested Budget includes a $15/meeting day, State-mandated rate.
DEPARTMENTAL OBJECTIVES:
1) Maintain quality legal representation
2) Cooperate with Probation, Human Services and District Attorney's offices to
resolve issues whenever possible so as:
a. To better ensure the clients' best resolution to their case and/or
problems.
b. To assist in judicial economy whenever possible
c. To participate and assist any organization whose purpose is to offer
services to aid in the protection of children.
d. To assist in the gathering of information to provide for proper
recommendations pertaining to emotionally disturbed juveniles.
DISCUSSION:
There is continued need in the budget for psychological evaluations and an investigator
for the Minor's Advocates Department.
1) Contract for the professional services of a psychologist. Due to change in court
funding, it is necessary for the Minor's Advocates Department to provide for a
psychologist who will complete thorough psychological evaluations for juveniles
with serious emotional and mental health disorders. Such evaluations will
provide diagnosis and recommendations for treatment, which are necessary for
determining appropriate dispositions for juveniles before the court due to criminal
offenses, but who are also emotionally disturbed. This department is dedicated
to providing the best of legal representation .. However, the court must be made
especially aware of the problems and recommendations for those children
suffering from emotional disorders. This appears to be an ongoing problem with
minors who have serious mental health problems. At this time there is problem
acquiring a clinical psychologist.
2) The department is responsible for the billing of interpreting services for out-ofcourtroom
interviews. To maintain quality legal representation for Non-English
speaking clients, hearing impaired clients and their parents.
3) There is a continuing need for an experienced bilingual investigator due to the
complexity and seriousness of delinquency cases, including, but not limited to
gang cases.
4) Due to the current case load a request for an Extra Help Attorney 1111 is included
in the FY 15/16 budget. The Extra Help Attorney will assist with the increase in
juvenile dependency and delinquency cases court appearances and client
interviews.
Court Charges and Billing
1) The department's procedure for billing the courts for legal representation of
parties before the court on a dependency case, (Welfare and Institutions Code
300) continues to remain unchanged. Dependency case attorneys include
attorneys from this department, 3 juvenile contract attorneys and list of conflict
attorneys.
The number of cases has increased substantially from the previous year. This is
directly reflected in the amount of investigation cost incurred. [State law requires
any child over four (4) to be interviewed.] The "recovery" costs have drastically
increased to the volume of dependency cases and the increase in conflict
attorney rates that was approved in January 2015.
Billing to the courts includes:
a) Services of the Minor's Advocates Department, including attorneys,
support staff, and investigator.
b) Services of the contract attorneys, also for dependency cases
c) Services of the conflict attorneys, on dependency cases
2) Conflict Attorneys billing to the County for legal representation on delinquency
and dependency cases is also processed through this department.
The requested 2015/2016 budget includes only $2,250 in expenses and revenues
awaiting specific projects to be approved by the Fish & Game Commission and the
Kings County Board of Supervisors.
The Proposed 2015/2016 Budget includes contributions (Other Charges) to the Road
budget (925100) from the Road Fund in the amount of $12,581,776. This is an
increase of $392,542 from the Adopted 2014/2015 Budget of $12,189,234. The
projected $4,981,776 of unreimbursed costs will come from the Road Fund
beginning fund balance for FY 15/16 which is projected to be $9,149,037.
1. Continue the on-going assessment of department organization and staffing to
assure community effectiveness and operational efficiencies.
2. Provide input to the Board, the CAO, state agencies and local legislators on the
state budget, federal health care reform and other issues that could affect Health
Department programs as well as other health care services available to Kings
County residents.
3. Implement the goals identified in the Departmental Strategic Plan for achievement
in FY 2015-16, including:
a. Develop duty statements and competency checklists for each position.
b. Identify key operational and programmatic data and develop a data dashboard.
c. The Public Health Emergency Preparedness team will work with the County
Office of Emergency Management to integrate Public Health response to the
operational area in the event of an emergency.
4. Prepare the Department to apply for accreditation by the Public Health
Accreditation Board to be achieved no later than December 31, 2016.
5. Assess all programs, policies and procedures using the Criteria for Performance
Excellence adopted by the Baldrige Performance Excellence Program.
1. Continue to strengthen and prioritize services for children and their families;
meeting the demand for National and State-clriven outcome measures and
mandates. A partnership with Kings County Child Welfare Services resulted in
the implementation of the State mandated program, "Katie A." and provides
Behavioral Health entitlement and access to care services for foster children.
Other services that are expanding are Parent-Child Interactive Therapy (earlyage
mental health program), mental health screenings for children up to the age
of 17, Truancy Intervention and Prevention Program (TIPP) and further
outreach through the PEl plan of the Mental Health Services Act and other
evidenced-based pilots to address early on-set behavioral problems that
continue to impact the developmental school years.
2. Continue the Development and Collaboration of the SB1022 framework with
Kings County Sheriffs Office. Probation. and providers; establishing program
plans and outcomes for the full implementation of a Day Treatment Center,
vocational, SUD and mental health services for inmates transitioning back into
their communities. This program is slated for FY 201512016 implementation.
3. Build Mental Health Residential Crisis Beds; with a grant submission under
SB82 for 8 crisis beds, a clinical and medical provider, and strengthens
Behavioral Health, Kings View Crisis Services, Adventist Health, Kings County
Law Enforcement, and other community stakeholders to ensure the safety,
security, and minimization of county resources in dealing with psychiatric
emergencies.
4. Expand the Collaborative Justice Treatment Court (CJTC) by seeking and
securing SAMHSA Grant funding and Establishing an Memorandum of
Understanding between Behavioral Health and Kings County yourts. With
Courts and other County Agency partners, the Department will continue to
advocate for the least restrictive environment for individuals suffering from
substance abuse disorders, PTSD and mental illnesses who are incarcerated or
face incarceration, or face an eminent release into the community without
resources. The pilot for this combined Veteran's, Drug, and Behavioral Health
Court has moved from a pilot project into a permanent program as of July,
2014.1n FY 201512016, an evaluation, expanded outcome measures, and
increased participation (more slots) will be added.
5. Completely convert and implement the protocols of all service related activities
into the department's new Data Management System; Anasazi. With this
automated system, reporting outcomes and creating performance based
measures with help the department track effectiveness, access to care and
service gap areas to be addressed. Ensure that data collected at local level is
interfaced with State data management system-DRC on an on-going basis. 
6. Continue to Improve and Monitor HIPAA practices, and structural and policy
safeguards that ensure the protection of all private health information for the
department. Re-vamp and/or improve encryption mechanisms and monitor
ongoing risks to breaches in security in partnership with Information Services
Department.
7. Create goals, objectives, and strategies that serve to prevent Suicide in Kings
County. Through the Tulare/Kings Suicide Task Force, the department will seek
to lower the risks associated with suicide ideation and follow-through. As part of
the Prevention and Early Intervention Statewide programs, a suicide response
LOSS team was implemented in Kings County and will need to be strengthened
and the volunteer base expanded to ensure the availability of post-vention
services to family members in Kings County. In June, 2014, the Statewide PEl
plans sunset, however Kings will continue to fund and partner with Tulare
County toward Suicide Prevention, Student Mental Health, and Stigma
reduction.
8. Establish a Medi-Cal/EPSDT billing component with Department; ensuring that
funding is being maximized for the County and increasing access to care for
children and youth; creating sustainability and growth toward community
services.
9. Contribute to the sustainability of CalMHSA efforts; shifting a percentage of
local County PEl funds to this governing board (through stakeholder process)
for the benefit of capacity building and leveraging their resources for Kings
County.
10. Implement only new AOD Prevention, Treatment. or Mental Health Programs
which have been established as Evidenced-Based: remaining consistent with
the expectation that an evaluation and monitoring component accompany all
programs funded by the department. Continue to re-visit and adapt department
Strategic Plans and MHSA Plans to meet the State (CaIOMS) and Federal
(NOMS) performance expectations and accountability standards.
11. Develop a QAlSystems Implementation/HIPAAlAccountability/Safety function
within the department to meet the growing needs of data collection, IT
responsibilities, security and safety practices, and quality compliance and
consistency across all units within the department.
12. Establish A memorandum of understanding (MOUl between NaphCare and
Kings View Corporation to further delineate the provisions of WIC 5150
assessments and aftercare services to assist an individual released from
incarceration back into the community.
The expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Administration budget unit
#422500 is cost applied across four budget units (420000, 420100, 422100, and
422200) in the amount of $1,197,386; Budget Unit #420000 is $8,512,590;
Budget Unit #420100 is $1,265,823; Budget Unit #422100 is $2,099,603; Budget
Unit #422200 is $7,589,763; and Budget Unit #422400 is 129,415. The
combined total expenditure budget for Behavioral Health Department is
$19.597.194 for FY 201512016. Revenues for FY 2015/2016 are $19,562,643. In
addition, the department has a mandated MHSA prudent reserve at the County
level in the amount of $2,138,118. Net County Costs total is $34,551, which is the
MOE total for this department.
1. Implement 2015-2020 Strategic Plan to include services provided by the
Family Resource Initiative, the School Readiness Initiative, and the
Elevating Early Care and Education (E3) Initiative
2. Continue to implement:
i. Linkages to Learning Program
ii. Backpack to Success Program
iii. New Parent Kit Distribution
3. Provide site visits and technical assistance for all grantees.
4. Update on a regular basis the First 5 Kings County website.
5. Review and revise Strategic Plan for FY 2015-2020 as required by
Proposition 10.
6. Submit all necessary and required reports to State Commission.
7. Develop new initiative/project to address the needs of the StrategiC Plan
for FY 2015-2020.
8. Revise policy manual to reflect new Strategic Plan 2015-2020.
DISCUSSION:
The requested expense budget for the First 5 Unit at the Kings County Health
Department is $1,934,114 for FY 2015/16. This is an increase of $69,364 from the FY
2014/15 Adopted Budget. The increase includes the projected reclassification of the
First 5 Program Officer to First 5 Services Coordinator as well as $40,000 for the First 5
Initiative.
1. Continue with development and implementation of an automated time study system to
reduce current processing time and increase accuracy in the existing manual time
study system.
2. Implement the Fortis document imaging and electronic file system in the Fiscal
Processing unit. Move towards paperless workflows throughout fiscal processing.
3. Implement a SharePoint Server system in HSA to facilitate collaboration and allow
staff to use familiar applications and web-based tools to create, access, store, and
track documents and data in a central location.
4. Centralize technology management systems and HSA technical support to provide
enhanced user support for HSA staff, support of administrative and customer support
applications, and improve collaboration with the Kings County Information Technology
Department.
5. Research and incorporate enhanced Federal and State claiming processes to
maximize administrative funding allocations, realignment funds, and other revenues.
This is required to minimize unreimbursed County general fund costs while complying
with Federal and State funding mandates.
6. Continue to address space issues related to an increase of allocated positions and
program expansion through possible capital projects, capital leases, or rentedlleased
facilities.
7. Implement and have a fully operational unit of staff that is responsible for going out
into the community, food distribution, health fairs, and locations that provide minor
consent services to provide applications and continuing case services.
8. Continue with implementation of soft case management in the APS, IHSS, and CPS
Divisions.
9. Develop and Implement the Linkages program between CWS and ETS.
10.lrnplement the Online CalWORKs Appraisal Tool (OCAT) Work Readiness Appraisal
Questionnaire in ETS.
Funding Background:
The requested expense budget for the administration of Social Services, CaIWORKs, Cal
Fresh, and Medi-Cal is $41,475,666 for FY 15/16. This is an increase of $5,790,520 from the
FY 14/15 adopted budget. This increase is primarily the result of an increase in salaries and
benefits for the requested positions, an increase in child care, and increases in maintenance
SI&G for office remodeling. The increase in contract services is due to increases in job
training and outreach and enrollment. The net County cost for Administration is $357,874 and
includes the required match for senior services including nutrition resulting from the contract
with the KingslTulare Area Agency on Aging, the Corcoran modular lease payment, and the
lease payment for the new Adult Services building. The budgets for departments 510000
and 520000 reflect the application of $24,855,482 in Realignment revenue. This reflects the
revenue from the 2011 Public Safety Realignment and the 1991 realignment. No transfers
from the Health Realignment trust are planned. The 510000 budget unit for Administration
uses $5,033,283 of realignment. The remaining $19,822,199 of realignment is applied to the
520000 budget unit for Categorical Aid. Social Services realignment is heavily dependent on
State sales tax collections. We are anticipating similar economic conditions to FY16 and have
budgeted accordingly. The unreimbursed cost for 520000, after the application of available
revenues and realignment, is $2,394,225, an increase in requested County General Fund
unreimbursed costs of $214,173 from FY 14/15. The requested FY 15/16 expense budget for
Dept. 520000 is $4,032,440 more than FY 14/15. The largest expenditure increase is in
foster care and reflects a large case load increase. The expense increase in CalWORKs cash
assistance reflects anticipated caseload increase resulting from the drought and the 5% grant
increase that is effective in April, 2015. The expense budget request for department 540000
is $193,500, no change from FY 14/15. No changes in service delivery are anticipated.
With the uncertainties surrounding FY 15/16 funding, it is possible that Human Services
might not receive funding necessary to support this budget as requested. Although the State
budget appears stable, our Agency will proceed with extreme caution into the' FY 15/16
budget year. Human Service Agencies in many counties have suffered large funding
shortages during the State budget crisis and have had to resort to serious layoffs to
compensate. Our Agency has, so far, weathered the storm without having to sacrifice
services or staff. This is because the Kings County Human Services Agency has always
operated conservatively. We did not build capacity unnecessarily simply because funding
was available; rather, the philosophy of this Agency has been to build staff and service
delivery capacity only to the levels necessary to adequately and reasonably meet the needs
of our residents and community.
1. Facilitate over 25,000 visits to the One-Stop Career Center. Provide case-managed
career technical training, On-the-Job Training, work experience and other
employment, training and placement services for 450 Kings County residents.
2. Meet or exceed performance standards set forth by the U.S. Department of Labor.
3. Effectively respond to business closures impacting Kings County employers and
employees, placing at least 70% of the dislocated workers into jobs or vocational
training.
4. Serve as a primary point of contact for labor market and socio-economic data for
Kings County.
5. Manage the One-Stop Job Center, which includes the JTO/EDC offices, the
Employment Development Department, the State Department of Rehabilitation,
Youth Services, and other education, employment and training partners.
6. Coordinate and administer local, state and federal business incentive zones which
benefit local businesses and help to attract new jobs and investment into Kings
County.
7. Complete the revamping of the Workforce Investment Board, renamed the
Workforce Development Board under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act
(WIOA); and, prepare the administrative and programmatic plan to transition into
WIOA.
DISCUSSION
Revenue for Workforce Investment Act (WIA) funded programs is subject to the receipt
of federal funding. That funding is anticipated to remain steady through FY '16.
Funding for economic development marketing is provided through a $282,000 contract
with the Kings County Economic Development Corporation (EDC).
JTO's role in coordinating economic development activities in Kings County has
resulted in strong relationships with existing businesses. Our involvement with the
California Central Valley Economic Development Corporation favorably positions Kings
County with real estate brokers and other decision makers across the U.S.
This Department will continue to oversee business incentive programs such as the
Recycling Market Development Zone, the Governor's Economic Development Incentives, Foreign Trade Zone and the Federal HUB Zone through its association with
the EDC.
JTO plans to continue the operation of a large work experience program in conjunction
with the Kings County Human Services Agency. Funding for this program is anticipated
at $2 million for the fiscal year, and has been included in anticipated revenues. The
objective of this strategy is to assist TANF public assistance recipients to gain work
experience, get hired, and become self-sufficient. The operation of this activity is
dependent upon available funding from the Kings County Human Services Agency.
Major programmatic changes for the 2015-2016 budget include: strong continued
partnerships with Valley workforce agencies to compete for regional workforce grants;
the continued emphasis on business retention and attraction; and the planning and
implementation of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act.
Line item changes of significance from the previous budget include a reduction in
Regular employees, reflecting an elimination of three positions from the approved 2015
budget; a significant increase in the Maintenance SI&G item, reflecting the need to
paint and replace carpet at 120 N. Irwin Street after fourteen years of wear; an increase
in the Travel and Expense item, which reflects an underestimation of costs in the FY
'14 budget. This category is impacted by the regional, state and nationwide business
attraction strategy, which calls for missions to five major real estate markets throughout
the United States to inform real estate brokers and site selectors about Kings County
and the entire Central Valley. The requested budget is projected to increase in two
categories managed by other Departments, namely Informational Technology Services
and CAP Charges. Requested equipment includes a replacement printer, six
computers, two servers utilized by and funded by the Kings County Economic
Development Corporation and a card swipe system to automate tracking of persons
utilizing the Career Center.
This budget anticipates the receipt of $4,648,864, representing an increase of roughly
$200,000 over planned 2014-2015 revenues. The 2015-2016 budget includes a $2
million work experience program funded through the Kings County Human Services
Agency.
In 2015-2016 the library plans to complete the following:
 Administrative Services
 Establish a cross-functional team with the librarians for library materials
acquisitions by July, 2015.
 DeSign and distribute Friends of the Library 5 Year Services Report by
July, 2015.
 Develop a Fund Development Strategy with emphasis on the Lemoore
Branch Library by June, 2016.
 Update Library Card and Meeting Room Policy by October, 2015.
 Create new baby library Card by April, 2016.
 Develop library marketing audit and plan by June, 2016.
 Present the San Joaquin Valley Library System's Strategic Plan to the
Library Advisory Board by May, 2016.
 Branch Services
 Investigate the feasibility of portable electronic devices for mobile
reference, children's and teen services, customer circulation. Share
findings with the Library Advisory Board by October, 2015.
 Purchase and install new tables and chairs at the Corcoran Branch Library
by November, 2015.
 Create new Family Place Library at the Stratford Branch Library by
August, 2015.
 Complete mural design and installation of the mural for the Family Place
Library by August, 2015.
 Install additional DVD storage units at all outlying branch libraries by
November, 2015.
 Investigate the feasibility of security cameras at the Hanford Branch
Library. Report findings to the Library Advisory Board by April, 2016.
 Purchase and install changing stations at all branch libraries by October,
2015.
 Collaborate with Hanford High Schools on creating database and library
resource presentations by November, 2015.
 Plan and provide 2016 Local Author Lecture by May, 2016.
 Public Works is proposing to replace the chiller condensing tower unit at
the Stratford Branch Library.
 IT Services
 Install Tech-Logic RFID technology at the Hanford Branch Library by
January, 2016.
 Install self-service LPTONE printing stations at Lemoore and Corcoran
branch libraries by July, 2015.
 Investigate the feasibility of working with County IT to establish wireless
connectivity at the Kettleman City Branch Library.
 Establish WIFI hotspot with the purchase of library furniture and electrical
upgrades at the Avenal Branch Library by November, 2015.
 Materials Management
 Weed the print collections using the system wide weeding process at all
branch libraries by May, 2016.
 Update the Collection Development Policy by June, 2016.
 Establish Baker and Taylor as another preprocessing vendor by February,
2016.
 Transition the DVD collections at the outlying branches to locking DVD
cases by March, 2016.
This year's 2015-2016 budget reflects the following major changes:
The Kings County Library is requesting support to install Radio Frequency Identification
(RFID). RFID technology will track books, CD's, DVD's, and other library collection
items. As items are checked out by patrons and then returned and re-shelved, a
tremendous amount of labor is required to move and track them. RFID tagging of the
library's collection automates the library's workflow. Library staff acknowledges that
some of the advantages of RFID are:
 Reduce material handling time.
 Better accuracy of library collection inventory.
 Better management of the library collection.
 Reduction repetitive motion.
 High detection rate and anti-theft capabilities of library collection.
 Improved location of lost andlor missing library materials.
This will be a three year project and will be implemented in three phases. Tagging the
entire library collection will begin in 2016. The library has submitted a fixed-asset
request to begin installation at the Hanford Branch Library. Subsequent phases will
include installations of Corcoran and Lemoore branch libraries in 2017; and Avenal,
Kettleman City, and Stratford in 2018. Each year the library will submit a fixed-asset
request for Board of Supervisor approval. To begin this three year project, the library
has made the following changes to the 2015-2016 budget:
Services & Supplies
For this fiscal year, the Kings County Library is requesting to expend approximately
$72,000 to initiate the first phase of the RFID installation for the Hanford Branch Library.
The budget reflects a decrease of $3,000 in Library Maintenance, $10,000 in Library
Office Expense, $20,000 in Library Professional & Special Services, $4,000 in Library
Outreach Expense, $23,500 in Library Materials, and $11,500 in In-Service Training to
accommodate this expenditure request.
California State Funding
For 2014-2015, the Kings County Library did not receive any Public Library funding
revenue from the California State Library. 2015-2016 will not include any Public Library
funding revenue from the California State Library.
1. Continue agricultural research to provide local science based information that will
help sustain economic stability in Kings County's major industry.
2. Assist local clientele in the adoption of new technologies for improved production
practices.
3. Develop updated educational tools for use in the Agronomy program. The new
extension materials may be produced in multiple media formats and will focus on various aspects of Agronomy and nutrient management. Research needs will be
developed to address clientele agronomic problems and needs.
4. Grow and structure the county 4-H program to allow more middle management
opportunities for volunteers to be engaged.
5. Provide nutrition education training, materials and support to classroom teachers in
low-income schools. Develop a School Lunchroom program through new Cal-Fresh
position.
DISCUSSION:
The requested budget for FY 2015-16 is $227,363 unreimbursed County cost. This
amount represents a reduction from 2014-2015 of $11,141. This is the net result of
reducing Clerical staff from the current Executive Secretary, to an Office Assistant 11/111
($13,425), a replacement computer for $1,625 and $3,600 for new vehicle lease for an
Agronomy Advisor. During this year, UC Cooperative Extension will add on a
professional Agronomy Advisor and 4-H Advisor.
The Proposed 2015/2016 Budget includes General Fund contributions (Other
Charges) to the Park Budget in the amount of $1,262,955, an increase of $76,974
from 2014/2015. This increase is due to the following factors: The new Park
Superintendent has a step increase, maintenance equipment is up $3,000 adding
changes in both utilities, CAP charges and Other Charges. This budget request
includes replacing a dump trailer at a cost of $7,726 and an equipment cover for
$12,000.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumUlate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
It was adopted in FY 2010/11 to fund a portion of the Morgue using $390,000 of these
impact fees. In FY 2011/12 the Board approved using $2,290,000 for the design of
the housing unit of the jail. The Board of Supervisors authorized a five-year study of
impact fees in FY 2014/15. That study is currently underway. A new Impact Fee
Hearing will be held during the first quarter of FY 2015/16, and an updated construction schedule will be adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves.
The balance in this fund for the proposed budget was $290,667.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
The Board of Supervisors authorized a five-year study of impact fees in FY 2014/15.
That study is currently underway. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held during the
first quarter of FY 2015/16, and an updated construction schedule will be adopted. At
this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed
budget was $878,069.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
The Board of Supervisors authorized a five-year study of impact fees in FY 2014/15.
That study is currently underway. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held during the
first quarter of FY 2015/16, and an updated construction schedule will be adopted. At
this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed
budget was $748,827.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 2010/11 it was adopted that these impact fees will no longer be collected. The
funds in the reserve were adopted to be used on the Sheriff's Evidence space
expansion. Those funds were not used.
The Board of Supervisors authorized a five-year study of impact fees in FY 2014/15.
That study is currently underway. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held during the
first quarter of FY 2015/16, and an updated construction schedule will be adopted. At
this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed
budget was $99,876.
Impact fees first appeared in the budget in FY 07/08. Impact fees have been collected
since 2005, however, time was needed for sufficient funds to accumulate before
project construction could commence. Future projects will appear in this budget unit,
as the construction schedule and funding levels permit.
In FY 2011/12 the Board suspended collecting impact fees related animal control
facilities. The Board of Supervisors authorized a five-year study of impact fees in FY
2014/15. That study is currently underway. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held
during the first quarter of FY 2015/16, and an updated construction schedule will be
adopted. At this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund for
the proposed budget was $5,305.
The Board of Supervisors authorized a five-year study of impact fees in FY 2014/15.
That study is currently underway. A new Impact Fee Hearing will be held during the
first quarter of FY 2015/16, and an updated construction schedule will be adopted. At
this time, all funds are set-aside in reserves. The balance in this fund for the proposed
budget was $32,096.
In prior years, Administration recommended that your Board contribute the equivalent
amount of the Williamson Act ($2,413,014 in 08/09) to the Capital Projects budget unit
to help to pay for upcoming capital projects. However, due to the serious financial
difficulties at the state, Williamson Act revenues was not budgeted in FY 09/10 or
10/11. FY 09/10 did not show any Williamson Act revenues in the capital budget, due
to the state not appropriating them in FY 09/10 and FY 10/11. In FY 11/12, $623,559
was received due to new revenue generated by revisions to the term for newly
renewed and new Williamson Act and Farmland Security Zone contracts related to
Assembly Bill 1265. It is estimated that the County will receive $175,000 in FY 14/15
for capital projects. .
Hazardous Waste Revenues have been budgeted in the capital projects budget in the
past because these revenues have historically been treated as one-time revenue. In
FY 11/12 the County received only $211,786 of the $300,000 Budgeted in Hazardous
Waste funds, and all of that was budgeted in the Fire Fund revenues. No Hazardous
Waste funds were included in the FY 11/12 or FY 12/13 for the capital project budget.
In FY 12/13 and FY 13/14 it was adopted to budget the Hazardous Waste Revenues
showing a contribution to the Kettleman City Water project. The projection for FY
2014/15 is at $150,000, which is also recommended to go towards the Kettleman City
Water project.
Revenue in the amount of $496,000 is being transferred in to cover the Human
Services modular and parking lot improvement projects.
The contribution from the General Fund for FY 15/16 is a total of $1,908,821. This
includes $39,400 in the AB 1265 Williamson Act/Farmland Security Zone revenue,
$350,000 in hazardous waste fees, and $1,519,421 in one-time State Mandate
reimbursement funds.
For FY 2015/16, department requests for capital projects were reviewed by staff from
Public Works, Department of Finance and County Administration. All on-going
projects will be reviewed at year-end and will appear in the Final budget. The following
are projects which are recommended to be included in the FY 15/16 Capital Budget.
Project 82420015 - Fire System $50.000
This project is for a Sapphire fire suppression system will replace the current Halon fire
suppression system in Sheriffs Communications Center.
Project 82420020 - Repair/Replace Roof $100,000
This project is a placeholder for miscellaneous roof projects that are needed around
the County.
Project 82420032 - Parking Lot/Improvements $100.000
This project is a roll over from FY 14/15, and is a project related to H.S.A.
improvements. This project is estimated to be $100,000.
Project 82420080 - HVAC Upgrade $30.000
This project is for five replacement air conditioning units for the Records Storage
Warehouse building.
Project 82420085 - Jail Tunnel $2.126.100
This project is a rollover from FY 14/15 for the tunnel project that connects the new Jail
to the new Courthouse facility and is intended to be part of the exchange with the
State for the remaining Court Buildings. This project was originally budgeted in FY
11/12 at $3,285,262.
Project 82420089 - Modular Building $393.000
This project is to provide a modular building for Adult Services for the Human Services
Agency. It includes $250,000 for the first year of a three-year lease purchase, $85,000
for site work, and $58,000 for professional services for the project.
Project 82420094 - Burris Park Restrooms - $145.561
This project is for a new restroom building for Burris Park. The project is partially
funded with a Housing Related Parks Program grant in the amount of $133,175.
Project 82420097 - Parks Sunscreen - $8.100
This project is for a new awning building for the Parks Shop.
Project 82450007 - Success Dam Enlargement $33,068
This project was originally budgeted in FY 08/09 and has rolled for the last seven
years.
Project 82420091 - SB 1022 Project $20.432.451
BUDGET NUMBER 700000 - 700003
This project is related to the Jail Phase III expansion project, and is a rollover from FY
14/15. The project was originally budgeted at $20,654,233. It is shown in a separate
budget unit - 700001 KC SB 1022 project but is rolled up into the total Accumulated
Capital Outlay Fund 2000.
Project 82420057 - New Jail Construction $34.848.413
This project was originally budgeted in FY 2012/13 at $40,851,606, and is rolled over
to expand the jail to include a new housing unit, medical infirmary, central plant, and
expanded laundry, kitchen, booking, jail administration, and multi-purpose spaces.
This project is funding from the AB 900 Phase II grant, Public Protection Impact Fees,
and through additional financing. This project is now shown in a separate budget unit,
Budget Unit 700002 KC AB 900 Project but is rolled up into the total Accumulated
Capital Outlay Fund 2000.
Revenues:
 ST Aid - SB 1022 - Kings County was conditionally awarded $20,000,000 in
State SB 1022 funds January 16, 2014, which will be rolled over for FY 15/16.
 ST Aid - AB 900 - $29,695,631 for FY 15/16, Kings County was awarded a
$33,000,000 lease-revenue bond on March 8, 2012 for the expansion of its
jail facility.
 Revenue Transfer In - Public Protection Impact Fees anticipated from FY
2013/14 are $170,000 and the match financing for the jail is anticipated to be
$6,000,000.
Project 82420095 - SB 81 Project $20.432.451
This project is related to the Juvenile Detention Remodel project. The County was
conditionally awarded $9,600,000 in State lease-revenue bond funding for the project
on April 9, 2015. The project is budgeted at $11,663,000. It is shown in a separate
budget unit - 700003 KC SB 81 project but is rolled up into the total Accumulated
Capital Outlay Fund 2000.
The scheduled payments for 2014/2015 total $1,245,000 and there is an expense for
the Trustee fee of $2,500, and service fees totaling $3,700. Revenue is generated
through charges to the Retirement accounts for County departments and interest on
deposits totaling $1,251,200. This reflects anticipated lower costs of borrowing, when
compared to PERS charges applied to departments. We are approaching the 10 year
anniversary of the POB issuance. At the time, it was novel to issue these bonds using
a variable rate of One Month Libor plus .30 basis points. The good news is that the risk
so far has paid off handsomely! Analysis completed by Treasury Staff shows the actual
savings through March 2015 compared to the fixed rate POBs the County issued is
$2,691,765. The current annualized monthly rate charged in March 2015 was at .47%.
Because we expect interest rates to begin slowly riSing again, we are continually
evaluating the possible savings (if any) of refunding these bonds at a fixed rate.
However, we are very pleased with the success of this variable rate issue, as we
continue to borrow at less than 1.00%.
Since this debt was refinanced at a lower rate a new Budget Unit 900500 was created.
Budget Unit 900200 was eliminated and replaced by 900500.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2015/2016 totals $1,145,407 and includes the Debt Service for three areas where lease
payments are involved:
 The Cogeneration facility lease is budgeted at $273,413, scheduled to be paid
off in January of 2020.
 The 2008 Chevron Energy Project is budgeted at $532,522, scheduled to be
paid off in July of 2028.
 Covered Parking Solar Project is budgeted at $339,472, scheduled to be paid off
in July of 2027.
For these projects, revenue is generated by charging departments through their Utilities
account for the cost of making this annual payment.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2015/2016 totals $485,600 and includes the principal payment of $265,000, interest of
$211,100, plus service fees of $9,500. The AB 1265 Williamson Act and Farmland
Security Zone payments fund this payment. This bond is scheduled to be paid off in
June of 2029.
Based on estimates provided by the Department of Finance, the Budget for FY
2015/2016 totals $680,025 and includes the Debt Service of $455,000 for the principal
payment and $225,025 for the interest. This debt is scheduled to be paid off in June of
2028.
1. PeopleSoft Upgrade
The County leverages a software application from PeopleSoft in support of Human
Resources and Finance (payroll) functions. The vendor notified the County that the
current version (9.0) is at end of life. An upgrade to version 9.2 will occur by end of
calendar year 2015.
2. eBenefits System
The employee management system in use by Human Resources and Finance lacks the
capability for employees to self-service their payroll and benefit needs. lTD will continue
installation of enhancements to the existing system necessary to provide this selfservice
capability.
3. Time and Attendance System
County collection of time and attendance (payroll) information is currently performed in
a manual fashion. lTD will continue supporting the automation process such that
employees self-serve timecard information, managers (electronically) approve
timesheets and the resulting payroll data uploads into the County's Payroll System.
4. Credit Card Clearing System
Currently the County restricts methods of public payment for departmental charges
(taxes, fees, fines, etc.) to checks and cash. lTD will continue the process of adding
technology necessary in support of the Finance Department's effort to add credit cards,
debit cards and electronic checks, including via our Website and the Internet, to the list
of available payment options.
5. HIPAA Data Tracking Compliance
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) requires specific
protections be maintained over all health information which is stored electronically. lTD will continue deploying controlling technology, which monitors the location and use of
restricted information and helps ensure compliance with related HIPAA regulations.
6. IP Telephony Features
During the Fiscal Year 2015 / 2016 lTD will continue deploying phase II and phase III
advanced features which will allow the County to fully realize the promise of advanced
telephony services.
7. Assessor/Clerk/Recorder Record Management System
The lTD is working closely with the Assessor, Tax Collector, and Auditor Departments
to replace current legacy applications (Property and Clerk/Recorder management
systems) with a new state-of-the-art system provided by the Thomson Reuters
Corporation.
8. Network Backbone Upgrade
The County network switch infrastructure, which supports all computer connectivity
between departments and the Data Center, will continue undergoing an upgrade from
one Gigabit to ten Gigabit speed. In addition, replacing key portions of the copper wiring
with fiber optics in planned. The modifications will greatly advantage computer users by
reducing system response times.
9. Wi-Fi Deployment
The need for WIFI connectivity of handheld devices is growing rapidly. The wireless
infrastructure supporting these mobile devices is undergoing expansion, in terms of
security, availability (number of County office locations) and resiliency from failure.
10. Exchange Email System Archiving
Managing email communication to and from County offices occurs through a Microsoft
Exchange system. The vendor is discontinuing the current third party system used to
archive historical email messages. Selecting and implementing a replacement solution
will occur during the upcoming fiscal year.
11. Microsoft Share Point
The Human Services Agency has requested implementation of the SharePoint System
from Microsoft. The solution advantages employees and the clients they serve by
supporting enhanced collaboration, better case management functionality and the
implementation of a workflow toolset.
12.Application Software Upgrades
Several County support systems take advantage of the computing capability of the
County's mainframe system. Since decommissioning of the mainframe system is
underway, transitioning these functions to more modern software and hardware
environments is a major lTD focus. We will continue working with departmental users of
the various systems involved to eliminate the County's dependency.
13. Server Environment Version Upgrade
A virtual server operating environment upgrade from version 2008 to 2012 is scheduled.
The options available through the new version will add numerous important features
and greatly streamline management of the server hosting system.
SPECIAL DISCUSSION NOTE:
While the focus of effort is customer service, the Information Technology
Department must plan for keeping the County's technology infrastructure current
and secure. Ongoing Federal and State audits focused on data security will
continue intensifying over the next several of years. We expect the increased
attention to result in additional requirements that ultimately change how the County
leverages technology. The County, through efforts of the lTD, is currently ahead of
many other Central Valley counties - however, the new rules will result in even more
restrictions on how we protect technology assets and how they are used.
The FY 2015-2016 Liability Self-Insurance Budget is requested at $1,181,582, an
increase of $87,076 from last year. This request includes funding of administrative
and claims costs as well as funding catastrophic reserves.
The Revenue Transfer In is from the General Fund, Budget Unit 141000, Insurance.
Effective July 1, 2004, the Board of Supervisors approved a self-funded health
insurance program for all medical benefits as opposed to only self-funding the vision
and dental components of the plan as in the past.
In December, 2005 a $900,000 loan from the General Fund was transferred to the
Health Insurance Fund for cash flow purposes .. This loan was completely paid off in
the 2007/2008 Fiscal Year.
In July 2008, the County implemented a Wellness Program. In 2008 we began the
Wellness Program with 481 participants. This number has increased over the years
and in FY 2014/2015, there were 686 participants, which included employees, their
spouses and their over 18 year old dependents as well as retirees and COBRA
participants.
Currently the Health Insurance Fund is projecting a fully funded reserve. The County
agreed to absorb the employee's increase in premium up to $500,000 over two fiscal
years, 2014/15 and 2015/16. The increase that was paid out of the reserves for fiscal
year 2014/2015 is $44,600 and the budgeted amountfor FY 2015/2016 is $228,108 for
a total of $272,708 from the Health Insurance Reserve. In April, 2014, the County approved the on-site Kings County Employee Health Center.
The facility opened on October 1, 2014 and is available to employees who are in the
Kings County Health Plan as well as their spouses, dependents, retirees and Cobra
participants. The costs for the Health Facility will be funded out of the Health
Insurance Reserve account.
The 2015/2016 Budget for the Self-Insured Insurance Plan is $13,244,598. This is an
increase from the 2014/2015 budget of $1.368.947 due to an increase of
approximately 77 people to the plan.
Kings County opened this on-site Health Center on October 1, 2014. Insurance
Advisory Members recommended that Kings County open an on-site health facility to
the Board of Supervisors. In April, 2014, the Board of Supervisors approved the health
facility, with Medcor as the vendor. The Kings County Employee Health Center is
scheduled to open in late summer of 2014. The Health Center has been widely
accepted by the employees and their dependents as well as retirees and Cobra
participants. The facility is averaging 273 patients per month and those numbers
continue to increase.
The health facility is located in Building 5 at the Kings County Health Department. The
facility is open Monday through Saturday, with varying hours to accommodate the
employees' work schedules. The employees are not be required to use their sick time
for their own appointments, do not have to pay a copay, and do not have to meet the
insurance deductible for services provided by the health facility.
The contractual cost for the first years' fees for Medcor was $555,720 plus a $93,070
one time start up fee. These costs were approved by the Board of Supervisors in April,
2014. Other costs associates with the Health Center are as follows: miscellaneous
charges which include one-time facility improvements, an AED unit, furniture, and other
start up supplies were budgeted at $65,000; Medical supplies which include labs, some
prescription drugs and medical supplies were budgeted at $52,500 per year, office
supplies were budgeted at $10,000; Janitorial was budgeted at $36,400; Utilities were
budgeted at $14,000; and IT costs were budgeted $2,200 for a total budget of
$828,890. The requested budget for FY 201512016 is $686,500. This is a reduction from the Adopted 2014/2015 Budget of $142,390, due to the one time start of fee in
2014/2015 of $93,070 and because costs did not reach budgeted figures.
Based on the figures that our Health Insurance Broker/Consultants are estimating. we
will see a reduction in claims costs in the Health Insurance Fund in FY 2015/2016.
There is a time lag for reported claims, therefore, it is hard to estimate the savings in the
first year of the health facility.
Workers' Compensation claims have continued to increase over the past several
years. The total cost for claims for FY 2011/2012 were $2,621,923, 2012/2013 were
$2,045,276, 2013/2014 were $2,542,702 and 2014/2015 to date are at $3,170,022.
We are working diligently to try and keep claims to a minimum, however, the costs
associated with the claims continues to rise due to new legislation and the costs
associated with the more severe injuries. The Worker's Compensation Budget is
recommended at $4,162,646 for FY 2015/2016. $4,100,000 in costs are zeroed out
because they are cost applied to individual department budgets to reflect those
departments' Worker'S Compensation insurance premiums. The majority of the
remaining costs are offset by insurance proceeds on former employees whose costs
are borne by an excess insurance policy and a projected transfer from the General
Fund of $25,446.
This Budget Unit is a summary showing the total cost Countywide for Worker's
Compensation insurance coverage.
 Administration:
1. Assist all divisions in securing grants to address some services/equipment that
cannot be provided currently due to funding shortages.
2. Continued involvement in the San Joaquin Valley Clean Energy Organization as
a means of keeping up- to-date on available grants and energy saving programs
3. Have each Division prioritize the tasks/services/projects that need to be done by
identifying those tasks or projects that cannot be completed with current
available funding.
4. Continue to monitor all maintenance operations to ensure courteous, prompt,
and professional response to requests and complaints. Respond quickly to
comments and/or inquiries by members of the public or members of the Board of
Supervisors.
5. Continue to assist County Administration in the implementation of policies to
ensure cost effective use of vehicles; and to establish the most cost effective
fleet size.
6. Assist County Administration and represent the County's needs with respect to
the design and construction of the expansions of the County Jail and other
criminal justice facilities.
7. Have divisions continue to work with the Human Resources department in the
preparation of evaluations and disciplinary procedures.
8. Continue to provide oversight on the various construction projects. Work closely
with other departments, Administration and outside agencies to ensure timely
and cost effective completion of each project.
9. Provide timely personnel, accounting, fiscal and administrative services to all
Public Works Divisions and County Departments.
10. Implement a departmental page on the County website.
11. Bring an ADA Transition and Compliance Plan to the Board of Supervisors for
consideration.
 Roads & Bridges:
1. Continue to maintain the roads and bridges in a safe condition.
2. Complete the annual edge-line and centerline restriping prior to Winter of 2015.
3. Continue the annual night time sign survey program.
4. Reconstruct the bridge at 16th at Tulare Lake Canal. Advertise for bids in the
Spring/Summer of 2015. Begin construction in the fall of 2015. Engineering Division
will provide contract/project management and inspection. Roads will front funds for
payment of progress payments with 100% reimbursement by FHWA.
5. Reconstruct five road segments associated with the Kettleman City Safe Routes to
School Project. Inspection and Management provided by the Engineering Division.
Roads will fund the approximately $600,000 of road reconstruction portion of
projects. Roads will cover the monthly progress payments with reimbursement from
the Federal and State. Construction should start in the fall of 2015.
6. Construct hot mix overlay on:
a) Hanford Armona Rd.lFront St. from 1 yth Ave. to 14th Ave.
b) 14th Ave. Lacey to Hackett St.
The project will use crumb rubber blended asphalt cement. The cost to the Road
Fund will be approximately $750,000. Construction will be during the summer of
2015.
7. Construct hot mix asphalt overlay of:
a) 18 Ave. between Central Union School and Jersey Ave.
b) Jersey Ave. between 18th Ave. and 17th Ave.
Construction will be in spring of 2016. Cost will be approximately 1,200,000.
8. Reconstruct Shaw Place along the new Home Gardens Park. The Road Fund will
cover the cost of the project at approximately $125,000.
9. Continue development of plans and specifications to rehab/replace the bridge on
Lacey Blvd. at the South Fork of Kings River.
10. Construct traffic signals at 13th Ave. and Lacey Blvd. The Engineering division will
provide project management and inspection. The Roads Division will provide
approximately $140,000 towards project costs and cover progress payments while
waiting reimbursement from FHWA. Construction should be in the fall/winter of
2015/2016.
11. Construct maintenance seals on 50 miles of County Roads.
12. Prepare road bed for CMAQ Seal project on eight miles of County Roads.
13. Coordinate Section 130 Project with CPUC and Burlington Northern, and Santa Fe
for safety improvements at Kansas Ave. Railroad Crossing.
14. Prepare Plans and SpeCifications for Highway Safety Improvements Project (HSIP)
at various locations. Hire consulting engineers by summer of 2015. Construction in
summer of 2016.
15. Provide Funding for the consultant's ADA Survey of County Roads.
16. Prepare plans and Specifications for the rehabilitation of surfacing on the Avenal
Cutoff Rd. at various locations. Construction scheduled for the spring of 2016.
17. Finalize the Bridge Preventative Maintenance Program by the winter of 2015.
18. Hire consulting engineer to design the Reconstruction of Home Ave. from 10th Ave.
to Shaw Place. Community block grant and Road Fund will provide project funding.
 Parks & Grounds:
1. Continue to provide safe and enjoyable parks that the public and schools may enjoy.
2. Continue to cooperate with the Burris Park Foundation with the goal of further
developing the Burris Park Outdoor Learning Center.
3. Encourage more special event use of the parks to generate revenue as well as
introduce the public to the Burris Park Museum, wagon barn and the multi-purpose
room. Continue development of the Parks and Grounds Division webpage through
the County Information Technology Department.
4. Continue performing quality maintenance while reducing quantity of services
wherever possible to match the staff levels of the Division. This is primarily in the
form of transformation of turf areas into low-maintenance bedding, replacement or elimination of dying landscape at the Government Center, renovation of irrigation
systems, replanting climate-appropriate trees and dense groundcovers, and
installation of rubberized decorative bark. Progress on this objective can be seen at
the Agriculture Complex and Health Complex.
5. Continue to search for grants and other opportunities, such as volunteers, to assist
in the goals of the Division. The State Beverage Container grant was applied for
and awarded to the County. This grant has been used to improve the recycling
opportunities within County buildings. Re-application will be made for future rounds
of this grant, but the State has notified the County that this grant will be phased-out
over the next two years. Application to the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control
Board for various grants has, and will continue to be made. The National Wildlife
Federation has several opportune grants that the Department should apply for.
6. Purchase and install new pre-fabricated restroom(s) at Park(s).
7. Continue to execute and comply with grants received.
8. To seek benefrts of Installation of a new caretaker residence at Hickey Park before
we invest much more into the current house.
9. To work with the Sherriff's Posse for updated electrical around area "M" at Burris
Park that would benefit the park as well as the Posse to help solidify a relationship
between the Parks division and The Posse.
10. To work on getting new equipment, building additions and storage all with safety and
long-term savings in mind i.e. a cover for our mowers to block direct sunlight, a
storage unit for irrigation supplies, and a dump trailer which has countless benefits.
 Fleet Management:
1. Continue to search for the best available technology to ensure that all the
equipment continues to run as clean as practicable.
2. Continue to monitor equipment usage and make recommendations to
departments to ensure the most efficient use of equipment.
3. Continue to promote compliance with State and Federal air pollution
requirements.
4. Take advantage of as many grant opportunities as practicable to provide
technology upgrades to equipment to ensure compliance with regulations.
5. Continue to add alternative fuel vehicles to the County fleet, while striving to find
grant funding that can assist in the purchasing of alternative fuel vehicles.
6. Continue to monitor diesel powered equipment, as well as preparing the fleet to
meet California Air Resources Board requirements for off road diesel powered
equipment by 2018.
7. Secure funding to purchase and install a 5,000 psi storage cylinder for the CNG
station.
 Building Maintenance:
1. Staff will continue working on the inventory system and incorporating it into our
work order system. It is tied into the preventive maintenance program that is now
100% implemented. We have created a more detailed description of work to be performed on each PM. And staff has began to list parts needed to perform the
PM's. We also have continued adding equipment on an ongoing basis.
2. Continue to utilize internet trainings on our TMA software system for all
supervisors, Facility Manager and Office Assistant in an effort to complete the
inventory program. We are utilizing the TMA program for generating a large
number of reports for evaluating equipment for replacement. estimating man
hours for particular tasks, checking on the status of work orders as needed, etc.
Staff only scratched the surface on the capabilities of the TMA system. I want to
send our office assistant to an extensive training in Oklahoma so we will be able
to upgrade or TMA system this next year. We have tried doing this via our
maintenance contract and that hasn't been very successful. I feel an intensive
training program (hands on) will be well worth the expense.
3. We will continue scheduling webinar trainings in our training room as well as inservice
trainings for janitorial and building maintenance staff on a regular basis.
We will also continue to offer the training lab to other divisions. We are starting
our janitorial certification program through Ernest Packaging and 8etco Cleaning
Products in the next couple of months.
4. We are still not moving forward with the replacement of high voltage
underground wiring. Copper is still high and after testing our remaining circuits
they are in good condition. We have removed the weakest underground wire a
couple of years back.
5. We will be performing a major PM on our High Voltage switch gear in the Central
Plant this year along with continued maintenance on other electrical rooms
throughout the county.
6. We will continue the maintenance contract for the high voltage running to our
repeater site at Flat Top Mountain. We have a continuous issue with loose
connections, nesting birds and failing guide wires so we will have the lines
walked and maintained again this next year.
7. We will continue having more web training programs on specialized equipment in
our training room and continue sending staff to outside trainings as needed.
8. We have changed all of our chemical dispensing systems over to 8etco units
and have set up a number of training classes this year and will continue
certification trainings this next budget year as well as next year.
9. Continue working on our electrical signage thru out the Government Center and
also at our outlying locations. We need to put labels on all our high voltage
switches, transformers, and breakers for safety reasons as well as future OSHA
requirements.
10. Expand the Central Plant Office area to allow for better work spaces for staff and
also allow an area for all blueprints to be stored and easily accessible. We will
also be trying to create a storage area outside along with a work shop are for
repairs on equipment.
11. Re-implement a carpet replacement and painting program. These programs
were dropped for budget reasons for a number of years and we are receiving
numerous requests from departments for carpet and paint.
12. Develop a schedule to start replacing generators beginning with the two 205KW
generators in the Services Building. We will look at possibly changing to natural
gas and having them permitted as low use generators for additional flexibility.
13. Look at other energy programs that may offer future savings for the County.
 Engineering (Surveyor):
1. Begin using the Pavement Management System to analyze the maintenance
needs of the County road network to a greater extent.
2. Continue to provide contract management services to other departments.
3. Continue to maintain the traffic collision database and proactively use the
program to provide analysis and recommend corrective action when warranted to
improve traffic safety on County roads.
4. Pursue the abandonment of minor roads where appropriate and as time allows.
5. Provide construction project management on major and minor projects.
6. Provide engineering design comments on development projects being processed
by the Community Development Agency.
7. Continue to seek outside funding sources for major road construction and
maintenance projects. Our goal remains to utilize Federal/State funds to pay for
our design, right of way, environmental, construction, and County staff costs to
the greatest extent possible.
8. Update and revise the Kings County Improvement Standards which were last
revised in May of 2003.
9. Update the Kings County traffic control device warrant policy.
10. Administer two (2) Highway Safety Improvement Program (HSIP) project grants
awarded to Kings County from consultant acquisition through construction.
11. Administer the Bridge Preventative Maintenance Program (BPMP) which was
developed last fiscal year. The task at hand will be to prepare plans and
specifications to implement the maintenance activities as defined in the BPMP.
12. Administer Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) project for curb, gutter,
and sidewalk on the south side of Home Avenue in Home Gardens. The task at
hand will be to prepare plans and specifications and manage the construction of
the improvements as specified in the scope of the grant within the specified
timeline.
13. Administer the Rubberized Asphalt Paving Grant, the first of its kind awarded to
Kings County, from consultant acquisition through construction.
DISCUSSION:
Administration:
The Administration Division budget has increased $51,733 due to $15,391 in salaries
and benefits, $12,509 in services and supplies, $10,887 in CAP charges, and $12,946
in IT charges. Our record and storage costs have increased due to consolidating files to
records and microfilm for space and safety reasons.
The Division has implemented tracking and monitoring practices to ensure the
efficiency of all accounts receivables and payables. The Division has also applied procedures to comply with recommendations and policies of other County Departments
such as Finance and Human Resources. They have also utilized the valuable services
of County Counsel for professional guidance. The Division has consciously made an
effort to unite all the personnel in the Public Works Department in common goals for
safety, efficiency and a positive work environment.
Roads & Bridges:
The 2014/2015 budget anticipated the Road Fund Revenue at $8,352,900. The Division
planned to use $1,383,344 from Road's Fund Reserve to Fund the proposed
expenditures of $12,189,234. The actual revenue is estimated at $8,532,262. Roads
estimates that it spent $1,387,274 from Roads Fund Reserve to cover the estimated
total expenditures of $9,919,536.
The proposed 2015/2016 Roads Division Revenue totals $7,600,000. The Division will
use $4,974,334 from Roads Reserve to meet the estimated expenditures of
$12,574,334.
AB 720 continues to have an impact on the operation of the Roads Division. This law
went into effect on Jan. 2013 and limits the amount of road reconstruction work that can
be done with County forces. Roads Division has been forced to contract out more work
at higher costs. There are two specific issues about this statute that concern the
division. First, the State Controller's Office (SCO) determines which projects are
labeled as reconstruction. It is possible that our crews do work assuming it does not fall
under AB 720 restrictions, only to have the SCO determine otherwise and thus being a
technical violation of AB 720. Secondly, AB720 requires a local agency to declare its
intent to do work by force account in advance of doing the work. It is not unusual for an
opportunity to arise whereby the Roads Division can acquire recycled material and only
pay freight costs. If the material is located such that it can be incorporated on a
particular project, and cannot be stored, we would want to make use of the offer of
material. AB 720 would not allow this if time is a consideration. Therefore, to allow the
maximum flexibility to the Roads Division, and to avoid a technical violation of AB 720,
Public Works would like to use this budget to declare its intent to use force account
labor to the maximum extent allowed under AB 720.
Parks & Grounds:
The Division recognizes the State of California water crisis and has done its due
diligence in conserving and cutting back on water usage. It has cut back the irrigation
timers by 50% as opposed to the 25% requested by the governor to reduce water
usage. The Division is also updating the irrigation system to include deep root bubblers
to apply water directly to the root system. They are also updating the ornamental turf
areas to a drought tolerant landscaping. One example is at the main entrance of the
government center. For the minimal health of the turf, 1,200 gallons per week of water
would be required but by updating the landscaping we will be saving nearly 1,000
gallons of water per week.
The Division has also made several improvements to Burris and Hickey Park this year.
Burris Park has added three horse shoe pits, new playground equipment on the north
end of the park, and a Museum Curator. The Museum Curator has allowed us to have the Museum open on a regular schedule every weekend for five hours per day which
has increased visitors to an average of 20 people per day. The Museum Curator will
also be alternating exhibits with those in storage so visitors will have the greatest
exposure to the archives donated to the Museum as well as placing rope patricians to
keep the artifacts safe. The Museum Curator is also researching on how the Burris Park
Museum can become accredited. Hickey Park also promotes the sport of Disc Golf for
park visitors. Disc Golf has grown in the last year due to the technical nature of the
course. Both parks have increased in special events this year.
Fleet Management:
The Fleet Division has completed the CNG station upgrade to help meet its goals for
clean fuel. They also purchased (3) new compressed natural gas vehicles. Motorpool is
planning to add (3) new electric vehicles next year with funding from San Joaquin Valley
Air Pollution Control District. The Division is also requesting a new Mechanic I to bring
the work force back to 2009/2010 staffing levels. They are also planning to send staff to
training to stay current on the maintenance and repairs of the new environmentally
friendly vehicles. Staff is actively looking for grants or any funding available for Electric
Vehicle Charging Stations to install at Motorpool. The Division is planning to meet with
each County Department individually in January to discuss their future needs.
Building Maintenance:
The Division's goal is to provide exceptional Janitorial as well as Building Maintenance
for all County locations and facilities. The Supplies and Materials budget has increased
by $10,000 due to the increase in the cost of supplies and vendor contract cost
increases. The Building Maintenance SI&G has increased by $103,761 because they
are currently implementing a rotation for revitalizing the paint and carpets in the
government center. The Division is planning to meet with each County department
individually in January to discuss their future needs.
Engineering (Surveyor):
The Engineering Division has seen a steady increase in work load over the last couple
budget years in the form of Capital Improvement projects, State and Feder~lIy funded
projects, Roads Division Projects, Building Maintenance Projects, and various grants.
The Division currently has twenty-seven (27) projects in various stages of development.
Approximately 80% of these projects are supported by outside government funding
either from the State of California (Caltrans), Federal Highway Administration (FHWA),
or grant funding such as Cal Recycle. The reimbursement rates for these grants and
funds ranges between 20%-100% with the overwhelming majority qualifying for 88.53%
reimbursement. Included in the eligible reimbursable tasks are; consultant acquisition
costs, consultant fees, construction costs, and County staff time required to initiate,
manage, and administer the public contracts from inception to completion. As such, a
Significant portion of staff costs when working on these projects is bourn by sources
outside of the County.
The Engineering Division is currently staffed with four individuals; 1) Chief Engineer
managing the division staffs work load and work product, project initiation and programming, project funding acquisition, project design, and project management, 2)
Engineer II (Civil) managing project funding acquisition and project management, 3)
Engineering Technician II processing encroachment permit applications, performing
encroachment permit field inspections, performing construction inspection, and
managing the traffic data base including stop warrant analysis for intersections, 4)
Engineering Technician " administering Right of Way maps, performing development
permit review, performing survey map review for technical accuracy and statutory
compliance, assisting the public when researching Right of Way maps, processing
encroachment permit applications, and performing encroachment permit field
inspections. In order to shoulder the growing workload, maintain the County's network
of roads and bridges, and capture the full benefit of State, Federal, and grant funding
available to the County, the Engineering Division is requesting an additional Engineer I
(Civil) be flexibly allocated in FY15/16. The guarantee of funds for the position's salary
and benefits has been offered by Public Works Roads & Bridges Division as the
Engineering Division services all design and construction projects for Roads. The goal
would be to recoup much of the cost for this new position from the various funds
outside of the County and deliver many of the projects that are deferred throughout the
year due to lack of staffing. In addition to requesting a new engineering position, the
Division requests a parity study or salary study for both the engineering class and the
technician class to determine its ability to be competitive when hiring and retaining
professional and sub-professional engineering and technical staff. A quick survey of
public agencies competing for candidates whom would likely apply to Kings County
includes City of Hanford, City of Lemoore, City of Visalia, City of Fresno, City of Clovis,
Fresno County, Tulare County, and Kem County shows Kings County's rate of
compensation between 10% to 30% less than its competitors depending on position
and agency when comparing job titles and descriptions. In order to recruit, train, and
maintain quality professionals and SUb-professional whom will provide a link to the
future and enable succession planning, the Department requests this study to take
place within this Fiscal budget year.
The Engineering Division requests the latitude to promote a flexibly allocated Engineer
11 (Civil) to an Engineer III (Civil) if the requirements are met as described in the
approved Job Description and Compensation document. The position is currently
funded by the Roads Division which would cover the additional cost. This action would
not require an additional position as it is currently flexibly allocated as an Engineer 11111111
(Civil).
As the Engineering Division has changed and project levels have increased so have our
needs for equipment. In 2002, over a decade ago, the Division acquired a truck
equipped a utility bed and side utility boxes utilized for survey eqUipment. In 2015 we
no longer perform our own survey work as this is contracted out to licensed surveyors
and consultants. As such, the vehicle is functionally obsolete which requires staff to
borrow trucks from other Divisions when possible or utilize motor pool which does not
have the appropriate vehicles in its inventory for engineering field work. The Division is
requesting a quad-cab truck with a short bed sufficient to carry three or more individuals
which would be utilized for site reviews, construction inspection, and encroachment permit inspection. The current vehicle does not have a truck bed due to the utility
boxes rendering it unable to carry equipment, signs, or other accoutrements needed in
the field or at public meetings held by the Division. This new vehicle would also be
utilized during the annual night time sign survey in which every County road is driven to
verify the placement and visibility of the County's sign network.
The Board of Supervisors was designated as the Successor Agency of the dissolved
Kings County Redevelopment Agency on January 31,2012. On April 11, 2012 the first
meeting of the Oversight Board for the Successor Agency for the County of Kings was
held. This Oversight Board is made up of seven members, three Board of Supervisor
appointments, two Superintendent of Schools appointments, one Community Service
District appointment and one Community College appointment.
This budget unit is included in the County budget for historical purposes only. The
Redevelopment Obligation Retirement Fund is no longer included as a County Budget
Unit.
