The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an overall net
County cost (NCC) increase of $0.4 million primarily due to
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits,
partially offset by the deletion of one-time funding for various
projects. The Recommended Budget also includes a net
decrease of 2.0 positions due to the deletion of 4.0 positions in
the Environmental Toxicology Program and 1.0 position in
Administration as a result of decreased services provided to
Public Works and Public Health and a reduction in State
revenue, respectively; partially offset by the addition of
3.0 revenue-offset positions in the Integrated Pest
Management Program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Pursue additional revenue source opportunities, through
proactive involvement in legislation development,
coordination with upper management of the California
Department of Food and Agriculture and Division of
Measurement Standards, and establishment of partnerships
with other agencies, to more effectively perform its mission.
¦ Implement long-term strategies to improve Service Excellence
and Workforce Excellence through ongoing employee
development and development of the Agricultural
Commissioner/Weights and Measures (ACWM) Internet
Website and other outreach efforts to enhance public
awareness of the Department and its services.
¦ Maintain focus of recruitment efforts to attract qualified and
skilled applicants to fill inspector positions to ensure
environmental and public safety, provide mandated and
increased protections to consumers and businesses, and
provide protection to the environment, native plant life and
the agricultural industry.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $2.1 million primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits partially offset by the deletion
of one-time carryover funding.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Work with justice partners to implement the Public Safety
AB109 Realignment Program;
¦ Implement and refine its programs and initiatives to
correspond with the County’s Strategic Plan;
¦ Collaborate with the Public Defender to develop a plan for the
creation of a new Case Management System;
¦ Collaborate with the Internal Services Department (ISD) and
the Chief Information Office to migrate the Department’s
active directory structure to the County’s;
¦ Migrate the Department’s Case Management System to a
browser-based technology and assist the Public Defender in
implementing this system for their office; and
¦ Collaborate with ISD to migrate the Department’s application
and data servers to the County’s Virtual Server Cloud.
The Department requires funding for 3.0 Investigator positions.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an overall increase
in NCC of $1.0 million primarily due to Board-approved
increases in salaries and employee benefits, funding for
10.0 positions for the Antelope Valley Communication Center,
3.0 positions for the Major Case Unit, one-time funding for the
replacement of the Voice Recorder System, and aging vehicles.
These increases are partially offset by the deletion of one-time
funding for safety equipment, vehicles, and a video
surveillance system.
The Department of Animal Care and Control will continue to
enhance revenue and develop more efficient processes for the
delivery of its services. The primary efforts will be the
implementation of the Antelope Valley Communication Center
to streamline response to service calls from constituents in the
Antelope Valley and offset the workload from the existing
communication center, and augmentation of staff in the
department’s Major Case Unit. The Department is
contemplating an enterprise solution for mobile connectivity
to provide field staff and service vehicles access to data and
updates through real time connectivity to the department's
network and shelter management system.
This endeavor will significantly enhance the efficiency of the
officers in the field by providing mobile access to licensing
information, and report writing in the field. The deployment of
video surveillance continues to be a high priority for the
department, ensuring the safety of our employees, the public,
and animals in our care; and provides a secure environment,
improves workforce accountability, and discourages theft and
other inappropriate conduct. The department has been
finalizing its 2020 plan. This is a five year plan for fiscal years
2015-16 through 2019-20 that focuses on two key areas of
need: facilities improvement and replacement; and staffing
requirements. In the interim, the refurbishment of aged kennel
buildings and other animal housing facilities continues to be a
primary focus of the department’s facility management
strategy.
The Department’s unmet needs request include funding for volunteer and medical programs. Additionally, the Department is
requesting funding for replacement of asphalt in the perimeter of the kennel buildings and parking lots at all of the department's
care centers, replacement of kennels at the Carson, Baldwin Park, Lancaster and Downey care centers, a mobile connectivity
solution for field access to the department's network and shelter management system, implementation of a CCTV system at the
Downey Care Center, and implementation of countywide dead animal removal services.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$99,000 primarily due to restoring funding for the
Organizational Grant, unavoidable cost increases, and
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits,
partially offset by the deletion of one-time funding for the
Organizational Grant program and Ford Theatre programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue a multi-year initiative to implement the
Board-adopted Arts for All strategic plan to make the arts core
in K-12 for 1.7 million students in the County by developing
ongoing systems for data collection that will inform Arts for All
planning processes, as well as provide evidence of changes in
arts education offerings in the region over time.
¦ Institute a number of new systems to improve grants and
professional development programs, including the
development of new guidelines for the FY 2015-16
Organizational Grant Program.
¦ Continue implementation of the Master Plan for the current
and future facilities of the John Anson Ford Theatres focusing
on upgrades to the theatre itself, including amphitheatre
stage reconstruction, new retaining walls and landscaping on
the hillside, and tenant improvements consisting of additional
dressing rooms, a new green room, and Americans with
Disabilities Act improvements.
¦ Implement, through the Los Angeles County Open Spaces
District grant funds, a new Civic Art Graffiti Abatement Project
which will create innovative arts based projects.
The Arts Commission’s critical unmet needs include additional funding and positions for the Administration, Civic Art, John Anson
Ford Theatre and Organizational Grant program as well as full restoration of the Free Concerts program.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease in
NCC of $5.9 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for various automation projects that were completed
as part of the Legacy System Replacement Project Phase 1, and
to backfill revenues resulting from the loss of the property tax
administrative fee (PTAF). The Recommended Budget also
includes funding for Board-approved increases in salaries and
employee benefits, and unavoidable cost increases associated
with the Data Warehouse and Document Imaging projects.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Assessor’s Office will continue to:
¦ Introduce operational efficiencies to improve work activities
and public services;
¦ Define and develop the Legacy System Replacement structure
for the Assessor’s tax system including all other stakeholder
departments;
¦ Increase the use of social media and the Internet to
disseminate critical service messages to the public about
Assessor programs and operations;
¦ Implement the electronic data warehouse and document
imaging program as a base step in any Legacy System
Replacement effort;
¦ Recruit, train, and develop additional staff to increase
operational effectiveness; and
¦ Pursue shorter duration projects that automate and improve
the assessment process.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $0.2 million primarily due to the elimination of one-time
carryover funding, partially offset by Board-approved increases
in salaries and employee benefits. The Recommended Budget
also includes a net increase of 7.0 revenue-offset positions to
address departmental workload increases associated with
Joint Powers Authorities (JPAs), Community Redevelopment
Agency (CRA) Dissolution, and the Department of Children and
Family Services (DCFS) group home and foster family agency
audits.
The Auditor-Controller advocates for fiscal responsibility and
service excellence through various initiatives, including:
¦ Ensuring public trust in County government by implementing
the Board-approved annual audit plan and conducting
investigations of fraud and malfeasance;
¦ Working with the Chief Executive Office to fully fund
compliance audits and enhancing service delivery by ensuring
that such services can be provided in a manner consistent
with government and accounting industry standards and best
practices for audit independence;
¦ Ongoing enhancement of eCAPS and the Advantage eHR
suite of applications to centralize and consolidate the County’s
financial management, reporting, human resources, and
talent management functions;
¦ Improving the fiscal accountability of social services
contractors by resolving issues related to federal recovery of
questioned costs, ensuring auditor access to contractor
records and continuing to enhance the Contractor’s Manual to
ensure compliance with contract terms and conditions;
¦ Promoting use of direct deposit to pay vendors, thereby
reducing the County’s reliance on check disbursements;
¦ Advocating for development of an integrated, enterprise
Property Tax System to replace aging, obsolete and inefficient
legacy applications that require high levels of staff and
technical support; and
¦ Promoting County efficiency initiatives such as eForms, the
Countywide Contracting Process Improvement Plan, and case
management systems.
The Auditor-Controller’s unmet needs include: 1) restoration of training funding; 2) staff to address increases in workload, changes
in legislation, and new projects; 3) staff to perform critical audits for General Fund departments at the level determined by the
Auditor-Controller’s countywide risk assessment; and 4) ensuring central funding for integrated, enterprise Property Tax System
(estimated cost: $70.0 million over several years).
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$14.6 million primarily due to the elimination of one-time
funding for contract, development, and maintenance costs
associated with the enterprise system.
The Transportation Clearing Account is a central receiving point for charges for transportation costs incurred by departments. All
charges are then distributed to the appropriate departments leaving this budget unit with no net appropriation. The 2014-15
Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in appropriation from the 2013-14 Final Adopted Budget primarily due to the
completion of the Transit Access Pass (TAP) program conversion from the traditional paper based bus passes and anticipated
expenditure trends.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a $0.4 million net
increase in NCC primarily attributable to increases in
Board-approved salaries and employee benefits, offset with
the deletion of one-time funding. The Recommended Budget
includes the addition of 1.0 Account Clerk I, 1.0 Senior Clerk,
1.0 Contract Monitor, Recreational Services and 1.0 Planner
positions, offset with projected increases in Beach and Marina
revenues. The Department increased funding for security
services, LAC-CAL equipment, Marina marketing and
programing, offset with projected increases in Beach and
Marina revenues. The Recommended Budget also reflects a
budget realignment based on historical experience and
anticipated requirements.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Implementation of the County’s and Department’s Strategic
Plans will accomplish the following outcomes: 1) visitors to the
beaches and Marina del Rey will experience world renowned
recreational opportunities and quality customer service
through accessible, clean, attractive and safe facilities; and
2) Marina boaters, visitors and residents will enjoy
experiencing the County’s “Crown Jewel” through redeveloped
leasehold properties and beautiful and well-maintained public
amenities.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects the current levels
necessary to provide efficient and responsive delivery of
services to the Board and the public. The overall NCC increase
of $2.7 million is primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits and restorations of funding for
community programs, partially offset by deletions of carryover
funding for the Information Systems Advisory Body (ISAB).
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Executive Office is in the process of implementing its
strategic plan, in alignment with the County’s Strategic Plan,
with multiple goals for FY 2014-15. Resources are needed to
achieve those goals which continue to focus on the use of
technology-driven services.
The Department’s unmet needs include the restoration of a curtailment taken in FY 2010-11 due to the County’s structural deficit,
increases to fund services received from other County departments, and various staffing requests to enhance operational efficiency
and service delivery.
The 2014-15 Recommended Capital Projects/Refurbishments
Budget reflects the Boards’ continuing commitment to allocate
a significant amount of available one-time funding to expand,
replace, or refurbish the County’s capital assets and
infrastructure. The Recommended Budget appropriates
$1.06 billion for 330 active projects that address high priority
health, public safety, recreation, and infrastructure needs
Of the total 2014-15 Recommended Budget appropriation,
$772.5 million is allocated to General Fund projects that
encompass a broad range of recreational, cultural, law
enforcement, health, and general government functions
funded by $238.1 million in one-time revenue from grants and
other sources, and $534.4 million in local discretionary monies.
The General Fund appropriation represents the 2014-15
budgetary requirements of 199 projects that are currently
under development, design, or construction.
The total appropriation for the 2014-15 Recommended Budget
represents a decrease of $104.0 million from the 2013-14 Final
Adopted Budget. The net decrease reflects the completion of
18 projects in 2013-14 and continuing progress on 199 other
projects that are currently under development, design, or
construction.
In addition to those projects appropriated in the General Fund,
the capital program includes certain critical projects which are
financed with special district revenue, commercial paper
proceeds, and are appropriated in certain special funds,
summarized in Volume Two These projects address capital
needs in the areas of infrastructure repair and development,
health services, public safety, and general government, and
include, but are not limited to, the Countywide Data Center
Project, Rancho Los Amigos Seismic Retrofit and Inpatient
Consolidation Project, Manhattan Beach Library Project, San
Fernando Valley Family Support Center Project, East Antelope
Valley Animal Care Center Project, Online Real-Time Centralized
Health Information Database Projects, and various Fire District
projects. There are 83 projects in development, design, or
construction with a total project value of $1.98 billion.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget does not reflect projects
that have been financed through the issuance of long-term
bonds. Such projects include the Hall of Justice Rehabilitation
Project valued at $231.8 million. Bond financed funds are held
and administered by independent bond trustees.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $4.4 million primarily due to the deletion of $7.6 million in
carryover funds, partially offset by $3.1 million in
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits.
The Recommended Budget also reflects the addition, without
NCC, of 4.0 positions to strengthen financial controls of the
Workers’ Compensation program and the addition of
1.0 position to address the increased workload in psychological
evaluations; and minimal costs associated with the
reclassification of two positions which provide countywide
web development services.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The revision to the County’s Strategic Plan is scheduled to be
approved by the Board in April 2014, which will include
updated strategic initiatives under Goal 1 (“Operational
Effectiveness”) and Goal 3 (“Integrated Service Delivery”).
Under the 2014-15 Strategic Plan, Goal 1 will incorporate
“Fiscal Responsibility” and Goal 2 will be expanded to
“Community and Responsiveness” with corresponding
strategic initiatives, reflecting the County’s renewed focus to
serving its constituents in the most proactive and responsive
manner. While some strategic initiatives may be multi-year
efforts, each will include three to five action items to be
completed during the calendar year. The structure of the
County Strategic Plan is designed to:
¦ Be more responsive to the dynamic environment in which the
County operates;
¦ Clearly identify and focus on the highest-impact strategic
priorities, reflecting a limited set of significant issues and
opportunities; and
¦ Recognize the uniqueness of individual department goals and
ensure that these equally important priorities are addressed
effectively and timely through departmental strategic
planning and operations.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $0.8 million primarily due to Board-approved salaries and
employee benefits increases as well as new and expanded
programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Support the County’s Strategic Plan by participating actively
as both owner and supporter of many County strategies and
objectives;
¦ Maintain a countywide strategic IT planning program
including an IT governance structure, which ensures
alignment of IT initiatives with County strategic goals,
strategies, and objectives;
¦ Review Board-approved IT contracts and department business
automation plans to ensure alignment with departmental and
countywide goals; and
¦ Foster better management of County IT resources to improve
service delivery and increase organizational effectiveness.
The Department’s unmet needs include the restoration of 1.0 Information Technology Consultant, CIO position, additional funding
for 2.0 Senior Information Technology Consultant, CIO positions to support the County’s Information Security program and the
District Attorney’s High Technology Crime Bureau, and funding for the creation of a departmental intranet and internet portal to
facilitate communication within the County and with outside entities.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects $173.3 million in
gross appropriation and the net deletion of 48.0 vacant budget
items. The increase of $5.9 million in gross appropriation is
primarily the result of increases in Board-approved salaries and
employee benefits. This is the 12th consecutive year that CSSD
receives a flat baseline administrative cost allocation from the
California Department of Child Support Services (DCSS),
assuming a flat funding allocation from the State for the
Electronic Data Processing Maintenance and Operation
budget. The budget also reflects the elimination of intrafund
transfer from the Department of Children and Family Services
(DCFS) associated with its discontinued utilization of the
CSSD’s Electronic Data Service Document Processing (EDP)
contract; one-time carryover funding for the CLEAR database
subscription service; and one-time trust fund balances and the
County’s share of Welfare Recoupment Collections. As part of
the continued effort to align expenditures with allocations, the
Department developed the “CSSD 2017” initiative as part of its
Strategic Goals and Planning.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ The Department continues to engage senior, mid-level and
line staff in its Child Support Statistical process to strategize
and redesign business practices using current and real time
statistical data to align resources and improve performance.
The Department remains committed to measures that ensure
effective and professional service delivery and support the
County’s Strategic Plan goals, and continues to align
performance measures with the County’s Strategic Plan and
the federal and State performance measures for local child
support agencies.
¦ The Department also continues to move forward with the
“CSSD 2017” initiative taking every opportunity to leverage
resources and build an organization that is structurally sound,
efficient, financially healthy, and focused on its goals and
mission.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget for Administration reflects
an increase of $43.1 million in gross appropriation, funded with
increases of $42.3 million in revenue, and $0.8 million in NCC.
The growth in revenue consists primarily of: 1) an increase of
$3.1 million in federal revenue for the Title IV-E Waiver; and
2) an increase of $39.2 million in anticipated 2011 State
Realignment growth funds. The $0.8 million net NCC increase
is the result of: 1) $0.3 million to support the Board-approved
Katie A. Strategic Plan; 2) $14.9 million to partially fund
employee benefits subsidies; and 3) $0.3 million for increased
rent charges. These are partially offset by the deletion of
$14.7 million in one-time funding from Title IV-E Waiver
Savings used for Board-approved Waiver strategies.
The Recommended Budget also reflects 189.0 additional
positions consisting of: 1) 126.0 line-operation positions to
reduce caseloads and provide necessary office support; 2) 27.0
line operations support positions; 3) 17.0 positions to support
the department’s Information Systems bureau; and
4) 19.0 positions for administrative support.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
DCFS continues its collaborative initiatives with the
Chief Executive Office (CEO), other County departments, and
community partners to support and strengthen the ability of
families and communities to help children thrive, and to
maintain child and youth safety. The Department has made
significant improvement to reduce the number of children age
0-12 in group homes by 54.0 percent. As evidenced in its
Waiver strategy indicators below, DCFS continues to make
meaningful improvements in the following key performance
indicators (from July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2013):
¦ Timely Response to Emergency Response (ER) Referrals
(Immediate Response) increased from 97.2 percent to
98.3 percent;
¦ Timely Response to ER Referrals (5-day) increased from
94.2 percent to 96.2 percent; and
¦ Placement Stability (children in out-of-home care from eight
days to 12 months) increased from 85.6 percent to
88.5 percent. The National Standard is 86.0 percent.
The Department has reported the following successful
initiations and implementations:
¦ Delinquency Prevention Project: The Department re-launched
this project to assist possible cross-over youth prior to being
referred to the Probation Department. The Department
continues to align practice model and resources in a manner
that provides those children with the greatest needs. DCFS
and Probation are engaged in collaboration with Georgetown
University’s Center for Juvenile Justice Reform.
Implementation of the practice model is assisting jurisdictions
across the County to identify practice areas (points) along the
path of a dependent youth’s involvement with the juvenile
justice system that needs strengthening.
¦ Student Information Tracking System (SITS): As a result of
AB 643, signed into law effective January 2014, DCFS is no
longer required to obtain a court order or have specific
parental consent to obtain educational information from a
school. In anticipation of the new law, DCFS and the
Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) currently use an
electronic data-sharing system which limits the information
on students with individual court orders. AB 643 allows data to
move more freely from the school to the social worker and
provides access to over 10,000 records online. The
Department is currently working to increase the number of
schools and school districts on SITS.
¦ Smartphones and tablets to Children Social Workers (CSWs):
As part of the new technology initiative to provide better
access to the Internet, Child Welfare Services/Case
Management System (CWS/CMS) and desktop files, CSWs are
being provided iPhones and tablets. The Department expects
to complete the roll out of an additional 1,200 new
smartphones and 2,400 tablets to CSWs in 2014. The
enhanced photo capabilities on these devices allow workers
to record key evidence in substantiating alleged abuse and
neglect. The photos can immediately be emailed to the office
in “real time” for review by a supervisor or manager to assist in
decision-making on possible detentions and to expedite case
processing.
In addition, the following strategies and initiatives
implemented in FY 2013-14 continue to support and generate
the desired outcomes:
¦ Strategic Plan 2012-16: In September 2012, the Department
completed the development, the first in over a decade, of a
comprehensive Strategic Plan that guides operations over the
next two years. The development of the plan included
extensive input from staff throughout the Department,
community partners, and other key stakeholders. The Plan
entails the departmental Vision, Mission and Values and three
overarching Goals (Emphasizing Child Centered Practices,
Pursuing Workforce Excellence, and Strengthening
Organizational Operation and Systems).
¦ Data-Driven Decision Making Practice: DCFS continues to
refine and enhance the capability and functionality of the
Data-Driven Decision Making practice and monthly stats
meetings. Through the implementation of these processes,
participants use data and the stories behind them to provide a
format for discussion regarding strengths, challenges,
strategies and best practices. The process includes reviewing
data, engaging staff in conversations about the key
performance indicators and focusing collective attention on
critical elements of our work. In addition, a newly-installed
data dashboard on the DCFS internal website allows all staff
and managers to monitor current data regarding key
performance indicators and statistics related to child safety
and well-being.
¦ California Fostering Connections to Success Act (formerly
known as AB 12): The Department has continued tracking
AB 12 and negotiated cost-neutrality with Sacramento. The
“cost neutrality” cap, which is a provision to ensure counties
are not disadvantaged financially for the implementation of
Extended Foster Care (EFC), was slated for removal when
AB 12 funding was incorporated into the 2011 State
Realignment. This could have potentially shifted the
additional financial burden to the County when insufficient
funds are allocated by the State. Due to the successful
advocacy effort by DCFS and CEO, the State agreed to retain
the “cost neutrality” cap on the County costs for EFC.
¦ New Policy Manual: The Department has initiated the
replacement of its existing 6,000 page policy manual with a
web-based, user friendly manual. The web-based policy
manual is anticipated to be completed by June 2014.
The Department’s critical unmet needs include additional funding to: 1) reduce social worker caseloads to 15 for Generic workers
and 12 for ER workers, in accordance with the SB 2030 Workload Study to ensure maximum service delivery to children and
families; 2) increase administrative and support staff to enhanced operational efficiency and workforce accountability; and
3) accommodate the Department’s space needs.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget for Assistance Payments
reflects an overall $5.8 million decrease in NCC primarily due to
the deletion of: 1) $4.8 million in one-time funding for
Extended Foster Care; and 2) $4.5 million in one-time funding
for Promoting Safe and Stable Families (PSSF) programs. The
NCC decrease is partially offset by a projected placement cost
increase of 1) $0.3 million for the Emergency Assistance
program; 2) $0.4 million for the General Relief Ineligible (GRI)
program; 3) $0.4 million for the Adoptions Assistance Program
(AAP); and 4) $1.2 million for the Kin-GAP program; and a
$1.2 million for ongoing Waiver initiatives.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department is currently implementing a number of
strategies to ensure safety, stability and permanency for
children under its care. The efficiencies as a result of the
strategic changes are projected to reduce foster care costs. The
three key areas that are projected to affect the assistance costs
include: 1) ensuring that only those children and families who
would be appropriately served by the child welfare system
enter the system; 2) reducing the time children spend in
out-of-home care; and 3) providing services to children and
families to enable the children to remain in their home or
achieve timely permanency.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$1.5 million in gross appropriation due primarily to additional
Realignment growth funding for Adult Protective Services;
increases in salaries and employee benefits; and Utility User
Tax (UUT) Cy Pres funding for the First District in Motion
programs. These increases are partially offset by a reduction in
the California Multi-Sector Workforce Partnership National
Emergency Grant (NEG) funding and the elimination of various
one-time funding for community and senior centers.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Promote sound, prudent, and transparent fiscal policies and
processes that help ensure maintenance of critical programs
and services.
¦ Enhance economic and social outcomes through integrated
services and best practices.
¦ Implement human capital best practices to enhance the
recruitment, development, retention, and well-being of
qualified County employees.
¦ Maximize the effectiveness of processes, structures, and
operations to support timely delivery of customer-oriented
and efficient public services.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$4.9 million in appropriation and a net decrease of
$10.2 million in revenue due primarily to the reduction of the
California Multi-Sector Workforce Partnership NEG funding.
There is a net increase of $5.2 million NCC attributable to
$218,000 for the Congregate and Home-Delivered Meal
Programs and $5.0 million for the Summer Youth Employment
Program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue to collaborate with County departments and our
network of non-profit and community agencies in providing
quality services.
¦ Leverage and maximize funding to enhance and create
subsidized employment opportunities for County residents
and businesses.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $0.3 million primarily due to Board-approved increases in
employee salaries and benefits and one-time funding to
purchase a new telephone system. The Recommended Budget
also reflects the expansion of the Real Estate Fraud Notification
Program that conducts real estate fraud investigations and
provides information, counseling, and assistance to
homeowners facing foreclosure.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue to expand the Homeowner Fraud Notification and
County Dispute Resolution programs;
¦ Identify and secure additional office space to accommodate
additional staff and provide improved public access; and
¦ Expand language capabilities to communicate with diverse
communities in multiple languages.
The Department of Consumer Affairs’ critical unmet needs include additional funding to address the Civic Center Office
reconfiguration expansion which requires additional positions with more workstations. The Department is also looking into new
configuration options that match their digital workflow.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase in
NCC of $1.5 million primarily due to front funding of the
Employment Advice Program and House Counsel Services
Program as well as Board-approved increases in salaries and
employee benefits. The net increase also includes the deletion
of one-time funding for capital assets equipment.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
County Counsel will continue ongoing initiatives in support of
the County's Strategic Plan including:
¦ Strengthening current practices, and enhancing client
relations through communication and training. Redesigning
the County Counsel website to improve ease of use and to
enhance content available. Content will be updated to include
information of interest to the public as well as information
about the Summer Intern Program, and it will serve as a
gateway to restricted client-only areas where access to
non-public information and resources can be provided to
client agencies with appropriate authorization.
¦ Reviewing and improving organization policies, processes
and/or structures to enhance effectiveness. Implementing
recommendations from the management audit performed by
HBR Consultants and communicating with the Board
regarding the manner and schedule of the implementation.
¦ Utilizing new and effective technologies to update office
systems and programs and improve organizational
effectiveness, such as the implementation of a web-based
electronic case management and e-filing system for the
Workers' Compensation Division and replacement of the
current Risk Management Information System.
¦ Managing resources more effectively by promoting prudent
fiscal policies and practices and exploring innovative methods
that help ensure fiscal stability. Developing and implementing
processes to further enhance the current Departmental Risk
Management Program by ensuring that risk management
functions are adequately staffed, and risk management
practices are aligned with the rest of the County. Also,
enhancing current ergonomic and wellness awareness
programs to better manage risks associated with employee
safety.
¦ Implementing a strategic framework to protect and secure the
County's technology assets and information. The
Departmental Security Officer and members of its legal staff
participate in the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act/Health Information Technology for
Economic and Clinical Health Act Privacy and Security
Committee to ensure departmental compliance.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a $4.9 NCC
increase primarily due to an increase of 3.0 positions for the
new Marsy’s Law Unit, funding for the Hall of Justice (HOJ)
project, and Board-approved increases in salaries and
employee benefits, partially offset by the deletion of one-time
funding for high tech crimes, revenue adjustments, elimination
of the Bad Check Enforcement Program, and a projected
increase in Public Safety Sales Tax (Proposition 172 revenue).
The Recommended Budget also reflects the addition of
2.0 positions for the Disability Health Insurance Fraud Program
fully offset by grant funding.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Office’s FY 2014-15 strategic planning efforts remain
focused on the following areas:
¦ Expand the application of alternatives to incarceration in
appropriate cases.
¦ Carry out the provisions of AB 109 including training and
refining internal statistical reporting mechanisms.
¦ Increase efforts to address the proliferation of identity theft
and cyber crimes.
¦ Advance a crime prevention campaign aimed at educating
and protecting citizens from financial crimes, particularly
those involving seniors.
¦ Increase involvement in the environmental crimes
enforcement community.
¦ Continue to work on information and document exchanges
with other criminal justice agencies.
The critical needs include $10.2 million for the reopening of the HOJ. Beginning December 2014, it will house the District Attorney
and over 700 employees. The cost includes furniture, fixtures, equipment, services and supplies associated with this move.
In addition, the District Attorney is requesting funding for 26.0 additional positions to carry out critical activities, such as:
1.0 dedicated investigator in the Major Crimes Division; 1.0 deputy district attorney IV and three paralegals to create a unit within
the Department’s Family Violence Division to more efficiently and accurately comply with its duty to audit Suspected Child Abuse
Reports (SCARS) cross-reporting in the County, as recommended by the Board-approved Blue Ribbon Commission on Child
Protection; 7.0 additional paralegals are necessary in order to effectively and efficiently perform core functions and duties in the
Divisions of Consumer Protection, Healthcare Fraud, Major Narcotics; Community Prosecution, and Appellate; 7.0 hearing officers
to handle identified criminal referrals in a non-courtroom and cost effective setting, consistent with departmental goals to expand
alternative sentencing models; 5.0 victim service representative II’s to better serve victims; 1.0 staff assistant II in Victim Witness
Assistance Program to coordinate events supporting victims of crimes all year round; and 1.0 management analyst to support the
significant increased workload in the Employee Relations Division associated with the County Policy on Equity, the newly organized
DDA bargaining unit, and significant requirements to be monitored and managed associated with employee’s leaves of absence.
These requested positions are essential to offset major curtailments of years past that have left the Department challenged in
responding to the increased demands of the office including Third Strike Resentencing, Marsy’s Law, and more.
The EPR budget provides funding for the County Office of
Emergency Management to prepare and implement plans and
policies for the protection of life and property within the
County in the event of an emergency or disaster; operate and
maintain of County Emergency Operations Center (EOC), train
personnel assigned to County government, special districts,
and other jurisdictions throughout the County; plan support
for Homeland Security; develop and provide emergency and
disaster related educational materials for County residents; and
conduct countywide disaster exercises.
Management of the County EOC includes the Operational Area
Response and Recovery System, an internet-based information
reporting and notification system used by jurisdictions and
agencies in the County operational area to convey conditions
and operational status as a result of an incident, emergency or
disaster, and the Specific Needs Awareness Planning program,
also an internet-based comprehensive planning and response
tool developed to address the needs of residents that may
have an insufficient ability to self-evacuate, or who may require
specialized care and resources during a disaster.
The budget also incorporates funds for Homeland Security
Grants that includes the State Homeland Security Grant
Program; Urban Area Security Initiative; Law Enforcement
Terrorism Prevention Program; Citizens Corps Program; Buffer
Zone Protection Program; and the Emergency Management
Performance Grant for County departments, unincorporated
areas, special districts, and cities within the operational area.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects deletion of
$1.1 million in carryover funding.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects anticipated
funding for various employee benefits offset with expenditure
distribution to County departments.
The County’s infrastructure requires ongoing investment to
meet continuous performance requirements. The 2013-14
budget appropriated funds for critical repairs at County health
facilities, parks, water treatment plants at Probation facilities,
and roof repairs throughout the County. The 2014-15
Recommended Budget appropriates $140.9 million for these
and other high-priority repairs, maintenance, and accessibility
modification needs at County facilities, including libraries,
parks, juvenile halls, senior centers, and animal shelters.
During FY 2013-14, departments identified additional deferred maintenance needs with an estimated total cost of $91.1 million.
These unfunded needs include various general facility repairs; replacement of outdated building systems such as boilers, chillers,
heating, ventilating and air conditioning units; roofs; and elevator upgrades to achieve building operational efficiencies.
The Federal and State Disaster Aid budget provides County departments with economic recovery assistance following major
emergencies and disasters. It includes appropriation for emergency and post-emergency responses, in addition to the repair,
restoration, or replacement of disaster-damaged County buildings and property, pending reimbursement from appropriate
governmental agencies and insurance companies.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes financing sources
and financing uses as follows:
Financing Sources
For budgetary planning purposes, the Chief Executive Office
considers total financing sources the difference generated in
FY 2013-14 from County revenues exceeding expenditures
(fund balance available), the use of prior-year obligated fund
balance, and property taxes. Any decrease in fund balance
available from the budgeted amount will require expenditure
reductions or the identification of additional financing.
The recommended fund balance of $1,202.2 million is
comprised of $148.5 million from General Fund operations;
and $1,053.7 million of unused FY 2013-14 funds carried over
to FY 2014-15 for the following:
¦ $592.4 million of Capital Projects funds for the completion of
various projects and refurbishment needs;
¦ $117.8 million of Extraordinary Maintenance funds for major
repairs and maintenance of County facilities and assets;
¦ $42.5 million of Project and Facility Development funds for
consultant and specialized services related to projects that are
under development, as well as improvements to County
facilities;
¦ $188.4 million of Provisional Financing Uses funds primarily
for the Departments of Children and Family Services,
Probation, Public Social Services, Sheriff, Mental Health,
District Attorney for the Hall of Justice relocation, Beaches and
Harbors for the electrical vault replacement, Public Defender
for expansion of videoconferencing capabilities, Animal Care
and Control for the communications center voice recorder
system, Agricultural Commissioner/Weights and Measures for
a database upgrade, Board of Supervisors, the eProperty Tax
Project, Grand Park maintenance, Information Technology
Shared Services, 2-1-1 Information Line and economic
reserves;
¦ $53.7 million of Board funds for various community programs;
¦ $27.1 million of Homeless and Housing Program funds for
Homeless Prevention Initiative projects;
¦ $23.3 million of Children and Family Services funds for the
Katie A. Settlement Agreement;
¦ $4.6 million of Department of Public Social Services funds for
General Relief enhancements and the Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) project;
¦ $3.6 million of Nondepartmental Special Accounts funds to
restore prior-year Public Library curtailments; and
¦ $0.3 million of Child Support Services funds to support the
deficit mitigation strategy using current year savings.
Obligated fund balance of $52.6 million is decreased for the
following:
¦ $31.1 million used to offset one-time costs;
¦ $14.0 million of Health Services Tobacco Settlement used for
health-related costs;
¦ $6.5 million used for continued support of the Los Angeles
Regional Interoperability Communications System (LA-RICS)
Joint Powers Authority administrative operations;
¦ $0.5 million used for Public Library Homework Centers and the
Chicano Digitization Project; and
¦ $0.5 million used by the Department of Community and
Senior Services for the First District in Motion Programs.
Property Tax revenues reflect a net increase of $204.9 million
from the FY 2013-14 Final Adopted Budget. The increase
includes $184.3 million due to a projected 4.06 percent
increase in assessed valuation based on the Assessor’s
preliminary forecast; $0.6 million in sales tax (Triple Flip)
revenue as a result of anticipated increases in taxable sales in
the County; and a net increase of $20.0 million in ongoing
property tax revenue residual related to the County’s General
Fund share of redistributed property tax revenue resulting
from the Redevelopment Dissolution Act (ABx1 26) enacted in
February 2012. Property tax revenues include in-lieu Vehicle
License Fee revenue as part of the State’s Local Government
Agreement (2004 Budget Act).
The recommended Property Tax revenue changes are
comprised of the following:
¦ $187.7 million increase in the Regular Roll;
¦ $16.6 million increase in the Supplemental Roll; and
¦ $0.6 million increase related to the taxable sales in the County
and the dollar for dollar swap of sales tax revenue with
Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) property tax
revenue (Triple Flip).
Financing Uses
Provision for obligated fund balance may be nonspendable,
restricted, committed or assigned for specific needs including
future legal or contractual obligations:
¦ Obligated fund balance Committed for Capital Projects and
Extraordinary Maintenance will increase by $47.2 million for
various future capital projects and refurbishment needs.
The Fire Department, as a Special District, is funded
independent of the County General Fund, and relies primarily
on property taxes and a special tax approved by the voters in
1997 to provide essential fire protection and emergency
medical services. Since 2008-09, the Department has been
impacted by an overall decline in property taxes and has
implemented cost containment measures to mitigate the
impact of this decline. However, with an improved financial
outlook as a result of projected increases in property tax
assessments, the Department is focusing efforts on preserving
its infrastructure; ensuring efficiencies; minimizing risk;
identifying new revenue streams; and maintaining an
appropriate level of reserves. These efforts will provide the
foundation to sustain the current level of emergency staffing
and essential support services.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes the addition of
17.0 support positions that will help generate additional grant
revenue and/or support departmental initiatives aimed at
improving efficiencies; funding for additional firefighter recruit training classes and for Board-approved increases in salaries
and employee benefits. The Recommended Budget also
includes funding for the future replacement of helicopters and
the Department’s Computer Aided Dispatch system.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department provides 24-hour, emergency services to over
four million people living and working in 57 of the County’s
88 cities, the unincorporated communities, and the City of
La Habra in neighboring Orange County. The Department’s
vast 2,300 square mile jurisdiction also includes 158 lifeguard
towers spanning 72 miles of coastline, to protect millions of
annual beach visitors, and over one million housing units. The
Fire Department is one of the largest emergency service
organizations in the country, and enjoys a world-renowned
reputation for its adeptness and innovation in managing largescale
wildfires, earthquakes, and other natural and man-made
disasters in Southern California.
The Department’s Strategic Plan includes twelve goals
designed to support future efforts in providing fire-protection
and life safety services. These goals are: Preventing Injury and
Illness; Delivering Exemplary Emergency Services; Innovating
New Delivery Systems; Fostering Workforce Excellence;
Ensuring Financial Stability and Accountability; Developing the
Leader in Each Employee; Strengthening our Infrastructure;
Automating our Systems; Containing Risks; Mitigating
Disasters; Preparing the People We Serve; and Communicating
our Value.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes funding for
programs in support of the following departmental strategic
planning efforts: 17.0 support positions which will improve
efficiencies and/or help generate additional revenue;
additional firefighter recruit classes; replacement of apparatus
and heavy equipment; replacement of necessary personal
protective equipment for firefighters; cardiac monitors for use
in emergency medical services; an automated fuel dispensing
system; migration to the Windows operating systems as
mandated by the Chief Information Office; a data system to
track employee injuries and claims; a new phone system for the
Lifeguard Division; and increases in the Department’s contract
air program.
The 2014-15 Budget Request includes funding to sustain departmental operations. The Department utilizes a multi-year fiscal
forecast for financial planning purposes. Recent budget forecasts indicate a slight increase in property taxes and therefore, the
financial outlook has improved. The Department will continue to evaluate new revenue streams to help support ongoing
operations.
Fire Department - Lifeguard budget provides funding for
lifeguard services at County-operated beaches that are the
responsibility of the General Fund. The budget establishes an
appropriation for a General Fund transfer to the Fire
Department’s budget, which includes a percentage of all costs
and budgeted positions for ocean lifeguard services. The
2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$0.6 million in NCC primarily due to the deletion of $2.1 million
in one-time funding for two rescue boats, a new phone system,
and Phase 1 of the Vehicle Replacement Program, partially
offset by $0.9 million for Board-approved increases in salaries
and employee benefits, and $0.6 million for the purchase of a
new rescue boat headquarters.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Fire Department’s Strategic Plan includes 12 goals
designed to support the Department’s envisioned future.
These goals are: Preventing Injury and Illness; Delivering
Exemplary Emergency Services; Innovating New Delivery
Systems; Fostering Workforce Excellence; Ensuring Financial
Stability and Accountability; Developing the Leader in Each
Employee; Strengthening our Infrastructure; Automating our
Systems; Containing Risks; Mitigating Disasters; Preparing the
People We Serve; and Communicating our Value.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget helps support the
Department’s Strategic Plan efforts as it relates to Lifeguard
operations.
The Lifeguard budget has a total of $4.7 million in unmet needs comprised of the following: $3.2 million, which includes funding
for 7.0 positions, for the restoration of curtailments implemented in fiscal years 2009-10 and 2010-11; $0.3 million for the
restoration of 2.0 positions that were eliminated as part of deficit reduction efforts in fiscal years 2010-11 and 2011-12; and
$1.2 million in additional needs for items such as the purchase of new uniforms and the incremental replacement of the Lifeguard’s
rescue boat fleet.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $12,000 primarily due to an increase in Board-approved
employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ The Grand Jury continues to:
¦ Increase recruitment of Civil Grand Jurors to better represent
the varied population of the County;
¦ Safeguard valuable Grand Jury original records and develop
long-term storage solutions; and
¦ Plan for a third Grand Jury to be used for Criminal Grand Jury
matters when needed.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $0.7 million due to the deletion of one-time carryover
funding. The Recommended Budget also includes a 1.5 percent
cost-of-living adjustment for Park operations and ministerial
increases in services and supplies fully offset with parking and
event revenue. Consistent with established contractual
obligations, and demonstrating a commitment to
public-private partnerships, the Recommended Budget
provides County funds for building and grounds maintenance,
custodial, security, and programming requirements necessary
for the operation of Grand Park.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, Grand Park exists to serve the people of
Los Angeles by assuring open spaces for casual sitting, leisurely
strolling, and civic gatherings. Grand Park serves the
community by providing access to community groups,
neighbors, schoolchildren, and sponsored performing events.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget is fully funded with
available resources, and reflects the minimum amount of local
resources required by law ($329.5 million and Vehicle License
Fees (VLF)-Realignment revenue of $263.4 million), plus an
additional $70.1 million in County funding. The additional
County funding components include $6.0 million from the
General Fund and $64.1 million in Tobacco Settlement funds.
The Recommended Budget also reflects $25.1 million in
County resources allocated to the Department of Public Social
Services (DPSS) for the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS)
Provider Health Care Plan and $11.7 million allocated to the
Capital Projects/Refurbishments budget for health-related
capital projects.
The Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC of
$42.8 million. This consists primarily of a $37.1 million
reduction in the use of Tobacco Settlement funds; a decrease of
$9.6 million in one-time funding for the final year of the Clinic
Capacity Expansion Program (CCEP); and a decrease of
$2.0 million in one-time Homeless Prevention Initiative funds
from the Second District; partially offset by an increase of
$3.3 million for a one percent increase in the maintenance of
effort (MOE) related to AB 85, Redirection of 1991 State Health
Realignment; an increase of $2.7 million for health care
provided by Juvenile Court Health Services to the Probation
Department, and other minor adjustments.
The Recommended Budget includes a net increase of
832.0 budgeted positions, primarily attributed to
737.0 additional positions for the nurse staffing plan primarily
to comply with State regulations; 56.0 positions for the
Board-approved Managed Care Services (MCS) reorganization;
35.0 positions for the conversion of contract staff to County
staff in the areas of radiology, family planning, information
technology (IT), pharmacy, and health interpreting services;
and 4.0 positions for the Children’s Welcome Center (CWC) at
LAC+USC Medical Center.
The Recommended Budget also provides for increased
operational costs associated primarily with Board-approved
salaries and employee benefits increases, the first phase of the
standardized nurse staffing plan primarily to comply with State
regulations, funding for the Senior Community Health Worker
Initiative, funding for newly trained Registered Nurses seeking
transition to become Nurse Practitioners, expansion funding
for the Housing for Health program, as well as funding for DHS’
support of patient care at the new Martin Luther King, Jr. (MLK)
Community Hospital.
The Recommended Budget reflects $214.7 million in Measure
B Special Tax revenue, of which $212.9 million is allocated for
County hospital emergency and trauma care costs at LAC+USC
Medical Center and Harbor-UCLA Medical Center (H-UCLA),
and for County hospital emergency care costs at
Olive View-UCLA Medical Center (OV-UCLA), and $1.8 million is
allocated for services related to trauma centers and emergency
medical services in Health Services Administration-Emergency
Medical Services.
The Department’s Enterprise Fund reserve was used in prior
years to fund departmental expenses; however, it is anticipated
to be depleted in FY 2013-14 and the Department is not
currently projecting a fund balance available at the close of the
fiscal year. Therefore, there is no balance available at this time
to fund the 2014-15 Recommended Budget.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) was implemented on
January 1, 2014 and DHS is continuing to develop its analysis
of the impact of the ACA. With the support of the Board and
the CEO’s Health Care Reform Task Force, DHS and its many
partners are working together to transform its system into an
integrated care delivery model that will enable its system to
provide the right care, at the right time, in the right location, by
the right kind of provider.
The Department has developed preliminary estimates to
project the impact on its budget regarding what is likely to
occur in FY 2014-15. However, because of the unpredictability
of what will actually take place as the ACA implementation
rolls forward, the Department cautions that significant
revisions to the budget may become necessary as the
estimates are refined to align with actual experience. Further,
the estimates included in the budget are solely based on the
impact to the Department and do not factor in any sharing
with the State under AB 85. The Department continues to work
with the State to develop data formats, procedures, and
protocols that will be used to determine the amount.
The Department’s chronic funding challenges have resulted in directing funding to cover the increased demand of patient care and
delaying investments in areas such as training, medical equipment purchases and facility maintenance.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget does not reflect funding
at this time for the new MLK Community Hospital. The
FY 2014-15 Budget increase will be reflected in a future budget
phase. The FY 2013-14 estimate reflects Board-approved,
one-time funding to assist MLK-LA with pre-hospital opening
activities.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net NCC
decrease of $8.7 million in one-time funding due to the
reduction in one-time carryover savings. The budget provides
one-time and ongoing funding to homeless assistance
programs including: Single Adult and Transitional Age Youth
Housing models; Gateway Connections Program to create
permanent supportive housing and supportive services for
homeless in the Gateway Cities area; Specialty Courts such as
the Prototype Court and Homeless Court Programs for
defendants who are homeless and have co-occurring illnesses
(mental health and substance abuse); and others that provide
supportive services for homeless families, individuals, and
veterans.
While the economic downturn had a significant impact on
many in the County, it had a disproportionate impact on the
most vulnerable among us – the homeless population. It is
important that the County help the most vulnerable homeless
individuals and families regain permanent housing.
The HHP has overseen at least 63 programs funded in part by
HPI. In FY 2012-13, these programs served approximately
10,800 individuals, families and/or youth. Some of the
highlights include the following:
¦ Secured emergency, transitional, or permanent supportive
housing for approximately 4,884 individuals, families or youth.
¦ Implemented the Family Solution Centers, which consist of six
regional sites within the County that connect homeless
families to rapid rehousing, permanent supportive housing,
and services. This demonstration project is funded in part by
HPI ($1.0 million) and is administered by LAHSA.
¦ Worked with the Sheriff’s Department, Corporation for
Supportive Housing, and other community-based
organizations to develop an improved Just In Reach Program
with a greater focus on permanent, supportive housing to
serve homeless ex-offenders exiting the jail and State prison
systems.
¦ Implemented the Gateway Connections Program to increase
permanent affordable housing with services, outreach and
engagement of street homeless, and rapid re-housing in the
Gateway Cities Region. This effort is funded by HPI
($1.2million per year for three years) from Supervisorial
Districts 1 and 4 and is administered by the Gateway Cities
Council of Governments and the CEO.
¦ Participated in the United Way’s Home for Good Funders
Collaborative which resulted in millions of dollars being
leveraged and coordinated to permanently house and provide
supportive services for approximately 1,000 chronically
homeless individuals.
¦ Continued to implement a Homeless Encampment Protocol, a
collaboration of the CEO, Sheriff’s Department, and LAHSA
that responds to homeless encampments throughout the
County. This collaborative program has addressed over
35 homeless encampments throughout the County in
FY 2012-13.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $1.8 million. The increase is primarily attributed to
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits,
ongoing funding for the expansion of the Executive Leadership
Development Program, front funding for the Impact Team, and
the expansion of the Administrative Intern Program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department of Human Resources continues working on
the countywide human resources (HR) transformation which
includes:
¦ Continuing front funding of the Impact Team;
¦ Implementing and expanding the Executive Leadership
Development Program;
¦ Continuing the expansion and use of broad-based testing,
competency-based examinations;
¦ Implementing the Performance Management Tracking
System (PMTS);
¦ Identifying a permanent solution to meet the increased space
and equipment needs for countywide examinations and
trainings; and
¦ Seeking permanent funding and positions to establish HR
Shared Services as part of the countywide HR architectural
model.
The Department’s unmet needs include funding for the establishment of a countywide testing/training space, an assessment tool
to provide information for implementing development plans and actions, as well as additional positions for test research and HR
departmental support.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $5.8 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for email migration costs for seven departments,
upgrade of the water pumping system and controls at the Hall
of Administration (HOA), replacement of private branch
exchange (PBX) systems with Voice-over Internet Protocol
(VoIP) for the most critical locations, power and sustainability
improvements at the Downey Data Center, server
consolidation, building maintenance workload, architectural
and engineering fees associated with the Disaster Recovery
Data Center project, and a reduction for the Countywide Cost
Allocation Adjustment. These decreases are partially offset by
ongoing and one-time funding for building maintenance
workload, ongoing funding for countywide contracting
training efforts, and increases in salaries and employee
benefits. Also reflected is a net increase in gross appropriation
of $8.0 million and 13.0 positions primarily attributable to
various reimbursable services provided to County departments
and other agencies, such as custodial services, County Office of
Sustainability services, computing services, IT shared services,
and facilities operations services.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The ISD Strategic Plan for 2014-15 identifies strategic goals to
improve customer service, create savings through innovation,
and provide environmental leadership. This year’s plan
includes the following new or continuing strategic objectives:
¦ Continue to expand countywide email service and the
County’s private cloud, which provides savings through
economies of scale and additional functionality;
¦ Implement new fiber countywide to address greater demand
for bandwidth due to the expanding use of video
conferencing, centralization of systems, WiFi access, and the
increased use of personal computing devices;
¦ Continue to re-band and replace the Countywide Integrated
Radio System (CWIRS) with a new P-25 compliant system, and
continue to support the Los Angeles Regional Interoperable
Communication System with essential radio technical and
contracting expertise;
¦ Implement the Southern California Regional Energy Network
Program, including the Energy Upgrade California program
(residential and multi-family incentives for implementing
energy saving measures) and financing programs that provide
low cost funds to implement energy saving measures;
¦ Continue to expand ISD’s customer service quality assurance
program to ensure strong customer feedback mechanisms;
¦ Create a new ISD internet website as a tool for customers to
access ISD services and provide an additional avenue for
customer feedback; and
¦ Continue to support the Chief Executive Office (CEO) and the
Department of Public Works in the construction project for a
new countywide data center, and lead countywide efforts to
develop and execute a consolidated data center strategy
based on shared computing and mechanical infrastructure.
Major accomplishments from last year include: expanded
private cloud hosting solution and implemented user
self-service server deployment; provided choices in server
hosting from “basic” through “fully managed,” and reduced the
cost per server ranging from 21 percent to 71 percent;
implemented service management software to track customer
incident reports for IT services; developed a pilot Contracts
Management System (CMS) intended for countywide use
along with the Auditor-Controller and other lead departments;
secured grant funding to offset the cost of implementing
electric vehicle charging infrastructure at various County
facilities; implemented energy efficiency projects (lighting
retrofits/controls, heating ventilation air conditioning (HVAC),
retro-commissioning) that resulted in $1.0 million countywide
annual cost avoidance in electric and natural gas costs; and
implemented the Disabled Veteran Business Enterprise
Preference program as directed by the Board.
The Department’s unmet needs include funding for 1.0 position to provide comprehensive and centralized contract training and
consultation services to departments countywide, and to upgrade the reserve uninterruptable power supply (UPS) with additional
capacity.
The Customer Direct Services and Supplies is a “pass through” budget to account for various services and supplies that ISD
purchases directly from outside vendors on behalf of customer departments.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease of $3.5 million in anticipated requirements from customer departments.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects funding for
anticipated judgments and/or settlements, attorney fees and
litigation costs, service contracts, and various commercial
insurance policies. The budget also includes a central
appropriation to fund large, unanticipated losses and losses of
a countywide nature.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $0.5 million primarily attributed to an anticipated increase in
facility operating costs and the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
based cost-of-living (COLA) adjustment pursuant to the 2012
operating agreement. The Recommended Budget also reflects
full-year funding and support for buildings and grounds
maintenance, utilities, and other anticipated operational costs
of LA Plaza de Cultura y Artes.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in Los Angeles County, LA Plaza de Cultura y Artes exists to
serve the people of Los Angeles, particularly children and
families, by educating them about Los Angeles history and
Mexican-American culture.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget provides for the collection
of lease payments due on LAC-CAL equipment leases from
County departments and the transfer of such payments to the
LAC-CAL Corporation. Also reflected is the payment of
insurance premiums for which expenditures will be distributed
to affected departments.
In the prior fiscal year, the JPA issued seperate and
independent request for proposals (RFP) for the design and
build of public safety-grade Land Mobile Radio (LMR) voice and
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) data wireless networks. The JPA
then selected, negotiated and awarded separate contracts to
the prevailing vendor in both RFPs
Both the LMR and LTE networks are currently undergoing
system design, with the JPA expediting all work associated
with the LTE network in an effort to utilize federal grant
funding resources that expire in August 2015. The LMR
network features a more practical design schedule, due to
flexibility of its funding sources. Each network is independent
of the other and will be activated separately.
The JPA is also refining the details for the overall system’s
estimated one-time financing and on-going funding needs
and is in the process of developing a comprehensive funding
plan and formula to divide the system’s costs equitably among
its members. It is also exploring legislative options to extend
the federal grants set to expire in 2015.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects continued
funding for administrative operations of the JPA.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a NCC decrease of
$2.3 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time funding
for a new electronic case file system (ECFS), the scanning of
case files, forensic laboratories accreditation costs, and
carryover funding from the prior fiscal year offset by
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits, a
countywide cost allocation adjustment, funding for 5.0 critical
new positions and one-time funding to continue the
implementation of the ECFS.
The Board, on recommendation of the Chief Executive Office,
appointed the current Chief Medical Examiner-Coroner on
August 12, 2013, and subsequently approved an ordinance on
September 3, 2013 renaming the Department from
“Department of Coroner” to “Department of Medical
Examiner-Coroner” and consolidated the management
structure under a single department head.
The Medical Examiner-Coroner strives to provide
compassionate, quality service to all of its customers, including
the decedents’ families; funeral directors; law enforcement;
courts, the District Attorney, Public Defender and other justice
agencies; foreign consulates; and the news media. The
Department is proud to be a leader in death investigation and
continues to be successful in maintaining the following
accreditations: National Association of Medical Examiners,
Institute of Medical Quality/California Medical Association,
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, Peace
Officers Standards and Training, and American Society of Crime
Laboratory Directors/Laboratory Accreditation Board.
In coordination with the Internal Services Department -
Information Technology (IT) Support Services Division and
departmental IT staff, as a multi-year goal, the Medical
Examiner-Coroner will develop an appropriate archival system
for radiography.
The Department will continue to work with the Chief
Information Office and Internal Services Department to
complete the next phases of the ECFS project, which will
expand system functionality to include Specimen Tracking,
Morgue Management, and Case Folder tracking thereby,
increasing efficiency and reducing risk of loss or destruction of
paper case files.
The following are included for consideration as budget needs and details become available:
The Department plans to evaluate its current staffing needs and organizational structure that has been in place for several years.
The Chief Medical Examiner-Coroner, with executive and physician managers, operations and administrative managers will
determine the Department’s operational and direct and indirect support needs. These needs will be presented to CEO Budget and
Classification and Compensation divisions to ensure that appropriate staffing models and levels are allocated in a manner that
more optimally aligns positions with duties, range and scope, level of responsibility and autonomy, and meets requirements set by
law or policy.
Broader expansion of the Antelope Valley Regional Office operation to occupy approximately 7,500 square feet of available space
at High Desert Hospital. This expansion would provide much needed additional decedent storage, augment autopsy capabilities
and would function as a remote Emergency Operations Center in the North County. Occupancy in this area is expected to
significantly increase over the next decade. This proposed expansion would improve current operations, and would become critical
in a natural or man-made disaster situation. The expansion would require additional funding to add 1.0 Coroner Investigator,
1.0 Forensic Pathologist, 1.0 Forensic Technician, 1.0 Forensic Attendant and 1.0 Senior Typist Clerk positions; as well as cover
moving and build-out and associated services and supplies costs related to the additional positions.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects the Department’s
focus on the Affordable Care Act (ACA) implementation and its
impact on the directly operated programs and contracted
agencies in several key areas. Under the roll-out of the
Medicaid expansion in the County, health plans will utilize the
Department’s access center as the countywide call center for
urgent mental health referrals as well as consultation
regarding specialty mental health services. To ensure a timely
and thorough response to these calls, the Recommended
Budget reflects 12.0 positions for the access center. In addition,
due to the growing demand for mental health services for
adults who are newly eligible for mental health benefits, the
Recommended Budget includes 33.0 positions for the directly
operated adult outpatient programs. This includes additional
social workers who will assess and treat the new Medicaid
expansion population and community workers who will aid in
care coordination as part of the Department’s emphasis on
integrating treatment with primary care entities.
The Recommended Budget also reflects the addition of
2.0 positions to support the Nurse Family Partnership
program, a collaborative effort with the Department of Public
Health, to conduct outreach and support for pregnant women
with mental illness. In addition, to ensure the Department
engages in quality assurance for claiming by the Office of the
Public Guardian, 1.0 additional position is included in the
Recommended Budget. This budget continues to develop the
Office of Empowerment and Advocacy by adding 4.0 positions
supporting efforts to ensure meaningful involvement of individuals in recovery in the design of mental health
programs. Additionally, the budget reflects the addition of
6.0 positions, fully funded by a grant received from the
Veteran’s Administration, for the delivery of services to
homeless veterans with mental illness.
DMH is preparing for the termination of the specific dedicated
mental health services funded through the California Work
Opportunity and Responsibilities to Kids (CalWORKs) Homeless
Services Program as that program transitions to new models of
service delivery. This will result in a decrease of $2.4 million and
10.0 positions, and curtailment of funding to contract
agencies. In addition, there is a decrease of 1.0 grant-funded
position for the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration Wellness Family Project to reflect the reduction
in the annual grant allocation. The Department’s budget also
includes continued funding for the Psychiatric Emergency
Services Decompression Plan, approved by the Board on June
25, 2012. Finally, the Recommended Budget reflects increased
rates charged to DMH for inpatient beds at Institutions for
Mental Disease (IMD) and State hospitals, due to unavoidable
cost-of-living increases of 4.7 percent and 6 percent,
respectively.
As in prior years, the Recommended Budget will allow the
Department to continue collaborating with County
departments, its stakeholders, and community partners to
implement Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) programs,
Board priorities, and other mandates that ensure the provision
of highest quality and most cost-effective services to children,
adolescents, adults, and older adults with serious mental
illnesses or disorders. These include, but are not limited to, the
following: 1) the ongoing delivery and assessment of services
provided by MHSA funded programs to children, transition age
youth, adults, and older adults to ensure they reflect the
Department’s commitment to a wellness and
recovery-oriented system of care; 2) the continued
collaboration with the Department of Children and Family
Services (DCFS) on the implementation of the Katie A. Strategic
Plan; 3) active participation in the restructuring of the General
Relief (GR) program in association with the Department of
Public Social Services (DPSS); 4) the implementation of the
Collaborative Care Integration program with the Department
of Health Services (DHS) to deliver Prevention and Early
Intervention (PEI) mental health services at DHS facilities;
5) services to chronically homeless individuals with serious
mental illness and co-occurring substance abuse disorders;
and 6) the execution of the County action plan to address the
needs of youth in probation halls and camps in conjunction
with the Probation Department, as well as the Public Safety
Realignment (AB109) program focused on the delivery of
assessment and treatment services to inmates and parolees
with mental health and/or co-occurring mental health and
substance use disorders.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to identify and implement strategic
approaches to ensure the provision of high quality and
cost-effective care to individuals with serious mental illness
disorders. In FY 2014-15 these will include:
¦ Continued implementation of the ACA, including the
Medicaid expansion.
¦ Development of Health Neighborhoods as a strategy for
effective coordination of mental health, health, and substance
abuse services – as well as a mechanism for empowering
communities to address health disparities.
¦ Delivery of integrated mental health-primary care services
through a variety of structural arrangements (e.g., co-location
of directly operated DMH staff in DHS facilities, alignment of
contract adult and child providers with primary care
providers) as well as use of technology such as eConsult and
telepsychiatry.
¦ Continued implementation of the Psychiatric Emergency
Service decompression plan in collaboration with DHS.
¦ Full implementation of the DMH Integrated Behavioral Health
Information System including the electronic health record.
¦ Continued implementation of Public Safety Realignment
mental health/co-occurring disorders services.
¦ Expansion of services to families of veterans returning from
Iraq and Afghanistan that will reduce the stress commonly
encountered during family reunification.
¦ Collaboration with other County departments such as DCFS
(Katie A. Strategic Plan), Probation (Juvenile Justice), and DPSS
(GR).
¦ Inclusion of stakeholders and community partners in efforts to
transform the entire mental health system.
¦ Continuation of focus on outcomes and increasing services for
underserved ethnic populations.
The Department’s unmet needs include: 1) funding for additional Jail Mental Health staff in order to enhance services delivered to
incarcerated individuals with mental illness within the existing Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department facilities, planned to be addressed
in a future budget phase; 2) augmentation of funding for the Probate section of office of the Public Guardian including funding
that would support the move of this program to space that can better accommodate the work of the program and funding needed
for unavoidable cost increases to maintain probate services; 3) funding to address services for uninsured consumers, including
homeless, dually diagnosed and the underserved ethnic populations; 4) positions for the Department’s ACCESS Call Center to
enhance the provision of timely services, crisis intervention, linkage/referrals, and language translation assistance, and to avoid
dropped calls; and 5) program and central administrative infrastructure, including information technology (IT), to support the
growth in mental health services’ programs and revenue sources.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an $88,000 NCC
increase primarily due to funding for 2.0 positions for the
Veterans Welfare Referral and Claims Benefits program, storage
space and Board-approved increases in salaries and employee
benefits, partially offset by the deletion of one-time carryover
funding to offset costs associated with the reopening of the
newly renovated Bob Hope Patriotic Hall.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to focus on increasing veterans’
service levels by collaborating with County departments,
developing and training staff, and partnering with military and
veterans’ service organizations. The Department will optimize
operational effectiveness and integrate service delivery by:
¦ Strengthening and enhancing its capacity to sustain essential
veterans’ service through effective training, agency
collaboration and leadership by:
• Ensuring that all veteran service representatives are state
accredited through the California State Department of
Veterans Affairs (DVA), Training Responsibility
Involvement Preparation of Claims (TRIP) through the
DVA, and nationally accredited through the National
Association of County Veteran Service Officers.
• Establishing partnerships with County departments and
veteran organizations and agencies such as: 1) partnering
with the Department of Public Social Services to identify
veterans receiving General Relief and pursue
compensation claims with the DVA; 2) coordinating with
the Department of Mental Health to provide mental
health services to veterans and families; 3) continuing
efforts with the Sheriff’s Department to provide services
to veteran inmates in County jails; 4) working with the
Departments of Human Resources and Beaches and
Harbors to explore job opportunities for veterans;
5) initiating a veteran’s resource center at Patriotic Hall
with the Public Library; 6) building a one-stop veterans
shop at Patriotic Hall in partnership with veterans
organizations and agencies; and 7) developing and
implementing a communications plan connecting
veterans to services and benefits.¦ Maximizing opportunities to measurably improve veteran’s
outcomes and leverage resources by:
• Delivering veteran services through innovative methods
and continuous integration by establishing
Memorandums of Understanding with County
departments and veteran organizations.
• Increasing outreach and promotional efforts to enhance
the number of veterans receiving services using outcome
measures.
• Providing learning opportunities in partnership with
academic institutions and County agencies.
• Recognizing department/staff through applications for
County, State and National awards programs.
The Department is requesting the following positions: 1.0 Application Developer, 2.0 Veterans Claims Assistant I, 1.0 Administrative
Assistant I, and 1.0 Career Development Intern.
With more than 2.0 million veterans living in California, a quarter of these veterans live in Los Angeles. Thus, it is also home to one
of the largest populations of homeless veterans in the nation. Predictably, with the increasing number of returning Afghanistan
veterans and their families to the Los Angeles area, the growing number and complexity of veterans’ claims, and the stand-up of a
service center at Bob Hope Patriotic Hall, there is a need to increase the Department’s staffing levels. Today’s limited funding will
not support the continuing increase in the needs of the veterans population. This will be the Department’s biggest challenge in the
coming years.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$0.1 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time carryover
funding partially offset by an increase in the CPI-based COLA
adjustment pursuant to the 1994 operating agreement
amended on May 20, 2008. The Recommended Budget also
includes funding for Board-approved increases in salaries and
health insurance subsidies fully offset with a decrease in
services and supplies funding consistent with the
Board-approved operating agreement.
The Recommended Budget continues support for a full
exhibition schedule, including special presentations of works
by Pierre Huyghe, John Altoon, Larry Sultan, Marsden Hartley,
and Archibald Motley. The permanent collection will be
highlighted with installations of pre-Columbian, Korean, and
Japanese works. Several LACMA-organized exhibitions
continue to travel, raising the museum’s image and prestige in
the field, including German Expressionism and France
(Canada), India’s Universe (China), and Calder and Abstraction
(England).
Art Programs with the Community continues its multi-year
partnership with schools, libraries, and other organizations
throughout Los Angeles Unified School District Local Districts
West and South. This year LACMA is also continuing the Art
and Film Educational Initiative, designed to expose audiences
to the intersection between art and technology. This program
series includes hand-drawn animation workshops for
Los Angeles Unified School District middle school students,
classroom teacher professional development, curriculum, and
an after school filmmaking program. In addition, the LACMA
Art+Film Lab will complete the final two sites of a nine-city
tour (Redlands, San Bernardino, Altadena, Monterey Park,
Hacienda Heights, Montebello, Compton, Inglewood, and
Torrance). This initiative consists of an artist-designed mobile
classroom that houses hands-on art and filmmaking
workshops, film screenings, and an opportunity for community
members to record their own video portrait. Each five-week
residency culminates in a special free day at LACMA where
community members receive complimentary admission and a
chance to view a commissioned video artwork featuring
residents from each site.
The Museum of Art will continue implementation of its
long-range strategic objectives:
¦ Improve the quality and presentation of the collections;
¦ Attract and engage a broader audience through expanded
international recognition of LACMA as a quality art institution
and continued commitment to educational programs and
overall scholarship;
¦ Improve the museum campus; and
¦ Develop a stable and sustainable financial and organization
plan.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget is based on the 1994
operating agreement amended on September 26, 2006, and
further amended on June 24, 2013 and October 8, 2013,
between the County and the Museum of Natural History
Foundation (Foundation), which established each entity’s
operational and financial responsibilities. This public-private
partnership enables the Museum to maintain educational and
research programs and basic operations at the Museum of
Natural History located in Exposition Park, the George C. Page
Museum at the La Brea Tar Pits, and the William S. Hart
Museum in Newhall. The Recommended Budget reflects an
NCC increase of $0.8 million primarily attributed to an increase
in the Consumer Price Index-based cost-of-living adjustment
and an increase in base funding to support physical and
programmatic expansion, partially offset by the deletion of
one-time carryover funding.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Museum continues to implement its strategic plan, which
is consistent with the County’s Strategic Plan. Through the
strategic planning process, the Museum will identify and
prioritize programs for funding in FY 2014-15 that further its
mission.
In recognition of the economic crisis that has impacted the County, the only critical need included in the FY 2014-15 Capital Budget
request is related to the Museum’s auditorium. This project requires significant investment that cannot be covered from the
operating budget.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $0.9 million primarily due to a cost-of-living adjustment,
unavoidable contract cost increases, management of various
County funded contracts, and an anticipated increase in capital
lease costs. Consistent with established contractual
obligations, and demonstrating a commitment to maintaining
public-private partnerships, the Recommended Budget
continues to provide County funds to maintain and operate the
facility.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, the Center exists to serve the people of
Los Angeles by assuring the presentation of the very best of
the performing arts in its theaters and concert hall. The Center
serves the community by providing access to the performing
arts to families and children on the Center’s campus and by
providing educational services in the region’s schools.
The Center continues to identify unmet needs for numerous deferred maintenance projects and the implementation of various
best practices approaches.
Nondepartmental revenues are derived largely from
revenue-generating activities not related to any specific
County department.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget primarily reflects:
¦ An increase of $9.0 million in deed transfer tax revenue based
on actual trend and a steady growth in the County’s housing
values;
¦ An increase of $1.3 million in sales and use tax revenue based
on ongoing trend;
¦ A decrease of $0.3 million in Other Governmental Agencies
associated with the dissolution of the Huntington Municipal
Water District in FY 2013-14;
¦ A decrease of $2.0 million for hospital interest earnings;
¦ An increase in revenues from franchises ($1.1 million) and
rents, concessions, and royalties ($0.9 million); and
¦ A realignment of revenues for overhead charges assessed to
the Hospitals and Special Fund/Special Districts ($2.0 million)
for the use of general County services.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects:
¦ A Board-approved increase in salaries and employee benefits
that will be allocated to departments in the subsequent
budget phase(s).
¦ A decrease in other financing uses due to the deletion of
one-time funding for various Public Library projects and the
elimination of a one-time transfer from the General Fund to
the Productivity Investment Fund. The decreases are partially
offset by increases in funding for the Pico Rivera Library, Public
Library Homework Centers, Chicano Digitization library
projects, and the Civic Center Parking Fund.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects $4.9 million
decrease in NCC primarily attributable to the deletion of
one-time funding, partially offset by Board-approved increases
in salaries and employee benefits, electricity rate increases, and
First Supervisorial District changes. The Recommended Budget
also reflects realignments based on historical experience and
anticipated needs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to maintaining the
County’s Strategic Plan. Continued and enhanced efforts found
in efficiencies, exploring new possibilities to augment revenue,
and discovering creative methods to sustain with minimum
funding will all be necessary for the Department’s operations
as well as to support the three Strategic Goals: Operational
Effectiveness (Goal 1), Fiscal Sustainability (Goal 2), and
Integrated Services Delivery (Goal 3).
The Department’s 2014-15 critical needs consist of partial reinstatement of programs (recreation and capital assets) and funding
curtailed as a result of the economic downturn; augmentation of the Department’s Employee Relations unit, training, aquatics and
strategic planning; replacement of aging, non-diesel vehicles, and information technology equipment upgrades and
enhancements.
Funding and augmentations for the aforementioned needs allow the Department to continue its operations without disruptions
and in some cases, may allow the Department to operate its facilities at a preferred service level. Partial reinstatement of programs
include full accessibility to lake swim beaches and nature centers; various recreational positions associated with these programs;
and capital assets for facility construction and ground maintenance. Additional personnel is needed for Employee Relations to
allow for effective, efficient handling of numerous caseloads (which has since increased from the implementation of the County
Policy of Equity); and for aquatics to effectively manage pools and increase safety. Other efficiencies would be achieved through
enhancements in supervisor training and strategic planning. Also, approximately 25% of the Department’s fleet of 600 vehicles has
reached the County replacement standard of 7 years or older and/or 100,000 or more miles, and funding to replace these vehicles
will greatly reduce the frequency of repair and costs. Lastly, replacement of outdated computer monitors and applications are
needed along with additional personnel, equipment and services for intranet development, computer maintenance and upgrades,
and for overall efficiency.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$9.9 million, primarily due to $13.1 million for Board-approved
increases in salaries and health insurance subsidies;
$2.8 million transferred from the Provisional Financing Uses
(PFU) budget unit for five positions for the enhancement of the
Return-to-Work (RTW) unit and 17.0 positions and services and
supplies for the opening of two Juvenile Day Reporting Centers
(JDRCs); partially offset by the deletion of $5.9 million in
one-time funding for the Employment Support Services
contract with the Sheriff’s Department ($600,000), Education
Reform carryover ($2.5 million), Title IV-E Reinvestment
program ($800,000), building refurbishments ($1.0 million),
and vehicle replacements ($1.0 million). The budget also
reflects a reduction of $0.1 million in other adjustments.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Probation Department has developed a strategic plan
transforming from a custodial and supervision model to an
evidence-based practices treatment and rehabilitation model.
The goals include implementing evidence-based practices;
developing and expanding collaborative efforts and
community capacity; and maintaining a commitment to
organizational development. The top priorities of the
Department are:
¦ Continue efforts to implement Department of Justice (DOJ)
recommendations;
¦ Continue the roll out of AB109 Realignment;
¦ Continue efforts to change the culture of the Department;
¦ Continue to work with the Chief Executive Office (CEO) to
identify funding for previously deferred maintenance projects;
and
¦ Continue to work with the CEO to identify funding for
high-mileage transportation vehicles.
The Probation Department’s most critical unmet needs include the following: 1) $0.63 million for the Office of Independent Review
contract and support positions request; 2) $2.2 million for the Alhambra area office seismic retrofit; 3) $0.83 million to repair and
replace two chillers at the Challenger Youth Memorial Center (CMYC); 4) $0.75 million for the San Gabriel area office refurbishment;
5) $1.2 million for the juvenile halls fire detection upgrade; and 6) $0.57 million (start-up costs) to renovate office space previously
occupied by the Auditor-Controller at the Downey Headquarters office.
The Community-Based Contracts budget funds private contracts, administered by the Probation Department, to reduce juvenile
crime and provide juvenile delinquency prevention services.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget appropriates $22.7 million
in services and supplies to fund consultant studies that
quantify departmental space needs, develop master plans,
provide technical, structural, and environmental impact
assessments, and assist in the development of facility
programs and capital planning efforts.
The Recommended Budget also incorporates $26.8 million in
other charges to fund County contributions for improvements
to County and other public facilities implemented by other
agencies or jurisdictions; $0.3 million in capital
assets - equipment to fund the acquisition of trailers to
mitigate operational impacts to recreation and public-oriented
programs that are displaced during construction; and
$6.2 million in other financing uses which represents transfers
of unspent funds from capital projects to be reallocated to
departments operating budgets for the purchase of furniture
and equipment, and to the Civic Art Special Fund per Board
policy to fund public art projects.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The budget provides a funding mechanism for departmental
and countywide capital development and planning activities.
The activities funded from this budget contribute to the
multi-year planning efforts of departments, and the County as
a whole, by ensuring that capital programs appropriately
reflect operational and programmatic requirements and
departmental strategic plans.
The Provisional Financing Uses budget unit serves as a
temporary budget for program funding that has yet to be
allocated to a specific budget unit. Once funding needs have
been determined, funds are transferred to the affected budget
unit by Board order.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease of
$161.8 million.
The following is a description of each budget category change.
Auditor-Controller
Reflects a $6.5 million increase for eCAPS related costs.
Children and Family Services
Reflects a decrease of $14.4 million for Title IV-E Waiver
($1.3 million) and Katie A. Settlement programs ($9.3 million),
AB12 related expenses ($2.6 million), and the Psychiatric
Mobile Response Team ($1.2 million).
Capital Projects
Reflects a decrease of $75.0 million for various deferred
maintenance projects.
Health Services
Reflects a $28.0 million decrease for costs associated with the
Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Hospital.
Parks and Recreation
Reflects a $2.8 million increase for anticipated operational
costs associated with newly constructed or refurbished park
facilities.
Probation
Reflects a decrease of $2.8 million for the Juvenile Day
Reporting Center ($2.3 million) and Return-to-Work program
($0.5 million).
Public Social Services
Reflects a decrease of $15.0 million for General Relief related
costs ($5.3 million) and other countywide funding needs
($9.7 million).
Sheriff
Reflects a $17.4 million net increase for anticipated costs
associated with implementing the Citizens’ Commission on Jail
Violence recommendations.
Various
Reflects a net decrease of $53.2 million for Board-approved
salary increases ($38.1 million), the elimination of one-time
funding transferred to various budget units in FY 2013-14
($31.8 million), and various other programs ($0.3 million).
These decreases are partially offset by an increase in carryover
savings from the prior year ($17.0 million).
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$8.1 million primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits; travel costs for Proposition 36
resentencing cases, and the deletion of one-time carryover
funding for facility repairs and the purchase of computers.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Enhance ongoing Risk Management efforts; ensure uniform
training standards for supervisors and managers; develop
and/or providing supervision, management and leadership
training through various means such as developing and
implementing new Deputy in Charge training, new and/or
refresher Head Deputy training, and non-attorney supervisor
manager training; identify/develop a knowledge-based
curriculum for supervisors and managers that is consistent
with and will facilitate the Department’s vision for workforce
development; and identify, evaluate and select methods of
developing and strengthening leadership skills among
attorney supervisors and managers through such things as
seminars, workshops, materials, exercises and programs.
¦ Further explore new and innovative methods to facilitate the
efficient internal dissemination and timely delivery of
information. The Office will also forge meaningful community
outreach efforts that promote civic pride and educate the
public about the role and mission of the Public Defender’s
Office. This will be accomplished by developing stronger ties
with other County agencies, such as the CEO’s Office of Public
Affairs, and with the communications deputies of
supervisorial districts as well as with outside agencies;
developing a plan to educate the public about the Public
Defender’s mission and services, via the Department’s public
website and through other means; developing informational
materials to promote public knowledge of the Public
Defender’s mission and its services and our Centennial
anniversary celebration, as well as constitutional rights under
both the California and United States constitutions; and
encouraging the volunteer outreach by staff in various venues
such as Volunteers in Parole and the Constitutional Rights
Foundation, to educate youth and families about the justice
system and their legal rights and obligations.
¦ Enhance disaster preparedness and employee safety and
augment existing risk management efforts through various
measures, including developing an orientation plan for
disaster preparedness for Public Defender staff; developing a
plan to offer comprehensive disaster preparedness training to
select employees office-wide; researching and identifying
materials for office-wide distribution in order to educate staff
on disasters, their impact, and the hazards posed by buildings
and non-structural items; identifying and evaluating materials
for posting on the Public Defender Portal which staff members
can access to educate themselves on disaster preparedness
and contact information in the event of a disaster; identifying
those staff members who have received comprehensive
disaster preparedness training and devise a plan to use their
knowledge for the improvement of the Department; and
identifying, training, developing and implementing a training
plan addressing employee safety in the field, specifically
including driving skills and responsibilities.
¦ The Public Defender has anticipated and prepared for a major
change in the Three Strikes Law, which took effect November
2012, and is currently handling 366 Proposition 36 Three
Strikes post-conviction matters in which the client has not yet
been resentenced and released. The Department has
absorbed this workload; however, additional expenses will be
incurred for employee travel to State prisons on these matters.
Lastly, the State has made findings which largely eliminate
Sexually Violent Predator (SVP) funding. Department SVP
operations cost about $7.0 million. The Department has
continued to maintain its budget within its limitations in spite
of numerous challenges.
¦ Public Defender plans to upgrade the Electronic Document
Management System (PD-EDMS) to integrate/interface with
the Case Management System (CMS). The Department is also
proceeding with a Public Defender Statistical System (PDSS)
which utilizes data from the legacy Defense Management
System (DMS) at a low cost.
The Department’s unmet needs include additional funding for unfunded salary and employee benefits; a contract analyst position;
and additional direct support and information technology staff. In addition, the Department needs one-time funding for
warehouse refurbishment; various office security upgrades; and reconfiguration/refurbishment of the Felony Records and
Lynwood Information Technology Offices.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase in
appropriation and revenue, and the elimination of one-time
carryover funding from prior year as well as funding for Board
approved salaries and employee benefits, resulting in a
reduction in NCC.
The Recommended Budget also reflects an increase of
53.0 positions, fully offset by decreases in services and supplies
and additional revenue, associated with the following
programs: 1) Substance Abuse Prevention and Control (SAPC)
Drug/Medi-Cal program for clinical oversight of contract
services; 2) Communicable Disease Prevention and Control to
address expanded scopes of work under the Affordable Care
Act (ACA); 3) Environmental Health for the new County Toxic
Threat Strike Team and to support the billing functions of the
electronic inspection system; 4) Chronic Disease and Injury
Prevention to fulfill the grant functions of the local health
department Nutrition Program; and 5) Centralized support to
streamline administrative processes.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Public Health’s Strategic Plan was developed through an
extensive process involving stakeholders, data and trend
analysis, and policy assessments, and includes goals and
objectives that contemplate the existing and emerging public
health landscape. The Recommended Budget supports efforts
to preserve an organizational infrastructure focused on
maximizing organizational effectiveness and meeting service
excellence goals. A strong organizational infrastructure
enables all public health programs to better serve clients,
address the public health needs of all County residents, and
meet program goals more effectively.
The Department has an unmet need of $3.1 million to fund 16.0 positions in contract monitoring; information technology;
Environmental Health; External Relations, Policy and Communication; Communicable Disease Control and Prevention; and the
Office of the Medical Director.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a reduction of
$24.8 million primarily attributed to the deletion of one-time
funding from the Utility User Tax allocations and Capital and
various Board-funded refurbishment projects. This reduction is
partially offset by an addition of $3.6 million to the General
Fund Contribution for the restoration of library service hours
and a 4.06 percent anticipated property tax growth based on
the Assessor’s forecast. The Department’s budget also includes
an additional 11.0 positions for the new Stevenson Ranch
Library.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Public Library’s new strategic plan establishes a roadmap
for sustaining the Department’s leadership as a 21st century
library. Their new purpose statement, along with eight key
initiatives, sets the framework for developing innovative
service models that will meet the increasing needs of its
diverse communities.
The Department will continue to construct new libraries and
refurbish aging library buildings. These buildings will be
designed with sustainable features that incorporate
self-service models; spaces that encourage creativity; larger
meeting rooms for civic engagement and community events;
and is equipped with robust and emerging technologies that
support digital initiatives.
The Official Budget request includes $7.0 million to augment the Department’s facilities and maintenance budget to address
structural or other building maintenance issues due to extended deferred maintenance at various library facilities. In addition,
Public Library requests $3.0 million books and material budget to meet the national average for material expenditure per capita for
a major urban library system given the vast population served.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget for the Department of
Public Social Services (DPSS) Administration reflects a
$90.0 million increase in gross appropriation and $3.2 million
increase in NCC. The NCC increase is primarily due to
Board-approved salary increases and the County share of
increases in employee benefits.
The Recommended Budget reflects the addition of
210.0 positions, fully offset by the reduction of 210.0 positions,
resulting in no net change in the number of budgeted
positions, as each new position request was offset with the
deletion of a vacant budgeted position. The new positions are
primarily for Family Stabilization program, information
technology efficiencies, and administrative support.
Although there was an increased demand for the full range of
DPSS services during the recent economic downturn, cash
assistance caseloads are projected to flatten or decline due to
the improving economy, though caseloads for non-cash
programs such as Medi-Cal are projected to continue
increasing.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to measures that ensure
effective and professional service delivery and support the
County’s goals of Operational Effectiveness, Fiscal
Sustainability, and Integrated Services Delivery.
In addition, DPSS Total Accountability Total Success (DPSSTATS)
performance review process continues to evaluate measures
that impact work performance and management
accountability. The Department’s 2014-15 Strategic Plan,
“Beyond the Leading Edge”, will include 41 objectives with a
focus on Technological Innovation and Workforce
Development.
The DPSS Customer Service Centers (CSC) now support all of
the Department’s district offices and continue to be an
effective service delivery mechanism for enhancing access and
improving the timeliness of case actions. The current service
population of CSC has reached over 1.2 million cases, and the
CSC receives a monthly average of 385,000 calls, which are
either resolved by the automated Interactive Voice Response
system or answered by an eligibility worker.
To enhance service outreach, DPSS continues to utilize the
Mobile Health and Nutrition Office, a 34-foot self-contained
mobile unit equipped with wireless technology to fully support
the use of laptops and Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT)
equipment. The unit functions as a one-stop CalFresh/Medi-Cal
office to allow walk-in applicants to conveniently apply for
CalFresh (formerly Food Stamps) and/or Medi-Cal without
having to go to district offices. The mobile office will also serve
as an emergency response unit during any natural disasters.
From May 2012 to May 2013, the CalFresh-only caseload
increased by 17.6 percent, or 310,150 households, due in part
to the implementation of the CalFresh Awareness Month
Campaign.
As part of the 2013 CalWORKs Youth Employment Program, in
collaboration with the Department of Community and Senior
Services (CSS), 1,532 CalWORKs youth, ages 14-21, were placed
in subsidized employment during the months of July through
October 2013. The agreement between DPSS and CSS for this
program is effective through 2017.
The work participation rate (WPR) remains a Department
priority. In 2012-13, significant changes to the Welfare-to-Work
program were implemented. These changes created the
Welfare-to-Work 24-month time clock which provides
CalWORKs participants greater flexibility in activities and lower
weekly requirements. After 24 months in Welfare-to-Work have
been utilized, CalWORKs participants will be expected to meet
federal work participation requirements. DPSS is preparing to
implement the State’s new Work Incentive Nutritional
Supplement (WINS) program which is intended to
substantially increase the WPR.
DPSS assesses current and future staffing needs based on
organizational goals and budget realities, and continues to
offer opportunities to develop and enhance the skills of the
workforce.
The DPSS Succession Plan is designed to provide opportunities
for training and guidance to create a qualified pool of highly
educated, well-trained, and success-oriented successors. The
Mentorship Program will be expanding into the second phase
for managerial positions. The DPSS Academy has been working
with departmental representatives to enhance the program
and develop a comprehensive training curriculum for mentors
and mentees. In addition, the Department supports the
County Management Fellows Program with plans to hire
eleven management fellows in 2014-15.
Since 2005, DPSS has maintained its relationship with the
California State University, Northridge (CSUN), offering a
Master’s of Public Administration (MPA) Program, allowing
employees an opportunity to advance their education, and in
2010, the Masters in Social Work (MSW) program was
implemented. The Department’s Volunteer Career Resource
Coordinator (CRC) Program was developed and implemented
in each office, to serve 1,000 participating employees, while
the CRC website provides ongoing resources to all employees.
DPSS continues its transition to technology-based solutions as
outlined in the Department’s Strategic Goal of Technological
Leadership, to maximize the use of leading edge technology
and improve outcomes and program excellence. The Electronic
Document Management System (EDMS) has expanded to all
32 district offices, two sub-offices, and five centralized
Electronic Scan Centers throughout the County. To date, EDMS
offices have imaged 1.7 million cases comprised of 21.8 million
documents.
The CSC provides participants with live access to
knowledgeable eligibility workers, Monday through Friday for
10 hours daily, as well as 24/7 access to the automated
Interactive Voice Response (IVR) System for case-specific and
general information. Over 250,000 calls per month are directed
to CSC Eligibility Workers that would have otherwise been
served by the district office eligibility staff.
Video Tele-Conferencing (VTC) technology was fully
implemented in the Department and enables multi-point
audio and video transmissions of meeting activities involving
several DPSS locations. VTC cuts travel costs and fosters
innovative collaboration by having stakeholders sit at one
‘virtual table’ and conduct important meetings. It also enables
training using a single location and facilitator at the DPSS
Training Academy to project sessions that can be attended live
by personnel at numerous other locations.
In April 2013, DPSS successfully developed and implemented
the Lobby Management and Display System, a web-based,
real-time queuing and monitoring tool that provides
minute-by-minute activity details. The system assists district
staff in managing lobby traffic flow to enhance customer
service.
The DPSS Risk Management Plan established 16 objectives, of
which 11 have been successfully completed. The primary goal
was to reduce the number of new workers’ compensation
claims during the fiscal year, and a 3.35 percent reduction in
the number of new claims filed was achieved, compared to the
base year of 2011-12.
In addition, DPSS provided budget training to line managers.
This effort ensured line managers understand the vital role
they play in maximizing revenue and in better managing their
staffing resources.
DPSS’ programs provide a vast array of services to families,
children, single adults, and the elderly, and are designed to
alleviate financial hardship and promote family health,
personal responsibility, and economic self-sufficiency. Over
2.4million participants are served monthly. DPSS also serves as
the County’s Operational Area Coordinator for care and shelter,
and the Operational Area Liaison with the grocery industry and
not-for-profit human services organizations. In this capacity,
DPSS is the lead for coordinating shelter support in the event
of a disaster or emergency.
DPSS has partnered with the Department of Children and
Family Services (DCFS) to provide integrated services for
mutual families and resources for other needy DCFS families
and caretaker relatives. As a result, 25,000 families have
benefited from this service coordination.
Funding for programs the Department administers depends largely on State and federal subvention. The 2014-15 Recommended
Budget assumes sufficient funding to support the current operational level. Due to the volatile nature of the State budget process,
the Recommended Budget does not factor in the Governor’s January budget proposal. The final State funding allocations will not
be known until after the State’s 2014-15 Budget is signed; therefore, DPSS will continue to provide leadership in advocacy efforts
focused on adequate funding levels to effectively administer its programs.
The Department’s unmet needs for 2014-15 are primarily focused on additional staffing needed to meet the demand. Over the past
several years, funding did not increase at the same rate as caseloads and program demands. Currently, case workers for the
approved caseload in the core programs are staffed below the full need level, though the level of understaffing varies significantly
by program. To fulfill the unmet needs for caseworkers, it would require a significant number of workers in all programs to bring the
staffing level to its full need.
The Public Social Services Assistance Budget provides
mandated and discretionary public assistance and social
services programs financed with federal, State, and County
funds. These programs include: California Work Opportunities
and Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs); Indigent Aid General
Relief (GR); In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS); Refugee
Resettlement Program/Refugee Cash Assistance (RRP/RCA);
Cash Assistance Program for Immigrants (CAPI); Refugee
Employment Program (REP); Community Services Block Grant
(CSBG); General Relief Anti-Homelessness (GRAH); and Work
Incentive Nutritional Supplement (WINS).
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in
appropriation of $75.8 million offset by a $91.4 million net
increase in revenue primarily due to CalWORKs grants and
realignment sales tax revenue. There is a net decrease of
$16.1 million in NCC.
This NCC decrease consists of the following:
¦ GR - $5.3 million increase due to the elimination of the Shared
Housing Deduction.
¦ GRAH - $6.3 million net decrease due primarily to the
elimination of one-time funding.
¦ IHSS - $14.8 million net decrease due to additional
realignment sales tax revenue of $25.5 million and the
elimination of $2.1 million in NCC for the $0.79 one-time wage
increase. These NCC decreases are partially offset by a
$12.2million (3.5 percent) increase to the MOE and a
$0.6 million State adjustment to the MOE.
¦ CalWORKs - $0.3 million decrease due to a 1.1 percent
decrease in the aided caseload and a $0.86 decrease in the
average monthly cost per case from the FY 2013-14 budgeted
level, prior to the five percent grant increase due to AB 85.
The majority of services provided through the Public Works -
General Fund are required by federal, State, and local mandates
and are funded by fees for services. Crossing guard, landslide
mitigation, graffiti abatement, pre-County improvement
district studies, property rehabilitation and nuisance
abatement, and unincorporated area services programs
continue to rely on funding from the County.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a $17.2 million net
NCC decrease primarily attributable to the elimination of
one-time funding for road and waterworks projects
($12.9 million); the Unincorporated Area Stormwater Urban
Runoff Quality Program ($3.4 million); Carmenita Road Median
Enhancement Project-Phase II ($1.3 million); Oxford Basin
Vegetation Project ($1.0 million); Sunshine Shuttle-
Unincorporated South Whittier Area ($1.0 million); Avocado
Heights Multipurpose Trail Project ($0.8 million); Hauled Water
Initial Study Plan ($0.5 million); Parks Water Management
Study ($0.2 million); Property Rehabilitation ($0.1 million);
Claremont Sewers ($0.1 million); and other Board-funded
programs/projects ($0.2 million). The decrease is partially
offset by a $0.3 million increase in negotiated COLA, fringe
benefits, and retirement costs; $0.3 million for Crossing Guard
services; $0.2 million for Pre-County Improvements; and
$3.6 million for the Unincorporated Area Stormwater Urban
Runoff Quality Program.
¦ To maximize public safety, ongoing training is provided to the
employees to enhance employee and technical growth.
Specialized training is provided in mandated subjects such as
the California Building Code and provides for a higher
standard of compliance.
¦ The Public Works - General Fund budget relies on NCC to fund
various activities in the Department. Public Works projects the
available NCC from the previous year to determine the
funding level required for the activities in the coming year and
will adjust each activity accordingly so that NCC does not
exceed from the adjusted allowance approved by the Board.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
programs and services. The four main components of the
Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process include program,
financial and staffing plans, and the budget request. Program
plans strategically establish management objectives for
outcomes/results, situation analyses, comprehensive needs
assessments, results-based work plans, and funding requests.
Financial plans project revenue sources and financing uses for
each operating fund and set preliminary budget allocations
for individual programs. Based on these funding allocations,
staffing plans are then developed as part of divisional
operational plans. The budget request is then prepared based
upon the program, financial, and staffing plans.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a $19.8 million
decrease primarily attributable to delays in the award of
contracts for maintenance and repair of channel
improvements, runoff regulation facilities, and construction of
channel improvements and aesthetic enhancements due to
unexpected soil conditions, eminent domain legal issues,
unforeseeable environmental assessment issues, and
permitting delays from other agencies. The major projects
which have been delayed include: Rory M. Shaw Wetlands Park
(a.k.a Strathern Wetlands Park), Sun Valley Watershed Upper
Storm Drain System (Phase 1), Pacoima Spreading Grounds
Enhancements, Clark Street Pump Station and Pipeline, and
Cogswell Dam Inlet/Outlet Work Rehabilitation.
The primary sources of revenue of the District are property
taxes and benefit assessments. The objectives of the District
are outlined within the Flood Control Act, which mandates the
District to carry out flood protection and water conservation
programs. These objectives include keeping the existing flood
protection system in a safe and effective condition to respond
to emergencies, perform maintenance and repair, and
conserve water.
The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial, and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then developed
as part of divisional operational plans. The budget request is
then prepared based upon the program, financial, and staffing
plans.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a $134.0 million
decrease primarily due to a reduction in the number of
roadway pavement rehabilitation and preservation
construction projects as the Proposition 1B program draws to a
close; deletion of one-time funding for unincorporated area
road projects and road construction and maintenance
activities, including the construction of roads, highways, and
bridges/tunnels; decrease in the use of obligated fund balance;
and a decrease in fund balance available. These decreases are
partially offset by an increase in Federal revenue for the Bridge
Replacement Program.
The Governor’s FY 2014-15 Budget Proposal includes a
reduction in gas tax for new and old Highway User Tax Account
(HUTA) revenues due to lower gasoline consumption and likely
downward adjustment of the new HUTA rate from $0.395 per
gallon to $0.364 per gallon in March 2014. The reduction is
offset by approximately $10 million in early transportation loan
repayments. Upon the State approval of its FY 2014-15 Budget
and legislative bills, Public Works may need to adjust the
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for County Gas Tax
revenues during the Final Changes phase.

The Recommended Budget was assembled with an emphasis
on optimizing the use of new gas tax (formerly Proposition 42)
funds for maintenance and preservation of the existing
roadway system. This strategy meets the County Strategic
Plan goals of Operational Effectiveness and Community and
Municipal Services by maximizing the use of available limited
revenues while providing residents in unincorporated County
areas with safe roads that provide the necessary mobility
options for work, education, and recreation.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial, and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The Internal Service Fund is designed to simplify billings for
services provided between the multiple funds that finance
Public Works operations. This fund allows for salaries and
employee benefits, materials and supplies, and equipment
charges for Public Works to be paid through the fund and the
appropriate amounts recovered from each special fund.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a $6.2 million
increase primarily due to increases in County retirement costs
due to prior-year losses in Los Angeles County Employees
Retirement Association’s investment portfolio and revised
investment return assumptions; Board-approved increases in
salaries and health insurance subsidies; retiree health
insurance premiums; administrative support services to align
the budget to anticipated overhead costs; the addition of two
permanent positions for the Management Fellows Program;
and various position changes to meet the operational needs of
the Department. These increases are partially offset by
decreases in services and supplies; capital project
management services for County capital projects; capital
asset-equipment purchases; and contingencies.
¦ The Recommended Budget presents Public Works with a
challenge in projecting future budgetary requirements for
services that will be rendered to other Public Works funds, for
the construction management of capital projects, and for
services to other County departments. The Capital Building
Projects Program relies heavily on the Board’s approval of
funding for County capital projects. A work plan is prepared
for the coming budget year to detail the capital project work
that will be funded. Rates and fees are analyzed each year and
adjusted to ensure that the Internal Service Fund recovers all
costs for services performed.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget provides for the
maintenance of core mission activities including public
counseling services at the downtown headquarters office and
eight field offices, case processing, community planning and
outreach, and zoning enforcement. Environmental impact
review and the activities of the Environmental Review Board
and the Significant Ecological Area Technical Advisory
Committee will continue as well as specifically funded
programs, including public hearings and workshops on the
countywide General Plan update and Zoning Ordinance
Update Program.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a $2.6 million net
decrease primarily attributable to the deletion of one-time
funding for consultant services for various planning initiatives,
partially offset by increases in salaries and employee benefits
and critical services and supplies. It also includes the addition
of 1.0 Senior Regional Planning Assistant to assist with the
Comprehensive Ordinance Revisions Plan.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to implement its Strategic Plan
while supporting the County’s Strategic Plan, including the
following initiatives:
¦ Provide responsive and proactive code enforcement of
discretionary permits, zoning and subdivision regulations in
unincorporated areas, and participate in the countywide
Nuisance Abatement Team (NAT) and Neighborhood
Enhancement Team (NET);
¦ Enhance public service through improved permitting
processes and databases, web-based case filing pilot projects,
new electronic transactions, Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) based land use and zoning information, and smart
phone enforcement operation;
¦ Enhance communication with landowners, neighbors,
constituents, and other governmental agencies by carefully
allocating resources to incorporate local area network
enhancements and other web-based technologies;
¦ Build stronger and healthier communities through its
development of land use, circulation, open space, noise, safety
and housing elements of the General Plan Update; and
¦ Secure Regional Planning Commission and Board approval of
community plans and zoning standards for unincorporated
areas.
The Department’s Unmet Needs include additional funding to support the Major and Minor Subdivision Case Processing and
Non-Discretionary Coastal Development Permits programs, and the restoration of 1.0 Management Assistant position curtailed in
FY 2009-10.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes resources
necessary to conduct the November 2014 Gubernatorial
General Election and perform Recorder/County Clerk
operations. The budget also includes funding to move forward
with new programs that promote efficiency, while taking into
consideration tentative real estate market recovery trends and
continuing high costs of conducting elections.
The Department continues to find ways to reduce operating
costs through efficiency efforts and has carried forward
substantial curtailments incurred since FY 2008-09. While
recorder fee revenues were beginning to show improvement in
FY 2012-13, current-year trends show a substantial decline due
to a slow-down in re-financing and real estate market activity
in general. In addition, the Department continues to absorb
the high cost of unscheduled special elections.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department’s Critical/Strategic Plan will continue to
implement automated and enhanced processes to improve
public service and employee workforce in the elections, voter
registration, Recorder, and County Clerk services through:
¦ Continued implementation of a Countywide Archives and
Records Management Program that will assess and develop a
process for indexing and maintaining County records and
items of historical value;
¦ Continued development of the multi-year Voting Systems
Assessment Project (VSAP) to modernize the County’s voting
system;
¦ Continued development, maintenance, and support of the
multi-county eRecording system (SECURE);
¦ Implementation of the election contest and ballot
management system including election results reporting
capabilities, and a paperless, automated, campaign finance
disclosure system;
¦ Development of a secure request for election services online
system that will streamline and improve the communication
of election service requests and associated documentation
from customer jurisdictions;
¦ Continued implementation of the Social Security Number
Truncation Program (AB 1168) to protect personal information
contained in recorded documents;
¦ Continued activities related to Recorder/County Clerk process
efficiencies, including upfront scanning and detailed mail
tracking and an online ceremony appointments feature that
will allow customers to pay and schedule appointments
online;
¦ Continued promotion of voter benefits of electronic sample
ballots through website enhancements and smart phone
applications and development of a Mobile/Online Program to
increase voter access to election information;
¦ Continued partnership efforts with California State University,
Northridge to provide a Master’s Degree in Public
Administration for all County employees, and opportunities
for Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk (RR/CC) staff to complete
their Associate of Arts Degree and Bachelor’s Degree through
local community colleges and public/private universities;
¦ Continued skill building workshops/certificate programs to
provide RR/CC staff new tools to increase efficiency and
effectiveness; and
¦ Expansion of efficiency initiative strategies to further
streamline processes, improve operations, reduce costs,
maximize program efficiencies, improve public service
delivery, and expand green energy conservation programs.
The Department’s unmet needs reflect $496,000 in deferred maintenance funding for a fire suppression system at the Norwalk
Headquarters computer room ($200,000), a replacement cooling tower ($16,000), and a new roof for the Van Nuys District Office
($280,000).
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a $10.9 million
increase in NCC due primarily to increases for debt service for
centralize financed projects, various new leases, and
operational costs offset by the deletion of one-time funding for
the new Long Beach Courthouse tenant improvements and
Calabasas Landfill Post Closure Fees.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a NCC increase of
$108.1 million primarily due to: $57.7 million in
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits;
$28.6 million for retirement; $18.0 million to fully eliminate the
Cadre of Administrative Reserve Personnel (CARP) program;
$31.3 million and 128.0 positions to implement phase I of the
Citizens’ Commission on Jail Violence (CCJV)
recommendations; $0.8 million in overtime funding for the
Summer Violence Crime Enforcement Program (SVCEP); and
$89,000 and 1.0 position for the Contract Law Enforcement
Bureau’s (CLEB) Unincorporated Area (UA) Unit. The above increases are partially offset by the elimination of
$5.6 million in one-time funding comprised of: $0.8 million for
the purchase of medical equipment for the Specialty Care
Clinic program; $0.2 million in carryover Utility User Tax (UUT)
funding for equipment purchases to patrol the East Los
Angeles Civic Center area; $1.6 million for the purchase and
installation of Mobile Data Computers (MDC) in the
Department’s vehicles; $0.6 million for two shooting
simulators; $2.1 million for information technology (IT)
equipment; $0.1 million for a Mobile Command Post at the
Santa Clarita Valley Station; and $0.2 million in carryover UUT
Cy Pres funding for the Whittier Party Patrol program. Also
reflected is a $22.8 million reduction in NCC due to an
anticipated increase in Public Safety Sales Tax (Prop. 172)
receipts.
The Recommended Budget also includes a net increase of
23.0 positions due to the following ministerial changes:
3.0 positions to develop an Employee Support Services
Program to assist the Probation Department, fully offset by an
increase in intrafund transfers; 15.0 positions for contract law
enforcement services as requested by contract agencies; and
5.0 positions for the Strategic Acquisitions Unit, fully offset by a
reduction in Capital Assets. Also provides authorization for
105.0 positions to implement phase II of the CCJV
recommendations.
The Department’s most critical needs, in addition to restoring any reductions in funding, are the following: 1) $43.9 million for
unavoidable cost increases in employee benefits ($36.9 million) and services and supplies ($7.0 million); 2) $11.0 million to backfill
the loss of federal State Criminal Alien Assistance Program funding; 3) $6.7 million to fund all the N3 inmate custody beds offset by
Public Safety Realignment revenue (AB109); 4) $8.2 million and 53.0 positions for Education-Based Incarceration evening shifts and
a Community Transition Unit; 5) $8.2 million and 53.0 positions to provide security and train inmates for the Fire Camps;
6) $1.3 million and 11.0 positions for the Threat Deterrent Enterprise Program to improve the Department’s capability to identify
and address present or emerging terrorist threats; 7) $7.7 million and 47.0 positions to implement Health Care Insurance
Enrollment under the Affordable Care Act; 8) 7.0 positions for the Electronic Media Communications Triage Unit to monitor illegal
internet communications fully offset by a reduction in capital assets; 9) $5.7 million and 1.0 position for IT efficiencies: Data
Warehouse ($3.1 million), Sheriff’s Electronic Criminal Document Archive ($0.6 million), and the Digital Evidence Management
System ($2.0 million); 10) $78.3 million to address the Department’s structural deficit related to Peace Officer Standards and
Training bonuses ($37.6 million) and leaves of absences ($40.7 million); 11) $51.0 million to fill 300.0 vacant Deputy positions that
are currently being used to address salary savings; 12) $129.2 million for additional IT needs; and 13) $73.8 million to address
deferred maintenance at various facilities.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects: 1) $5,000 net
increase in telephone utilities; 2) $1.8 million net increase for
ENIA costs; 3) $50,000 net increase for Criminal Justice
Information Systems (CJIS) projects; and 4) $0.9 million net
increase for Voice-over Internet Protocol (VoIP) equipment
lease costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ ISD will continue to enhance the performance of the County’s
telecommunications systems and simultaneously minimize
costs.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease in
NCC of $0.7 million primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for the Banking and Remittance Processing System
upgrade, the deletion of 5.0 budgeted positions that
supported the Public Health License program which is being
transferred to the Department of Public Health (DPH), and the
transfer of the eCommerce project to the Chief Information
Office (CIO). The Recommended Budget also includes
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits,
anticipated increases in retirement and retiree health
insurance costs, funding to address workload, and one-time
funding for replacement of the Property Tax Telephone System.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The following are examples of the Department’s continuing
efforts to create efficiencies, work collaboratively with other
departments, and maximize revenue:
¦ Implement a refunding project, with the support of the CEO,
for bonds issued by the former redevelopment agencies that
is anticipated to earn the County up to $100.0 million of
additional property tax revenue over the next 10-20
years. Since its inception in early 2013, the project has
generated approximately $33.0 million of revenue that will be
received by local taxing entities (including the County, local
cities, and school districts) over the life of the bonds. The
County’s share of this $33.0 million is expected to be between
$8.0 and $10.0 million.
¦ Continue with the Defaulted Property Tax Reduction Program,
which requires County vendors to be current on property
taxes before entering into a contract with the County. Since its
inception in October 2009, this program has recovered
approximately $4.5 million in delinquent property taxes for
the County.
¦ Expand the functionalities of the online payment system so
that taxpayers with bills that exceed $50,000 can make
payments online with ease and without the pre-registration
process that was previously required.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects funding for the
County’s $290.6 million MOE payment to the State, which is
comprised of $245.9 million base MOE, $37.6 million CFP, and
$7.1 million representing 50 percent of any excess above the
AB 233 fines and forfeitures MOE. In addition, the budget
includes $105.2 million for court-related expenditures that are
the County’s responsibility. The Recommended Budget also
reflects Board-approved increases in employee benefits.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $15,000 primarily attributable to increases in utility costs for
NCC-funded facilities. The Recommended Budget also reflects
an increase in funding for electricity, natural gas, water, other
utilities, power plant operations, and the Enterprise Energy
Management Information System (EEMIS) program, more than
offset by decreases in funding for Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Block Grants (EECBG), and California Public Utility
Commission (CPUC) programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continues to complete energy retrofit projects and centrally
administer utilities costs throughout the County.
On November 4, 2008, unincorporated County voters approved the passage of the Utility User Tax - Measure U. The revenues are
generated from user taxes on gas, electricity, and communication. These revenues are fully offset with appropriations in the
Departments of Board of Supervisors, District Attorney, Health Services, Parks and Recreation, Public Library, Public Works, and
Sheriff for various programs within the unincorporated areas.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget reflects no change from
the 2013-14 Adopted Budget based on current trends and
economic conditions.
