The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an overall net
County cost (NCC) increase of $0.8 million primarily due to
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits,
partially offset by the deletion of one-time funding for a
specialty truck. The Recommended Budget also reflects a net
increase of 5.0 revenue-offset positions including 4.0 positions
in Weed Hazard/Integrated Pest Management Bureau, and
1.0 position in Weights and Measures Bureau.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Investigate and pursue increased revenue source
opportunities through proactive involvement in legislation
and regulation development, coordination with
administrators and management of the California Department
of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) and the California Department
of Pesticide Regulation to influence program funding and
levels of local support, and active collaboration with statewide
partners to secure enhancements in federal funds.
¦ Improve Service Excellence and Workforce Excellence through
ongoing employee development, specifically for
departmental managers. Agricultural Commissioner/Weights
and Measures (ACWM) managers are encouraged to
participate in the Executive Development Leadership
Program. To date, ACWM has four Executive Development
Leadership Program graduates, three managers and the Chief
Deputy. The Department continues the enhancement of the
ACWM Internet website, and other outreach efforts to
maximize public awareness of the Department and its
services.¦ Maintain focus on recruitment efforts to attract qualified and
skilled applicants to fill inspector positions to ensure
environmental and public safety, provide mandated and
increased protections to consumers and businesses, and
provide protection to the environment, native plant life and
the agricultural industry.
¦ Utilize the second Productivity Investment Fund (PIF) grant of
$0.2 million from the County Quality and Productivity
Commission to support development of a geographic
information system (GIS)-mapping and data management
system for the Exotic Pest Detection Program and to
coordinate efforts with CDFA to establish the system as a
statewide standard.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase in
NCC of $1.3 million primarily due to Board-approved increases
in salaries and employee benefits partially offset by the
deletion of one-time carryover funding and a decrease in
retirement costs. The Recommended Budget also reflects the
addition of 1.0 position fully offset by grant revenue.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Work with the Superior Court, Public Defender, District
Attorney, and Probation Department to implement
Proposition 47;
¦ Develop an integrated program for pre-filing and post-arrest
mental health diversion in collaboration with the District
Attorney, Public Defender, Superior Court, Countywide
Criminal Justice Coordination Committee, Departments of
Mental Health, Public Health, Public Social Services and
Sheriff;
¦ Collaborate with the Internal Services Department to
implement Microsoft Office 365 cloud based services; and
¦ Develop and replace the Department’s Legacy Case
Management System with a new system that is fully capable
of sharing mission critical information with its justice partners,
and complies with all County security requirements.
The Department requires 6.0 Psychiatric Social Worker II positions to participate in the County’s Diversion and Re-Entry program, by
providing mental health evaluations and referrals to mental health facilities.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an overall
decrease in NCC of $2.8 million primarily due to the deletion of
one-time funding associated with operating carryovers,
CCTV video surveillance systems, Wi-Fi installation at various
care centers, dead animal pick-up services, Palmdale Care
Center start-up costs, as well as furniture, fixtures and
equipment. The Recommended Budget also includes funding
for Board-approved increases in salaries and employee
benefits, and a Volunteer Program Coordinator position for the
Carson Animal Care Center.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department has finalized its strategic plan which
incorporates eight key areas that align with County strategic
goals and initiatives:
¦ Animal Care Center Vision - Encompasses a desire for facilities
to be "clean, open, modern, well-equipped, organized with
professional, smiling, and engaged employees working
harmoniously with co-workers, volunteers, customers, and
adoption partners, creating an enriched environment for
animals and a welcoming environment to the public."
¦ Integration of Shelter Medicine and Shelter
Services -Memorialize the shared leadership vision and
develop a plan to share, implement and actualize that vision
to further integrate shelter medicine and services.
¦ Financial Planning and Decision Making - To provide more
effective information to support strategic decision making
and prudent financial management. Revenue-producing
recommendations will be included.
¦ Staff Development and Succession Planning - To improve the
Department’s strategy for succession planning, enhance the
comprehensive new hire orientation and training, and
establish annual reorientation.
¦ Contract Methodology and Practices - Develop a plan to
improve contract city rates, including engaging a consultant
to recommend and implement new rate setting methodology,
and assessment of organizational barriers to obtaining
accurate data.
¦ Emergency Response Program - Develop a written manual
that includes all areas of strategic response to ensure
continuity of the Department’s current Emergency Response
Program.
¦ Establish Staffing Standards - Develop a projection for staffing
needs for the year 2020 and recommendations work towards
these needs on an annual basis. Recommendations will align
with the long-term facilities plan.
¦ Facility Improvement and Replacement Plan - Collaborate
with the Department of Public Works and the Chief Executive
Office’s Real Estate Division to develop a formal Capital Plan.
The Department’s unmet needs request covers a wide array of requirements. The Department is specifically requesting funding for
facilities improvement and deferred maintenance projects to repair and improve the Department’s animal care infrastructure as
well as to mitigate safety risks to the public, its employees, and the animals in its care. Further, the Department is requesting
funding for critically needed positions to augment staffing in field, kennel, and clerical services. Additionally, with the soft opening
of the Palmdale Animal Care Center scheduled for April 2016, the Department is requesting ongoing funding for costs associated
with the operation of the care center.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget sets aside $2.0 million in the Provisional Financing Uses budget unit for the staffing needs of
the Department.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC decrease
of $88,000 primarily due to the deletion of one-time funding,
partially offset by Board-approved increases in salaries and
employee benefits. Also reflects funding for the John Anson
Ford Theatre, Community Impact Arts Grants, unavoidable cost
increases and research capability enhancements.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Re-open and program a full summer season of the John
Anson Ford Amphitheatre with significant upgrades
completed, including stage and hillside reconstruction, new
sound wall and picnic terrace with concessions and office
buildings.
¦ Continue a multi-year initiative to implement the
Board-adopted Arts for All strategic plan to make the arts core
in K-12 for 1.7 million students in the County by providing
critical support to school districts, collecting data on arts
education in the County and expanding teacher professional
development offerings through online systems in partnership
with the Los Angeles County Office of Education (LACOE)
through an initiative funded by the Productivity Investment
Fund.
¦ Implement the first year of the Community Impact Arts Grants
to non-arts organizations providing essential services
throughout the County.
¦ Continue the inaugural comprehensive inventory of
County-owned artwork in more than 900 facilities.
¦ Form an advisory committee and initiate a countywide
discussion on cultural equity and inclusion in the arts to report
back to the board with actionable recommendations.
¦ Launch new Arts Commission websites and, with
funding by Metro, roll out an updated cultural calendar
platform integrated with LA Tourism’s website,
DiscoverLosAngeles.com.
The Arts Commission’s critical unmet needs include additional funding for information technology systems and operating cost
increases as well as an additional support position for the Civic Art program due to increases in the workload of core operations.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net
NCC decrease of $8.6 million primarily due to the deletion of
one-time carryover funding for the Assessor Modernization
Project (AMP) (formerly known as the Legacy System
Replacement Project), Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
project and live scan requirements, overtime, training room
reconfiguration, outside counsel services to assist with
Assessment Appeals Board (AAB) caseloads, and
bridge-funding associated with the Bristol Parkway lease cost
increase. The Recommended Budget also includes funding for
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits,
the final of a multi-year restoration of prior-year curtailments,
and the continuation of one-time funding for Appraiser
positions within the Business Solutions Group to serve as
subject matter experts for AMP.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Assessor’s Office will continue to:
¦ Introduce operational efficiencies to improve work activities
and public services;
¦ Increase the use of social media and the Internet to
disseminate critical service messages to the public about
Assessor programs and operations;
¦ Initiate the second phase of development of the AMP while
partnering with County stakeholders and tax system
departments;
¦ Recruit, train and develop additional staff to increase
operational effectiveness; and
¦ Pursue shorter duration projects that automate and improve
the assessment process.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase in
NCC of $0.8 million primarily due to Board-approved increases
in salaries and health insurance subsidies, the Department’s
proportional share of the costs to prefund the County’s retiree
healthcare benefits, and the addition of 1.0 position to address
increased workload associated with new guidelines cited in the
Federal Uniform Guidance. These increases are partially offset
by the deletion of one-time carryover funding for training and
miscellaneous renovation costs, and a decrease in retirement
costs. The Recommended Budget also includes 2.0 revenue
offset positions for enterprise systems support and
Ombudsman services to the Department of Children and
Family Services (DCFS).
The Auditor-Controller advocates for fiscal responsibility and
service excellence through various initiatives, including:
¦ Ensuring public trust in County government by implementing
the Board-approved annual audit plan and conducting
investigations of fraud and malfeasance;
¦ Working with the Chief Executive Office to fully fund
compliance audits and enhancing service delivery by ensuring
that such services can be provided in a manner consistent
with government and accounting industry standards and best
practices for audit independence;
¦ Reinforcing countywide information technology (IT) security
by conducting annual IT risk assessments, periodically seeking
best practices to improve these assessments, and performing
a risk-based program of audits of departments’ application
systems and IT security policy compliance;
¦ Improving the fiscal accountability of social services
contractors by resolving issues related to federal recovery of
questioned costs, ensuring auditor access to contractor
records, and continuing to enhance the Contractor’s Manual
to ensure compliance with contract terms and conditions;
¦ Proposing a Board mandate to require all new, renewed, and
materially modified County contracts and agreements to
include language stipulating the County’s policy to issue
payments to contractors, vendors, and other payees
electronically. The default form of payment shall be electronic
funds transfer or direct deposit, or in the most appropriate,
efficient, secure, and timely form of payment as determined
by the Auditor-Controller;
¦ Continuing to work with the Assessor and Treasurer and Tax
Collector to explore options for development of an integrated,
enterprise Property Tax System to replace aging, obsolete and
inefficient legacy applications that require high levels of staff
and technical support;
¦ Continuing enhancement and update of eCAPS and the
Advantage eHR suite of applications to centralize, consolidate,
and fully utilize the County’s financial management, reporting,
human resources, and talent management functions; and
¦ Promoting County efficiency initiatives such as use of
electronic forms, expanding the Countywide Contract
Management System, archiving financial/human resource
records to reduce operating costs and supporting the
Countywide Open Data Initiative.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in
NCC of $2.4 million primarily due to the elimination of
one-time funding for contract, development, and maintenance
costs associated with the enterprise system. The
Recommended Budget also includes one-time funding for the
continuation of eCAPS Phase V project deliverables and the
absorption of ongoing various system development, hosting,
and maintenance costs.
The Transportation Clearing Account is a central receiving point for charges for transportation costs incurred by departments. All
charges are then distributed to the appropriate departments leaving this budget unit with no net appropriation. The
2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects the continuation of the countywide transportation program.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a $5.7 million net
decrease in NCC primarily attributable to the deletion of
one-time funding, partially offset by Board-approved increases
in salaries and employee benefits. The Recommended Budget
includes the addition of 1.0 Public Information
Officer I position, fully offset with services and supplies
savings. The Department increased funding for
Board-approved contracts, offset by increases in Beach and
Marina revenues. The Recommended Budget also reflects
budgetary realignments based on historical experience and
anticipated requirements.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Implementation of the County’s and the Department’s
Strategic Plans will accomplish the following
outcomes: 1) visitors to County beaches and Marina del Rey
will experience world renowned recreational opportunities
and quality customer service through accessible, clean,
attractive and safe facilities; and 2) Marina boaters, visitors and
residents will enjoy experiencing the County’s “Crown Jewel”
through redeveloped leasehold properties and beautiful and
well maintained public amenities.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects the current levels
necessary to provide efficient and responsive delivery of
services to the Board and the public. The overall NCC decrease
of $0.6 million is primarily attributed to the deletion of
one-time funding and carryovers related to various programs,
partially offset by Board-approved increases in salaries and
employee benefits, funding adjustments related to various
community programs and funding to enhance compliance
function.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Executive Office is in the process of implementing its
strategic plan, in alignment with the County’s Strategic Plan,
with multiple goals for FY 2016-17. Resources are needed to
achieve those goals which continue to focus on the use of
technology-driven services.
The Department’s unmet needs include funding for the Office of the Inspector General (OIG); the implementation of the Office of
Child Protection; additional staff to enhance operational efficiency and service delivery; funding to defray cost increases associated
with services received from other County departments.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects the Board’s
continuing commitment to allocate a significant amount of
available one-time funding to expand, replace, or refurbish
the County’s capital assets and infrastructure. The
Recommended Budget appropriates $994.1 million for
293 active projects that address high priority health, public
safety, recreation, and infrastructure needs.
Of the total 2016-17 Recommended Budget appropriation,
$695.9 million is allocated to General Fund projects that
encompass a broad range of recreational, cultural, public
safety, health, and general government functions funded by
$223.2 million in one-time revenue from grants and other
sources, and $472.8 million in local discretionary monies. The
General Fund appropriation represents the 2016-17 budgetary
requirements of 230 projects that are currently in acquisition or
under development, design, or construction. The total
appropriation for the 2016-17 Recommended Budget
represents a decrease of $66.3 million and the completion of
30 projects from the 2015-16 Final Adopted Budget.
In addition to those projects appropriated in the General Fund,
the capital program includes certain critical projects which are
financed with special district revenue, commercial paper
proceeds, and are appropriated in certain special funds,
summarized in Volume Two. These projects address capital
needs in the areas of infrastructure repair and development,
health services, public safety, and general government, and
include, but are not limited to, Rancho Los Amigos Accessible
Gym Wellness and Aquatic Therapy Center and
New Outpatient Facilities Projects, Los Angeles County
Museum of Art East Campus Replacement Building,
Olive View-Medical Center and ValleyCare
Network-San Fernando Valley Comprehensive Health
Center/Health Clinics Project, and various Fire District projects.
There are 63 projects in acquisition, development, design, or
construction with a total project value of $1.75 billion.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget does not reflect projects
that have been financed through the issuance of long-term
bonds. Such projects include the Zev Yaroslavsky Family
Support Center, the Harbor-UCLA Medical Center Emergency
Services Expansion Project, and the Hall of Justice
Rehabilitation Project with a total value of $96.6 million. Bond
financed funds are held and administered by independent
bond trustees.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $2.2 million primarily due to $3.3 million for Board-approved
increases in salaries and employee benefits; $0.7 million for
2.0 additional positions to establish the Office of
Homelessness; and $0.1 million for the assessment of the Chief
Executive Officer’s (CEO) network infrastructure upgrade at the
Hall of Administration (HOA); partially offset by the deletion
of $1.3 million in one-time carryover funds and a decrease
of $0.6 million to properly reflect intrafund transfers from the
Emergency Preparedness and Response (EPR) budget unit.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
As part of the Board action to amend the County Governance
Structure, the Board directed the CEO to assess various
functions and responsibilities assigned to the CEO to ensure
that the CEO is more responsive to emergency requirements
and focused on supporting the Board’s strategic policies and
priorities. A comprehensive review of the Department and the
resulting organizational assessment identified CEO functions
and units that are primarily strategic, versus those that are
primarily transactional/operational.
Pending Board approval to formally adopt the recommended
changes to the CEO organizational structure, the new structure
will address key Board priorities such as:
¦ Establish the Office of Homelessness to provide strategic
leadership, oversight and administrative support to
departments in implementing 47 homeless strategies and
coordinate the County’s overall comprehensive effort to
combat homelessness;
¦ Transfer transactional functions (with 77 budgeted positions)
that are more closely aligned to the core mission of other
County departments;
¦ Transfer the Chief Information Office strategic functions (with
19 budgeted positions) to the CEO to better support the
Board’s strategic initiatives; and
¦ Enhance the CEO’s asset management functions, including
master planning, sustainability, asset lifecycle management,
and economic development.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $0.3 million primarily due to deletion of one-time funding,
partially offset by Board-approved increases in salaries and
employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to:
¦ Support the County’s Strategic Plan by participating actively
as both owner and supporter of many County strategies and
objectives;
¦ Maintain a countywide strategic IT planning program
including an IT governance structure, which ensures
alignment of IT initiatives with County strategic goals,
strategies and objectives;
¦ Review Board-approved IT contracts and department business
automation plans to ensure alignment with departmental and
countywide goals; and
¦ Foster better management of County IT resources to improve
service delivery and increase organizational effectiveness.
The Department’s unmet needs include additional funding for: 1.0 Senior Information Technology Consultant, CIO position to
develop work order solicitations for the new Enterprise Services Master Agreement and manage the countywide application
portfolio in support of the replacement and modernization of legacy systems; 1.0 Management Fellow position to provide staff
support for various projects; unavoidable cost increases such as billings from other County departments and rent costs; and
unanticipated operating expenses.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects $179.6 million in
gross appropriation. The budget fully utilizes both the
Administrative and Electronic Data Processing Maintenance
and Operation allocation from the California Department of
Child Support Services (DCSS). It leverages the County’s share
of welfare recoupment collections, enabling the drawdown of
a 66 percent Federal Financial Participation match. The
Recommended Budget reflects a net reduction of 78.0 vacant
positions and contains a $3.8 million dollar placeholder to
balance the budget as the Department continues to work with
DCSS as well as the Chief Executive Office (CEO) to identify
further mitigation strategies and secure necessary resources.
The balance between fiscal sustainability and delivery of
services to County residents continues to be a challenge as the
Department continues to face flat funding from the State every
year, along with consistent salaries and employee benefits cost
increases, and increases in other unavoidable costs of doing
business.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ The Child Support Statistical (CSTAT) and AdminStats tools
continue to assist senior, mid-level, and line staff to engage in
discussions regarding strategizing the refinement of its
business practices, using current and real-time statistical data
to align resources and improve performance. The Department
remains committed to best practices that ensure effective and
professional service delivery to support the County’s Strategic
Plan goals and the federal and State performance measures
for local child support agencies.
¦ The Department continues to refine the utilization of the
Predictive Analytics tool and has implemented a new business
model of segmentation and assignment of cases based on the
needs of each case. In addition, specialized quadrant
workgroups identify targeted strategies and projects tailored
to each specific case type. These workgroups perform a
double duty of identifying and implementing best practices as
well as mentoring the Department’s future leaders. The
Department has developed a practice of specialization in and
a tailored approach to case management, without adding
additional staff or resources.
¦ The Department has placed considerable focus on its case
processing operations by combining all case establishment
functions into a single division and reengineering early
intervention activities into a single specialized unit. This
provides parents with their paternity and support orders more
rapidly. More importantly, by having a specialized focus on
each and every new judgment, CSSD is placing financial
support into the hands of families sooner.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget represents the 14th consecutive year of a fixed administrative cost allocation from DCSS, as
well as the exhaustion of the remaining trust funds that have assisted the Department in previous years. In addition, CSSD has had
to absorb nearly all increases in salaries and employee benefits, and other unavoidable costs of doing business with little to no
assistance. Therefore, in an effort to present a balanced budget, this budget reduces funding for a net of 78.0 vacant positions and
contains a placeholder of $3.8 million, as the Department continues to actively seek additional funding solutions, as well as work
with CEO, to maintain a balanced budget.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Administration reflects
a $77.3 million increase in gross appropriation, funded with
increases of $28.4 million in revenue, and $48.9 million in NCC.
The growth in revenue consists primarily of an increase of
$30.7 million in federal revenue and an increase of $3.0 million
in State general funds offset by a decrease of $5.1 million in
2011 Realignment uses and a reduction of $0.2 million in other
financing sources. The $48.9 million NCC is a result of
$9.7 million in Katie A. PFU funds and anticipated carryover to
support the Katie A. Strategic Plan; $1.1 million in Provisional
Financing Uses (PFU) funds from the Board Priorities/Blue
Ribbon Commission fund; $30.5 million in PFU funds
generated from prior-year Title IV-E Waiver reinvestment
funds; and $19.3 million to fund the County’s Share of the
Board-approved salary and employee benefits cost increases.
These are partially offset by a $9.7 million deletion of prior-year
one-time funding for the Katie A. Strategic Plan; $1.1 million
deletion of prior-year one-time funding from the Board
Priorities/Blue Ribbon Commission fund; $0.4 million deletion
of prior-year one-time funding for vehicle replacement,
Edelman Children’s Court Capital Project and the Electronic
Suspected Child Abuse Reporting System (E-SCARS) project;
and $0.5 million decrease in rent charges.
The Recommended Budget also reflects 40.0 additional
positions consisting of: 1) 22.0 positions to support the
County’s efforts to address Commercially Sexually Exploited
Children (CSEC); 2) 8.0 positions for dependency courtrooms;
3) 3.0 positions for placement services; and 4) 7.0 positions for
program and administrative support.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The focus of DCFS’s efforts in FY 2016-17 will continue to be
guided by their Strategic Plan, which emphasizes the
overarching goals of engaging in child centered practices,
pursuing workforce excellence and continuous operational
excellence aimed at achieving child safety, permanency, and
well-being/self-sufficiency.
Playing a key role in achieving that vision is progressing with
the implementation of a departmentwide cultural change via
the Core Practice Model (CPM). The CPM is focused on
relationships, approaches, and techniques used at the
practitioner level to enable youth and families to achieve the
Department’s specific goals. It emphasizes effective
engagement and team approaches with staff and families to
identify childrens’ underlying needs and develop interventions
which will address these needs. The CPM is a requirement of
the Title IV-E Waiver and the Katie A. Settlement.
DCFS has recognized the value of collaborating and teaming
with families via Child and Family Team (CFT) meetings to
address unique needs relating to safety, risk and the
child’s well-being. Teaming is a key component of the CPM and
lies at the heart of the CFTs. By utilizing CFTs, the Department
works with families to identify a support structure based on
people the families trust to help sustain them once their case
with DCFS has been closed. This approach has the added
benefit of curbing the amount of time needed in order for each
case to be sufficiently and effectively addressed.
In collaboration with other departments, DCFS developed an
inter-agency Immersion Approach to the CPM
implementation. The Immersion Approach emphasizes
working with the Department of Mental Health to implement
the CPM via CFTs by providing targeted case management that
starts with a mental health assessment and moves through
treatment plans designed to uniquely address each family’s
needs. The three goals of this approach are: 1) to prevent
out-of-home placements; 2) to place the child with kin
(if possible); and 3) to ensure that the child’s first placement is
their last placement.
A key strategy to achieving this goal is by reducing caseloads
for Children’s Social Workers (CSW). This fiscal year the
Department has requested this fiscal year the ability to hire up
to 300 additional CSWs which will continue to reduce
caseloads and allow staff time to learn, train, and implement
the CPM throughout the Department.
The Department anticipates a potential decrease in
placements once the CPM has been fully integrated
departmentwide. However, until that time comes, a necessity
for addressing current placement needs remains.
The increased number of detained children combined with the
dwindling number of available emergency placement options
created an urgency to prevent overstays at the Department’s
Emergency Response Command Post, Children’s Welcome
Center (CWC) and Youth Welcome Center (YWC).
This heightened concern has led the Department to spearhead
several different Emergency Shelter Care Service Initiatives to
ensure children will have a safe and structured out-of-home
environment for 24-hours a day, seven days a week, when
removed from their homes in an emergency. Part of this fiscal
year’s Recommended Budget will contribute towards the
Department’s efforts to establish the 72-Hour Transitional
Shelter Care (TSC) Program, which increases the number of
contracted beds for children and youth taken into protective
custody after-hours. The TSC has been contracted to operate
for three years, which should allow the Department time to
reduce the need for placement via the CPM implementation.
The Department’s critical unmet needs include additional funding to: 1) reduce social worker caseloads to 15 for generic workers
and 12 for emergency response workers, in accordance with the SB 2030 workload study, in order to ensure maximum services to
children and families; 2) increase administrative support to enhance operational efficiency and workforce accountability; and
3) accommodate the Department’s space needs.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Assistance Payments
reflects a $4.3 million increase in NCC due to an increase in the
California Necessities Index (CNI) and changes to caseloads of
1) $1.2 million in the Emergency Assistance (EA) program,
2) $0.6 million in the General Relief Ineligible (GRI) program,
3) $0.3 million in the Approved Relative Caregiver (ARC)
program, 4) $1.2 million in the KinGAP program, and
5) $1.0 million in the Adoption Assistance program (AAP).
Furthermore, the Department has committed $2.0 million in
ongoing funds to support the County’s overall effort to combat
homelessness by providing rapid re-housing and case
management services to families in the child welfare system
where the parent(s)’ homelessness is the sole barrier to
reunification with their child or children.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department is currently implementing a number of
strategies to ensure safety, stability and permanency for
children under its care. The efficiencies, as a result of the
strategic changes, are projected to reduce foster care costs,
while maintaining the best interest of each child. The three key
areas that are projected to affect the assistance costs for foster
care include: 1) ensuring that only those children and families
who would be appropriately served by the child welfare
system enter the system; 2) reducing the time children spend
in out-of-home care; and 3) providing services to children and
families that enable children to remain in their homes or
achieve timely permanency.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$1.5 million in gross appropriation primarily due to
realignment growth funding for Adult Protective Services
(APS); increases in Board-approved salaries and employee
benefits; one-time funding for the administration of the Youth
Jobs Program; and User Utility Tax (UUT) Cy Pres funding for
the Seniors In Motion programs. These increases are partially
offset by reductions in one-time and prior-year carryover
funding from FY 2015-16 for programs and services; one-time
funding for the administration of the Youth Jobs Program; and
funding for retirement costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Support major countywide initiatives and priorities in the
areas of child protection, homelessness, County efficiencies,
and succession planning.
¦ Redesign nutritional services to seniors to minimize the
impact of expected cost increases in the preparation and
distribution of meals with current funding levels.
¦ Develop and implement client-centered approaches through
integrated services and best practices.
¦ Implement new mandates of the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA).
¦ Build on collaborative efforts to expand comprehensive
services to participants.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net NCC
decrease of $5.5 million primarily due to the deletion of
prior-year, one-time funding of $12.1 million for the Youth Jobs
and Senior Nutrition Programs, partially offset by $6.6 million
for the aforementioned programs. The Recommended Budget
also includes $0.4 million in grant funding from the QPC for the
County’s JB-AJCC pilot program.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Support major countywide initiatives and priorities in the
areas of child protection, homelessness, County efficiencies,
and succession planning.
¦ Redesign nutritional services to seniors to minimize the
impact of expected cost increases in the preparation and
distribution of meals with current funding levels.
¦ Develop and implement client-centered approaches through
integrated services and best practices.
¦ Implement new mandates of the WIOA.
¦ Build on collaborative efforts to expand comprehensive
services to participants.
In FY 2015-16, the County provided $12.9 million in one-time funding to support the Youth Jobs Program. The Department
requests $12.9 million in ongoing funding for FY 2016-17 and in future years as well for this program. Chronic youth
unemployment has long-term implications that impede individual and regional prosperity. Youth who do not engage in work
experience or skills attainment early on will experience lower wages in the future. In addition to providing work experience, the
countywide Youth Jobs Program introduces youth to potential career pathways in high-growth industries.
The Department provides approximately 2.5 million meals to about 41,000 seniors through its nutrition programs. Effective in
FY 2016-17, the cost of meals is expected to increase as the Department will procure new providers. In order to maintain the
number of meals and seniors served, the Department is requesting $2.5 million for FY 2016-17.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in
NCC of $1.2 million primarily due to implementation of the
Board-approved Wage Enforcement Program (WEP) associated
with the County’s minimum wage ordinance and
Board-approved increases in salaries and health insurance
subsidies. The Recommended Budget also includes expansion
of the Homeowner Notification Program funded through
increased Senate Bill (SB) 62 revenue.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Identify and secure additional office space to accommodate
increased staffing and provide improved public access to
services;
¦ Implement the new WEP to provide answers to questions
regarding the new minimum wage ordinance, educate
employers and workers in order to bring them into
compliance, and accept complaints and conduct
investigations into allegations of minimum wage ordinance
violations; and
¦ Expand the Real Estate Fraud Homeowner Notification
Program.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $1.4 million, primarily due to Board-approved salaries and
employee benefits and front funding for the fifth year of a
five-year program for the Employment Advice and House
Counsel Services Programs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
County Counsel will continue ongoing strategic plan initiatives
to support the County's Strategic Plan, including:
¦ Developing and implementing new initiatives, strengthening
current practices, and enhancing client relations through
communication.
¦ Creating a new Board Liaison Division to continue to provide
the highest level of service to the Board and assist in achieving
its goals and initiatives.
¦ Utilizing new and effective technologies to update office
systems and programs to improve organizational
effectiveness. In addition, the Office is working towards the
implementation of a web-based electronic case management
and e-filing system for the Workers’ Compensation Division
and an electronic case management system for the
Dependency Division.
Managing resources more effectively by promoting prudent
fiscal policies and practices and exploring innovative methods
that help ensure fiscal stability. For instance, the Office
continues to ensure that its risk management practices are
aligned with the rest of the County by enhancing current
ergonomic and wellness awareness programs to better
manage risks associated with employee safety.
¦ Assessing, enhancing, implementing and monitoring the
cybersecurity and privacy framework to better protect and
preserve the privacy, confidentiality, integrity and availability
of the County’s information technology infrastructure. For
example, County Counsel’s Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPPA) Privacy and Security Officer and
members of the legal staff participate in the HIPPA/Health
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
(HITECH) Privacy and Security Committee to ensure
departmental compliance.
The Office needs $3.0 million for the refurbishment and reconfiguration of existing County Counsel office space located at the
Edmund D. Edelman Children's Court in Monterey Park. The Dependency operation, which provides services exclusively to the
Department of Children and Family Services, occupies this space. Due to its age and water leakage issues, the dilapidated furniture
and carpet need replacement as they pose health and safety concerns. The refurbishment will result in a better use of the existing
space by consolidating legal and support staff by court and other relevant assignments and will create sufficient file storage space.
The library space and cubicles will be reconfigured. The Redaction Unit will be further secured to better enable the processing of
confidential files. This project includes lighting improvements and ceiling replacement to address damage from multiple water
leaks.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$14.0 million primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits, one-time funding to continue
the Sexually Violent Predator (SVP) program, and funding for
5.0 positions for the Trial Support unit, 2.0 positions for the
Bureau of Investigation (BOI), 1.0 position for the Community
Cyber Investigation Response Team (CIRT), 3.0 positions for the
Human Trafficking unit and 1.0 position for the Complex Child
Abuse unit, partially offset by the deletion of one-time funding
for the Hall of Justice (HOJ) project and an increase in public
safety sales tax (Proposition 172) revenue. The Recommended
Budget also reflects the addition of 15.0 positions for the
Victim Witness Assistance Program (VWAP) and 1.0 position for
the Workers’ Compensation Fraud program, fully offset by
grant funding.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Office’s FY 2016-17 strategic planning efforts are as
follows:
¦ Fulfill the District Attorney’s leadership responsibilities related
to public safety and the pursuit of justice in furtherance of the
office mission of promoting fair and ethical policies and
practices and ensuring compliance with constitutional and
statutory duties.
¦ Identify and implement operational and organizational
strategies to improve public safety and the pursuit of justice.
This will include identifying opportunities for engagement in
collaborative relationships with justice partners and
community stakeholders.
¦ Actively and effectively communicate our duties, goals,
successes, and challenges to the public to instill confidence in
our commitment to the pursuit of justice, and promote public
awareness of justice and safety issues and trends.
Create efficiencies, reduce redundancy, and manage
information to be used for improved decision making. This will
include identifying relevant data to employ in the decision
making process.
¦ Identify and implement effective administrative and
employment practices to promote fiscally responsible
decision making, employee safety, a well-trained workforce
and succession planning.
The 2016-17 Budget Request includes funding for 35.0 new positions. The requested positions are necessary to carry out critical
activities in support of the Department’s mission and strategic initiatives, as well as to promote operational efficiency and cost
avoidance.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$10.7 million.
The following is a description of the programs that are being
funded in other budget units:
Health Services
Reflects $9.1 million in funding for Health Services to hire the
ODR Director, funding to open a Sobering Center, including
space, staffing and overhead costs, and a pool of funding for
contracted housing for health options, including interim
housing, rental subsidies, and move-in assistance.
Sheriff
Reflects $1.4 million in funding for Sheriff to begin year one of
six of Crisis Intervention Training to allow Sheriff personnel to
improve tactics when dealing with the mentally ill and reduce
the use of force.
The EPR budget provides funding for the County Office of
Emergency Management to prepare and implement plans and
policies for the protection of life and property within the
County in the event of an emergency or disaster; operate and
maintain the County Emergency Operations Center (EOC); train
personnel assigned to County government, special districts,
and other jurisdictions throughout the County; plan support
for Homeland Security; develop and provide emergency and
disaster related educational materials for County residents; and
conduct countywide disaster exercises.
Management of the County EOC includes the Operational Area
Response and Recovery System, an internet-based information
reporting and notification system used by jurisdictions and
agencies in the County operational area to convey conditions
and operational status as a result of an incident, emergency, or
disaster. In addition, the County uses Alert LA County, a mass
notification system, to notify residents and businesses via
recorded phone, text, and/or email messages, of emergencies
or critical situations with information regarding necessary
actions, such as evacuations.
The budget also incorporates funds for Homeland Security
Grants including the State Homeland Security Grant Program
(SHSGP); Urban Area Security Initiative (UASI); and the
Emergency Management Performance Grant (EMPG) for
County departments, unincorporated areas, special districts,
and cities within the operational area.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in
NCC of $0.5 million, primarily due to a posting correction of
$0.6 million, partially offset by the deletion of $0.1 million in
one-time carryover funding.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects anticipated
funding for various employee benefits offset with expenditure
distribution to County departments.
The County’s infrastructure requires ongoing investment
to meet continuous performance requirements. The
2015-16 budget appropriated funds for critical repairs,
including heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC),
elevators, fire safety, roof repairs, and other maintenance
needs throughout the County. The 2016-17 Recommended
Budget appropriates $196.5 million for critical and other
high-priority repairs, roof replacements, HVAC unit
improvements, elevator and fire alarm system upgrades, and
accessibility modification needs at County facilities, including
beaches, parks, juvenile halls and camps, senior centers, and
health centers.
During FY 2015-16, departments identified additional deferred maintenance needs with an estimated total cost of $81.2 million.
These unfunded needs include various general facility repairs; replacement of outdated building systems such as boilers, chillers,
and HVAC units; roofs; and elevator upgrades to achieve building operational efficiencies.
The Federal and State Disaster Aid budget provides County departments with economic recovery assistance following major
emergencies and disasters. It includes appropriation for emergency and post-emergency responses, in addition to the repair,
restoration, or replacement of disaster-damaged County buildings and property, pending reimbursement from appropriate
governmental agencies.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes financing sources
and financing uses as follows:
Financing Sources
For budget planning purposes, the Chief Executive Office
considers total financing sources the difference generated in
FY 2015-16 from County revenues exceeding expenditures
(fund balance available), the use of prior-year obligated fund
balance, and property taxes. Any decrease in fund balance
available from the budgeted amount will require expenditure
reductions or the identification of additional financing.
The recommended fund balance of $1,423.4 million is
comprised of $150.9 million from General Fund operations;
and $1,272.5 million of unused FY 2015-16 funds carried over
to FY 2016-17 for the following:
¦ $455.0 million of Capital Projects funds for the completion of
various projects and refurbishment needs;
¦ $173.5 million of Extraordinary Maintenance funds for major
repairs and maintenance of County facilities and assets;
$40.1 million of Project and Facility Development funds for
consultant and specialized services related to projects that are
under development, as well as improvements to County
facilities;
¦ $390.7 million of Provisional Financing Uses funds primarily
for the Departments of Children and Family Services, Board of
Supervisors, Sheriff, Probation, Public Social Services, and
Mental Health, as well as the Correctional Enhancement
Program and future budget uncertainties;
¦ $64.5 million of Homeless and Housing Program funds for
Homeless Prevention Initiative projects;
¦ $60.2 million of Diversion and Re-Entry funds for the
redirection of persons in need of physical, mental, and public
health services from the criminal justice system to appropriate
care and treatment in lieu of incarceration;
¦ $52.6 million of Board of Supervisors funds for various
community programs;
¦ $31.7 million of Children and Family Services funds for the
Katie A. Settlement Agreement;
¦ $2.2 million of Public Social Services funds for General Relief
anti-homelessness projects;
¦ $1.8 million of Child Support Services funds for various
operational needs; and
¦ $0.2 million for extended hours for cooling centers in response
to inclement weather emergencies as declared by the
Department of Public Health.
Obligated fund balance of $32.9 million is decreased for the
following:
¦ $11.0 million for Phase 5 of the eCAPS Financial System
project;
¦ $9.8 million of Health Services Tobacco Settlement funds for
health-related costs;
¦ $5.0 million for Sheriff programs including Phase III of the
recommendations of the Citizens’ Commission on Jail
Violence, additional sworn staffing to patrol all
unincorporated areas, and Phase I of the Body Worn Camera
system;
¦ $5.0 million for continued support of the Los Angeles Regional
Interoperability Communications System Joint Powers
Authority administrative operations;
¦ $1.5 million for the Assessor’s Legacy System Replacement
Project to ensure that the design, functionality, and
operational effectiveness of the replacement system meet the
County’s operational and business objectives;
¦ $0.5 million for the Seniors in Motion program to support
healthy lifestyle activities for senior citizens; and
¦ $0.1 million for Public Library Homework Centers at various
libraries.
Property tax revenues reflect a net increase of $242.2 million
from the FY 2015-16 Final Adopted Budget. This includes an
increase of $222.7 million due to a projected 5.0 percent
increase in assessed valuation; a $31.4 million increase in
property tax revenue residual based on the current trends of
the County’s General Fund share of the redistribution of
property tax revenue as a result of Redevelopment Dissolution;
a $4.0 million increase in one-time revenues for asset sales
related to Redevelopment Dissolution; partially offset by a
$15.9 million decrease in sales tax revenue as part of the Triple
Flip unwind due to the State’s payment of the 2004 Economic
Recovery Bonds. Property tax revenues include in-lieu vehicle
license fee revenue as part of the State’s Local Government
Agreement (2004 Budget Act).
The recommended property tax revenue changes are
comprised of the following:
¦ $253.9 million increase in the Regular Roll;
¦ $0.2 million increase in the Supplemental Roll; and
¦ $11.9 million net decrease primarily due to the elimination of
the Triple Flip.
Financing Uses
Financing Uses include funding for appropriations for
contingencies as outlined in the revised Board
Policy 4.030 “Budget Policies and Priorities”, approved on
September 30, 2014.
Provision for obligated fund balance may be nonspendable,
restricted, committed, or assigned for specific needs including
future legal or contractual obligations.
Obligated fund balance of $45.1 million is committed for
various information technology legacy replacement projects.
The Fire Department provides 24-hour, emergency services to
over four million people living and working in 57 of the
County’s 88 cities, the unincorporated communities and the
City of La Habra in neighboring Orange County, and over one
million housing units. The Department’s vast 2,300 square mile
jurisdiction also includes 158 lifeguard towers spanning
72 miles of coastline to protect millions of annual beach
visitors. The Department is one of the largest emergency
service organizations in the country, and enjoys a
world-renowned reputation for its adeptness and innovation in
managing large-scale wildfires, earthquakes, and other
disasters in Southern California. The Department, as a Special District, is funded independent of
the County General Fund, and relies primarily on property
taxes and a special tax approved by the voters in 1997 to
provide essential fire protection and emergency medical
services. As the Department moves forward, it will continue to
focus its efforts on establishing the Emergency Medical
Services (EMS) Bureau; ensuring fiscal sustainability by
identifying new revenue streams and maintaining sufficient
levels of reserves; minimizing risk; and enhancing the culture
of the organization through continued training. These efforts
will provide the foundation to sustain the current levels of
emergency staffing and essential support services.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes funding for
21.0 positions for Emergency Operations including the
opening of Fire Station 143 in the Santa Clarita Valley, and
expanded operations at Fire Station 51 to provide truck
services to the unincorporated area of Universal City; funding
for the Department’s share of Lifeguard restorations and
unmet needs; 1.0 position to oversee the Grants and
Cooperative Agreements Division and maximize grant
opportunities; funding for four additional fire fighter trainee
recruit classes; replacement of apparatus and heavy
equipment; replacement of necessary personal protective
equipment for firefighters; and 5.0 support positions which will
improve efficiencies and help generate additional revenue. The
budget also includes funding for Board-approved increases in
salaries and health insurance subsidies, unavoidable costs,
retiree health other-post employment benefits (OPEB), and
other charges; partially offset by decreases in retirement,
services and supplies and capital assets expenditures.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department’s Strategic Plan includes 12 goals designed to
support the Department’s envisioned future. These goals are:
Preventing Injury and Illness; Delivering Exemplary Emergency
Services; Innovating New Delivery Systems; Fostering
Workforce Excellence; Ensuring Financial Stability and
Accountability; Developing the Leader in Each Employee;
Strengthening our Infrastructure; Automating our Systems;
Containing Risks; Mitigating Disasters; Preparing the People
We Serve; and Communicating our Value. At this time, the
Department is particularly concentrating on five areas: Critical
Infrastructure, Fiscal Sustainability, Emergency Medical
Services, Mitigating Risk, and Education/Training.
The 2016-17 budget request includes funding to sustain departmental operations. The Department utilizes a multi-year fiscal
forecast for financial planning purposes. The Department is anticipating slight increases in its primary funding source (property
taxes) and will continue to evaluate new revenue streams which may help support ongoing operations.
The Fire Department - Lifeguard budget provides funding for
lifeguard services at County-operated beaches, which are the
financial responsibility of the General Fund. The budget unit
establishes an appropriation for a General Fund transfer to the
Fire Department’s budget, which includes a percentage of all
costs and budgeted positions for ocean lifeguard services. The
2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$2.6 million in NCC primarily due to funding for restorations
and other critical needs of $2.0 million and Board-approved
increases in salaries and health insurance subsidies, partially
offset by the deletion of one-time funding of $0.6 million for a
dock house.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Fire Department’s Strategic Plan includes 12 goals
designed to support the Department’s envisioned future.
These goals are: Preventing Injury and Illness; Delivering
Exemplary Emergency Services; Innovating New Delivery
Systems; Fostering Workforce Excellence; Ensuring Financial
Stability and Accountability; Developing the Leader in Each
Employee; Strengthening its Infrastructure; Automating
its Systems; Containing Risks; Mitigating Disasters; Preparing
the People We Serve; and Communicating the Department’s
Value. At this time, the Department is particularly focused on
five areas: Critical Infrastructure, Fiscal Sustainability,
Emergency Medical Services, Mitigating Risk, and
Education/Training.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget supports the Fire
Department’s Strategic Plan efforts as it relates to lifeguard
operations.
The Lifeguard budget has unmet needs totaling $1.3 million comprised of the following: $0.6 million for dive team and paramedic
training; $0.3 million for vehicle outfitting, a watercraft, a Tuff Shed and a rescue boat engine; $0.2 million for program restorations;
$0.1 million for a Fire Equipment Mechanic and Emergency Medical Technician; and $0.1 million for medical exams.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an increase in NCC
of $9,000 primarily due to Board-approved increases in salaries
and employee benefits partially offset by a decrease in
retirement contributions.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Grand Jury continues to:
¦ Increase recruitment of Civil Grand Jurors to better represent
the varied population of the County;
¦ Safeguard valuable Grand Jury original records and develop
long-term storage solutions; and
¦ Plan for a third Grand Jury to be used for Criminal Grand Jury
matters when needed.
The second Criminal Grand Jury (SB 796, which added Section 904.8 to the Penal Code), if and when impaneled, will require
additional funding of approximately $0.9 million for staff, grand juror expenses, space, and infrastructure.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC decrease
of $46,000 due to the deletion of one-time funding, partially
offset by an increase in funding for unavoidable custodial
contract costs and additional security services for the 4th of
July and New Year’s Eve events.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, Grand Park exists to serve the people of
Los Angeles by assuring open space for casual sitting, leisurely
strolling and civic gatherings. Grand Park serves the
community by providing access to community groups,
neighbors, schoolchildren, and sponsored performing events.
On January 13, 2015, the Board unanimously approved in
concept the integration of DHS, DMH, and DPH, to create the
Agency. The Board requested the CEO to report back with a
proposed structure for the Agency and a timeline of how it
would be implemented, including a stakeholder/public
participation process, which the CEO submitted on
June 30, 2015. Finally, on September 29, 2015, the Board
formally approved an ordinance to create the Agency, as well
as approved strategic priorities and an operational framework
for the Agency.
One component of the operational framework indicates that
the budgets for the three departments included in the Agency
will remain separate. Therefore, the 2016-17 Recommended
Budget reflects the summation of the three department’s
budgets, after which each department follows.
The Agency’s strategic priorities and operational framework
were developed by a temporary steering committee comprised
of the Directors of DHS, DMH, DPH, and the Public Health
Officer. Public convenings were held and formal written
comments were accepted to obtain input from community
stakeholders. The strategic priorities and operational
framework reflect the steering committee’s efforts to develop
and fulfill the Agency’s mission to improve the health and
wellness of County residents through the provision of
coordinated care and services.
The Board-approved strategic priorities, which each include
defined goals and outcomes for the Agency, are as follows:
¦ Consumer access to and experience with clinical services.
¦ Housing and supportive services for homeless consumers.
¦ Overcrowding of emergency departments by individuals in
psychiatric crisis.
¦ Access to culturally and linguistically competent programs
and services.
¦ Diversion of corrections-involved individuals to
community-based programs and services.
¦ Implementation of the expanded substance use disorder
benefit.
¦ Vulnerable children and transitional age youth.
¦ Chronic disease and injury prevention.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget is fully funded with
available resources, and reflects the minimum maintenance of
effort (MOE) required by law ($336.1 million and vehicle license
fees (VLF) realignment revenue of $273.7 million), plus an additional $81.4 million in County funding. The additional
County funding components include $19.0 million from the
General Fund and $62.4 million in Tobacco Settlement funds.
The Recommended Budget also reflects $22.3 million in
County resources allocated to the Department of Public Social
Services (DPSS) for the In-Home Supportive Services Provider
Health Care Plan and $15.9 million allocated to the Capital
Projects/Refurbishments budget unit for health-related capital
projects.
The Recommended Budget reflects a net increase in NCC of
$17.5 million, consisting primarily of increases in VLF of
$8.1 million, a one-percent increase of $3.3 million in the MOE
related to AB 85, which governs the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
implementation in California, and $6.1 million related to rapid
rehousing.
The Recommended Budget includes an increase of
80.0 positions, offset with 24.0 positions, for a net increase of
56.0 positions and related operational costs, primarily
associated with Board-approved functions, including
15.0 positions related to the Office of Diversion and Re-Entry
(ODR) to hire the ODR Director and establish a
County-operated Sobering Center, 5.0 positions for Integrated
Correctional Health Services (ICHS) primarily to establish the
ICHS leadership structure within DHS, 25.0 positions to expand
primary care medical homes, and 35.0 positions to convert
contracted hospital personnel to County staff.
The Recommended Budget reflects $210.3 million in
Measure B Special Tax revenue, of which $208.5 million is
allocated for County hospital emergency and trauma care costs
and $1.8 million is allocated for services related to trauma
centers and emergency medical services in Health Services
Administration-Emergency Medical Services.
The Recommended Budget also reflects the use of
$84.4 million in estimated obligated fund balance to be
transferred to the four hospital enterprise funds for ongoing
health care costs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The ACA was implemented on January 1, 2014 and the
Department is continuing to refine its analysis of the impact.
The Department is making good progress on key initiatives
and operational changes that will help the health system
succeed under the ACA. With the support of the Board, DHS
and its many partners are working together to transform its
system into an integrated care delivery model that will enable
it to provide the right care, at the right time, in the right
location, by the right kind of provider.
 The Department’s chronic funding challenges have resulted in directing funding to cover the increased demand of patient care and
created unmet needs in areas such as training, medical equipment purchases and facility maintenance.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects the Department’s
focus on enhancement of mental health programs with other
County departments, and a significant expansion of programs
that support countywide priorities including addressing the
needs of homeless individuals, jail diversion, and improving
the system of care for children and youth, particularly those
involved with the child welfare system. In addition, the
Recommended Budget reflects the Department’s dedication to
ensuring required access and treatment capacity for
individuals of all ages and addressing the needs of various
vulnerable and underrepresented populations. Included in the Recommended Budget is funding for contract
provider implementation of expanded Mental Health Services
Act (MHSA) Community and Services Supports (CSS) programs,
which began pursuant to a mid-year MHSA plan adjustment in
FY 2015-16. Among the initiatives supported by the additional
MHSA funding are innovative programs focusing on
ameliorating the mental health impact of trauma, outreach to
underrepresented populations, temporary shelter and support
to those in crisis, services to persons reintegrating into the
community after incarceration, and expansion of the capacity
of various current MHSA programs such as field capable clinical
services. The Recommended Budget also supports additional
services for children and youth by increasing funding for
Katie A. Wraparound Programs, offset with federal and County
funding.
The Recommended Budget reflects 40.0 new positions to
further support the implementation of the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) and Medi-Cal expansion. Through greater awareness of
mental health issues and the decreasing stigma regarding
seeking help, DMH’s directly-operated clinics are working to
ensure required access to treatment capacity for individuals
with serious mental illness.
The Recommended Budget additionally reflects 13.0 new
positions to accommodate current and expected workload in
the Office of the Public Guardian. The new positions will
alleviate caseload increases due to shorter timeframes for
investigation of State hospital referrals; new responsibilities for
some medical decisions and administration of psychotropic
drugs; and additional workload for investigations, lower-level
locked placements, and responses to judicial inquiries by
Superior Court community courtrooms.
The Recommended Budget reflects annualized funding for
DMH to strengthen mental health services for inmates in
County jails, which is a collaborative effort with DHS under the
new Health Agency. DMH will complete hiring for positions
allocated for this purpose in FY 2015-16. These positions will
improve screening when individuals enter the jail, provide
more intensive treatments for inmates with a high level of
mental health needs, creating a better linkage to community
care upon release from jail. The Recommended Budget also
includes federal funding to establish an inpatient facility under
contract to DMH that will enhance the County’s capacity to
deliver acute hospital-level mental health treatment for
inmates.
Finally, the Recommended Budget includes adjustments to
better align DMH’s actual expenses and revenues with
budgeted expenses and revenues.
The Department’s unmet needs include: 1) augmentation of funding for the Probate and Lanterman-Petris-Short sections of the
Office of the Public Guardian; 2) enhancement of outpatient services in several areas as jail diversion and full implementation of
Proposition 47 as it continues to create increased demand for specialized forensic mental health programs; 3) additional services
for uninsured consumers, including the homeless, dually diagnosed, and underserved ethnic populations; and 4) funding for
program and central infrastructure.
As the County Health Agency takes shape, DPH continues a
transformational period that began in 2016. DPH moves
forward with an organizational restructuring, and
opportunities for new roles and relationships are assessed and
developed.
The Recommended Budget provides for total appropriation
funding of $976.9 million supported by grants, fees, and
revenue resulting in an NCC of $201.8 million. This reflects an
NCC increase of $4.0 million primarily attributable to
Board-approved adjustments to salaries and employee
benefits, partially offset by a reduction in Tobacco Settlement
funds. Notable changes in the Department’s Recommended
Budget include:
¦ Measure B revenue of $0.7 million to fund a co-established
trauma prevention program with DHS.
¦ Division of HIV and STD Programs – $4.5 million revenue
increase for two new federal awards from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention centered on Bio Medical HIV
Prevention services and client re-engagement to HIV medical
services (established in September 2015).
¦ 14.0 new positions to support the areas of chronic disease and
injury prevention, health facilities inspections, and children’s
medical services.
¦ A placeholder for the Department’s pending implementation
of the Online Real-Time Centralized Health Information
Database (ORCHID) electronic health record (EHR) system.
The Department’s Strategic Plan, developed through an
extensive process involving stakeholders, data and trend
analysis, and policy assessments, includes goals and objectives
that contemplate the existing and emerging Health Agency
landscape in the County. The Department’s Recommended
Budget is consistent and aligned with the following Strategic
Plan priorities: healthy and safe community environments;
preventive health care; empowered health consumers; health
equity; public health protection; and improved infrastructure.
The Health Agency Strategic Priorities have presented
collaborative opportunities and allowed member departments
to leverage capacity and expertise. DPH is collaborating with
Health Agency departments on these Strategic Priorities, such
as establishing a single unified ORCHID EHR system as well as
collaborating with DHS in seeking billing solutions that
maximize reimbursement and minimize County cost.
The Department has the following unmet funding needs for: 1) the continuous delivery of core chronic disease prevention
programs; 2) modernization of County-owned facilities; and 3) the Los Angeles County Health Survey (LACHS), a population-based
telephone survey that provides DPH and its many stakeholders with critical information concerning the health of County residents.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects no activity since
the final $10.0 million annual installment payment for
pre-hospital opening activities was provided to MLK-LA in
FY 2014-15. MLK-LA successfully opened the MLK Community
Hospital on May 14, 2015 and as such, the MLK Financial
Assistance budget unit is no longer needed.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget provides continued
funding for homeless services as well as support for the
implementation of the 47 strategies approved by the Board
including: homeless prevention programming for families;
expansion of subsidized housing programs, particularly rapid
re-housing; developing interim/bridge housing for those
exiting institutions; increasing employment opportunities for
homeless adults via social enterprise; expanding the Jail In
Reach Program; developing a uniform countywide outreach
and engagement protocol; establishing a decriminalization
policy and first responders training to effectively address
homeless encampments and unsheltered homeless
individuals; enhancing the emergency shelter system; and
other strategies that seek to coordinate a seamless homeless
services system to better support singe adults, families, and
youth.
Although the recent economic downturn has been reversed
nationally, the negative impact on the homeless population
continues to exist as documented by the 2015 Homeless Count
conducted by the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority
(LAHSA), which recorded a 12.4 percent increase in
homelessness from 2013. The County has prioritized its
commitment to homelessness via the HI and associated
funding for the 47 approved strategies, supported by the
creation of the Office of Homelessness, within the CEO, to
continue to support the work of the initiative to reduce entries
into and expedite exits from homelessness for single adults,
families, and youth.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease in NCC
of $0.1 million. The decrease is primarily attributed to the
deletion of one-time funding, partially offset by increases for
Board-approved salaries and employee benefits and front
funding for the final year of a 5-year program for the Impact
Team.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The FY 2016-17 Base Budget Request reflects a gross
appropriation of $83.4 million, an increase of $10.7 million
from the FY 2015-16 Budget. The Base Budget Request will
enable the Department to continue its focus on providing
innovative, effective, and efficient human resources (HR)
solutions to County departments and the public served, by
recruiting, developing, and retaining exceptional and diverse
talent for public service.
Key accomplishments of the Department over the past year
include: 1) completion of the Dependent Eligibility Verification
Audit, which lead to the removal of ineligible dependents from
County medical and dental benefit plans and generated
savings in the amount of $7.7 million and $17.8 million for
2015 and 2016 respectively; 2) implementation of a new
application and examination processing system, NEOGOV,
which for the first time provides a countywide end-to-end
recruitment and selection platform with online application
tracking, exam scheduling, exam scoring, and class
specifications; 3) launch of the new HR website, which serves
as an effective recruitment asset through enhanced social
media presence and information delivery that broadcasts
employment opportunities and benefits to the general public
and potential candidates; and 4) support of the Fire
Department in expediting and overseeing the administration
of the Fire Fighter Trainee exam that included the review of
over 6,700 applications and administration of 4,500 written
tests.
Other notable accomplishments include: 1) the publication of
“How To” guides on career and workforce development topics
such as resume, employee onboarding, and the stay interview;
2) navigation of the largest County recruitment and outreach
forum at the “Taste of Soul” event, reaching over
10,000 members of the public; 3) expansion of the Career
Development Intern Program to the County’s 88 cities and
public and private businesses; 4) collaboration with selected
County departments in response to the Merit System Services
Personnel Management Audit conducted by the State (Cal HR)
and recognition for meeting all federal merit principals and
maintaining some best HR practices; 5) County recognition by
Forbes Magazine as one of America’s Best Employers of 2015;
6) winning the Productivity and Quality Top Ten Award as
collaborator in the Women’s Veterans Program; 7) assistance to
the Fire Department in expediting the background
investigation associated with the hiring of Fire Fighter Trainees;
and 8) winning the National Association of Counties Award for
both the Executive Leadership Program and the Absence
Management System.
The Department’s unmet needs include funding of a position to develop career path trainings and establish a career development
program similar to the Executive Leadership Development Program for mid-level managers, emerging leaders, and new
supervisors. The Department also needs funding for a position to address increased workload demands in personnel
investigations.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$4.2 million primarily due to additional one-time funding for
data center relocation costs and ongoing funding for data
center lease and power costs, building maintenance workload,
increases in salaries and employee benefits, and countywide
cost allocation charges. These increases are partially offset by
the deletion of one-time funding needed in FY 2015-16 for
various projects and programs such as consultant services to
complete a feasibility analysis, email migration, enterprise
network infrastructure, a contract tracking system, and the
installation of bike racks.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The ISD Strategic Plan for 2016-17 identifies strategic areas of
focus and associated goals that will enhance its ability to
provide effective and cost efficient internal and external
customer service, as well as take a leadership role in
implementing the County’s Environmental Policy. This year’s
plan includes the following new or continuing strategic
objectives:
¦ Continue working with the Chief Executive Office (CEO) on the
acquisition of a leased Data Center space which will become
the County’s Enterprise Data Center, replacing the current
Downey Data Center.
¦ Develop a business strategy to revitalize Application
Development Best Practices utilizing more sophisticated
App Dev and Dev Ops technology.
¦ Work actively on new open source solutions to replace the
incumbent legacy, mainframe-based solution. Moving from
the current WebSphere 7.0 platform to an open source
solution will give the County the ability to provide on-demand
service to County constituents in a more responsive manner.
Expand the cloud-based services for Microsoft Office 365
(O365) Suite by implementing other key products to effect
greater collaboration capabilities such as Skype for business
instant messaging, conference calling bridges and
point-to-point video calling, and SharePoint collection sites.
¦ Continue to operate and maintain a number of essential
legacy computing systems on behalf of County departments
and the courts.
¦ Continue expanding broadband capacity to accommodate
videoconferencing, electronic medical records, server
virtualization, data center centralization, Wi-Fi access, and the
increased use of personal computing devices.
¦ Continue the expansion of ISD’s customer service quality
assurance program to ensure strong customer feedback
mechanisms.
¦ Establish new vehicle purchasing agreements and coordinate
with ISD-managed departments to support County efforts to
comply with the recently updated Board Policy 3.020 (Clean
Fuel Sustainable Fleet) standards and vehicle replacement
plan.
¦ Continue to work with CEO on County facility assessments to
identify repair needs. ISD will continue to work with the CEO
to alleviate the deferred maintenance backlog by prioritizing
roofs, heating ventilation air conditioning systems, and
fire/safety systems.
¦ Establish a gasoline fuels centralization purchasing program
as a Board and County priority. Propose centralized funding
for: risk management, electric vehicle infrastructure
development, user “charge-back” development, and central
program management.
¦ Develop an alternative governance model and proposal for
sustainability programs serving the region (outside of County
operations). This includes a potential Joint Powers Authority
for Community Choice Aggregation (CCA) and might include
Southern California Regional Energy Network (SoCalREN)
programs.
¦ Launch the Green Building Program which encourages,
emphasizes, and provides technical assistance for Leadership
in Energy and Environmental Design certification of existing
County buildings.
¦ Continue to work on countywide water saving initiatives,
including plumbing upgrades, cooling tower retrofits and
drought-tolerant landscaping projects. An anticipated Water
Revolving Loan Fund will help fund these projects.
¦ Work with the California Public Utility Commission (CPUC) and
the Local Government Commission to create a local
government-specific, Cap-and-Trade Program for installation
of comprehensive measures to reduce greenhouse gases in all
sectors (energy, water, green building, transportation, and
waste). ISD will require coordination with the CEO-Legislative
Affairs and Intergovernmental Relations Unit, state agencies,
legislators, and the Governor’s office.
¦ Work with the County Sustainability Council and the
Department of Regional Planning to implement the Municipal
Climate Action Plan into the County General Plan update.
Major accomplishments from last year include:
¦ Established residential Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE)
as a County priority.
¦ Completed installation of 117 electric vehicle charging
stations at various County locations as part of the initial
Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Pilot Project.
¦ Worked with CPUC to approve up to a 10-year program
funding cycle for the SoCalREN which provides region-wide
energy programs administered through ISD.
¦ Established a CCA as a Board and County priority. Led a CCA
task force, with funding authorized by the Board from ISD, to
develop a feasibility study (schedule shows CCA in operation
in early 2017).
¦ Completed the County’s consolidation of centralized email
system users and moved all 95,000 users to the
O365 government cloud for email services.
¦ Expanded ISD’s private cloud hosting solution from
2,060 servers to 2,311. Implemented the user self-service
server deployment, which brought the average server
deployment time to less than 25 minutes.
¦ Completed the Federal Communications Commission
mandate calling for an 800 MHz re-band of the Countywide
Integrated Radio System. Completed opt out with
Sprint/Nextel to upgrade all 7,000 user radios to
P-25 technology at no cost to the County.
¦ Completed facility assessments with the CEO on more than
500 buildings out of a total of 1,150 with over 6 million square
feet of space surveyed.
¦ Provided the Zev Yaroslavsky Family Support Center (Center)
with building, custodial and grounds maintenance along with
IT shared services. ISD continues to support and work
collaboratively with the CEO and all seven tenant department
representatives to provide excellent support services. The
public demonstrates continued support for the facility with its
patronage.
The Customer Direct Services and Supplies is a “pass through” budget to account for various services and supplies that ISD
purchases directly from outside vendors on behalf of customer departments.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a decrease of $5.5 million in anticipated requirements from customer departments.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects funding for
anticipated judgments and/or settlements, attorney fees and
litigation costs, service contracts, and various commercial
insurance policies. The budget also includes a central
appropriation to fund large, unanticipated losses and losses of
a countywide nature.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$31,000 attributed to an increase in the Consumer Price Index
based cost-of-living adjustment pursuant to the
2012 operating agreement. The Recommended Budget also
reflects full-year funding and support for buildings and
grounds maintenance, utilities, and other anticipated
operational costs of LA Plaza de Cultura y Artes.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, LA Plaza de Cultura y Artes exists to serve the
people of Los Angeles, particularly children and families, by
educating them about Los Angeles history and
Mexican-American culture.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget provides for the collection
of lease payments due on LAC-CAL equipment leases from
County departments and the transfer of such payments to the
LAC-CAL Corporation. Also reflected is the payment of
insurance premiums for which expenditures will be distributed
to affected departments.
In prior fiscal years, the JPA issued separate and independent
request for proposals (RFP) for the design and construction of
public safety-grade Land Mobile Radio (LMR) voice and
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) data wireless networks. The
JPA then selected, negotiated and awarded separate contracts
to the prevailing vendor in both RFPs and began to implement
each system.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects operational
funding for the JPA as the implementation of the LMR and
LTE systems continues.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a $1.8 million
NCC decrease primarily due to the deletion of one-time funds
and a reduction in services and supplies, partially offset by
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Regional efforts to improve services include the move to a
building adjacent to the former High Desert Multi-service
Ambulatory Care Center facility in the Antelope Valley and the
establishment of an investigative response office in Lomita to
offer quicker response time, and greater efficiencies, including
reduction in fuel consumption and employee drive time.
¦ The Department has a need to recruit and retain key
management, physician, and line positions, and is in the
process of recruiting and selecting a Chief of Operations and
Chief of Laboratories. The Department also has a critical need
for forensic pathologists, criminalists and investigators.
Recruiting and retaining qualified managers and staff will lead
to an improvement in services.
The Department will improve departmental efficiency,
productivity, and quality using selected and focused
ITdevelopment. The Department will assess and re-prioritize
new and ongoing departmental IT projects including
migration of outdated operating systems to current ones,
improvement of remote access capabilities, and further
development and implementation of a Documentum-based
electronic case file management system (ECFS). Additionally,
the acquisition, implementation, and staff training for a
CT-scanner is underway, which will also provide a much
needed radiographic adjunct in evaluating occult trauma in
decedents, and assist the Department in resolving matters of
religious objection.
¦ With the anticipated implementation of ECFS, the possibility
of having real-time metric capability is realized. The
Department will develop a managerial "dashboard" that will
provide useful and factual metrics and turnaround times for
gross case, investigator response and report, autopsy protocol
and toxicology, and other metrics as necessary.
The Department continues to evaluate its current staffing needs and organizational structure that has been in place for several
years. A departmental reorganization plan will be presented to the CEO to ensure that appropriate staffing levels are allocated in a
manner that aligns positions with duties, scope, and level of responsibility. In addition, the Department is considering the
expansion of the Antelope Valley Regional Office.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$0.8 million primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits, 1.0 position for building
operations at Patriotic Hall and an adjustment to the
Countywide Cost Allocation (2CFR Section 225), partially offset
by the deletion of one-time carryover funding for the Veterans
Outreach Program, digital monitors and a surveillance system.
Critical/Strategic Planning Priorities
The Department continues to:
¦ Expand and fully integrate service delivery with partners
creating a seamless system to meet the ongoing needs of
veterans and families.
¦ Improve staff productivity through training, promotions,
hiring qualified candidates to fill vacancies and improve
customer satisfaction through team development and
leadership training.
¦ Maximize building operations and capacity through tenant
license agreements, shared service contracts, and events
planning and scheduling.
¦ Assist the needs of County employees and families serving in
the Military Reserves.
The Department is requesting 1.0 Intermediate Typist Clerk position to assist with building operations.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net NCC increase
of $0.6 million primarily due to an increase in the Consumer
Price Index-based cost-of-living (COLA) adjustment pursuant
to the 1994 operating agreement amended on May 20, 2008.
The Recommended Budget also includes funding for
Board-approved increases in salaries and health insurance
subsidies fully offset with a decrease in services and supplies
funding consistent with the Board-approved operating
agreement.
The Recommended Budget continues support for a full
exhibition schedule, including special presentations of works
by Pablo Picasso and Diego Rivera, Toba Khedoori, Guillermo
Del Toro, and John McLaughlin, as well as an installation
highlighting Chinese paints. The permanent collection will be
highlighted with installations of pre-Columbian, Chinese,
Korean, and Japanese works. Several LACMA-organized
exhibitions will continue to travel domestically and abroad,
raising the museum’s image and prestige in the field, including
Diana Thater (Chicago), Agnes Martin (New York), and Reigning
Men (Australia).
Art Programs with the Community continues its multi-year
partnership with schools, libraries, and other organizations in
Compton, Van Nuys, and Torrance. Through this program,
LACMA provides curricula for teachers that make connections
with the State Content Standards for the visual arts, language
arts, and social science. With the Quality and Productivity Fund
grant received from the County, LACMA is overseeing
architectural improvements to the Charles White Elementary
School, where they’ve partnered for the last eight years setting
up exhibitions, artist residencies, and workshops. LACMA
received a grant from the Institute for Museum and Library
Services to offer film-making workshops for veterans and their
families, as a way to shed light on the veteran experience.
LACMA also received a three-year grant from the Irvine
Foundation to engage diverse audiences and participants in
the communities of East Los Angeles, the San Fernando Valley,
and Inglewood to create exhibitions and programs influenced
by community input and interests. Evenings for Educators
continues to be a successful professional development
program for K-12 teachers, presenting strategies to incorporate
the visual arts into the classroom with activities to enhance
creativity, curiosity, and critical-thinking skills. Through these
and many other Educational Outreach programs, LACMA is
able to engage over 530,000 guests, in addition to those who
visit the galleries every day throughout the year.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Museum of Art will continue implementation of its
long-range strategic objectives:
¦ Improve the quality and presentation of the collections;
¦ Attract and engage a broader audience through expanded
international recognition of LACMA as a quality art institution
and continued commitment to educational programs and
overall scholarship;
¦ Improve the museum campus; and
¦ Develop a stable and sustainable financial and organization
plan.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget is based on the
1994 operating agreement amended on September 26, 2006,
and further amended on June 24, 2013, October 8, 2013,
June 23, 2014, and June 22, 2015 between the County and the
Museum of Natural History Foundation, which established
each entity’s operational and financial responsibilities. This
public-private partnership enables the Museum to maintain
educational and research programs and basic operations at the
Museum located in Exposition Park, the George C. Page
Museum at the La Brea Tar Pits, and the William S. Hart
Museum in Newhall. The Recommended Budget reflects an
NCC decrease of $0.1 million primarily attributed to the
deletion of one-time carryover funding, partially offset by an
increase in the Consumer Price Index-based cost-of-living
adjustment (COLA).
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Museum continues to implement its strategic plan, which
is consistent with the County’s strategic plan. Through the
strategic planning process, the Museum will identify and
prioritize programs for funding in FY 2016-17 that further its
mission.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$1.1 million due to cost-of-living and countywide cost
allocation adjustments. Consistent with established
contractual obligations, and demonstrating a commitment to
maintaining public-private partnerships, the Recommended
Budget continues to provide County funds to maintain and
operate the facility.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
Consistent with the County’s vision to improve the quality of
life in the County, the Center exists to serve the people of
Los Angeles by assuring the presentation of the very best of
the performing arts in its theaters and concert hall. The Center
serves the community by providing access to the performing
arts to families and children on the Center’s campus and by
providing educational services in the region’s schools.
The Center continues to identify unmet needs for numerous deferred maintenance projects and the implementation of various
best practices approaches.
Nondepartmental revenues are derived largely from
revenue-generating activities not related to any specific
County department.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget primarily reflects:
¦ An increase of $20.5 million in sales and use tax revenue
associated with anticipated growth in collections
($4.6million) and the conclusion or "unwind" of the Triple Flip
($15.9 million), as authorized by Proposition 57;
¦ An increase of $11.0 million in deed transfer tax revenue
based on actual trend and steady growth in the County’s
housing values; and
¦ An increase of $1.4 million in transient occupancy tax revenue
based on actual trend and projected growth in collections.
¦ A decrease in salaries and employee benefits due to the
transfer of funding for Board-approved salaries and employee
benefits to various departments.
¦ A decrease in services and supplies due to the deletion of
one-time funding for the National Association of Counties
annual conference, executive recruitment for the Office of
Child Protection, and the bike racks project.
¦ A decrease in other financing uses primarily due to the
deletion of one-time funding for projects relating to the
Public Library, information technology infrastructure, and the
Productivity Investment Fund.
¦ A decrease in revenue due to the deletion of a one-time
SB90 interest payment, partially offset by projected growth in
interest earnings from the treasury pool.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a $5.1 million
decrease in NCC primarily attributable to the deletion of
one-time funding, partially offset by increases for
Board-approved salaries and employee benefits, the Trails
Planning Section, Virginia Robinson Gardens, the County Cost
Allocation Adjustment, and the backfill of
Proposition A revenue. The Recommended Budget also reflects
realignments based on historical experience and anticipated
needs.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to supporting the
County’s Strategic Plan Goals of Operational
Effectiveness/Fiscal Sustainability (Goal 1), Community
Support and Responsiveness (Goal 2), and Integrated Services
Delivery (Goal 3) by continuing and enhancing efforts found in
efficiencies, exploring new possibilities to augment revenue,
and discovering creative methods to sustain, with minimum
funding, the Department’s operations.
The Department’s 2016-17 critical needs consist of ongoing funding for Parks after Dark Programs at the existing nine parks and
expansion at nine additional areas of high gang activity, as well as the restoration of programs (recreation, lake, and crafts
positions) and services and supplies curtailed as a result of the economic downturn.
Funding and augmentations for the aforementioned needs would allow the Department to continue its operations without
disruptions and in some cases, may allow the Department to operate its facilities at a preferred service level. Full reinstatement of
programs include full accessibility to lake swim beaches and nature centers; various recreational positions associated with children
and senior recreation programs; and various craft positions for facility maintenance and repairs.
Other unmet needs include funding for additional personnel to ensure the health and protection of trees and other plant life in
park facilities; water specialist and support positions to ensure that all water-related operations are conducted at the highest
supportable standard; ongoing funding to enhance support services for recreational programming; and funding to update the
Department’s strategic plan.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a NCC increase of
$21.6 million, primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and health insurance subsidies and revenue backfill;
partially offset by the deletion of one-time funding for
Title IV-E Waiver, Education Reform, and Succeeding Through
Achievement and Resilience (STAR) Court programs, vehicle
replacement, and commercially sexually exploited children
(CSEC) training. The budget also reflects a realignment of
revenue based on historical trends and the deletion of
53.0 vacant positions to offset overstated budgeted revenues.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Probation Department has developed a strategic plan
transforming from a custodial and supervision model to an
evidence-based practices treatment and rehabilitation model.
The Probation Department also continues to expand
collaborative efforts and community capacity. The Strategic
Plan has five top priorities for the Department that includes the
following:
¦ Reduction of recidivism by six percent from the baseline by
2018 by promoting positive behavioral change among its
clients;
¦ Operate facilities that promote healthy development and skill
acquisition for justice involved youth;
¦ Enhance the protection of victims’ rights and ensure victim
sensitivity;
¦ Attract, develop, and maintain an exemplary and motivated
workforce utilizing ongoing training, mentoring, and coaching
to ensure professional development of staff; and
¦ Enhance the culture of the Department including the
implementation of the PROBSTAT data gathering and analysis
system to achieve mission critical tasks and hold all levels of
departmental management accountable.
The Department’s critical unmet needs include additional funding to: 1) establish ongoing closed-caption television maintenance
and support staffing; 2) increase alteration and improvement budget; 3) increase NCC to fully replace CJFTCF revenue; 4) establish
laundry services contract; 5) renovate Vermont area office; 6) renovate minor’s restrooms at Camps Munz, Mendenhall, and
Gonzales; 7) repave Challenger Memorial Youth Center parking lot; 8) resurface Barry J. Nidorf Juvenile Hall parking lot; 9) refurbish
East San Fernando area office; 10) renovate Firestone area office; 11) renovate Harbor area office; 12) install Sally Port at
Los Padrinos Juvenile Hall; and 13) meet the Department’s warehouse space needs. The requested amount is estimated at
$32.4 million.
The Community-Based Contracts budget funds private contracts, administered by the Probation Department, to reduce juvenile
crime and provide juvenile delinquency prevention services.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget appropriates $21.4 million
in services and supplies to fund consultant studies that
quantify departmental space needs; develop master plans;
provide technical, structural, and environmental impact
assessments; and assist in the development of facility
programs and capital planning efforts.
The Recommended Budget also incorporates $28.2 million in
other charges to fund County contributions for improvements
to County and other public facilities executed by other
agencies or jurisdictions; $0.8 million in capital
assets–equipment to fund the acquisition of trailers to mitigate
operational impacts to recreation and public-oriented
programs that are displaced during construction; and
$13.9 million in other financing uses which represents transfers
of unspent funds from capital projects for reallocation, project
related funds to be transferred to departments’ operating
budgets for the purchase of furniture and equipment, and
transfers to the Civic Art Special Revenue Fund, per Board
policy, to fund public art projects.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The budget provides a funding mechanism for departmental
and countywide capital development and planning activities.
The activities funded from this budget contribute to the
multi-year planning efforts of departments, and the County as
a whole, by ensuring that capital programs appropriately
reflect operational and programmatic requirements and
departmental strategic plans.
The Provisional Financing Uses budget unit serves as a
temporary budget for program funding that has yet to be
allocated to a specific budget unit. Once funding needs have
been determined, funds are transferred to the affected budget
unit by Board order.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
$44.0 million.
The following is a description of each budget category change.
Children and Family Services
Reflects a decrease of $36.1 million due to the transfer of
one-time funding to the Department of Children and Family
Services for the Title IV-E Waiver program ($30.5 million),
Katie A. Settlement Strategic Plan ($4.5 million), and
implementation of the Blue Ribbon Commission
recommendations ($1.1 million).
Health Services
Reflects a net increase of $4.6 million primarily due to the set
aside of contingent funding for potential costs associated with
the transfer of the Sheriff’s Department’s Medical Services
Bureau to the Department of Health Services ($5.1 million),
partially offset by a decrease in prior-year carryover savings
($0.5 million).
Parks and Recreation
Reflects a net increase of $5.0 million for anticipated
operational costs associated with newly constructed or
refurbished park facilities ($5.3 million), partially offset by the
transfer of ongoing funding ($0.3 million) to the Department
of Parks and Recreation for the Trails Planning Section.
Sheriff
Reflects a net increase of $24.8 million primarily due to the
redirection and increase for future Sheriff facilities debt service
payments ($23.3 million). In addition, funds set aside for
operational needs ($5.0 million), partially offset by a funding
transfer ($3.5 million) to the Sheriff’s Department for
settlement costs and implementation of the
Citizens’ Commission on Jail Violence recommendations.
Various
Reflects a net increase of $45.7 million for housing and
economic development initiatives ($17.9 million), Stormwater
Urban Runoff Quality Program ($7.4 million), mental health
needs in County jails ($6.1 million), Assessor’s Legacy System
($4.7 million), costs related to Proposition 47 implementation
($3.2 million), San Fernando Valley Family Center ($2.4 million),
Animal Care and Control staffing plan ($2.0 million),
Office of Child Protection ($1.6 million), budget uncertainties
($5.6 million), community programs ($8.0 million), and various
other programs ($5.0 million). These increases are partially
offset by decreases due to funding transfers to the Internal
Services Department for data center relocation costs
($4.0 million), Sheriff’s Department for implementation of the
Department of Justice recommendations ($3.4 million),
Probation Department for backfill of revenue losses
($3.0 million), several departments for various programs
($3.6 million), as well as a decrease in prior-year carryover
savings ($4.2 million).
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$7.5 million primarily due to Board-approved increases in
salaries and employee benefits, partially offset by the deletion
of one-time carryover funding and a decrease in retirement
contributions. The Recommended Budget also reflects
one-time funding to continue the Sexually Violent Predator
(SVP) Program and one-time funding for overtime to address
an increase in the Department’s workload.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department’s Strategic Planning Initiatives include:
¦ Working to address County priorities of child protection,
ensuring treatment for the mentally ill, elimination of
homelessness and reduction of the jail inmate population.
¦ Assessing the Juvenile Client Assessment Recommendation
and Evaluation (CARE) Program for compliance with best
practices in serving children with critical educational and
mental health needs.
¦ Improving assessment and performance measures through
the acquisition and development of a case management
system (CMS). The Public Defender continues to develop its
new statistics system, which employs key performance
indicators as a basis for assessing and comparing attorney
workloads.
¦ Addressing support staff’s operational needs to create
capacity and flexibility to respond to changes in court
practices and the law.
In addition, the Department collaborated with justice partners
in applying for a MacArthur Foundation Safety and Justice
Challenge grant targeted at reducing the number of clients
confined in jail.
The Department’s unmet needs include additional funding for positions to assist with Proposition 47, peace officer body worn and
vehicle cameras, proposed Mental Health Diversion Programs and a Public Information Officer. The Department is also seeking
funding for its CMS.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a reduction of
$24.1 million primarily attributed to the deletion of one-time
funding from the Utility User Tax-Measure U allocations, new
construction projects, and various Board-funded
refurbishment and capital projects. This reduction is partially
offset by a 5.30 percent anticipated property tax growth rate.
The Department’s budget also includes Board-approved
increases in salaries and retiree health insurance benefits and
the addition of 4.0 positions.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Public Library’s strategic plan establishes a roadmap for
sustaining the delivery of quality library services and support
for the Department’s leadership as a 21st century library. Our
purpose statement, “The Library Gives You the Freedom to
Connect, Explore, Create - Whatever Your Needs or Dreams”,
along with eight key initiatives, sets the framework for
developing innovative service models that will meet the
increasing needs of our diverse communities.
In 2016-17, the Public Library will continue to have a key focus
on its strategic initiatives and funding solutions for the
Department’s operating budget, in concert with the
construction of new libraries and refurbishment of aging
library buildings. These buildings will be designed with
sustainable features that incorporate self-service models;
spaces that encourage creativity; larger meeting rooms for
civic engagement and community events; and equipped with
robust and emerging technologies that support our digital
initiatives.
The Public Library’s unmet needs include $5.6 million for facilities and maintenance budget to address critical structural and
building maintenance issues due to extended deferred maintenance at various library facilities throughout the County. Additional
unmet needs include $0.5 million for additional public safety services due to the increased needs for security services at various
library facilities; $4.0 million to augment operating revenues to sustain ongoing library service levels; and $0.3 million to purchase
two bookmobiles to replace the aging bookmobiles and continue to provide library services to patrons living in remote locations
without a library near them.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the Department of
Public Social Services (DPSS) – Administration reflects a
$68.3 million increase in gross appropriation and a
$12.1 million increase in NCC. The NCC increase is primarily due
to Board-approved salary increases and the County’s share of
increases in employee benefits and CalFresh expenditures,
offset by the elimination of one-time funding.
The Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of
16.0 positions. The new positions are primarily for the
Los Angeles Eligibility, Automated Determination, Evaluation
and Reporting (LEADER) Replacement System (LRS), In-Home
Supportive Services (IHSS), and administrative support.
Although there was an increased demand for the full range of
DPSS services in the last few years, with the economic recovery,
cash assistance caseloads are projected to flatten or slightly
decline, while caseloads for non-cash programs such as
Medi-Cal are projected to continue rising.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department remains committed to measures that ensure
effective and professional service delivery and support the
County's goal of Operational Effectiveness/Fiscal Sustainability
and Integrated Services Delivery.
The Department continues to enhance its Customer Service
Centers (CSC) to improve the service provided to participants.
The current service population of the CSCs have reached over
2.4 million cases with a monthly average of 752,046 calls. The
CSCs recently implemented a feature allowing participants to
leave a call back number instead of waiting in queue during
extended wait periods. In addition, a simplified authentication
system was added to the Integrated Voice Response (IVR)
system that allows participants to use personal information to
access case information.
DPSS also continues to maximize leading edge technology to
improve outcomes and program excellence. The Department
recently started to implement restricted wireless connectivity
in its district offices to support lobby self-service, lobby
check-in, and allow customers online access to case and
program information. In FY 2016-17, the Department plans on
expanding its Electronic Bulletin Boards (EBB), Electronic
Document Management System (EDMS), and point of services
scanning projects.
The Department is also working to lower the annual cost of
workers' compensation. Between June and December 2015,
47 additional employees were returned to work and
17 employees retired after being on a six month or more leave
of absence. Based on the risk management mitigation
strategies implemented during the fiscal year, the Department
achieved a 27.6 percent reduction in workers' compensation
expenses from the prior year.
DPSS programs provide a vast array of services to families,
children, single adults, and the elderly and are designed to
alleviate financial hardship and promote family health,
personal responsibility, and economic self-sufficiency. Over
3.5 million participants are served monthly. In addition, the
Department continues to focus on homeless prevention and
housing relocation. In the first quarter of FY 2015-16, a total of
5,313 families were served through the Temporary Homeless
Assistance Program, 1,177 families received assistance to
secure permanent housing, 855 families were assisted through
the Eviction Prevention Program, and 163 families via the
4-month Rental Assistance Program. In addition, 475 families
were placed in permanent housing, 384 families received crisis
housing placements via the Homeless Family Solutions System
and 586,129 households received CalFresh benefits,
representing 1,180,615 individuals.
DPSS continues to partner with other County departments to
improve service delivery and to provide integrated services.
The Department's partnership with the Department of
Children and Family Services (DCFS) provides integrated
services for mutual families and resources for other needy
DCFS families and caretaker relatives. Approximately 18,000
families benefited from this service coordination from
July 2015 to November 2015. Additionally, the Department
continues to assist DCFS youth to find employment via the
Child Family Team (CFT) meetings and Non-CFT subsidized
employment. The Department's partnership with Community
and Senior Services (CSS) has also enabled the placement of
over 5,400 California Work Opportunities and Responsibility to
Kids (CalWORKs) and foster youth in subsidized employment
since July 2014 through December 2015. This, along with other
efforts, allowed the County to meet the federal work
participation rate standard resulting in hundreds of millions of
dollars of State cost avoidance in federal penalties. Lastly, DPSS
plans on expanding the Family Stabilization Care Coordinator
Program with the help of the Department of Mental Health
(DMH). The coordinators are co-located DMH social workers
who consult with family stabilization participants in need of
services outside the scope of DPSS in order to provide referrals
to various community resources.
As DPSS moves into 2016-17, it will continue to devote
resources towards one of its primary initiatives; to reduce and
prevent homelessness through various programs and
numerous partnerships with other County departments and
local agencies.
Funding for programs the Department administers depend largely on State and federal subvention. The
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget assumes sufficient funding to support the current operational level. Due to the volatile nature
of the State budget process, the Recommended Budget does not factor in the Governor’s January budget proposal. The final State
funding allocations will not be known until after the State’s FY 2016-17 Budget is signed.
The Department’s unmet needs are primarily focused on additional staffing needed to meet increased demands. Over the past
several years, funding did not increase at the same rate as caseload and program demands. Currently, case workers for the
approved caseload in the Department’s core programs are staffed significantly below the full need level, though the level of
understaffing varies significantly by program. Thus, it would require a significant number of workers to fulfill the unmet needs for
case workers and administrative staff.
The Public Social Services Assistance Budget funds mandated
and discretionary public assistance and social services
programs, financed with federal, State, and County funds.
These programs include: CalWORKs; Indigent Aid General
Relief (GR); General Relief Anti-Homelessness (GRAH); IHSS;
Cash Assistance Program for Immigrants (CAPI); Refugee
Resettlement Program/Refugee Cash Assistance (RRP/RCA);
Refugee Employment Program (REP); Community Services
Block Grant (CSBG); and Work Incentive Nutritional
Supplement (WINS).
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a $23.1 million
increase in appropriation and a $12.8 million net increase in
revenue primarily due to 1991 Realignment Sales Tax Growth
in IHSS. Also reflected is a $10.3 million net increase in NCC
primarily due to the annual Maintenance of Effort (MOE)
inflation factor of 3.5 percent and wage increases in the IHSS
program.
The majority of services provided through the
PublicWorks - General Fund are required by federal, State, and
local mandates and are funded by fees for services. Crossing
guard, landslide mitigation, graffiti abatement, pre-County
improvement district studies, property rehabilitation and
nuisance abatement, and unincorporated area services
programs continue to rely on funding from the County.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a $19.4 million net
NCC decrease primarily attributable to the elimination of
one-time funding for Unincorporated Area Stormwater Urban
Runoff Quality Program ($9.0 million); Unincorporated County
Road projects ($6.8 million); Waterworks projects
($1.1 million); Oxford Basin Vegetation Project ($1.0 million);
High Desert Corridor ($0.8 million); Hauled Water Initial Study
Plan ($0.6 million); Holiday decorations in East Los Angeles
($0.3 million); Graffiti Abatement ($0.2 million); Claremont
Sewers ($0.1 million); and other Board-funded programs and
projects ($0.1 million). The decrease is partially offset by a
$0.7 million increase for Board-approved salaries and health
insurance subsidies.
¦ To maximize public safety, ongoing training is provided to
employees to promote technical growth. Specialized training
is provided in mandated subjects such as the California
Building Code to ensure a higher standard of compliance.
¦ The Public Works - General Fund budget relies on NCC to fund
various activities in the Department. Public Works projects the
available NCC from the previous year to determine the
funding level required for the activities in the coming year and
will adjust each activity accordingly so that NCC does not
exceed the adjusted allowance approved by the Board.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
programs and services. The four main components of the
Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process include program,
financial and staffing plans, and the budget request. Program
plans strategically establish management objectives for
outcomes/results, situation analyses, comprehensive needs
assessments, results-based work plans, and funding requests.
Financial plans project revenue sources and financing uses for
each operating fund and set preliminary budget allocations
for individual programs. Based on these funding allocations,
staffing plans are then developed as part of divisional
operational plans. The budget request is then prepared based
upon the program, financial, and staffing plans.
The Department’s unmet needs include $33.9 million for the Unincorporated Area Stormwater Urban Runoff Quality Program to
address regulatory stormwater and urban runoff compliance requirements.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a $52.6 million
increase primarily attributable to increases in the anticipated
award of infrastructure project contracts for flood protection
and water conservation efforts and obligated fund balance set
aside for future infrastructure and facility improvements
projects. The primary sources of revenue of the District are
property taxes and benefit assessments. The objectives of the
District are outlined within the Flood Control Act, which
mandates the District to carry out flood protection and water
conservation programs. These objectives include keeping the
existing flood protection system in a safe and effective
condition to respond to emergencies, perform maintenance
and repair, and conserve water.
The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial, staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then developed
as part of divisional operational plans. The budget request is
then prepared based upon the program, financial, and staffing
plans.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an $85.6 million
decrease primarily due to reductions in fund balance available;
gas tax revenues; federal aid urban project revenues; and the
deletion of one-time funding for unincorporated area road
projects; partially offset by an increase in MTA grants revenue
for various roadway intersection improvement projects.
The FY 2016-17 budgeted revenues for the Highway User Tax
Account (gas tax) is approximately $150.0 million. It reflects a
$13.0 million (8 percent) decrease from the FY 2015-16 budget
of $163.0 million and a $39.0 million (21 percent) decrease
from the FY 2014-15 actuals of $189.0 million. This trend of
lower gas tax revenues is expected to continue due to the drop
in gasoline prices and growing prevalence of fuel-efficient,
alternative fuel, and zero-emission vehicles.
Although the precipitous drop in gas tax revenues in
FY 2016-17 will not result in any reductions in levels of service
for the road maintenance and operations programs, there will
be a reduction in the number of roadway pavement
rehabilitation and preservation construction projects. While
Public Works has budgeted conservatively, the continued drop
in gas tax revenues will necessitate the department to
implement further reductions to the transportation
improvement programs. Public Works will continue to monitor
gas tax revenues and budget accordingly for future fiscal years.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ The Recommended Budget was assembled with an emphasis
on optimizing the use of new gas tax (formerly Proposition 42)
funds for maintenance and preservation of the existing
roadway system. This strategy meets the County Strategic
Plan goal of Operational Effectiveness by maximizing the use
of available limited revenues while providing residents in
unincorporated County areas with safe roads that provide the
necessary mobility options for work, education, and
recreation.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial, staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The Internal Service Fund is designed to simplify billings for
services provided between the multiple funds that finance
Public Works operations. This fund allows for salaries and
employee benefits, materials and supplies, and equipment
charges to be paid through the fund and the appropriate
amounts recovered from other departmental funds.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an $18.0 million
increase primarily due to Board-approved increases in salaries
and health insurance subsidies; retiree health increases;
administrative support services to align the budget to
anticipated costs; and various position changes to meet the
operational needs of the Department. These increases are
partially offset by decreases in retirement costs; capital project
management services for County capital projects; capital
asset-equipment purchases; and contingencies.
The Recommended Budget presents Public Works with a
challenge in projecting future budgetary requirements for
services that will be rendered to other Public Works funds, for
the construction management of capital projects, and for
services to other County departments. The Capital Building
Projects Program relies heavily on the Board’s approval of
funding for County capital projects. A work plan is prepared
for the coming budget year to detail the capital project work
that will be funded. Rates and fees are analyzed each year and
adjusted to ensure that the Internal Service Fund recovers all
costs for services performed.
¦ The Department’s Strategic Plan provides for a structured
approach to strategic planning and budgeting for individual
public works programs and services. The four main
components of the Public Works’ Integrated Planning Process
include program, financial and staffing plans, and the budget
request. Program plans strategically establish management
objectives for outcomes/results, situation analyses,
comprehensive needs assessments, results-based work plans,
and funding requests. Financial plans project revenue sources
and financing requirements for each operating fund and set
preliminary budget allocations for individual programs. Based
on these funding allocations, staffing plans are then
developed as part of divisional operational plans. The budget
request is then prepared based upon the program, financial,
and staffing plans.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget provides for the
maintenance of core mission activities including public
counseling services at the downtown headquarters office and
eight field offices, case processing, community planning and
outreach, and zoning enforcement. Environmental impact
review and the activities of the Environmental Review Board
and the Significant Ecological Area Technical Advisory
Committee will continue as well as specifically funded
programs, including public hearings and workshops on the
Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, West Carson Transit
Oriented District Specific Plan (TODSP), West
Athens-Westmont TODSP, and Willowbrook TODSP.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a $0.9 million NCC
increase primarily attributable to Board-approved increases in
salaries and health insurance subsidies and retiree health cost
increases; and the addition of 1.0 Graphic Artist position to
create and produce a wide variety of diverse professional
quality graphic material and creative designs artwork, partially
offset by decreases in County retirement costs and the deletion
of one-time funding.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department continues to implement its Strategic Plan
while supporting the County’s Strategic Plan including the
following initiatives:
¦ Providing responsive and proactive code enforcement of
discretionary permits, zoning and subdivision regulations in
unincorporated areas, and participating in the countywide
Nuisance Abatement Team (NAT);
¦ Enhancing public service through improved permitting
processes and databases, web-based case filing pilot projects,
new electronic transactions, Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) based land use and zoning information, and smart
phone enforcement operation;
¦ Enhancing communication with landowners, neighbors,
constituents, and other governmental agencies by carefully
allocating resources to incorporate local area network
enhancements and other web-based technologies; Building stronger and healthier communities through
development of land use, circulation, open space, noise, safety
and housing elements of the General Plan Update; and
¦ Securing Regional Planning Commission and Board approval
of community plans and zoning standards for unincorporated
areas.
The Department’s unmet needs include additional funding for positions to support Field Offices, code enforcement
inspections/urgent needs, California Environmental Quality Act and Significant Ecological Areas Ordinance implementation, and
Santa Monica Mountains North Area Plan. Funding is also needed for consultant services to conduct a Transfer of Development
Rights Feasibility Study.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes resources
necessary to conduct the November 2016 Presidential General
Election as well as to perform Recorder/County Clerk
operations. The budget also includes funding to move forward
with new programs that promote efficiency, while taking into
consideration the fluctuations in the real estate market and
continuing high costs of conducting elections.
In FY 2012-13, recorder fee revenues were beginning to show
improvement; however, in FY 2013-14, recorder fee revenues
declined 30 percent and real estate purchasing indicators show
trends have now leveled-off. In addition, the Department
continues to absorb the high cost of unscheduled special
elections. The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a
decrease in NCC of $6.6 million primarily due to the deletion of
one-time funding from the previous year and a reduction in
retirement costs, partially offset by Board-approved increases
in salaries and employee benefits, and funding to stabilize core
operations due to declines in recorder fee revenues.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The Department’s Critical/Strategic Plan will continue to
implement automated and enhanced processes to improve
public service and employee workforce in the elections, voter
registration, Recorder, and County Clerk services. As such, the
Department will:
¦ Continue development of the multi-year Voting Systems
Assessment Project (VSAP) to modernize the County’s voting
system;
¦ Conduct voter outreach and multi-media efforts to engage
voters for the November 2016 Presidential General Election
and increase access to election information;
Continue implementation of the Archives and Records
Management Program to standardize countywide archives
records management practices and establish a County
archives program;
¦ Continue partnering with the UCLA Anderson School of
Business to develop revenue forecasts based on economic
predictors that affect recording activities, hence departmental
revenue;
¦ Expand eCheck, the Department’s electronic payment system,
to additional large-volume document recording customers.
This will enhance service through a secure and efficient
method of payment and improve accounting business
processes;
¦ Migrate the Department’s legacy system infrastructure to
eBlock, a cloud-based solution that will facilitate seamless
migration of digital vital records and other information assets
to a countywide central data center;
¦ Enhance information security efforts in compliance with
information technology (IT) standards to ensure maximum
data security measures are implemented to safeguard
highly-sensitive Recorder, County Clerk, and Election data and
related systems;
¦ Implement a paperless, automated Campaign Finance
Disclosure System to improve management of campaign
statement filing requirements;
¦ Continue the Emerging Leaders program, which provides
mentorship opportunities for non-supervisory staff to
enhance career development and offer a pathway to become
successful future County leaders; and
¦ Continue to use Lean Six Sigma (LSS) to provide solutions for
inefficient and/or costly internal processes. LSS allows
knowledge transfer of “best practices” and encourages staff
participation in increasing efficiencies and decreasing
operating costs as part of the normal course of business.
The Department continues to defer the installation of a specialized fire suppression system to safeguard critical computer systems
and public records at the Norwalk Headquarters.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an $8.5 million
increase in NCC primarily due to a decrease in billable use
allowance expenditures, partially offset by the deletion of
one-time funding for centrally financed commercial paper
programs and non-capital related expenditures.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an overall NCC
increase of $61.1 million primarily due to: $108.4 million in
Board-approved increases in salaries and employee benefits;
$5.7 million to prefund retiree healthcare benefits; $1.6 million
and 6.0 positions for the Human Trafficking Bureau (HTB);
$2.9 million and 15.0 positions for the Emergency Operations
Bureau (EOB)/Department’s Operation Center (DOC);
$0.6 million and 6.0 positions for the Criminal Intelligence
Bureau (CIB); $0.3 million for the Summer Violent Crime
Enforcement Program (SVCEP) (also known as Summer Gang
Suppression); and $3.4 million for equipment and consultant
services to replace the Department’s mission-critical Computer
Aided Dispatch (CAD) system. In addition, the Recommended
Budget includes the transfer of $6.9 million from the
Provisional Financing Uses (PFU) budget unit to the
Department’s operating budget for 46.0 existing and
38.0 additional positions phased-in to address the Citizens’ Commission on Jail Violence (CCJV) recommendations, as well
as Rosas, Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and
Department of Justice (DOJ) settlement agreements.
The above increases are partially offset by a $17.5 million
decrease in retirement costs; $16.7 million anticipated increase
in public safety sales tax receipts; $15.0 million decrease
resulting from the deletion of various one-time funded
programs; $13.3 million decrease in rent charges; and a
$6.1 million reduction in debt service.
The Recommended Budget also includes a net increase of
1.0 position due to the following ministerial changes:
2.0 positions for the new Crisis Intervention Training (CIT)
program fully offset by an intrafund transfer (IFT) from the
Diversion and Re-Entry (DR) budget unit; 2.0 Constitutional
Policing Advisor positions fully offset by a reduction in services
and supplies; 2.0 positions for the Mentally Ill Offender Crime
Reduction (MIOCR) grant program fully offset by IFT from the
Department of Mental Health; addition of 1.0 position for the
Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS); and
7.0 positions for the Taskforce for Regional Auto-Theft
Prevention (TRAP) fully offset by the Vehicle Theft Prevention
Program Special Revenue Fund, partially offset by the deletion
of: 5.0 positions due to the expiration of the Affordable Care
Act (ACA) grant; net deletion of 3.0 positions to gain an
Assistant Division Director in custody-specialized programs;
and a net deletion of 5.0 positions for contract law
enforcement services as requested by contract agencies. 
The Department’s most critical needs, in addition to restoring any reductions in funding, are the following: 1) $2.0 million and
7.0 positions for year 1 of 5 of the Mental Evaluation Team (MET) to respond to mentally ill persons in crisis, barricaded suspects,
suicides in progress, and other potential self-inflicted injury calls; 2) $2.9 million and 8.0 positions to support the FastTest Program
for computer Adaptive Testing of Deputy Sheriff Trainee; 3) $4.7 million and 43.0 Custody Assistants positions for station jail
staffing, to adequately perform all duties required at patrol stations, consistent with a study completed by the Department’s
Contract Law Enforcement Bureau in April 2014; 4) $7.0 million to address the Department’s revenue loss from the Inmate Welfare
Fund due to the Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) reduction in approved calling rates; and 5) $24.3 million for critical
infrastructure projects, such as the replacement of air handlers, generators, chillers, and roofs; replacement of sewer and plumbing
lines at the North County Correction Facility; and the installation of a boating dock system in Marina del Rey.
The Department is also requesting funding for the following critical programs: 1) $8.1 million and 35.0 positions for CCJV Phase III;
2) $10.6 million and 56.0 positions for UA Patrol Phase II; and 3) $17.3 million and 52.0 positions for the implementation of a
multiple-year initiative to outfit sworn departmental personnel with body-worn cameras.
The Department is requesting $266.0 million to address a structural deficit related to unavoidable cost increases as
follows: 1) $42.8 million in employee benefits; 2) $4.0 million associated with Bonus I and II benefits; 3) $12.0 million to backfill the
loss of federal funding for the State Criminal Alien Assistance program; 4) $59.1 million to address the Department’s structural
budget shortfall relative to Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) bonus ($16.6 million) and leaves of absences
($42.5 million); and 5) $148.1 million to fill 300 vacant Deputy and 1,000 civilian positions that are currently being used to address
salary savings.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects net increases of:
1) $1.8 million for telephone utilities; 2) $1.3 million for ENIA;
3) $0.5 million for Voice-over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
maintenance and equipment costs; and 4) $50,000 for Criminal
Justice Information Systems (CJIS).
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ ISD will continue to enhance the performance of the County’s
telecommunications systems and simultaneously minimize
costs.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects a net decrease in
NCC of $34,000 primarily due to the deletion of one-time
funding for replacement of the Department’s Collection and
Accounts Receivable System (CARS). The Recommended
Budget also includes Board-approved increases in salaries and
health insurance subsidies, an increase of 2.0 positions to
address appropriate supervision in the Public Service and
Revenue and Enforcement Divisions, and partial restoration of
prior-year curtailments.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
The following are examples of the Department’s continuing
efforts to create efficiencies, work collaboratively with other
departments, and maximize revenue:
¦ Continue the refunding project, with the support of the CEO,
for bonds issued by the former redevelopment agencies. This
program received the National Association of Counties 2015
Achievement Award. Since the first bond sale in December
2013, the program has issued in excess of $350.0 million of
refunding bonds on behalf of eight former redevelopment
agencies. The total debt savings are in excess of $101.0 million
and will benefit the County, State, and each city that
participated in the program.
¦ Conduct an online solution to receive property tax payments
automatically and securely from organizations responsible for
a large number of parcels. The property tax eCommerce portal
usage continues to grow, reaching 14 percent of total
collections in 2015.
Continue the expansion of remote deposit service from 90 to
261 remote deposit devices which allows County departments
and agencies to deposit checks received from the public
electronically, reducing physical depositing of paper items.
¦ Expand the public counter on the first floor at the Kenneth
Hahn Hall of Administration to include space for Assessor and
Auditor-Controller staff to provide a one-stop customer
service experience for taxpayers.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects funding for the
County’s $290.6 million MOE payment to the State, which is
comprised of $245.9 million base MOE, $37.6 million CFP, and
$7.1 million representing 50 percent of any excess above the
AB 233 fines and forfeitures MOE. In addition, the budget
includes $109.6 million for court-related expenditures that are
the County’s responsibility. The Recommended Budget also
reflects Board-approved increases in salaries and employee
benefits, partially offset by an increase in revenue and the
deletion of one-time carryover funding.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an NCC increase of
$1.5 million primarily due to the Water Conservation Revolving
Loan Fund, partially offset by decreases in utility costs for
NCC-funded facilities. The Recommended Budget also reflects
a decrease in funding for electricity, natural gas, water, other
utilities, and California Public Utility Commission (CPUC)
programs, offset by increases in power plant operations,
energy management programs, and grant funding for the
Southern California Regional Energy Network (SoCalREN) for
calendar year 2016.
Critical/Strategic Planning Initiatives
¦ Continue to complete energy retrofit projects, increase water
conservation efforts, and centrally administer utilities costs
throughout the County.
On November 4, 2008, unincorporated County voters approved the passage of the Utility User Tax - Measure U. The revenues are
generated from user taxes on gas, electricity, and communication. These revenues are fully offset with appropriations in various
budget units including the Departments of Board of Supervisors, District Attorney, Parks and Recreation, Public Library, Public
Works, and Sheriff for various programs within the unincorporated areas.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects no change from the 2015-16 Final Adopted Budget based on current revenue trends.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget reflects an increase of
$19.8 million due to anticipated general growth.
