Current Secured Property tax revenue is budgeted at a slightly higher amount and Unsecured Property tax revenue
is budgeted at slightly lesser amount based on current property tax values. The delinquency rate remains moderate
and revenues for delinquent payments and penalties are marginally increased. The Supplemental revenue line item
is again budgeted in a negative amount as the County is still experiencing tax rolls with refunds rather than increased
assessments. In-Lieu Vehicle License Fee (VLF) and Sales Tax represents the State’s Triple Flip (property tax
revenue from the schools and special districts in lieu of vlf and sales tax) per SB 1096 guidelines and are requested
in the same amounts as the previous fiscal year pending revised estimates from the State. The County’s Sales Tax
is estimated to increase modestly as business activity is beginning to pick up. Revenue received from Property Tax
Transfer is increased reflecting a more active housing market. Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue is budgeted
at an increased amount, but in a fiscally prudent amount due to uncontrollable factors that could affect this revenue
stream. SB90 mandate reimbursement is decreased because of the State continuing to either defer or unfund
mandate reimbursements in the State Budget. Payment In-Lieu Taxes (PILT) authorized by the Emergency
Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (PL 110-343) is budgeted at the same amount pending receiving estimates from
the Federal Government. Cost Allocation is increased to adjust to State/Federally funded programs and non-
General Fund departments requiring more general government services than in the previous fiscal year. Funding is
requested in the Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU) Additional Capacity line item and is based on a stable level
sanitation usage. Medicare Part D Subsidy is funding received from California Public Employees’ Retirement
System (CalPERS) for retirees who participate in the voluntary federal outpatient drug benefit program. No revenue
is budgeted as this program is ending with the implementation of the Obama Health Care reform. Penalties and
fines received from Superior Court are adjusted based upon revenues received to date. The Transfers In amount
reflects Interest earnings and the closing projects in other funds that initially received General Fund support.
The estimated ending Fund Balance is requested in an amount just slightly less than last fiscal year’s actual amount.
Changes in salaries and benefits reflect newly hired personnel. No Longevity is budgeted as no current employee
qualifies for this benefit. Group Health for Retirees is increased to account for additional retirees that are receiving
this benefit. Expenditures in the Accrued Benefits line item for last fiscal year represent payments of accrued time to
a former employee. The Insurance line is increased as a result of significant liability claims from last fiscal year now
being included in the calculations used to determine department charges. No replacement computers are requested
this fiscal year. The Software line item reflects the annual cost of the MinuteTraq Agenda hosting, maintenance, and
upgrades. Training and Seminars is increased to allow the Clerk of the Board to attend the annual California Clerk of
the Board of Supervisors meeting and/or for additional training. The new Supervisor Training conducted by the
California State Association of Counties (CSAC) was completed last fiscal year.
Develop a structurally balanced budget within Board guidelines.
? Assist all departments in meeting their goals and objectives.
? In conjunction with Public Works, assure that the Bridgeport Fire Station is completed within budget.
? Coordinate efforts with Public Works to assure a smooth transition at the Airport.
? Working with Human Resources, assure that labor negotiations are conducted in a manner consistent with
providing for the County’s long-term stability, as directed by the Board.
Requested Changes:
Certain benefit line items are adjusted to account for a new employee hired in the previous fiscal year.
Revenue and appropriations are adjusted based on anticipated costs for the annual audit.
Standard practice is to request General Contingency at 1-percent of the County’s previous fiscal year’s adopted
operating budget which was $44,972,312.
Revenue to collect for Auditor services provided to the Mariposa County Superior Court is reduced based on the
amount of service anticipated to be provided. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect a newly hired employee
and a reclassification that the Board approved taking effect in July 2012. A long time employee retired resulting in
expenses in the Accrued Benefits line item in the previous fiscal year, as well as a reduction in Longevity Pay, and
an increase in Group Health for this fiscal year. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated
service demands and actual expenditures from the previous fiscal year.
Provide exceptional customer service to the taxpayers, with a staff that is dedicated to providing assistance in a
professional and friendly manner using their many years of experience to resolve taxpayer issues. The County
Treasurer is committed to the safe investment of county funds using safety, liquidity and yield as guidelines.
? Implement Phase II of the new Transient Occupancy Tax collection program.
? Improve website for ease of use and provide more useful information.
? Continue to provide excellent service to the taxpayer with limited operating funds.
Requested Changes:
Revenues are adjusted based on the tax sale of parcels and the department now managing the County’s funds
rather than using an investment firm due to the increasing of management fees. Money received from recovering
delinquent bond fees in the Lake Don Pedro district is now budgeted and funding from the Tax Collectors Cost fund
(#390) is included again to offset the costs associated with tax billings. Salaries and benefits are adjusted based on
the Board approved reorganization in the previous fiscal year. The Investment Charges line item is reduced to reflect
the County Treasurer now managing the investment of county funds. Expenses related to Lake Don Pedro Bond
delinquency/foreclosure proceedings are again budgeted in the Bond Delinquent Fees line item. Costs for the new
Transient Tax Occupancy collection program are budgeted in the Software line item, as well as the traditional
maintenance/upgrade costs for the County’s financial system. The department is requesting to purchase security
cameras for the office and building entrances, and this is budgeted in the Equipment line item. Other service and
supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service demands and actual expenses in the previous fiscal
year.
Uphold and maintain the County of Mariposa’s Public Service Policy that was adopted with Resolution 98-231.
Requested Changes:
Revenues are increased slightly based on greater Recording activity due to some improvements in the housing
market. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect advancements in flex class positions. The Maintenance
Equipment line item is increased for the purchase of an upgrade to the Auditing Program that calculates all business
property accounts as the older version is no longer supported. The Department is requesting to implement
document scanning of Homeowner Exemptions and preliminary change of ownership records, to free up document
filing space and allow for more efficient use of clerical staff time. This expense is budgeted in the Professional
Services line item and is a one-time fee for set up and configuration with the existing operating system. Minimal
adjustments are made to service/supply line items based on actual expenses in the previous fiscal year and
anticipated service demands.
The Department is requesting a reclass/equity adjustment of approximately 6-percent for the Assessment Office
Manager position (estimated total increase of $4,125). This increase is not included in the Requested Budget per
the budgeting guidelines established by the Board. This request will be analyzed further by the Human Resources
department and brought to the Board for consideration in a separate action. Attached is a memorandum from the
Assessor/Recorder regarding the requested budget.
Provide responsive legal advice and client service.
? Provide assertive representation in civil litigation and administrative hearings.
? Provide prompt and effective assistance in negotiation and drafting of contracts and other legal documents.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is increased based on anticipated legal services being provided for Child Welfare, Public
Guardian/Conservator, and agencies outside of the General Fund. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the
Board approved increase in salary to County Counsel. The Insurance line item is reduced due a reduction in
“experience” or claims that have occurred in the last seven years.
Arrange for Department Heads and managers to attend the mandated AB 1826 Harassment Prevention
training.
? Commence and successfully complete negotiations with the County’s four bargaining units.
Requested Changes:
Salary and benefits for the newly created Human Resources/Risk Manager position are now included for a full year.
The Insurance line item is reduced due to a reduction in “experience” or claims that are no longer included in
calculating departmental share of costs. The Professional Services line item represents appropriations for a
classification and compensation study that the Board directed to be included in the budget for funding consideration.
All four employee bargaining unit contracts expire in the fall of 2013, and funding is requested to contract with a
professional labor negotiator. The Training & Seminars line item is increased as staff is requesting to attend more
training courses. Minor adjustments are requested in several service/supply line items to account for costs
associated with the new Director position.
Review new software needs for County Clerk functions.
? Establish new Fictitious Business Name (FBN) procedures.
? Update website usability.
? Complete the updating of the procedural manuals.
Requested Changes:
The Board approved a reorganization of this department in the previous fiscal year and the salaries and benefits
related to the newly allocated Office Assistant I/II position are now budgeted for a full fiscal year. Additionally, the
salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect a Board approved promotion in a flex position. Group Health for Retirees
is reduced as a retiree is no longer receiving this benefit. The department is requesting to purchase Fictitious
Business Name (FBN) software as the existing program is out of date and is no longer supported by the vendor.
Revenue received annually for processing FBNs offsets the costs of this purchase. Minor adjustments are requested
in various service/supply line items based on anticipated service demands.
Prepare and conduct a successful Gubernatorial Primary Election.
? Improve website for ease of use and to provide more useful information.
? Research sale of unused and obsolete election equipment.
Requested Changes:
Revenue and appropriations are included for the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) Grant, which will purchase
accessibility equipment for specific polling locations. Election Fees are increased in anticipation of the Primary
election in the spring of 2014. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to account for the reorganization that the Board
approved in the previous fiscal year. Because the reorganization is complete, no additional funding is requested in
the Reorganization line item.
Repairs roofs and rain gutters at Public Works Administration, Woodland Hall, McCay Hall, and pump house
at Hornitos Park.
? Replace flooring in the kitchen at Midpines Hall and repair/replace flooring in McCay Hall.
? At Probation Department – replace fence, repair dry rot, and replace floor and sink cabinet.
? Repaint eaves and window frames at the District Attorney office.
? Continue implementation of preventative and predictive maintenance programs.
Requested Changes:
The department is proposing to establish a separate “Plant Operations” budget which will be responsible for the
maintenance of the water and wastewater plants. The new “Plant Operations” budget is intended to have no net
county cost and will consist of three employees currently budgeted in Facility Maintenance.
Revenue for Facilities Maintenance Services is reduced to recognize the separation of Plant Operations and is
based on anticipated service demands of Yosemite West for road maintenance and snow plowing needs.
Miscellaneous Revenue represents a contract with Yosemite Area Regional Transit Service (YARTS) for
maintenance at their bus stops and for maintenance/cleaning from the rental of county facilities. Salaries and
benefits are reduced to reflect the three employee positions that are now budgeted in the Plant Operations budget.
The Household Expense line item is increased based on the amount and cost of cleaning supplies for building
maintenance needs. As a result of several workers’ compensation claims in recent years, the Insurance line is
increased. To account for maintenance contracts with an electrician, plumber, and air/heating units, the Professional
Services line item is increased. The County Vehicle and Fuel line items are reduced due to several vehicles now
being budgeted in the Plant Operations budget. Other adjustments to service/supply line items are based on actual
expenses to date and anticipated service demands.
No revenue is requested at this time for a P.G. & E. Grant award. If staff is successful in obtaining the grant, then
appropriate revenue and appropriations will be presented in a separate board action. Salaries and benefits are
adjusted based on the incumbent accepting another job and a new employee being hired at a lower step. Insurance
is increased due a previous workers’ compensation claim.
Funding for the Way-Finding project is requested in an amount sufficient to complete the project and the Fair Parade
trophies are budgeted at the actual cost of the trophies. Attached is a memorandum from the Mariposa County Arts
Council regarding their funding request.
Begin environmental/design process for 6 bridges as part of the Bridge Replacement Program.
? Begin analyzing and researching possible solutions to the Courthouse Renovation project.
? Plans, specifications, and estimates for the re-construction of Mt. Bullion Cut-Off Phase II.
? Repair construction deficiencies to the Red Cloud Library.
? Engineering and design services for repairs to the History Center porch.
? Oversee construction of Bridgeport Fire Station.
? Design and surveying work associated with several large road construction projects.
Requested Changes:
Revenue for providing engineering services for road maintenance projects related to State Transit Improvement
Projects (STIP), the Disaster Recovery Initiative (DRI) Grant, and Bridge Replacement program are requested in
amounts based on anticipated service demands including the cost of outside engineering services for the DRI Grant.
No funding is requested for the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act – A Legacy for Users
(SAFETEA-LU) projects as engineering services for these projects were completed in the previous fiscal year.
Revenue in the Engineering Services line item represents funding received from other departments for engineering
services.
PERS Incentives were inadvertently omitted from the previous year’s budget but are now projected for employee(s)
eligible for this benefit. No appropriations are requested in the Communications line item as the department is no
longer paying for cell phone service. Professional Services accounts for map checking services and for a consultant
on the DRI Grant project. Rents & Leases Building represents payment to the Road Fund for rent and utilities.
Expenses related to the operation of the map machine, copy machine, and plotter were omitted from the last year’s
budget and are now requested in the Copier Expense line item. The department is requesting to replace one
computer in the Equipment line item. Other service/supply line items are adjusted based on actual year expenses
and to offset increases in other line items.
Upgrade the County email system.
? Install help desk system to track workload and resource consumption.
? Support the installation of AS400 system upgrade.
? Maintain system availability and support department initiatives.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the reclassification of the PC Technician classification to an Information
System Specialist classification. The Communications line item is increased to account for an increase in the
monthly charge for Sierra Tel Special Interstate Access (network connections). The department is requesting to
purchase two replacement computers in the Equipment line item which accounts for the increased amount. The
Software line item is increased to purchase Help Desk software. Other adjustments to service/supply line items are
based on actual expenditures in the previous fiscal year and anticipated service demands this fiscal year. No fixed
assets are requested.
Senior Services In-Kind represents the administrative match between the County and Area 12 Agency on Aging and
based on the amount of in-kind services being provided by the County, and is also included in an agreement
approved by the Board of Supervisors. Funding is requested to be transferred to the Land, Building, Improvement
fund (#501) for the repairs to the History Center Porch and Government Center. The Miscellaneous Transfers
represents a request for General Fund support in the newly created Plant Operations fund which was formerly
included in the Facilities Maintenance budget. The funding contribution to the Airport Fund is increased to account
for the managing of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) programs and projects. The Building Department is
again requesting a loan based on projected revenues in the next fiscal year and the estimated year-end fund
balance. No General Fund contribution is requested to correct the Energy Grant.
The contributions to Senior Nutrition and to the Senior Service fund are based on anticipated available federal
revenue and projected year-end fund balances. General Fund support is requested to increase in the Road Fund
Contribution line item based on reduced revenue estimates and service demands. Funding for the Government
Center debt service fund is increased based on the loan payment schedule.
The Transfers In line item represent funding from the State Parole fund (#437) and from the Community Corrections
fund (#432) to offset the increase in the legal services contract due to anticipated increased workload from
representing parole revocations. The Court Appointed Counsel line item is increase increased to account for the
Board approved increase in the legal services agreement. Other adjustments in service/supply line items are based
upon prior fiscal year actual costs and estimated expenses for this fiscal year.
Locate parents absent from the family unit.
? Legally establish paternity.
? Enforce support to the custodial party of the children.
Requested Changes:
Funding levels are requested in amounts based on allocation schedules received from the State Department of Child
Support Services. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved two Permanent Part-Time Child
Support Assistant I/II positions in the previous fiscal year. Additionally, a Child Support Specialist III position retired
in previous fiscal year. The department is requesting to promote the Child Support Office Technician to a Child
Support Specialist II position effective October 2013 and eliminate the Office Technician position. This
reorganization is not in the Requested Budget, but will be brought to the Board in a separate action once analyzed
by the Human Resources/Risk Management department. Additionally, the department will be requesting the
promotion of a Child Support Office Assistant I to a Child Support Office Assistant II position in December 2013. This
promotion will also be brought to the Board in a separate action.
Extra-Help is increased based on the anticipated workload of the Child Support Attorney III position. Group Health
for Retirees is increased based on a new retiree that qualifies for this benefit. Adjustments to service and supply
line items are based on anticipated service demands and available revenue. The Transfers Out line item represents
payment to Human Services for office space.
Funding for this program has been removed from the State Budget. Government accounting practices require that
this budget remain in the Final Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Continue to pursue centralized and secure office space for the entire District Attorney’s Office.
? Obtain approval to reclassify one staff position and the promotion of two staff positions.
? Expand participation of the Drug Court program to include Driving Under Intoxication (DUI) offenders and
others where addiction is one of the primary causes of their criminality.
? Successfully prosecute the California Mining and Mineral Museum robbery case.
? Complete record retention/archive project to including scanning old cases into digital format.
Requested Changes:
No funding is requested from Probation’s CalEMA grant as the grant funding period has ended. Revenue allocated
to District Attorneys and Public Defenders as part of the implementation of AB109 is now budgeted in the Transfers
In line item. Extra-Help is reduced based on actual expenses in the previous fiscal year. Appropriations are
requested to increase in the Professional Services line item to account for the Superior Court now charging for
certified copies of prior arrest records ($25 for each prior and .50 for each additional page). The Blood Alcohol
Testing line item is increased to account for an increase in the number of drug and alcohol cases.
The Department is requesting that the position of Administrative Assistant – District Attorney be reclassified to an
Administrative Analyst, that a Legal Secretary I be promoted to Legal Secretary II, and that a Deputy District Attorney
I be promoted to a Deputy District Attorney II. Funding for these position changes have not been included in the
budget per the budgeting guidelines established by the Board of Supervisors. These position adjustments will be
analyzed by the Human Resources department and brought to the Board for consideration in a separate action.
Attached is a memorandum from the District Attorney regarding the budget requests.
Reduce the trauma victims and witnesses of crime through crisis intervention, court accompaniment, and
referrals to local resources.
? Provide assistance to victims navigating the criminal justice system.
Requested Changes:
Funding from the Community Corrections Partnership (Fund #432) is again included in the Transfers In line item to
offset the cost of an Extra-Help Victim Witness Advocate. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on
available revenue. No Training & Seminar appropriations are requested due to declining revenues.
Upgrade laptop computers and laptop work stations in patrol vehicles.
? Upgrade Briefing Room/County Emergency Operations Center (EOC).
? Upgrade 911 Dispatcher Radio Consoles and Radio Equipment.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from the National Forest Service for narcotic investigations on federal forest lands is reduced
slightly based on anticipated need and on the agreement approved by the Board of Supervisors. The Transfers In
line item represents funding transferred in from the Supplemental Law Enforcement (SLESF) fund - $100,000 and
from the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) fund - $50,000. Funding from SLESF is based on this fund’s
estimated year-end fund balance and offsets the salaries of two Deputy Sheriff positions, while the CCP funding will
offset anticipated Overtime associated with parolees. Money transferred in from Rural Law Enforcement is
requested in an amount necessary to offset the costs of one Sergeant, four Deputy Sheriffs, and one Dispatcher.
Salaries are adjusted to account for merit step increases, new hires at a lower step, and current vacancies. The
Forestry Contract line item represents the salaries of Extra-Help employees used to provide law enforcement
services on federal lands and is offset by revenue (Forestry Contract, Drug Enforcement Agency and BLM).
Overtime is increased based on actual costs in the previous fiscal year and more employees at a higher merit step.
The increase is offset by funding from CCP (Fund #432). Of note is a reduction in the Retirement-Employee line
item as a result of the recently implemented Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA) approved by the State.
The Insurance line item is increased because of costs associated with new and existing workers’ compensation and
liability claims.
Accommodate training needs of newly assigned officers in – basic boating skills, boating under the influence
investigation.
? Continue to maintain patrol of the waterways to ensure a safer environment for boaters and recreational
users.
Requested Changes:
Longevity pay is budgeted for employees who are now eligible to receive this benefit and Post Certificate Pay is
increased to represent employees receiving advanced certificates and the benefit amount associated with these
certificates. The Insurance line item is increased based on workers’ compensation claims experience.
Continue researching and possibly implement pre-fabricated jail cell block with the existing jail compound.
? Continue working with John C. Fremont Medical District to provide enhanced inmate medical services.
? Continue researching and possibly implementing a water storage system capable of retaining 10,000 gallons
of water.
Requested Changes:
Funding from AB-109 (Fund #432) is again budgeted to offset the cost of two Jail Officer positions that allocated last
fiscal year as well as additional funding to recognize the impact AB 109 will have on the jail population. Longevity is
increased to account for employees now being eligible to receive this benefit. Shift Differential was inadvertently
omitted from last year’s budget and now included. Post Certificate Pay is increased based on more employees
qualifying for this benefit. Benefits are reduced as a result of new hires at a lower step and the implementation of the
Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA) that was approved by the State legislature. The Insurance line
item is increased to cover the cost of new and existing Liability claims. Last fiscal year the Building Maintenance line
item accounted for repairing the roof and it is now requested at its historical level.
Successfully recruit and hire Extra-Help Probation Corrections Officers to staff needs of Juvenile Hall.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. Longevity is now budgeted for employees that now qualify
for this benefit. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on upon actual expenses in the previous fiscal
year and anticipated service demands.
Increase electronic monitoring services and other jail alternatives to lower risk offenders to help alleviate jail
overcrowding.
? Decrease probation violations by applying appropriate rehabilitative services and probation supervision
based on the offender’s criminogenic needs.
? Increase services to clients living in Greeley Hill and Coulterville.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from Restitution Rebate and Juvenile Probation is reduced based on actual receipts in the prior
year. Grant funding from the Office of Justice Programs (OJP) is reduced based available grant funds and partially
funds a Deputy Probation Officer I/II position. No revenue is budgeted for the Stimulus grants as these have been
completed. Revenue received from services is reduced based on anticipated service demands and on actual
receipts from the prior year. The Transfers In line item represents funding from AB 109 (Fund 432) and is used to
offset costs associated with implementation of prison realignment. Last fiscal year this funding offset
salaries/benefits for a Deputy Probation Officer I/II which is now budgeted in the SB-678 - Community Corrections
fund (#434). Funding received from the Wrap-Around fund for the cost of a Deputy Probation Officer III is increased
to fully fund the position, while funding from the JJCPA is reduced based on the State’s proposed level of funding for
this program. Salary/benefit line items are adjusted to account for a Deputy Probation Officer I/II now being
budgeted in Fund 434.
The Insurance line item is decreased to account for some workers’ compensation and liability claims no longer being
included in the calculations as they now exceed the seven year calculation period. Monthly maintenance costs are
now included in the Software line item for the new Case Management system. Other service and supply line items
are adjusted based on the previous year’s actual expenses and anticipated need.
The sub-budget unit (001-0224-535) for the JJCPA grant provides partial funding for a Deputy Probation Officer I/II
position.
Complete Bridgeport Fire Station and place it into public service.
? Repair the retaining wall at the Ponderosa Basin Fire Station.
? Update and gain Board approval of the County Emergency Operation Plan (EOP).
? Complete the Local Hazard Mitigation Plan update and gain Board approval of the Plan.
Requested Changes:
Reimbursement received for Fire Marshal services is increased based on anticipated requests for this service. The
Insurance line item is increased based on the costs associated with workers’ compensation claims that are used in
calculating charges to departments. No appropriations are requested in the Grant Match line item as the grant
associated with this match has been completed. County Vehicle expense represents the depreciation/replacement
charges on existing command, patrol vehicles, Rescue 22, and one water- tender, as well as minor maintenance
costs (oil changes, fuel filters, etc.). This line item is increased based on anticipated maintenance costs. The
County Service Area #3 line item accounts for replacement costs associated with the new fire apparatus and will
slightly increase each fiscal year.
The Sub-Budget is offset by the Emergency Management Planning (EMP) grant and funds an Office Assistant I/II
position and an Emergency Planner position. The Equipment line item includes appropriations to purchase new
radios and pagers.
Provide two continuing education workshops on topics of local interest relating to agriculture.
? Implement GIS mapping of invasive noxious weed species throughout the County.
? Implement weights and measures inspection programs.
? Work with State and Federal legislators on increased funding for wildlife services, weights and measures,
and invasive noxious weed species.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is increased to reflect additional and new grant awards, as well as estimated State/Federal allocations
based on anticipated expenses. In anticipation of space becoming available in the existing office, the department
has increased several line items associated with the possibility of occupying this additional space. These include
increases in Communications for additional lines, Maintenance of Equipment for additional computer connections,
Rents & Leases of Building; and Utilities. The Trapper line item is increased in accordance with the recently
approved contract for this service. The purchase of GIS software for invasive weed mapping is reflected in the
Software line item, which is offset by grant funding.
Update Titles 16 and 17 for General Plan consistency.
? Adopt Department Procedures Manual to address customer service expectations.
? Update application packets to packets current, and to make process and application requirements clear and
understandable.
? Continue work on completing the Midpines Community Plan using county staff.
Requested Changes:
Transfers In revenue represents staff time performed on LAFCO job duties. Salary/benefit adjustments include the
filling of the Deputy Planning Director position, the full year cost of the Permanent Part-Time Code Compliance
Technician position that was approved in the previous fiscal year, and the filling of the Assistant Planner position at
lower step than the incumbent. Extra-Help is requested to increase to allow for Senior Planners to assist on complex
projects and save the need to hire consultants. Longevity pay is reduced to account for a reduction in the number of
employees who qualify to receive this benefit. Group Health for Retirees is decreased to reflect the medical premium
costs of retirees who are eligible to receive this benefit. Professional Services includes funding for the continued
legal services of Abbott & Kindermann on specific planning issues. The Code Compliance line item accounted for
the funding that the Board approved for this function during the 12/13 Final Budget Hearings and this funding is now
budgeted in the appropriate salary and benefit line items. Appropriations are requested in the Microfilming line item
for the continued scanning of planning documents that are located in the Government Center Vault and includes a
portion of the funding that the Board approved last fiscal year as not all of the contracted work was able to be
completed. The County Vehicle line item is increased to account for the “old” Building vehicle being transferred to
this department for use by the Code Compliance Technician, and the Fuel line item is increased accordingly. Other
service and supply line item adjustments are based on prior year actual costs and to meet anticipated service
demands.
The Department has requested a reclassification of a Planning Technician position, which is currently under review
by Human Resources. This request will be presented to the Board once the review is complete and no increases
associated with this possible reclassification are included in the budget. In the General Plan sub-budget, the
increase in the Training & Seminars line item is requested to allow for Planning Commission training in mining,
green-house gas emissions, and historic preservation matters, and for mileage reimbursement related to attending
Planning Advisory Committee meetings.
Attached is a memorandum from the Planning Director regarding the requested budget and unmet needs. It should
be noted that the Historical Sites Inventory Update proposal has been withdrawn
No grant revenue or appropriations are requested at this time. Any future grants will be brought to Board for
approval in a separate action. Governmental accounting practices require that this budget be included for two years
after transactions have ceased.
Revenue is requested in the amount of the grant award. Extra-Help is requested to assist with volunteer
retention/recruitment and the remaining funding will be used as training and response stipends for volunteers.
Purchase a new Computer Automated Management System (CAMS) server.
? Cross training for the Administrative Analyst and the newly hired Accountant II positions.
Requested Changes:
Revenue from reimbursable services performed by Pubic Works Administration staff is decreased based on
estimated billable time to be performed. The Insurance line item is reduced based on claims exceeding the sevenyear
period and no longer being used in the calculations for these charges. A replacement computer and new
CAMS server are requested in the Equipment line item. The remaining requested changes are adjustments based
on prior year actual costs and to meet anticipated service demands.
Facilitate a smooth transition between County Health Officers.
? Develop a web-based information page for air quality and educate the public about ozone air pollution in
Mariposa County and Federal mitigation requirements.
? Achieve ninety-percent acceptance of Hepatitis B vaccination among at-risk personnel in the Sheriff, Fire,
and Health departments.
? Develop community-based programs to address childhood and adult obesity, and begin pilot project on this
issue.
Requested Changes:
State and grant revenues are adjusted based upon preliminary estimates from the State and anticipated amounts of
grant awards. Funding received from a new program in the Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) will be used to
purchase tablets for field use. Realignment revenue coming from Vehicle License Fees (VLF) and Sales Tax are
increased based on anticipated receipts and unused funding from the previous fiscal year. No funding is budgeted in
the First 5 Public Health Nurse line item as this program will not receive grant funding this fiscal year. Likewise the
Pacific Bell Settlement has been completed as has the CUPA Electronic Reporting program.
Salary/benefit adjustments include a full year of the Board approved increase in salary for the Health Officer position;
a reduction from full-time to Permanent Part-Time of the Public Health Nurse position; an increase from Permanent
Part-Time to full time of the Registered Nurse position; an additional Secretary position that is offset by grant funding;
and the elimination of a Senior Office Assistant position. Clinic Extra-Help is increased to account for additional
nursing hours to meet anticipated service demands. Out-of-Class pay is no longer requested as this issue has been
resolved with the change in allocations.
No County Medical Services Program fee is anticipated this fiscal year with the implementation the Federal Health
Care Reform. Other various service/supply line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses, available
grant funding, and anticipated service demands.
Begin collection of outstanding debt owed to the County by setting up a recovery system through Probation’s
collection program, establishing reasonable payment terms with clients, and efficient follow up on past due
accounts.
? Coordinate efforts with John C. Fremont Healthcare District in creating a successful Patient Centered
Medical Home (PCMH).
? Create a plan for implementing the court ordered Katie A program by ensuring all youth in foster care are
assessed for mental health needs and developing a plan of action for placement of these youth into higher
levels of care.
? Recruit, train, and retain after-hours crisis workers by working with local colleges for recruitment of eligible
candidates and keep an on-going certified training program available.
Requested Changes:
Because of the implementation of 2011 Realignment, revenue for this program has shifted from State funding to
Realignment funding. Various revenue line items are adjusted to reflect this change. Funding received from the
Individual Education Plan is reduced based on this fund’s estimated available cash.
The Department is requesting to add a Staff Services Analyst position to assist with new reporting and tracking
requirements associated with the Health Care Reform and revised Medi-Cal requirements. This position will be split
between this budget, Alcohol & Drug, and the Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) fund. Additionally, the department
is requesting an additional Mental Health Clinician position based on the anticipated need for counselors going
forward with the Health Care Reform and the possible caseload increase as a result of the Katie A lawsuit associated
with foster care youth. A Mental Health Assistant III position that was previously budgeted in the MHSA fund is now
budgeted here due to changes in funding allocations. Clerical staff positions are now funded in the Human Services
Administration budget for ease of accounting and tracking these include an Office Technician, Senior Office
Assistant, and Office Assistant I/II. Salary and benefits for these adjustments are included in the Requested Budget.
Extra-Help is increased to accommodate a larger pool of social workers to staff the after-hours team. The
Standby/Call Back line item is increased to reflect a change in how this compensation is utilized per an item
approved by the Board in the previous fiscal year. Because of a reduction in available contract providers, the
Professional Services line item is decreased. Telepsychiatry is reduced based on previous year’s actual expenses
and anticipated need for this service. The new line item Contract-Transportation is based on the anticipated need to
transport clients to treatment facilities. Cost Allocation is increased to reflect the services performed by other county
departments for this function. Due to the clerical staff now being budgeted in the Human Services Administration
budget, the amount of funding transferred out for administrative costs is increased.
Create an electronic health record program where medical, mental health, and alcohol and drug information
can be kept for common clients.
? Begin communication with primary care providers to coordinate and eliminate duplication of services and
medications for common clients.
Requested Changes:
Funding received from Drug Medi-Cal reimbursement is now included in this budget. Revenue received from 2011
Realignment is now incorporated into one line item for ease of accounting and is increased based on funding
allocations. Adjustments in salary and benefits include allocating a Staff Services Analyst position that will be split
between this budget, Behavioral Health, and the Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) fund to assist with new
requirements associated with Health Care Reform; and now budgeting the clerical staff positions in the Human
Services Administration budget – Office Technician, Senior Office Assistant, and Office Assistant I/II. No Extra-Help
is requested this fiscal year. Benefits are adjusted based on staffing level changes. The Primary Prevention
Services line item is reduced to correspond with the Board approved contract amount and at a level estimated to
meet service demands. Appropriations are decreased in the Management Information Systems (MIS) contract
based on actual usage of program. The Client Incentives line item represents a replenishing of stock incentive items.
Appropriations are requested in the Alcohol/Drug Inpatient (CAPS) and Echoes line items based on anticipated
clients in these programs. Cost Allocation is increased to reflect more use of county administrative services. To
keep current on new Health Care Reform regulations, the Training and Seminars line item is increased. The
Transfers Out to Human Services Administration is increased based on clerical staff now being budgeted in the
Human Services Administration budget. A Contingency is requested to meet unanticipated needs that may arise
during the Fiscal Year. This budget has no net county cost.
Complete the five-year Child Welfare/Probation System Improvement Plan.
? Implement a number of evidence-based and pilot project efforts to provide better services to families that
come to the attention of Child Welfare Services.
? Implement structural and program changes in Eligibility and Employment Services.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from “traditional” Realignment is increased based on anticipated service demands, while funding
from 2011 Realignment is now budgeted in one line item for ease of accounting. Salary/benefit adjustments include
separating out the Social Worker I-IV and Eligibility Worker I-III positions into several line items for allocation
purposes; and now budgeting the clerical positions in the Human Services Administration budget. The Department
is requesting to add one Staff Services Analyst to assist with reviewing and implementing new regulations and two
Eligibility Worker I/II positions due to the anticipated increase in caseload that will occur with the implementation of
Health Care Reform. Extra-Help and Overtime line items are reduced to account for clerical positions now being
budgeted in Human Services Administration. Group Health for Retirees is increased based on the number of
employees who have retired in the past year and are eligible to receive this benefit. The department is setting aside
appropriations for potential Unemployment and Accrued Benefit costs that may occur during the fiscal year.
Operational expenses in the services/supplies line items are adjusted based on actual costs in the prior fiscal year
and on anticipated service demands. The Training line item represents a training contract with University California
Davis and is budgeted for two additional training days. Per SB 1036 the State now has a fixed Maintenance of Effort
(MOE) for In Home Supportive Services (IHSS) rather than a cost sharing ratio and this is now shown in the IHSS
MOE line item. The department completed the upgrade to the computer system in the previous fiscal year and the
Equipment line item is reduced accordingly. A new vehicle is requested based on increased travel demands. The
increase in the amount of funding being transferred to the Human Services Administration budget is increased to
account for the clerical positions now being budgeted in this unit. Funding received from the Behavioral Health
budget represents reimbursement for on-call staff time during normal work hours, while funding is requested to be
transferred out to Behavioral Health and Alcohol & Drug as reimbursement for work performed in the Child Abuse,
Prevention, Intervention, and Treatment (CAPIT) and CalWORKS. There is no net county cost for this budget.
Because of stricter oversight of payments the department is receiving repayments of benefits from clients that
received them in error. Revenue line items are now included in the budget for these repayments. 2011 Realignment
funding is now budgeted in one line item for ease of accounting. The In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) line item
is reduced based on the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) amount that is included in the Social Services budget. This
budget has no net county cost.
To ensure that both program and fiscal accountability are understood by the members of the Board of
Supervisors, County Administration, and the employees of the Department.
? Encourage professional development of the employees in the Human Services Department.
? Work with community, State, and Federal partners to ensure that the interests of Mariposa County are well
represented.
Requested Changes:
Several revenue line items in the previous Fiscal Year were one-time corrections and are therefore not budgeted.
Funding received from other Human Services departments is adjusted based on the level of administrative/overhead
support provided to the respective departments and to recognize that clerical staff are now budgeted in this
department. Salary/benefits adjustments include the budgeting of clerical staff for all Human Services budgets are
now in this budget; increasing a 0.5 Permanent Part-Time Office Assistant I/II position to full time and adding one
Account Clerk III position. These additional positions are requested to assist in clerical demands caused by
increased caseload as well as the implementation of Health Care Reform.
The Maintenance Building line item is increased to account for service contracts for the HVAC as well as the water
treatment on the HVAC system. To recognize the elimination of the maintenance/replacement charges in the lease
agreement that the Board approved, the Rents/Leases Building is reduced. The Purchased Services line item
accounts for email system, landscaping services, window washing, floor mats, and telephone system. The Cost
Allocation line item is increased based on administrative overhead charges as calculated by the Auditor’s
department. There are also several one-time costs associated with a departmental computer domain, software
licensing, and equipping two vehicles with sheriff radios. Other adjustments to service/supply line items are based
on actual costs from the previous fiscal year. Reimbursements from other Human Services departments for these
expenses are included in the Intrafund Transfers line items as well as in the Transfer In revenue line items. This
budget has no net county cost.
Revenue is reduced based on proposed Federal sequestration cuts. Minor adjustments are requested in service and
supply line items based on prior year actual expenses and to meet anticipated service demands.
Remain a member of the San Joaquin Valley Library System Consortia.
? Partner with schools and community organizations to reach out to citizens that do not yet utilize the Mariposa
County Library system.
Requested Changes:
No revenue is budgeted in the Friends of the Library line item as this organization pays for items purchased by the
Library rather than donating the money. Salary/benefits are adjusted to reflect the Board approved promotion in the
previous fiscal year of a Library Assistant II to a Senior Library Assistant.
Livestock and Natural Resources – conduct a needs assessment to better understand community needs and
develop relevant educational and extension programs to help meet those needs; monitor forage production
on rangelands to track feed availability for livestock.
? Master Gardener – host a successful 2014 statewide conference for approximately 500-600 participants;
continue offering fire safe workshops and handouts.
? 4-H Youth Development – add a fifth club in the Midpines area, host a special luncheon recognizing 64 years
of 4-H in Mariposa County, take part in the statewide 4-H 100 year celebration with floats in local parades.
Requested Changes:
Title III funding in the Transfers In line item used to fund the Master Gardener Coordinator and program costs is
reduced due to the department receiving a two year University of California (U.C.) grant to fund the position. No
Extra-Help is requested as the Master Gardener Coordinator is being funded through the U.C. Minor adjustments to
service and supply line items are based on prior year actual expenses and anticipated service demands.
Obtain grant monies to enhance existing and add new recreational programs.
? Build and strengthen working relationships with outside youth and adult organizations.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. Extra-Help is increased based on anticipated use of the
County’s swimming pools, day camp activities, and to account for administrative staffer two days per week. The
department is requesting to purchase a solar pool cover with appropriations budgeted in the Equipment line item. All
other requested changes are based upon anticipated need and prior year actual costs.
The amount of funding requested to be transferred out to the specific programs is based on available funding.
Revenue from interest earnings is reduced based on the estimated cash balance and declining interest rates.
Funding received from the State is reduced based on estimated allocation amounts. Funding is requested to be
transferred out to the Transit fund to offset operating expenses and the Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased
to balance the fund.
Revenue estimates are based on funding received from the State Rural Planning Assistance program and the State
Transportation Improvement Program: Planning, Programming, and Monitoring Program (STIP-PPM), and are based
on allocation letter received from the State. The Contracts line item is reduced based on estimated funding.
Reimbursement for staff time of the Assistant Public Works Director – Support Services and to the
Engineering/Surveyor budged for engineering services on STIP projects are budgeted in the In-County Services line
item. Requested appropriations in the Administration line item are to account for services provided by Public Works
administrative staff to this budget. The Cost Allocation line item is reduced because employees are no longer
allocated in this budget and therefore this budget requires less administrative overhead. Training and Seminars and
Private Vehicle is increased to allow staff to attend conferences. The Transfers Out line item accounts for the
required Financial Audit and is paid from the Audit budget (001-0103). No Contingency is requested.
Appropriations are increased based on revenue received in prior fiscal years and no recent activity in the fund.
Revenue received from Criminal Fines is reduced based on the previous year’s actual collections and interest
earnings are also reduced based on the estimated cash balance and current interest rates. Revenues received from
various Highway User Taxes (HUTA) are budgeted at the same level pending final allocation determinations by the
State. Money from the Intermodal Surface Transportation Exchange Act (ISTEA)/Exchange is reduced based on
preliminary funding allocations. Revenue in the Forest Reserve line item as the Secure Rural Schools and
Community Self Determination Act is reduced to account for sequestration cuts and estimated funding allocation.
The Transfer In line item represents reimbursement for work performed on the Airport Slurry Seal project (Fund
#615). The Road Department Services line item represents Road staff time on maintenance of Zone of Benefits
(ZOB) and is increased based on revenue received in the prior fiscal year. Miscellaneous Revenue represents fees
received from Road Permits.
Funding from the Local Transportation Claim (#031) is requested in an amount based on available funding. Because
of an overall reduction in Federal/State revenue, the department is requesting an increase in the General Fund
contribution in order to maintain existing services.
One Maintenance Worker III position is temporarily being underfilled at a Maintenance Worker I/II level due to a
personnel issue and is budgeted to be paid from the Maintenance Worker III line item rather than the Maintenance
Worker I/II line item. Extra-Help is reduced to account for the reduction in revenue. Overtime and Standby
appropriations are reduced based on actual costs from the previous fiscal year. The Professional Services line item
formerly accounted for reimbursement for engineering and administrative services, but this expense is now
accounted for in the Administrative Fee line item. Appropriations in the Professional Services – Construction is for
road maintenance yard well testing services. The Cost Allocation line item is reduced based on a reduction in the
need for General Fund services. Other adjustments to service/supply line items are based on prior year actual costs,
to meet anticipated service demands, and to adjust to the reduction in revenue.
Appropriations are budgeted at an amount that corresponds with available revenue. No requests for funding had
been received at the time the budget was prepared.
Revenue is adjusted based on receipts received in the previous fiscal year. Appropriations are adjusted based on
the estimated cost for legal subscription service. Office Expense costs in the previous fiscal year accounted for
special storage boxes for the temporary storage of historical law library books during the remodel of the Courthouse.
Appropriations are requested in amounts that correspond with anticipated revenue and estimated administrative
costs.
Revenue is requested in the amount approved by OES and corresponds with the estimated cost of repairs to the
roads that were damaged during the severe weather of December 2010, and is adjusted based on reimbursements
in the previous fiscal year. Likewise, appropriations are adjusted based on repair work already completed. No
appropriations are budgeted in the Transfers Out line item as this represented funding returned to the General Fund
in the previous fiscal year to correct the original estimate of the cash match required for these projects.
Revenue from Fire Assessments is increased based on prior year actual receipts. The Transfers In amount
represents the County’s contribution from the Tobacco Settlement fund. The Miscellaneous Expense line item
represents available funding for repairs to existing fire stations and is increased based on available revenue. The
Fire Assessment Services line item accounts for reimbursing the Auditor and Tax Collector for their staff time and
associated costs with collecting and managing the fire assessment. Requested funding in the Transfers Out – Debt
Service line item is the payment on the fire engines. The Transfers Out to Capital Improvements in the previous
fiscal year was for the installation of the fire rated pump and generator for the Midpines Fire Station. No funding is
requested at this time to be Transferred Out for capital improvements to fire stations this fiscal year.
Interest earnings are reduced based on current interest rates and available cash balance. The Loan Repayments
line item reflects payment from the Coulterville Service Area sewer bonds. The Office Technician I line item is for
possible staff time provided by Administration in preparing Water Agency agendas and minutes. Professional
Services is increased to recognize the anticipated cost of funding outside legal services relating to the agreement
with the Merced Irrigation District (MID), County Counsel services, as well as the consulting contract with MPUD.
Funding in the Non-Dedicated Funds line item reflects money available for special projects approved by the Board of
Directors.Revenue is adjusted based on actual amounts collected in the prior fiscal year. Appropriations in the Professional
Services line item are for reimbursable work provided by Facilities Maintenance as well as any possible outside
repair service. No Contingency is requested this fiscal year.
Revenue is adjusted based on the prior year’s actual receipts. Funding is requested to be Transferred In from the
Coulterville Utility Capital Fund to offset possible repair/maintenance expenses. Service and supply line items are
adjusted based on anticipated service needs and available funding. The Special Fees line item includes funding for
Title 22 (a regulatory compliance) and annual fees charged by the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB)
and the California Department of Public Health. The Bond Redemption represents the loan repayment to the Water
Agency fund. No Funding is requested to be transferred out to the Coulterville Utility Service Fund and no
Contingency is requested this fiscal year.
Miscellaneous Revenue represents money received from leasing county owned property for cattle grazing.
Appropriations for improvements to the existing horse trails and operating expenses are requested in amounts that
correspond with available revenue and estimated service demands.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts and to recognize reduced property values. The line item
Leachate/Septic Haul Fees accounts for charges collected from the County’s Landfill for accepting and disposing of
leachate and will vary depending on the amount of rainfall. Appropriations in the Maintenance Equipment line item
are increased to balance the fund and are available for possible maintenance/repair needs. The Laboratory
Expense line item is increased to account for new testing regulations. Professional Services represents charges
from the Plant Operator budget for maintenance costs. No funding is requested to be Transferred Out to the Don
Pedro Sewer Utility Capital fund.
Revenues are adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available
revenue and anticipated service demands. The Department is requesting to rent an 80-foot man-lift to for the
possible need of repairing/replacing street lights, which is reflected in the Rents/Leased Equipment line item. No
new extensive lighting work anticipated at this time. Contingency is requested in an amount necessary to balance
the fund.
Reimbursement to Public Works staff for maintenance work is reflected in the Professional Services line item.
Funding is again being requested to be Transferred Out to the Mariposa Pines Utility Capital Fund.
Appropriations are adjusted based on the amount of available funding, with the Professional Services line item
representing costs associated with the bulk item pick up program.

Revenue amounts are adjusted based on actual amounts collected in the prior fiscal year, current interest rates, and
anticipated delinquencies. The Transfers In line item represents funding being transferred in from the Yosemite
West Capital Fund (#545) to help offset maintenance/repairs costs. The majority of appropriation line items are
adjusted based on prior year actual expenses and anticipated service level demands. The Maintenance Equipment
– Roads is reduced as maintenance for the snowcat will be charged to the sewer division. Due to new testing
regulations the Laboratory Expense – Sewer line item is increased. The Equipment – Sewer line item represents the
purchase of a diaphragm pump and a printer. The Building – Sewer line item in the previous fiscal year reflected
the costs associated with the Board approved storage container. Based on projected expenses relating to
maintenance the Maintenance Equipment – Water is increased and the Professional Services – Water reflects the
continuing costs for the services of Provost & Pritchard. No fixed assets are requested this year and no funding is
being requested to be Transferred Out to the Yosemite West Utility Capital fund.
Residual funding is requested in the Unclassified line item for use by the Sheriff for law enforcement purposes
related to illegal drug investigations.
Residual funding is requested in the Unclassified line item for use by the Sheriff for law enforcement purposes
related to criminal investigation activities.
Revenue from the State Child Abuse Prevention grant is budgeted in the Family Preservation line item.
Appropriations requested in the Family Resource Programs are for child abuse prevention activities, while the
Transfers Out line item represents funding transferred to the Children’s Trust Fund and to the Social Services budget
for reimbursement for staff time spent working on this program.
Revenue is requested based upon allocation schedules distributed by the State. No appropriations are requested in
the Miscellaneous Expense line item based on available funding. Funding being transferred out to the Sheriff’s
operating budget helps to offsets the cost of two Deputy Sheriff positions and is reduced from the previous fiscal year
based on the State’s funding allocation. Likewise the amount of funding being transferred to the Jail and District
Attorney operating budgets is also reduced.
No grant revenue is anticipated in this fiscal year. Appropriations are requested in amounts that reconcile with
revenue received in previous fiscal years. The Construction line item reflects available grant funds for qualified
housing rehabilitation projects.
Purchase new software for the client data base that will interact with the State system and provide better
automation of information and claiming processes.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is adjusted based on estimated unexpended 2013 grant funding and anticipated grant funding to be
received this fiscal year. New grant revenue for the specifically for the purchase of the new software and computer
upgrade is now budgeted. Funding in the previous fiscal year in the Transfers In line item was for reconciliation of
grant funds, and is not needed this fiscal year. The salary line items represent county employees but are in
categories that correspond to the reporting requirements of the grants, with the exception of the Weatherization
Worker and Account Clerk III classification. The Account Clerk III is an existing position that is now partly being
allocated here for grant tracking purposes. Extra-Help hours are reduced based on anticipated weatherization
projects. The Equipment and Software line items represent the purchase and upgrade of computers and software
for interaction with the State system and is offset by grant funding. Other appropriations for services and supplies
are adjusted based on the level of grant funding and estimated service demands.
No new revenue is estimated to be received this fiscal year. Remaining appropriations budgeted in the appropriate
line item to meet estimated service demands.
Continued community outreach growth through participation on various committees.
? Market department programs through outreach, updating brochures, participation and collaboration with
other community entities.
Requested Changes:
The requested General Fund contribution is a slightly reduced amount based on the reallocation of clerical staff to
other departments under Community Services. Salaries/benefits are adjusted to reflect more of the clerical staff time
being charged to the Transit fund. Other requested changes in appropriations are based on prior year actual costs
and anticipated service demands.
Grow participation in the congregate and home delivered meal services.
? Continued community outreach growth through participation in various committees.
C-1: Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP) are
reduced based on anticipated sequestration cuts. The General Fund contribution is requested to decrease due to
new hires at a lower step and a reallocation of clerical staff, which has reduced salary/benefit costs. Extra-Help is
reduced as the extended medical leave matter has been resolved. The Insurance line item is increased to account
for workers’ compensation claims experience. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on prior year actual
expenses and anticipated service demands.
C-2: Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP) are
reduced based on anticipated sequestration cuts. Other revenue adjustments are based on prior year actual
receipts and anticipated donation levels. The General Fund contribution is requested to increase based upon the
estimated year-end fund balance and available revenue. Extra-Help is reduced as the extended medical leave
matter has been resolved. The Insurance line item is increased to account for workers’ compensation claims
experience. All other adjustments to service and supply line items are based on prior year actual expenses.
Restaurant: Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP)
are reduced based on anticipated sequestration cuts. Voucher Reimbursement is reduced based on prior year
actual receipts and reduction in the number of meals served. The General Fund contribution is slightly decreased
based on anticipated service demands. The Voucher Reimbursement appropriations line item is reduced based on a
reduction in the number of meals anticipated to be served. Adjustments to other service and supply line items are
based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands.
The Federal government has again extended this funding source and revenue is requested at a reduced amount
based on the sequestration cuts and estimated funding allocations. Interest is reduced based on the available cash
balance and current interest rates. Appropriations are adjusted based on the remaining funding available and the
Transfers Out line item represents the continued funding of the operational costs associated with the Master
Gardener program in the Cooperative Extension budget.
No new revenue is requested based on anticipated project development needs. All available funding is budgeted in
the Professional Services line item for possible project development needs.
This fund was established in Fiscal Year 2007/08 when the development application was submitted and there has
been limited project work to date on this project. No new revenue is requested and all available funding is budgeted
in the Professional Services line item for legal advisement on the proposed project.
This project has been inactive and all remaining funding has been transferred out to the Planning Department for
reimbursement of staff time on the project. No revenue or appropriations are requested. Governmental accounting
standards require that this fund be included in the budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
No new revenue is requested and all available funding is budgeted in the Professional Services line item for possible
project development needs.
This fund was closed out in the previous fiscal year. Governmental accounting standards require that this fund be
included in the budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Revenue is requested based on preliminary State allocation. Appropriations are requested to be Transferred Out to
the Probation operating budget in a corresponding amount.
The Transfers Out line represents funding for one Sergeant, four Deputy Sheriffs, and one Dispatcher position in the
Sheriff’s operating budget. The Transfers Out line is requested in a reduced amount based on new hires being at a
lower step and with different benefit calculations. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is requested in an amount
necessary to balance the fund.
Revenue is requested based on preliminary calculations provided by the State and the School District. A portion of
the available funding is requested to be Transferred Out to the Behavioral Health budget for eligible program costs,
while remaining funding is budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line item in order to balance the fund.
Extra-Help is used to assist in the collection of DNA evidence and remaining funding is appropriated in the
Miscellaneous Expense line item for possible future expenses related to this program and to balance the fund.
Revenue is reduced based on prior year actual receipts and appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available
funding.
A portion of this funding is for Extra-Help that provides maintenance/repair services for the Jail facility. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item is adjusted based on available funding and to balance the fund.
Revenue amounts are requested based upon preliminary projections provided by the State and Federal
Governments, and appropriations are adjusted accordingly. The Transfers Out line represents funding to the
Probation department for assistance with carrying out Title IV requirements.
Appropriations are adjusted based on the estimated year-end fund balance. The line item Discount on Tax Due is to
cover shortages of less than $10 on tax bills.
Revenue is reduced based on actual receipts from the prior fiscal year. Appropriations are reduced to correspond
with available revenue and the negative year-end fund balance.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections and appropriations are adjusted based on available
revenue and estimated year-end fund balance.
Interest is reduced based on the estimated cash balance and current interest rates. The Miscellaneous Expense line
item is increased based on the estimated year-end fund balance and available revenue. The Transfers Out line
represents the County’s contribution to the County Service Area (CSA) #3.
Requests for reimbursement must be made by a certain date in order to be included in the State Budget, and for
several budget cycles this deadline has been missed resulting in a negative cash balance. Staff in the Auditor’s
Department is correcting this issue. Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to reimburse the County for
costs occurred in previous fiscal years, while the estimated costs for the storage of the vehicle and defense records
for this fiscal year are included in the Miscellaneous Expense line item.
LAFCO fees are adjusted based upon anticipated studies in Lake Don Pedro and Mariposa Public Utility District
(MPUD). The Professional Services line item represents costs associated with Municipal Service Review (MSR) and
SOI boundary studies for the Lake Don Pedro Community Service District, and annexation/reorganization proposals.
Transfers Out to the Planning operating budget is to account for staff time on any annexation proposals.
Revenue and appropriations are budgeted based on preliminary funding estimates from the Federal and State
Governments and to meet anticipated service needs.
Funding is again requested to be Transferred In from the Family Preservation (#328) fund to meet the required
minimum funding level for community based child abuse prevention needs and support the Child Abuse Prevention
Council (CPAC) activities. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated yearend
fund balance.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections. Appropriations are budgeted in the Miscellaneous
Expense line item for future needs of the department and are based on available funding and the estimated year-end
fund balance.
This fund has been closed, but governmental accounting practices require that this fund be included in the budget for
two years after transactions have ceased.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. The Medical Services Providers line item represents
funding available to local physicians for emergency care provided to the indigent and for which the physician is
personally liable. Appropriations in the Hospital line item are distributed to John C. Fremont Health Care District
based on a legislative formula for unreimbursed medical services provided to the indigent. The Transfers Out line
item reimburses the Health budget for the management of this fund.
Revenue from Interest earnings and recordings are adjusted based on current interest rates and actual receipts from
the previous fiscal year. The Transfer In line item represents a partial repayment from the Social Security Truncation
fund (#419) for the purchase of software to remove the first five digits of social security numbers from recorded
documents and create a “public record” document. Appropriation adjustments are based on available revenue and
the estimated year-end fund balance.
Appropriations in the Miscellaneous Expense line item represent unspent funding from the previous fiscal year that
will be returned to the State as stipulated in the agreement. The Transfers Out line item reflects money available to
the Health operating budget for tobacco cessation education program costs and is adjusted to correspond with
available revenue.
Revenue received from Interest earnings is reduced based on current interest rates. The Professional Services line
item contains appropriations to continue with the preservation of historical records and in the Equipment line item the
department is requesting to replace two existing computers that are used for recording purposes. In order to comply
with AB 1168 (Social Security truncation) the department is requesting to purchase software for microfilm conversion
back to 1980.
Revenue is increased in anticipation of gaining Board approval for a fee increase. Appropriations are adjusted
based prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands. The Transfers Out line item represents funding
being transferred out to the Treasurer/Tax Collector budget to partially offset the cost of tax billing documents. Other
appropriation adjustments are based on available revenue and anticipated service demands.
Funding received from sales tax is slightly increased based on actual receipts through the first three-quarters of the
previous fiscal year, while funding received from vehicle license fee (VLF) is reduced based on receipts received to
date. The County Medical Services Program (CMSP) VLF represents the amount withheld by the State to fund this
program. Appropriations in the Transfers Out line items are to offset expenses in the Health operating budget and
are adjusted to correspond with available revenue.
Managed Care revenue that was previously budgeted directly in the Behavioral Health budget has now been
included in the 2011 Realignment and is accounted for in this fund. Appropriations are adjusted accordingly to
account for this revenue.
Revenue is increased to account for caseload growth owed to the County for previous fiscal years that the State is
now going to pay. Appropriations being transferred out to the Social Services, Social Service Programs,
Wraparound, and In-Home Supportive Services are increased accordingly. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is
increased to balance the fund.
Requested revenue represents a State grant provided by the Federal government for bioterrorism/public health
emergency preparedness activities. The Miscellaneous Expense line item reflects interest earnings and residual
grant funds from the previous grant award. The Transfers Out line item transfers available grant funding to the
Health operating budget for eligible costs associated with the bioterrorism/public health emergency program.
The PHN grant was not awarded this fiscal year. Miscellaneous Expense line item represents accumulated interest
earnings and is used to balance the fund. Funding being transferred out to the Health operating budget is in an
amount equal to the grant award.
Funding from donations received during the Gambusia (mosquito fish) distribution day are requested at the same
level as the previous fiscal year and appropriations for expenses related to the distribution day (media, bags, fish)
are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
The fund has been separated into three sub-budget units for accounting tracking purposes: 410-0436 will account
for Children’s and Adult’s System of Care; 410-0437 will account for Prevention Education and Intervention; 410-
0438 will account for Workforce Education, and Training and Innovation. Due to this change in accounting, revenue
and appropriations are all adjusted. As approved by the Board during the 2012-13 Mid-Year review, Mental Health
Services Act (MHSA) revenue is now budgeted in one line item, rather than being broken out as it is received in one
payment from the State. The Transfers In line item represents funding from the Mental Health Realignment Fund
(#393) that will be used to fund core services. Adjustments to Salary/Benefit line items includes budgeting all clerical
staff in the Human Services Administration budget and adding a Staff Services Analyst position that will be budgeted
in Alcohol & Drug, Behavioral Health, and this fund.
Revenue is adjusted based on estimated allocations from the State and Federal governments which are now using
the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for calculation purposes. The Transfers In amount reflects the County’s
MOE and is from Social Services Realignment (#394). The IHSS Advisory expenses were previously budgeted in
the Social Services budget but are now accounted for in this fund. The payment of the County’s MOE to the State is
now budgeted in the PA Admin MOE line item. The amount of funding transferred to Social Services is increased to
match the current contract level. Other adjustments are based on prior fiscal year actual amounts and anticipated
program needs.
Identify computer software that integrates collections with probation victim/fine/fees case management
system.
? Increase victim restitution payments through a more coordinated partnership with Probation. Officers.
Requested Changes:
Revenue from Collections is reduced as the Superior Court is now performing their own cost recovery system “inhouse.”
Funding is now being transferred in from the Community Corrections Program (AB 109) based on work and
collection efforts related to this program. Due to the Superior Court now performing their own collection services, no
Extra-Help is requested and various appropriation line items are reduced as well. There is no net-county cost in this
program.
Fully implement new case management system.
? Complete risk assessments on all juveniles placed on probation.
Requested Changes:
Grant funding is received in advance for the next fiscal year and this is reflected in the Miscellaneous Expense line
item. Appropriations are requested in the Professional Services line item in order to contract for possible counseling
services. Overhead for reimbursement of administrative costs is again requested as an allowable expense of the
grant and is reduced based on the amount of support provided to this function. Other appropriation line items are
adjusted based on prior year actual costs.
Revenue is requested based on the estimated number of recorded documents the department will receive this fiscal
year and appropriations are budgeted accordingly. The Transfers Out represents available funding to be transferred
to the Recorders Modernization fund for reimbursement of the truncation software purchase.
Revenue reflects an anticipated payment from the fueling station as reimbursement for the clean up procedures.
Appropriations are requested in amounts necessary to continue with the clean up, the monitoring at the Airport
performed by a contract with American Geological. The need for potable water at the Public Works yard is expected
to end once the well comes on line.
The APSA and ER grant programs have been completed and no revenue is requested this fiscal year. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item reflects interest earnings and unspent grant money from the previous fiscal year.
The Transfers Out line items represents funding that will be transferred to the Health operating budget to offset the
costs of purchasing computer equipment that will be used in the field by environmental health staff assigned to the
CUPA program.
Funding in the Miscellaneous Revenue line item represents repayments from the Social Security Administration and
is based on actual receipts from the previous fiscal year. Funding adjustments in the Transfers In line items are
based on caseload growth, available funding, and 2011 Realignment guidelines. Salary/benefits are adjusted due to
a reallocation of certain position based on job responsibilities and to reflect the transfer of clerical staff to the Human
Services Administration budget. Various service/supply line items are adjusted based prior year actual costs and on
estimated service demands. The Cost Allocation line item reflects greater use of general government staff time since
the program has now been fully functional for two years. The Transfers Out to Human Services Administration
represents this fund’s portion of overhead and administrative services. The Transfers Out – Probation line item
provides funding to the Probation budget for a Deputy Probation Officer III assigned to this program. A Contingency
is requested to balance the fund and for possible unanticipated program expenses.
Revenue is adjusted based on the respective grants and their timelines. Appropriations are adjusted to match
available grant funds and are for the services provided by VSBDC, reimbursement of county staff time, funding
available for loans to qualifying Mariposa County businesses, and promotional and operational expenses. For
tracking and reporting purposes, this funding will be transferred out to the Microenterprise Assistance Loan fund
(#425) once a loan has been approved.
Revenue reflects the interest and principal on several business assistance loans that have been awarded. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item represents funding received as loan repayments and is available to the County for
eligible program activities.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item reflects unspent funding from the previous fiscal year that will returned to the
State, and the Transfers Out line items represent available funding to reimburse the Health operating budget for
allowable expenses.
The County Librarian is requesting to purchase an Overdrive Platform in order to allow the use of Kindle e-books at
the Library at an approximate cost of $3,000.
Revenue is requested in an amount as provided in a State formula. Appropriations are requested in specific line
items to carry out the requirements of AB 109 as recommended by the Executive Committee of the Community
Corrections Partnership and approved by the Board of Supervisors. The Extra-Help line item will fund 920 hours of
a Deputy Probation Officer I/II, and Overtime will offset costs associated with Deputy Probation Officers and Deputy
Sheriffs for performing Probation Enforcement Apprehension Team (PEAT) operations. Several new service/supply
line items are established related to parolee transition costs back into the community. The Board approved contract
with Mountain Crisis Services is included in the Professional Services line item, and no funding is requested in the
Rents/Leases Building as this cost has now been included in the contract with Mountain Crisis Services. New
software is anticipated to be purchased this fiscal year for the purpose of providing greater statistical information as
required by the State. Fixed assets include a trailer for the Jail and a van that will be used for violators assigned
community service in lieu of jail time. The Transfers Out line item reflects funding being transferred out to the Jail
budget to offset the additional Jail Officer positions that the Board approved in the previous fiscal year, to Probation,
Victim Witness, Revenue and Recovery, Sheriff, and Indigent Defense, to offset costs associated with the additional
job duties created by this legislation.
Revenue is requested in line items based on the preliminary State allocations and revenue formulas for specific
programs, and is now consolidated for ease of accounting. Funding is budgeted in specific line items to be
transferred out to the respective Human Services operating budgets as eligible expenses are recorded and reported.
Funding being transferred to one budget is consolidated into one line item.
Increase electronic monitoring and other jail alternatives to lower risk offenders to help alleviate jail
overcrowding.
? Increase services to clients living in Greeley Hill and Coulterville.
? Increase victim services and victim restitution payments.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is requested based on State allocations of the grant awards to counties. Adjustments to salary/benefits
include the Deputy Probation Officer I/II position that was approved by the Board during the Mid-Year review in the
previous fiscal year. Extra-Help is also requested to assist with the anticipated workload. Appropriations are
requested in specific line items to carry out the evidence based program requirements. In the previous fiscal year
the Transfers Out line item represented funding being transferred to the Probation budget to offset the cost of a fulltime
Probation Officer I/II position that was assigned to this grant program. This is no longer needed with the newly
allocated position now being budgeted in this fund.
Revenue is requested based on grant awarded by the State. The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents
interest earnings and prior fiscal year unspent grant funds. The Transfers Out line item reflects funding available to
be transferred to the Health operating budget once eligible grant expenses are recorded.
Revenue is requested based on the State allocated grant award. The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents
prior fiscal year unspent grant funds and to balance the fund. Other appropriation line items are adjusted based on
operating expenses related to this program.
Revenue is requested based on the State allocation funding schedule. All available funding is requested to be
transferred out to the District Attorney and Indigent Defense budgets, to offset costs related to parole revocations.
This grant has been completed. Remaining residual funding is requested to be transferred out to General Purpose
Revenue in order to close out this fund.
Revenue is requested based on the State grant award and appropriations are budgeted accordingly for eligible
expenses related to the program.
Revenue is requested in the estimated amount necessary to provide sufficient court security. Appropriations are
requested based on the cost of the assigned Deputy Sheriff and the estimated cost of the Extra-Help Bailiffs.
This is a reimbursable grant and revenue is requested based on the amount that has not yet been invoiced.
Appropriations are requested based on remaining available grant funding.
Two new repair projects are requested in Fund 501 – they are drainage repairs to the Government Center and the
History Center Porch. Both of these funds require General Fund support and this is shown in the Transfers In line
item A small amount of residual funding from now completed projects is requested to be returned to the General
Fund in the Transfers Out line item. The Courthouse Construction fund – 502 is adjusted based actual revenue
receipts received in the previous fiscal year and the possible remodel of the downstairs courtroom. Residual funding
remaining in the Mariposa Creek Project - #505 is requested to be transferred to General Purpose Revenue. The
Public Transportation Modernization Improvement and Service Account (PTMISA) Fund #507 accounts for grant
revenue and includes appropriations for a generator at the Fleet building that was approve by the Board with the
2011-12 Mid-Year review and for restrooms at the Park & Ride which were approved by the Board with Resolution
LTC 12-5. Revenue and appropriations in the County Road Projects – Fund #511 are adjusted to account for State
and Federal funding received for specific road projects. Included in this fund are the State Transportation
Improvement Program (STIP), the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for
Users (SAFETEA-LU) projects such as Mt. Bullion Cutoff, Bullion Street, Mariposa Creek Signage, Oak Grove
Bridge, and Triangle Road. Fund #512 – County Bridge Replacement is newly established to specifically account for
revenue associated with bridge replacement repairs, which were previously budgeted in the Road Fund.
Full funding and appropriations associated with Coulterville Drainage Project are budgeted in Fund #513.
Construction has been completed on the Don Pedro Fire Station and remaining unspent funding in Fund #517 is
requested to be transferred to the Bridgeport Fire Station Fund (#521). No revenue or appropriations are requested
in the Fish Camp Fire Station – Fund #518 or the Midpines Fire Station – Fund #519 as these projects have been
completed. Remaining available funding is budgeted in the appropriate line item for the construction of the
Bridgeport Fire Station in Fund #520. Funding is requested to be transferred out of the Coulterville Utility Capital
Fund - #530 and into the Coulterville Service Area fund for repair/maintenance costs. Additional funding is
requested to Transferred In to the Mariposa Pines Utility Capital Fund - #534 from the Mariposa Pines operating
budget and appropriations are adjusted to reflect this additional revenue. Available funding in the Yosemite West
Utility Capital Fund #535 is requested to be Transferred Out to the Yosemite West Maintenance budget for repairs to
the waste-water treatment plant.
Revenue from construction permits is increased slightly based on anticipated projects occurring during the fiscal
year. Due to building activity still not generating sufficient revenue, the department is anticipating again requiring
General Fund support to offset a negative fund balance. Extra-Help is requested to increase to assist with clerical
duties and to continue with the scanning project. The Professional Services line item represents the anticipated use
of contracted plan check services.
The Department is requesting to change the Extra-Help Development Services Technician to 0.70 Permanent Part-
Time, and to allow for an Extra-Help Building Inspector. These requested increases are not included in the budget.
Attached is a memorandum from the Building Director regarding the budget.
Complete the redesign of the Landfill.
? Install a bailer system and support equipment to save on shipping cost and increase the value of our
commodities.
? Increase diversion by adding animation to the sorting process.
Requested Changes:
Fund 601 – Solid Waste Operations: Funding from a Department of Conservation grant is anticipated this fiscal year.
No E Waste revenue is anticipated this fiscal year. Money received through the California Redemption Value (CRV)
program – certain recyclable beverage containers, is increased based on prior year actual receipts.
Maintenance Equipment and Maintenance Building are both increased to account for anticipated repair work on
heavy equipment and the Compost Facility. The Professional Services line item is reduced based on anticipated
contracts and administrative services provided by Public Works Administration. The Leachate Hauling line item is
reduced as this is not being done through self- hauling. Leachate Disposal represents the costs of leachate
dumping fees at the Don Pedro Wastewater Treatment Plant. In the previous fiscal year, the department was able
to obtain free soil but this will is not anticipated to be available this fiscal year. Cost Allocation is increased based on
General Fund administrative services provided to this department. Equipment purchases include: a water pump,
and roll off bins for placement at the Transfer Stations. Software reflects the purchase of CRV Interface. Funding
for the possible purchase of land is again included. The Transfers Out represents funding to the newly established
Solid Waste Heavy Equipment fund to accumulate funding for the eventual replacement of the equipment. The
Retirement of Long Term Debt represents the principal and interest payments on the USDA Loan for the Compost
Facility. The Capital Lease Principal represents payments on the bulldozer, roll-off truck, and compactor.
The costs to operate the Transfer Stations are shown as sub-budgets. Staff has placed county bins at the Transfer
Stations and is now performing our own hauling, resulting in a decrease in the Transportation Hauling line items.
Refuse received at the Fish Camp and Hornitos Transfer Stations is minimal, and currently Solid Waste is picking up
the material in a pick-up truck. Other appropriation line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenditures
and anticipated service demands.
Fund 602 – Solid Waste Closure: There are no requested changes to this fund.
Implementation of the transportation recording tool created by Nelson/Nygaard for recording data used for
CalTrans reports, cost analysis, and cost allocation plans to Area 12 Agency on Aging.
? Reorganization of the Community Services Department with the implementation of the Mobility Management
Program approved by the Local Transportation Commission.
Requested Changes:
No Interest earnings are requested based on a low cash balance. Funding received through the Section 5311 is
increased based on preliminary allocations received from the State, while funding received from Area 12 Agency on
Aging is reduced due to sequestration cuts. Transit Fares are reduced based on prior year actual receipts. Revenue
from the Local Transportation Claim is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund. Adjustments to
salary/benefits include a pending reclassification of an Office Assistant II to a Secretary and with a greater allocation
of staff time assigned to this fund. Other appropriations adjustments are based on prior year actual costs and to
meet anticipated service demands.
The Miscellaneous Revenue line item reflects the payment on the long term debt of the hangars that is collected by
the FBO through hangar lease payments. The Transfer In amount represents the General Fund contribution to
account for retiree costs, airport insurance, and service contracts associated with the weather station/radio systems,
and basic maintenance requirements/costs of the runways which are still a county responsibility. The General Fund
contribution is increased from the previous fiscal year based on the estimated year-end fund balance and the FBO
no longer providing a monetary contribution to the Fund. The Group Health for Retirees is increased based on the
medical benefits a retiree is eligible to receive. No appropriations are requested in the Professional Services line
item for consultant services. The Equipment line item represents replacement runway lights. The retirement of the
long term represents the loan repayment on hangars.
This project has been completed and remaining appropriations are requested to be transferred to the Special
Aviation Fund - #613 for use on specific airport projects.
Revenue is requested in the State allocated amount as well as the remaining unused money from Fund 611 in the
Transfers In line item. Appropriations are budgeted to correspond with expected revenue. This money may be used
for runway and building maintenance, including the runway painting project. The department is requesting
appropriations in the Professional Services line item for a consultant to assist with Federal Aviation Agency (FAA)
regulations and issues, as well as continuing to work on the Airport Master Plan and Capital Improvement Plan.
This grant project has been completed and no grant revenue is requested. Residual grant funding is requested to be
transferred out to the Road Fund to offset a portion of unreimbursed expenses incurred on this project.
Revenue is requested in amount based on estimated of staff time and operating expenses from the previous fiscal
year. A General Fund contribution is requested until such time as costs are known and rates charged to the Special
Districts are revised. Salary and benefits reflect the costs associated with the Plant Operator position and two
Maintenance Worker III positions assigned to this division. Service and supply line items are estimated costs for
operating the division.
Train staff on the new technology in the newer vehicles and equipment.
? Begin replacing Roads Heavy Equipment to comply with Air Resources Board (ARB) requirements.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from Interest earnings is reduced based on current interest rates. Revenue received from
departments for maintenance on vehicles is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. The revenue line item
titled Accidents represents reimbursement from insurance companies for vehicle repairs. Non-Fleet Policy Charges
reflects reimbursement from departments for additional equipment (trailer hitches, fuel tanks, etc.) that are requested
on certain vehicles. A number of appropriation line items are adjusted based on available revenue and anticipated
service demands. The Transfers Out line item represents the department’s payment on the Fleet Maintenance Shop
building loan.
During the Mid-Year review funding was transferred into this fund from the Solid Waste fund. Another contribution of
the same amount is included in the Transfers In line item and appropriations are adjusted accordingly.
Depreciation and replacement charges are requested for the command and patrol vehicles, and one water tender,
and are adjusted based on the depreciation schedule. The CSA#3 Replacement line item accumulates
depreciation/replacement charges for the new equipment that was purchased with County Service Area #3 funding.
The funding for these line items is budgeted in appropriation line items in the Fire operating budget. The Vehicles
line item reflects accumulated and new funding for future replacement purchases of fire apparatus.
Replacement and Depreciation line items are adjusted based on existing county vehicles/equipment and the
estimated cost to replace these vehicles. A list of the requested replacement vehicles and heavy equipment is
attached.
Fund 705 – General Insurance: Revenue and appropriations are adjusted to reflect the reimbursement for insurance
premiums, Group Health for Retirees costs, and Unemployment charges. The Special Insurance line item was
increased last fiscal year to balance the fund with the actual year-end fund balance and is requested at the historical
level.
Fund 706 – Workers’ Compensation: Revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for
premiums and workers’ compensation medical and administrative costs. Appropriations in the Workers’
Compensation are increased based on actual costs incurred in the previous fiscal year. No appropriations are
requested in the Special Insurance line item to offset increases in other line items. An audit on our insurance funds
determined that the County’s Workers’ Compensation fund is under-funded. To correct this situation, the reserve in
the Workers’ Compensation fund is requested to be increased at a slightly greater amount than from the previous
fiscal year.
Fund 707 – Liability: Revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for premiums and
liability claims. To set aside sufficient funding for existing and potential claims the Reserve is requested to be
increased as this is the funding that is used once claims are filed and begin to accrue expenditures.
Revenue is adjusted based on anticipated receipts and funding transferred in from the Lake Don Pedro Waste Water
Treatment Plant Bond Reserve fund and appropriations are budgeted accordingly.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections, and appropriations are requested to be transferred out to
the Lake Don Pedro Waste Water Treatment Plant Bond fund.
