Revenue received from Property Taxes is increased based on current estimates of property tax values. The Current
Unsecured property taxes are reduced based on declining houseboat values and the change in mining claim
assessments. The delinquency rate has declined and revenues for delinquent payments and penalties are decreased to
reflect this current trend. The Supplemental revenue line item is budgeted in a positive amount as the County is
beginning to see a slight increase in assessments. In-Lieu Vehicle License Fee (VLF) and Sales Tax represents the
State’s Triple Flip (property tax revenue from the schools and special districts in lieu of vlf and sales tax) per SB 1096
guidelines and are adjusted based on estimates from the State. The County’s Sales Tax is estimated to increase as
business activity is remaining steady. Revenue received from Property Transfer Tax exceeded the previous fiscal year’s
budgeted projections due to the sale of several local businesses, which is not anticipated to occur this fiscal year.
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue is increased based on current receipts, but this source of revenue can be
volatile due to uncontrollable factors that could affect this revenue stream as happened with the federal government
closure in 2014 and current drought issues. Revenue from Franchise fees, Criminal fines and other penalties are
adjusted based on current receipts. Interest earnings are increased based on current receipts associated with a higher
cash balance. The SB90 mandate reimbursement is based on information from the State regarding payment of past
claims. Payment In-Lieu Taxes (PILT) authorized by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (PL 110-343) is
budgeted at the amount estimated by the Federal Government. Cost Allocation is decreased based on the State
approved Cost Plan calculations for Non-General funds and Federal/State funded programs that use county resources.
Revenue received from the administration of supplemental tax assessment processes is expected to increase slightly
based on the increase in the number of assessments being processed. Penalties and fines received from Superior
Court are adjusted based upon estimated revenues. Transfers In in the previous fiscal year recognized the close out of
several Capital Improvement funds that had originally received General Fund support. The Revenue Stabilization
represents funds received from Social Services 1991 Realignment funds. The Transfers In – Yosemite West in the
previous fiscal year represented the repayment of a loan in full.
The estimated year end General Fund Balance is requested at an increased amount based on estimates for TOT
receipts. The General Fund Designation in the previous fiscal year represented the Board approved increase in the
General Reserve to meet the minimum required amount. No increase in the General Reserve is requested this Fiscal
Year.
Changes in salaries and benefits reflect recently concluded negotiations and the reclassification of the Clerk of the
Board to department head status. Group Health for Retirees is increased to account for former employees that are
eligible and elect to receive this benefit. The Insurance line is decreased based on the calculations used to determine
department charges. The Membership line item is increased to recognize revised membership dues. Appropriations in
the Professional Services line item are requested in order to begin the project of preserving historical hand written Board
minutes. Publications/Legal Notice, County Vehicle and Copier Expense line items are reduced based on prior year’s
expenditures. The Equipment line item represents the possible purchase of miscellaneous equipment items and the
Software line item reflects the annual cost of the MinuteTraq Agenda hosting, and other miscellaneous software needs.
Individual travel line items for Board members reflect the anticipated costs associated with attending various
conferences throughout the fiscal year. The New Supervisors Training has been completed therefore no funding is
requested this year.
Work closely with new Department Heads to provide direction and assistance as needed.
? Working in coordination with Human Resources, assure that labor negotiations are conducted in a manner
consistent with providing for the County’s long-term stability, as directed by the Board.
? Continue to provide policy direction and support to the Board.
Requested Changes:
The Rents & Concessions revenue is not budgeted as the sublease with the National Park Service for the building on
Stroming Road has ended and likewise no appropriations are requested in the Rents/Leases Building line item.
Changes in salaries and benefits reflect the recently concluded negotiations. The Equipment and Software line items
are increased for the purchase of a replacement computer and associated software for front desk staff.
Funding and appropriations are adjusted to the anticipated performance audits that will be conducted this fiscal year.
The Transportation Planning item was completed in the previous fiscal year, but is re-budgeted this year because the
County has not been invoiced for the audit.
Standard practice is to request General Contingency at 1-percent of the County’s previous fiscal year’s adopted
operating budget which was $47,750,246.
The minor adjustments to this budget unit are based on prior year expenditures.
Revenue collected for services provided to the Mariposa County Superior Court and agencies outside of the General
Fund are adjusted based on the amount of service anticipated to be provided. Revenue received for Auditors Fees in
the previous fiscal year was from certain one-time fees that will occur this fiscal year.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect recently concluded negotiations. Longevity is decreased based on the
number of employees eligible for this benefit. Communications is decreased based on prior year’s expenditure. The
increase in Memberships is based on the information received from the member organizations. Professional Services
accounts for the cost of completing various reports and schedules as required by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB) 68. The increase in the Software line accounts for the anticipated level of computer system
support needed from the vendor.
Continue to streamline payment processing.
? Streamline treasury deposit processing.
? Continue to provide excellent service to the taxpayer.
Requested Changes:
Revenues are adjusted based on an anticipated increase in investment fees. Revenue from returned check fees is
reduced based on prior year’s receipts. Funding from the Tax Collectors Cost fund (#390) is not being requested at this
time. Salaries and benefits are adjusted based on the recently concluded negotiations and to recognize the filling of the
previously vacant Chief Deputy Treasurer/Tax Collector position. Accrued Benefits in the previous fiscal year was
payment to a former employee for their accrued time. Extra-Help is increased for additional staff hours needed to
process tax payments. Longevity is decreased based on employees qualifying for this benefit. The Publications /Legal
Notice line item is increased based on number of tax notices to be published. The Investment Charges item includes
fees for the software, custodial and banking services and is increased for payment of a treasury oversight audit. The
Software line item is increased slightly based on information from licensing companies for maintenance services.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect recently concluded negotiations, anticipated employee promotions and the
previous under filling of an Assessment/Recording Clerk III position. Accrued Benefits represents the payment of
accrued time to a former employee. Office Expense is increased based on the calculated costs of postage, bank note
paper and manuals. Other adjustments to service and supply items are based on the departments anticipated needs
and service demands. The Training and Seminars line is increased for all staff to attend trainings for new computer
systems and trainings held by the State. The sub-budget line item for Rents & Leases of Equipment is a data entry error
that was not previously corrected.
Provide responsive legal advice and client service.
? Provide assertive representation in civil litigation and administrative hearings.
? Provide prompt and effective assistance in negotiation and drafting of contracts and other legal documents.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Insurance line item is
increased based on the calculation of claims experience and the settlement of a workers’ compensation claim. Other
minor adjustments to service and supply line items are based on anticipated needs.
The Department is requesting to amend the job description of the Executive Assistant and adjust the salary to that of an
Administrative Analyst. No funding has been included for this request per budgeting guideline instructions.
Update County-wide Human Resources and Risk Management Policies and Procedures.
? Introduce and implement county-wide Safety Initiative.
? Commence and complete negotiations with the Deputy Sheriff’s Association (DSA) and Sheriffs Management
Association (SMA) bargaining groups.
? Review and update existing County Performance Management Systems.
? Reduce Workers’ Compensation costs.
? Develop and implement county-wide training for supervisors and management staff.
? Implement an on-line County job application system.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received in the previous fiscal year represents reimbursement for the purchase of employment posters. Salary
and benefits changes are reflective of the recently concluded negotiations, the hiring of a new Human Resources/Risk
Management Director and the Board approved allocation of a 0.30 Office Assistant I/II position. Since the hiring of the
Director position, the Out-of-Class pay is no longer necessary. The Insurance line item is increased due to an increase
in “experience” or claims that are included in calculating departmental share of costs. The Memberships line item is
increased based on information obtained from the member organizations. The Professional Services line item is
increased for follow up work to be done in association with the classification and compensation study. The Service
Employees International Union and Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization bargaining unit contracts
have been completed and thus no appropriations are requested. The bargaining contracts with the two Sheriff
organizations expire in the fall of 2015 and funding is requested to contract with a professional labor negotiator. The
Rents & Leases/Building line item is increased based on the lease agreement. The Equipment line item is for the
purchase of a new computer. The increase to the Software line item is for the implementation of an on-line job
application system. Other minor adjustments to services and supplies line items reflect anticipated expenditures.
Prepare cost analysis for Fish & Game and notary software.
? Continue to review new software needs for County Clerk functions.
? Support Presidential primary election.
? Upgrade operating procedures.
Requested Changes:
Salaries and benefits have changed based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. Minor adjustments are
requested in various service/supply line items based on anticipated service demands.
Attend trainings for VoteCal launch and begin process for database conversion.
? Prepare and conduct a successful Presidential Primary Election.
? Update operating procedures.
Requested Changes:
Revenue for reimbursements from the State is requested based on anticipated postage costs. Salaries and benefits are
adjusted based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. Extra-Help is increased to allow for addition staff hours
during the Primary Election. The Election Expense line item is budgeted at the same level as in previous years when
elections have occurred.
Create an inventory system for the maintenance products and tools and organize facility’s shop.
? Create an unmet needs list for every county building and facility.
? Train staff in areas such as HVAC& playground certifications.
? Replace the HVAC units at the Government Center.
? Repair and replace the dry rot at the County Library.
? Replace and repair Probation building’s floor and damage to the outside of Woodland Hall.
? Replace and repair drainage at the Mariposa Pool.
? Work with PG&E and Sierra Business Council to receive more energy grants.
? Paint and carpet the Government Administration building and Technical Services office.
? Continue work with PG&E ‘s vegetation management program.
? Work with youth organizations to rebuild fields and dugouts.
? Resurface Mariposa Tennis Courts.
? Remove roots damaging walkways and sidewalks.
? Build a Pump House over the Catheys Valley Cemetery well.
Requested Changes:
Revenue for Facilities Maintenance Services is reduced slightly and Miscellaneous Revenue is increased to recognize
an accounting change in the reimbursement from Human Services for custodial supplies.
Salaries and benefits are increased to reflect changes resulting from the recently concluded labor negotiations. The
Department is contemplating a re-organization and has been working with the Human Resources/Risk Management
department on job descriptions and salaries. Once finalized, this proposed reorganization will be brought to the Board
for review and possible implementation. Extra-Help is requested for two custodian and three Maintenance Worker I
positions to assist in meeting service demands. Overtime and Standby are adjusted based on anticipated need.
Longevity is decreased to reflect reorganization and employees now being eligible for this benefit. Out of Class pay is
not requested as reorganization has combined job duties and promoted staff into the higher positions.
Clothing is increased based on projected needs. The Food line item represents the need to furnish drinking water to
staff due to contaminated water supply. As a result of several workers’ compensation claims in recent years, the
Insurance line is increased. Maintenance of Buildings is increased based on increasing needs of County buildings. The
Professional Services line item accounts for maintenance contracts with an electrician, plumber, and air/heating units;
while Service Agreements accounts for pest control, elevator maintenance and drug testing. The Rents & Leases for
Equipment are the expenditures relating to the rental of garbage bins at county parks and facilities. The Sprinkler
30
Backflow Maintenance line is increased based on the number of units needing to be tested this year. Other adjustments
to service/supply line items are based on actual expenses from the prior year and anticipated service demands. The
increase to Training and Seminars reflects the need for training in Heating, Ventilation & Air Conditioning, playground
certification and grounds maintenance issues. The Transfers Out amount in the previous fiscal year was to fully fund a
replacement vehicle that had not accumulated sufficient replacement funds.
Continue to seek out grants and programs to benefit Mariposa County businesses and overall community.
? Increase community awareness regarding the business assistance loan program in order to maximize utilization
of available funds.
? Continue to explore and provide educational and training opportunities for Mariposa County businesses.
Requested Changes:
Revenues are now budgeted in the appropriate Transfer In line items to reflect anticipated reimbursement amounts from
the Coulterville Drainage and the Disaster Recovery Initiative (DRI) grants for grant management expenses. Salaries
and benefits are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. The Membership line item is increased
based on dues for membership in the California Economic Development organization. The Professional Services line
item is a request for an E-Civis Service contract for assistance with digitalizing grant documents. The majority of
service/supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service demands and prior years’ expenditures. The PG&E
line item represents the Board approved PG&E grants for the restoration of the Courthouse clock and clock tower. The
Software line item is the associated cost for 5 user licenses in the E-Civis system for grant management/tracking. Fuel,
Training and Private Vehicle Use line items are increased in anticipation of travel needs by staff.
Funding requests from the Mariposa County Arts Council, Northside History Center, the Mining & Mineral Museum, Fair
Parade and the Coulterville Visitor Center are being made in the same amounts as the previous fiscal year. The
Mariposa Visitor Center contract is increased slightly to recognize an increase in the minimum wage that will go into
effect on January 2016 and that will be included in the proposed agreement. The Yosemite Renaissance line item
reflects a request to cover a prior year shortfall and a return to previous funding level. The Mariposa History Center line
item is a request for additional vault storage fixtures to house county historical records. The Tourism Bureau’s request
represents a return of funding that was reduced in the previous fiscal year (which the Board has already approved) as
well as the traditional county contribution amount ($500,000). No funding is requested in the Yosemite Gateway
Partners line item as this was a one-time contribution for the Yosemite Sustainability Conference and no contribution
has been requested by the Pioneer Wagon Train.
Continue environmental/design process for 12 bridges in the Bridge Replacement Program.
? Finish programming the two burned out Foresta Bridges with the Bridge Replacement Program.
? Plans, specifications, and estimates for the AC overlay of Triangle Road (PM 20.06-21.62).
? Engineering services for overlaying of Silva Road identified under the 2014 RTIP program.
? Construction services for the Safe Route to Schools sidewalks and West Whitlock Road.
? Obtain grant funding for Drought Related Projects (Coulterville and Yosemite West).
? Development of a five-year Capital Improvement Program.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from the State Transit Improvement Projects (STIP) for inspection services is increased based on the
anticipated road maintenance projects to be completed with this funding source. Revenue from the Highway Bridge
Program represents ongoing engineering services and the Bridge Preventive Maintenance Plan by outside consultants.
Reimbursement for engineering services related to the Disaster Recovery Initiative (DRI) Grant reflects work to be done
on West Whitlock Road, Dogtown Road, Bonderant Road and Schilling Road. Fees received from other county
departments for engineering services is based on prior year receipts and anticipated service demands. The Transfer In
line item is general administrative funding from the Coulterville Drainage capital improvement project (fund #513).
Salaries and benefits are adjusted as a result of recently concluded labor negotiations and increasing the Surveyor
position from 80% to full-time. Longevity is increased based on the staff eligible for this benefit. PERS Incentives are
projected for employee(s) eligible for this benefit.
Appropriations are budgeted in the Insurance line item to reflect the department’s share of this cost. The Professional
Services line item accounts for consultant services on future projects. The Service Agreements line item represents the
Carlton Software agreement. Rents & Leases Building represents payment to the Road Fund for rent and utilities
associated with the use of office space. The department is requesting to replace one computer with new system that will
have Automated Computer Aided Design (auto-cad) capacity in the Equipment line item. The fixed asset - Surveyor
Equipment line item is for the purchase of Global Navigation Satellite System Receivers, Robotic Survey Total Station
and a mobile Geographic Information System.
Deploy expanded storage and new backup strategy.
? Upgrade the Public Works file server, PC’s and data backup processes.
? Deploy new power over Ethernet switches in preparation of moving to a VoIP phone system.
? Implementation of the upgraded SunGard system and Cognos reporting tool.
? Implement On-line building permit application system and FTP server.
? Implement a help desk system to document workload and improve computer asset management.
? Deploy email and disk encryption methods for Public Health and other departments to meet new security
requirements.
? Put Mariposa County on solid computer infrastructure and support.
Requested Changes:
The Salaries and benefits amounts are adjusted based on the recently negotiated labor contracts and includes the
request for a PC Technician position effective January 1, 2016, based on current workload and for the Help Desk calls.
The Longevity line item is increased based on the number of employees eligible for this benefit.
The reduction in the Communications line item is due in part to the transfer of costs for phone and internet connection of
the Agricultural Commissioner/Cooperative Extension to their budget units. The Maintenance of Equipment line is
increased in anticipation of needed hardware maintenance of the County’s main computer system. The Professional
Services Programming line is increased based on programming contracts and Help Desk implementation. The Software
line item is also increased in anticipation of the Help Desk position and additional client server licenses for new user
requests.
The Department is requesting to purchase the following fixed assets:
Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) phone system. The current voice mail system is failing and becoming
extremely difficult and expensive to repair.
39
Data Network Switches. The existing switches have reached end of life and are essential to county computer
system functions.
Sungard System Upgrade. The upgrade will be to a windows based interface and will include a Human
Resources module and modern report writer. This system upgrade is projected to save in future maintenance costs.
The Senior Services In Kind is a match requirement for Area 12 on Aging grant funds and is increased based on the
increase to the grant in Community Services-Senior Services fund #341. The Land, Building and Improvements line is
for painting of the Government Center building and replacement of several Heat, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
(HVAC) systems. The Miscellaneous Transfers Out line item is not being used this year as each transfer out request
has a specific line for tracking purposes. The Yosemite West Maintenance and Coulterville CSA line items, represents
the Board approved General Fund loans to these Districts for the costs associated with the rate study contract. Fleet
Maintenance is not requested this year as the Public Works reorganization of staff should not require General Fund
support for standby costs. The Building Department is again requesting a contribution from the General Fund based on
the estimated year-end fund balance and to offset the costs associated with services provided for the public good.
The contributions to Senior Nutrition (C-1 C-2 & Restaurant) and Senior Service funds are based on anticipated
available federal revenue and projected year-end fund balances. The General Fund support to the Road Fund is
increased based on reduced revenue estimates. The Transfer Out line (07-87) is the requested General Fund support
for Plant Operations fund #616. Funding for the Government Center debt service fund is increased based on the loan
payment schedule.
To improve conviction rates and provide more consistent and appropriate sentencing.
? Reduce the trauma to survivors and witnesses of crime through crisis intervention, court accompaniment, and
referrals to local resources.
? Continue to provide professional assistance to survivors and witnesses of crime.
Requested Changes:
The Department is anticipating the award of grant money that will fund a portion of an existing Deputy District Attorney I
position, and one-half of the Victim Witness Services Supervisor position. Extra Help is not anticipated this year with
the hiring of an Advocate. Appropriations are requested based on the approved grant budget and includes a contract
with Mountain Crisis Services for work with victims of domestic violence, stalking and sexual assault. This grant is also
funding the associated software for the new computer system. Travel and Training are increased for newly hired staff.
The Jury & Witness Expense line item is increased based on prior year expenditure. Decreases to Office Expense,
Copier Expense and Private Vehicle are based on reduced needs for these expenses.
The revenue line item for Juvenile Defense remains stable. The Transfer In revenue represents funding from AB109
(fund #432) and additional revenue from State Parole funding (fund #437) to offset costs associated with parole
revocations. The increase in the Medical Evaluations line item is associated with the rising cost of medical services and
the case load demand. The increase to the Court Appointed Counsel line item is based on the Board approved contract
for public defense attorneys. The Child Defense line item is decreased based on prior year expenditures.
Increase the number of families receiving support.
? Increase the reliability of child support payments to families.
? Expand methods to assist non-custodial parents in meeting obligations.
? Provide consistently high quality customer service.
? Work cooperatively with the Court and other county agencies to meet mutual goals.
? Continually improve standings in the federal performance measurements.
Requested Changes:
Revenue and appropriations are requested in amounts based on allocation schedules received from the State
Department of Child Support Services. The increases in salaries and benefits reflect the recently concluded labor
negotiations and the approved reallocation of two Permanent Part-Time positions to one Full Time position. Extra-Help
is increased based on the anticipated workload of the Child Support Attorney III position. The Longevity line item is
increased based on the number of staff that will be eligible for the benefit this fiscal year. The County Vehicle line item
is increased based on the anticipated increase in monthly costs for a new vehicle. Appropriations for the possible
replacement of a printer are requested in the Equipment line item. The Transfers Out line item represents payment to
Human Services for office space. The various line item adjustments and overall decrease to service and supply line
items is based on anticipated service demands and available revenue.
Obtain approval to reorganize the District Attorney’s Office.
? Pursue a centralized and secure office space for the entire District Attorney’s Office.
? Implement a new complete record retention/archive project to include scanning old cases into digital form to
greatly reduce the need for storage space.
? Continue to train for and promote professionalism among staff by receiving additional training through the
California District Attorneys Association (CDAA).
Requested Changes:
Revenue from the Non-Sufficient Funds Diversion Program is decreased based on a decrease in these cases. Revenue
from Business and Professions code section 17206, Unfair Competition, violations is not requested this year as the
department does not anticipate prosecuting any cases of this nature. The Transfer In from State Parole (Fund 437) is
increased based on available funding to help offset costs associated with parole revocations. The revenue from Rural
County Crime Prevention (Fund 353) is requested in an amount to correspond with the salary increase of safety
personnel. The Transfer In line from Drug Task Force Grant (Fund 444), represents the District Attorney’s share of a
Probation Department grant that funds a portion of an existing Deputy District Attorney and an existing Legal Secretary
position.
Salary and benefit line items are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor negotiations and the hiring of two new
Deputy District Attorneys at lower steps than the incumbents. The Legal Secretary Grant line item is now included with
the Legal Secretary line item for ease of budgeting, and because the grant has been discontinued. No Extra Help is
requested as the Department does not anticipate using temporary staff and has requested these funds in the Overtime
line item. The Longevity line item is increased based on the number of staff qualifying for this benefit. The Unfunded
Liability Payment represents the new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s
contribution towards retirement plans. This amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line
item as it has been determined by an actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension
Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future.
The Insurance line item is decreased based on premium calculations. The Jury and Witness Expense line item is
increased based on the increased number of jury trials in the past year. The Medical and Laboratory line item is
increased base on the rising costs of these services and an anticipated increased workload. The Membership Fees line
item is increased based on the information obtained from the California District Attorneys’ and Investigators’
Associations. The H.T.E. Licensing/Support line item represents transaction charges associated with the process of
online “discovery” activities. The Publications/Legal Notice line item is increased based on prior year’s expenditures.
The Education line item represents the reimbursement allowance for staff enrolled in classes that will benefit the County.
The increase in the Equipment line is for the purchase of replacement computers. The increase in the Software line is
for the annual maintenance and updates for the new Case Management System. The Training and Seminars, and
Private Vehicle line items are increased for continuing education and advanced training costs for two new Deputy
District Attorneys.
Grant revenue for this program has been transferred to the Drug Task Force and Project School Climate budget (fund
444) and is now under the direction of the Probation Department. The District Attorney’s share of the grant revenue is
being transferred in to the primary prosecution operating budget. Government accounting practices require that this
budget remain in the Final Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Continue to provide comprehensive assistance to survivors and witnesses of all types of violent crimes.
? Reduce the trauma to survivors and witnesses of crime through crisis intervention, court accompaniment and
referrals to local resources.
Requested Changes:
The grant funding is increased based on information received from the Federal government. The additional grant
funding has enabled the Department to hire an Advocate at 80% Permanent Part-Time and continue funding for 50% of
the Victim Witness Coordinator. Salary and benefit lines are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor
negotiations and the added position. Extra-Help is not requested this year based on the hiring of permanent staff. The
service and supply line items remain at prior year budget levels. There is no net county cost in this budget unit.
Implement a Deputy Recruit process that will assist in the recruitment and retention of local candidates.
? Obtain stable funding for Deputy Sheriff positions that were reduced due to fiscal constraints during the
recession.
Requested Changes:
The increase in Animal Licenses is based on the new tag system and prior year’s actual receipts. The reimbursement
revenue for Police Officer Standard Training (POST) is based on the number of new hires attending training. The Office
of Criminal Justice Program (OCJP) Drug Abuse grant ended in September 2014 and has been replaced with a Transfer
In from the Drug Enforcement Task Force Grant (Fund 444). The Forest Service Agreement revenue line is for narcotic
investigations on federal forest lands and is reduced slightly based on a recently negotiated contract. No funding is
being requested at this time for reimbursement of law enforcement services during large fire incidents. The Transfers In
line item represents funding from the Supplemental Law Enforcement (SLESF) fund and is based on anticipated
revenue from this program and offsets the salaries of two Deputy Sheriff positions. The Transfers In from the Rural Law
Enforcement fund (#353) is requested in an amount necessary to offset the costs of one Sergeant, one Deputy Sheriffs,
and one Dispatcher. The Transfer In Sheriff Salary line item is to account for additional funding from the Rural County
Crime Prevention fund offsetting the final three months (July – September) of the salary increases for safety members
contained in the current Memorandum Of Understanding.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to account for step increases and the Board approved salary increase for the Sheriff.
The Overtime line item is increased based on prior year’s expenditure and in anticipation of an active fire season due to
the continuing drought. The Longevity line item is based on the number of employees that are eligible for this benefit.
Out-of-Area and POST Certificate Pay are decreased based on a lower number of employees qualifying for this benefit.
Group Health for Retirees is increase to account for an increase in the number of retirees eligible to receive this benefit.
58
CalPERS is now requiring participating organizations to pay the portion of the employer’s retirement that goes towards
the unfunded liability of the safety group in a lump sum and this now budgeted in a specific line item. As a result of this
new requirement, the Employer’s Retirement line item has been reduced. The Insurance line item is decreased
because of costs associated with existing workers’ compensation and liability claims have been reduced due to aging of
the claims past seven years. Maintenance of Buildings has increased based on the need to complete previously
deferred maintenance projects. All other Service and Supply line items are requested in amounts based on prior year
costs.
Maintain annual patrol of the waterways to ensure the safest possible environment for all boaters and
recreational users.
? Through grant funding, acquire a special use flat bottom rescue boat to navigate the unprecedented low water
levels as the result of the current drought.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from the State is budgeted at the traditional level. The adjustments to salaries and benefits adjusted
to reflect step increases and salary adjustments contained in the current Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). No
appropriations are being requested in the Longevity line item as the employees assigned to this budget do not yet
qualify for the benefit. The POST Certification line item is increased based on anticipated qualifying Sheriff Deputies.
The Unfunded Liability Payment represents the new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the
employer’s contribution. This amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has
been determined by an actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of
2013 (PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future. The Insurance line
item is decreased based on existing workers’ compensation claims and the deletion of claims experience aging past
seven years. Requested appropriations in fixed assets is for a flat bottom boat to be used in very low water conditions.
Completion and occupation of the Jail Addition project.
? Continue work to accommodate AB109/AB117 and Proposition 47 legislation.
? Develop a water storage plan to become a permanent auxiliary water source for the jail complex.
Requested Changes:
While the passage of AB84 – The Trust Act – has eliminated revenue from State Criminal Alien Assistance Program
funds, this funding represents residual funding that maybe received from prior claims. Recent legislation has also
eliminated Federal Housing revenue for Federal inmates. The Work Furlough and Week-End Housing Programs have
also changed with passage of new State law resulting in fewer inmates qualifying for the programs. The Transfer In line
represents funding from the Community Corrections AB 109 (Fund #432) to partially offset the cost of two Jail Officer
positions and the effect that parolees could have on the jail population and is increased based on available funding. The
Transfer In – Jail Salary line item accounts for funding from the Rural County Crime Prevention fund (#353) to partially
offset the salary increases for safety members contained in the existing Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).
Salaries and benefits are increased based on conditions contained in the existing MOU. The Overtime line item is
increased due to current vacancies from injury/illness. The Unfunded Liability Payment represents the new amortization
and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution towards retirement plans. This amount has
been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been determine by an actuarial study to be
a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) and will need to be funded
directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future.
Services and Supply line items are being requested at the 2013/14 budget amounts resulting in slight increases in
various lines. Significant increases include the Insurance line that is calculated on premium amounts and specific claims
experience; the Medical & Laboratory line item that is based on increasing medical costs and Title 15 requirements.
The Fixed Asset line item represents the replacement of the Jail Office AC/Heater that is in danger of failing.
Continue to recruit and hire Extra-Help Probation Corrections Officers to fulfill the staffing needs of the juvenile
hall.
? Reduce juvenile hall costs by using alternatives to incarceration for youth, when deemed appropriate, to hold
them accountable while protecting the community.
Requested Changes:
The fees associated with the Juvenile Hall have remained stable. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect
conditions contained in the current Memorandum of Understanding. The Extra-Help line item is increased based on
calculations to fully cover operational hours. Unfunded Liability Payment represents the new amortization and rate
smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employers’ contribution towards retirement plans. This amount has been
separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been determine by an actuarial study to be a new
“risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to
avoid an underfunded situation in the future. Other Service and Supply line items are adjusted based on current
expenditure levels.
Decrease probation violations by applying rehabilitative services and appropriate supervision levels targeted at
criminogenic risk and needs.
? Continue to improve and enhance jail alternative programs for lower risk offenders.
? Provide programming opportunities and educational classes to jail inmates.
Requested Changes:
The revenue line for the Community Recidivism & Crime Reduction (CRR) grant reflects funding for community based
organizations and was budgeted in the Miscellaneous Revenue in the previous fiscal year. The State Revenue for
Juvenile Probation & Camps is based on information from the State. The revenue from the Drug Abuse grant has been
redirected to a new special revenue fund (#444) for accounting and tracking purposes. The Juvenile Accountability
Block Grant for Evidence Based Practice (JABG-EBP) is budgeted in the amount remaining to be claimed for the
development of the juvenile case management system. The Transfers In line item represents funding from Community
Corrections - AB 109 (Fund 432) and is used to offset costs associated with continued implementation of prison
realignment programs. The funding received from the Wrap-Around fund (#422) represents funding available to support
a Deputy Probation Officer position and allowable overhead costs. The Transfer In line item - Juvenile Justice Crime
Prevention Act (JJCPA) Fund (#351) represents the amount from the allocated by the State for this program which
offsets the salary of a Deputy Probation Officer. The Transfer In of Rural County Crime Prevention (RCCP) funding is to
partially offset the salary increases for safety members contained in the existing Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).
Salary and benefit line items are adjusted to account for increases contained in the existing MOU, the Board approved
increase to the salary of the Chief Probation Officer as well as the change in position in allocations that were approved
last fiscal year. The Extra Help line item is increased to account for the addition of a Work Study Trainee who will help
with the collection and analysis of data associated with AB109 as well as receptionist duties. Unfunded Liability
Payment represents the new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution
towards retirement plans. This amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has
been determine by an actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of
2013 (PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future.
70
The Insurance line item is decreased to account for some workers’ compensation and liability claims no longer being
included in the calculations as they now exceed the seven year calculation period. The Office expense line is increased
based on prior year expenditures. The Professional Services line item previously budgeted for grant funded software
development that has been mostly completed and accounts for the CRR grant to local community based organizations.
Other services and supplies line items are adjusted to align with anticipated expenditure levels.
The sub-budget unit (001-0224-535) is for the Juvenile Justice Crime Prevention Act (JJCPA) program.
Completion of Fire Department Five Year Strategic Plan.
? Provide training and education opportunities for all members.
? Complete the County Emergency Operation Plan (EOP).
Requested Changes:
The Emergency Planning Grant revenue is budgeted in the amount of the 2015 grant award. Salary and benefit
savings from the vacant Fire Chief position is budgeted in the Extra-Help line item for the Assistant Fire Chief Extra-Help
positions. The Group Health line item is increased based on the current list of retirees eligible to receive this benefit.
The Insurance line item is increased based on workers’ compensation and other insurance claims used in calculating
the charges. The Cal Fire Contract for dispatching emergency medical and fire services is reduced because the
previous year’s amount reflected unpaid Fiscal Year 2013/14 contract amounts. The Professional Services line includes
services contracts for certification of breathing apparatus and the Grizzlies Fire Academy and is increased based on
demand for these services. The County Service Area #3 line item accounts for replacement costs associated with the
new fire apparatus and will increase slightly each fiscal year.
The Sub-Budget (001-0228-542) is offset by the Emergency Management Planning (EMP) grant and funds an Office
Assistant I/II position and an Emergency Planner position. The Equipment line item represents grant funding available
for minor equipment purchases.
Conduct Agricultural Damage Assessments with respect to drought damage and other natural disasters to aid
ranchers and producers in obtaining disaster assistance through the US Department of Agriculture and the Farm
Services Agency.
? Provide 2 continuing education workshops per year.
? Monitor agricultural pests which might impact our agricultural industry.
? Implement Geographic Information System mapping of invasive noxious weed species throughout the County.
? Work with State and federal legislators on increased funding for Wildlife Services, Williamson Act, Marketplace
equity and consumer protection (Weights & Measures), invasive species programs, and invasive noxious weed
management.
Requested Changes:
The revenue for Sealer of Weights is decreased based on the estimates from contracts. The Agriculture Commission –
State revenue is increased based on the State Budget and reimbursable program expenses. The Arundo Eradication
Project has been completed so funding is requested. Revenue from Fees and Sale of Supplies is decreased to reflect a
lower number of anticipated pesticide registrations.
Adjustments to salaries and benefits are reflective of the recent labor negotiations, the Board approved increase to the
salary of the Agricultural Commissioner, and the Department’s request for a Deputy Agricultural Commissioner position.
This request will support the Department in succession planning efforts. Extra-Help is increased to account for
additional hours for field assistants. The Communications line item is increased to account for the internet connection
costs that have been transferred from the Information Technologies budget unit. The Equipment Rental Contract line is
increased based on contract agreements. The Integrated Weed Management line is decreased as the Arundo
Eradication project has been completed. Publications and Notices line item is increased in anticipation of advertising for
the new deputy position. The Trapper line item is increased in accordance with the contract for this service. Other
service and supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service demands.
Continue General Plan Implementation, including:
o work on the Midpines Community Plan,
o processing of Zoning Ordinance amendments to implement the Catheys Valley Community Plan,
o processing of General Plan/Zoning Ordinance amendments for General Plan policies for mining
permitting,
o development of comprehensive code amendments to implement the General Plan, and
o complete 2013-2014 Biennial Review for Land Conservation Act contracts including compliance
activities.
? Complete processing of General Plan Housing Element and Safety Element Updates.
? Complete processing of code amendments for the Bed & Breakfast/Vacation Rental program.
? Make Road Map Atlas for First Responders available in digital format.
? Work with advisory committees on Energy Action Plan and Transit Center Feasibility Study.
Requested Changes:
The Transfers In represents reimbursement for staff time performed on LAFCO (Fund #370) job duties and the
Transfers In- Probation is funding from the Community Corrections - AB109 (Fund #432) to offset 20% of the Code
Compliance Technician position. No revenue is requested from the DRI grant as all reimbursable work has been
completed and reimbursement has been received. The new Transfer In line for Explorer Cabins is for anticipated staff
time associated with the new project at Tenaya Lodge (Fund #359). Salary and benefit adjustments reflect the recently
concluded labor negotiations and the Board approved salary increase for the Planning Director. The Longevity line item
is increased based on the number of employees who qualify to receive this benefit. The Professional Services line item
is increased based on anticipated contract needs. The Commission line item is increased based on calculations of the
number of meetings and mileage reimbursements for commissioners. Other service and supply line item adjustments
are based on prior year actual costs and to meet anticipated service demands. The Transfer Out line in the previous
fiscal year represented funding for a vehicle purchase.
In the General Plan sub-budget, the Office Expense is increased in anticipation of additional mailings needed for
Midpines and Catheys Valley projects. The Professional Services line is reduced to the remaining amount of the
contract for the housing element survey and a legal services contract. The reduction in Publications & Legal Notices is
based on prior year expenditures. The increase in Plan Commission – General Plan is to account for the increased
number of hearings needed for General Plan items. The increase in the Software line reflects the purchase software
maintenance and upgrades for mapping programs. The increase to Training reflects continuing education needs and
conference attendance.
All residual grant monies are now included in a separate fund (#445), as this grant has a reporting cycle different from
the County’s fiscal year cycle which has in the past caused reconciliation difficulties. Governmental accounting
practices require that this budget be included for two years after transactions have ceased.
Continue recruitment and retention efforts for volunteer firefighters.
? Continue offering stipends for training and response.
? Support Volunteer Coordinator efforts.
Requested Changes:
The Fire Safer Grant revenue is requested in the amount of the grant award. The Extra-Help line item funds 3 Volunteer
Coordinator positions for assistance with volunteer retention/recruitment. The remaining funds are being used as
training and response stipends for volunteer firefighters. The budget has no net county cost.
The time period for the final audit of this disaster has elapsed and no notice has been received by the State. Residual
funding received as reimbursement from this disaster is no longer being budgeted. Per Governmental Accounting
standards, this budget must be included in the Final Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Continue the division’s success in meeting all requirements and deadlines.
? Continue the cross training of the Administrative Analyst in the duties of the Accountant’s position.
? Administrative Analyst to take on more “as required” tasks from Public Works senior management.
? Reclassification of the Account Clerk III position to an Accounting Technician II or III.
Requested Changes:
The revenue received from reimbursable services performed by Pubic Works Administration staff is increased based on
estimated billable administrative time to be performed for other Public Works divisions. Salaries and benefits lines are
adjusted to reflect recently concluded labor negotiations, the hiring of new Public Works Director, and budgeting for the
vacant Accountant I/II at a 0.50 Permanent Part-Time position. This part time allocation will make it necessary for some
of the accounting tasks to be assigned to both the Administrative Analyst and the Account Clerk III. These additional job
duties for the Account Clerk III will provide an opportunity for a reclassification study. The Food line item represents the
need to provide drinking water for staff due to arsenic in the current well water. The Professional Services line item is
decreased as this represented a contract for the services of an Interim Public Works Director in the previous fiscal year.
The decrease in Rents & Leases – Buildings is based on a more accurate calculation of costs for reimbursement to the
Road Fund for office space. The increase in County Vehicle Expense represents placing a vehicle into service for use
by the department head. A replacement computer and new chair are requested in the Equipment line item. The
increase in the Fuel line item is associated with the increase in anticipated travel by staff. The Training and Seminars
line is requested for the Department Head’s various conferences and for a staff member to attend the Cost Accounting
Management System (CAMS) Conference. Other services and supplies line items are adjusted to reflect a more
accurate expenditure level.
Appropriations in the Transit Contract represent the Board approved increase in the YARTS contract. Funding for this
contract is from the Local Transportation fund.
Provide sufficient staffing to ensure adequate service to County residents through the procurement of one
additional Development Services Technician.
? Begin the County Health Department accreditation process with the Public Health Accreditation Board.
? Continue activities strengthening prevention of disease to reduce cost to the county and citizens for medical
care.
Requested Changes:
The State allocations and grant revenues are adjusted based upon preliminary estimates from the State and anticipated
amounts of grant awards. The California Children’s Services line item is increased based on anticipated Medi-Cal
caseload. EBOLA is a new program providing funds to ensure public health is protected from this communicable
disease. Various local fees and miscellaneous revenues have been adjusted to reflect current workloads. Funding from
the Fire Department’s Support and Aid for Everyone (SAFE) offsets personnel costs and is now budgeted at the grant
award amount. Revenue received from Vehicle License Fees was increased based on available funds. Transfers In
line items from the various grant programs are adjusted to match current grant awards and anticipated operational costs
of these programs.
Salary and benefit lines are adjusted to reflect recently concluded labor negotiations. The Health Department is
requesting an additional Development Services Technician (DSTs) due to the increased workload in the Environmental
Health division. The Extra Help and Clinic Extra-Help line are adjusted to account for additional nursing hours to meet
anticipated service demands and provide coverage for anticipated short term vacancies.
93
The Insurance line item is decreased based on calculations from existing liability and workers’ compensation claims.
The increase to Office expense is for a new computer for use in the accreditation program. The Professional Services
line item includes funding for two personal service agreements for the new accreditation program. The increase to Air
Pollution expenses is based on the additional cost for air monitoring communication fees and increase in subcontractor
services. The increase in Hospital is to pay for increased frequency in services for x-rays and laboratory fees. The
increase to the Public Health Emergency Preparedness (PHEP) line reflects a new professional services contract for a
preparedness drill that is offset by EBOLA grant funding. County Vehicle, Travel, and Private Vehicle Use costs are
increased to provide for additional travel and training for the new Health Officer. The increase in software is to purchase
new software necessary to compile reports to the State, software updates, and software for 2 new computers. Other
various Service and Supply line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses, available grant funding, and
anticipated service demands.
Develop an improved system for documentation that will enable staff to capture billable hours more effectively
and timely.
? Greater client access to psychiatric services through the hiring of a full-time Psychiatric Nurse Practitioner.
Requested Changes:
The Small County Emergency Risk Pool (SCERP) funding was not utilized last year and is not anticipated to be claimed
this year. The Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Act (SAMHSA) revenues are based on allocation information
received from the State and the late receipt of the final payment for Fiscal Year 2014/2015. The Early and Periodic
Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) Medi-Cal revenue has been incorporated into the standard Medi-Cal
revenue based on the changes the State has made in the Department of Health Care Services in conjunction with
Health Care Reform guidelines, and is increased based on anticipated receipts. No Medicare revenue is requested due
to the Department referring this caseload to an outside professional. The Patient Fees and Other Insurance revenue
line items are reimbursement from clients and third party insurance companies for Mental Health services that are now
allowable under Health Care Reform guidelines and are adjusted based on current receipts. Fees for Conservator
activities and Telepsychiatry at the jail are decreased based on anticipated service demands. Transfer In from Mental
Health Realignment is based on revenue projections from the State and is requested in an amount to meet anticipated
service demands. The Transfer In from Fund 443 is the allowable overhead amount from the new Mental Health
Services Act Triage Grant. This revenue will offset portions of salaries and other expenses related to implementing the
new program. Transfer In from fund 422 – Wrap Around – reflects the balance of funding from fund 422 and the
associated draw from Social Services 2011 Realignment (#433) funding in support of Wrap Services. The Wrap Around
program operations are being consolidated with Behavioral Health for program efficiencies.
Salary and benefits are adjusted based on the recent concluded labor negotiations and reallocation of staff based on the
Department’s reorganization plan. The Department is requesting new position of Psychiatric Nurse Practitioner. Extra-
Help is decreased due to a reduced number of hours for the psychiatrist. Longevity is now included based on the
number of employees qualifying for this benefit. No Overtime is requested as the majority of the vacancies have been
filled. The PERS Incentives are decreased based on the reallocation of staff that receives this benefit. Out–of-Class
Pay is reduced as higher level positions have been filled. The Communications line is increased based on prior year
expenditures. The Professional Services line is increased based on an additional contract for counseling services. The
Contracted-Transportation line item is reduced based on the anticipated success of the Mental Health Triage program
where issues are resolved at the client’s location rather than transporting them to the hospital emergency room. The
Institutions for Mental Disease (IMD) Contracts is increased based on the current caseload for this clientele. The MIS
Contract is the proportional share of the costs to operate and maintain the mental health computer system. Client
Incentives are increased based on client needs for transportation assistance. The Board and Care line item is
decreased as these services are now paid by the client. The Homeless Assistance line item is funded through the
Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness (PATH) grant and is intended to provide temporary housing on
a very limited basis. Respite Care and Wrap Family Flex Funds are to help families in the Wrap Around program
98
overcome barriers in their case plan. The Cost Allocation line item is increased based on the proportional share of the
cost of services performed by other county departments. The Equipment and Software line items are for the purchase
of laptops for work in the field. The Prior Year Settlement line represents funding due to or payable from the County
based on the annual cost report. The Transfer Out to Probation is Wrap Around funding that partially funds a Probation
Officer assigned to work with the clients in the Wrap Around Program. The Transfer Out to Human Services
Administration has increased due to staff reallocations. The net county cost represents the State mandated contribution.
Implement program evaluation tools and strategies necessary to report on program outcomes and successes.
? Develop additional services for North County based on articulated community needs.
Requested Changes:
The revenue received from Drug Medi-Cal reimbursements is increase based on a current caseload and new billing
tools. The Transfer In line for Fund 380/Alcohol & Drug Prevention is the available funding from funds 380 and 384 for
Alcohol and Drug Prevention programs. The Transfers In - Realignment revenue is budgeted in an amount to meet
anticipated service demands. Adjustments in salary and benefits reflect recently concluded labor negotiations and
reallocation of staff positions based on the Department’s reorganization plan. The Inpatient services line items reflect
contracted residential stays for Drug Court participants and the Drug Testing line item is also reflective of costs
associated with Drug Court participants. Other adjustments to Services/Supplies are based on prior year expenses and
anticipated demand for services. Transfers Out to Probation and the District Attorney are to offset costs associated with
the Drug Court Enhancement program. The Transfers Out to Human Services Administration is decreased based on
reallocation of staff. This budget has no net county cost.
Clients referred to Child Welfare Services will exhibit better outcomes for children and families through
implementation of Safety Organized Practice.
? Increase Family Finding activities.
? Re-explore Differential Response, working to build community partnerships.
? Expand employment services for CalWORKs clients.
? Integrate CalWORKs reform strategies to decrease barriers for families returning to work.
? Increase the percentage of CalWORKs clients who are participating in work.
Requested Changes:
The funding received from “traditional” Realignment (fund #394) is increased while funding from 2011 Realignment (fund
#433) is decreased based on anticipated revenue and available fund balances in both of these funds. The Transfers In
for State and Federal revenues are adjusted based on allocation information. Revenue from In-Home Supportive
Services (IHSS) Public Authority is increased based on increased salary and benefit costs for staff allocated to the
program activities.
Salary and benefit adjustments are reflective of the recently concluded labor negotiations and Board approved new
positions and reallocations that occurred in the previous fiscal year. The Department is a requesting a new positon of
Psychiatric Nurse Practitioner of which half will be allocated in the Behavioral Health budget. The increase in Extra-Help
will fund a Fraud Investigator and a Social Services Aide. Overtime is decreased based on prior year’s expenditure.
Longevity is decreased due to reallocation of staff. Stand-by is increased based on prior year’s expenditure. The PERS
incentive line is decreased based on confirmation of staff eligible for this benefit. Out-Of-Class pay is requested to
compensate existing staff performing additional duties due to vacancies.
Office Expense is increased for the purchase of minor furniture items. Appropriations for Child Abuse Prevention,
Intervention and Treatment (CAPIT) is being requested this year as the program activities will be done by an outside
contractor. In prior years this program was done in-house, however this year the Department has taken on new
strategies that will bring child abuse prevention to the schools. The Training line item accounts for UC Davis sessions
and is increased this year as the Department has requested three more training days for a total of 15 days. The In-
Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Maintenance of Effort (MOE) line item is calculated by the State using various factors
including hours authorized to recipients of services and the hourly wage paid to the providers and is now accounted for
in this budget. CalWORKs Ancillary expenditures are decreased based on a reduced demand for services. The C-IV
Migration line item is the State run eligibility computer system (C-IV) that is three years old and now out of warranty,
therefore a system refresh is planned. The decrease in County Counsel services for Child Protective Services is
reflective of a reduction in demand for Counsel’s services. The Equipment line item includes the purchase of furniture
and computer equipment for two new Deputy Directors and Program Manager. Software is increased based on
106
purchases of new computer systems for the Deputy Directors. Other operational expenses in the services/supplies line
items are adjusted based on actual costs in the prior fiscal year and on anticipated service demands. The new vehicle
and automated front door purchases were completed in the previous fiscal year, and no fixed assets are requested this
fiscal year.
The decrease to the Transfer Out to Human Services is based on the calculation of the staff position allocations and
cost sharing to the supporting budget units. The Contingency line represents available funding for unanticipated
operational needs. This budget unit has no net county cost.
The Miscellaneous Revenue lines represent various repayment categories for Assistance Programs. The Transfers In
lines reflect funding from State, Federal and Realignment sources and are budgeted based on current caseload
demands. The adjustments to aid program expenditures are based on caseload demand for services and that the In-
Home Supportive Services costs are now accounted for in the Social Services budget. The Transfer Out line items are
reflective of State and Federal reimbursements for expenditures initially funded with Realignment dollars. This budget
has no net county cost.
Develop an in-house leadership training series for all leaders in efforts to meet the Department’s standards and
expectations.
? Create a comprehensive standardized system for orienting and training new staff across the Department.
? Improve the collection and use of data in order to effectively evaluate program outcomes.
? Improve program management tools and strategies to ensure effective program management.
? Make services more accessible to residents in North County through outreach and identification of unmet needs.
? Review, revise, reformat, organize, and train staff on Departmental Policies and Procedures.
Requested Changes:
Funding received from other Human Services divisions through the Transfers In line items are adjusted based on the
level of administrative/overhead support provided to the respective divisions. The revenue and program operations for
Fund 422 Wrap Around have been transferred to the Behavioral Health operating budget due to program consolidation
and staffing reallocations. Salary and benefits are adjusted as a result of the recently concluded labor negotiations and
the Board approved addition of Assistant Director, Deputy Director of Administrative Services, Staff Services Analyst
and Maintenance Worker I/II & III positions.
The Communications and Postage line items are increased based on prior year expenditures and anticipated outreach
costs. The Insurance line has increased based on the organizational change within the Department and calculation of
claims over the past seven years. The Maintenance Building line item is increased to account for service contracts for
the HVAC, water treatment on the HVAC system, elevator, janitorial supplies and other minor building maintenance
issues. The Rents & Leases – Buildings is adjusted based on approved lease agreements. The Purchased Services
line item accounts for the contracted services for basic maintenance/upkeep and is decreased based on the contracts
costs for these services. The Cost Allocation line item is decreased based on administrative overhead charges as
calculated by the Auditor’s department. The Equipment line item includes the purchase of cubicle doors, telephones &
detachable headsets, computer system servers, switches and routers and laptop computers. The increase to Software
includes software licensing, lighting automation and a contribution to the County’s computer system upgrade. Other
adjustments to service/supply line items are based on actual costs from the previous fiscal year. The Department is
requesting to purchase a replacement vehicle. The reimbursements from other Human Services General Fund budgets
are included in the Intrafund Transfers line items and are adjusted based on the calculated ratio of staff in those units.
The Department is funding a contingency for unanticipated service demands. This budget has no net county cost.
Requested revenue is based on proposed Federal allocations for this program. Adjustments to salaries and benefits
reflect the recently concluded labor negotiations. Minor adjustments are requested in service and supply line items
based on prior year actual expenses and to meet anticipated service demands.
The Department is requesting an increase to personnel by creating a Community Services Deputy Director position.
This position will provide a direct succession and/or chain of command when the need arises as well as provide
assistance with the upper management responsibilities of the Department. The additional personnel cost would be
distributed by percentages between all programs under the Community Services department. This new position is not
projected in the requested budget at this time as the Human Resources Department requires Board authorization to
proceed with developing a job description and a proposed salary.
Provide action oriented programming with positive community outcomes.
? Continue to partner with community and governmental organizations.
? Establish a branch library in Catheys Valley.
Requested Changes:
Donation revenue is being budgeted in anticipation of funds being received from various organizations. Salaries and
benefits are adjusted based the recently concluded labor negotiations and the Board approved salary increase for the
County Librarian. Extra-Help is increased for additional staff hours for new programs – Smart Start, After-School
Tutoring, and MakerSpace. Group Health for Retires is increased to account for former employees who are eligible to
receive this benefit. Adjustments to service/supply line items are based on of prior year actual expenditures and
anticipated service demands.
Livestock and Natural Resources Program - continue to develop relevant educational and extension programs
addressing the issues identified by the community; monitor forage production on rangelands; grant proposals for
research and trials pertinent to livestock production.
? Master Gardener Program – train on drought related issues; continue to offer fire-safe workshops; build on
public outreach.
? 4-H Youth Development Program – increase enrollment; add new clubs in the Greeley Hill and El Portal areas;
initiate a day-camp program for K-3rd Grades to promote the program; add new projects (biking, hiking,
automotive, etc.).
Requested Changes:
No funding is requested in the Transfers In line item for Title III funding from the Secure Rural Schools and Community
Self-Determination Act for the Master Gardener program due to a reduction in revenue from this source. Salaries and
benefits are adjusted to account for the recently concluded labor negotiations and to account for the Board approved
Extra-Help Master Gardener Coordinator position, which for the last two years had been funded by a grant from the
UCCE. The Department is requesting a full-time Master Gardener Coordinator position, but this funding is not included
in the budget as an Extra-Help position is currently fulfilling these duties. A full-time position is preferable to adequately
fulfill all of the Department’s needs of this position. There are minor adjustments to service and supply line items based
on prior year actual expenditures and anticipated service demands.
Improve and expand programs and services through grants, fulfilling unmet needs and coordination with other
entities to utilize resources in creative ways to create additional parks, recreational programs and community
events.
? Provide advanced training to staff to enhance programs and services offered
Requested Changes:
The revenue for Day Camp Fees is increased based on the number of participants anticipated. Water Aquatics
revenue has increased based on popularity of this activity and the addition of a third class time. The Scholarship
Contribution revenue has not been affirmed by donors and therefore not included in the requested budget. This revenue
maybe added during September adjustments or at Mid-year should donations be received.
Salaries and benefits are increased based on recently concluded labor negotiations. The Department is working on a
reorganization of staff over several units with the Human Resources Department regarding job titles and description of
duties and salary ranges. This proposed reorganization and any budget adjustments will brought to the Board for review
and approval at a later date. Out-of-Class is requested to continue to recognize an employee who is performing job
duties outside of their classification. Adjustments to service and supply line items are based on prior year actual costs
and anticipated service demands.
Revenues remain stable and the amount of funding requested to be transferred out to the specific programs is based on
available funding. No appropriations are requested for Transit based on this fund’s estimated revenue. Funding for
Regional Transportation is increased to the amount approved by the Board of Supervisors for the Yosemite Area
Regional Transportation System (YARTS) contract.
The revenue from interest earnings is based on the estimated cash balance and interest rates. The funding received
from the State is increased based on estimated allocation amounts. Funding is requested to be transferred out to the
Transit fund to offset operating expenses and the Miscellaneous Expense line item is decreased to balance the fund.
Revenue estimates are based on funding received from the State Rural Planning Assistance (SRPA) program and the
State Transportation Improvement Program: Planning, Programming, and Monitoring Program (STIP-PPM) and are
based on allocation information received from the State as well as current rollover estimate. Transfers In is funding from
the Local Transportation Commission for Unmet Needs. The Contracts line item is reduced to account for projects that
have been completed. Reimbursement for staff time in Public Works Administration budget for work on transportation
projects and in the Engineering/Surveyor budget for engineering services on STIP projects are budgeted in the In-
County Services line item. The increase in the Administration line item is to account for general administrative overhead
services provided by Public Works administration staff to this budget. The Transfers Out line item accounts for the
required Financial and Performance Audits and is paid from the Audit budget (001-0103) and is requested in a reduced
amount because the Triennial Audit was completed in the previous fiscal year. The Contingency line item is requested
to balance the fund.
The Transfers In from the LTF is decreased based on a higher beginning fund balance and no anticipated activities. No
funding from Fund #501 is requested based on little to no project activity occurring this fiscal year. Appropriations are
adjusted based on available revenue. The Transfer Out to the Mariposa Creek project fund #506 is not being requested
as this project has been completed.
Re-establish the Weed Control spray program.
? Complete phase two of Mt. Bullion Cut-Off.
? Construction and repair on Triangle Road between Tip Top Road and Highway 49 South.
? Construction and repair on West Whitlock Road.
? Re-establish the practice of ditch maintenance on paved County roads.
? Fill road crew vacancies to maximize production.
? New pavement on 3rd Street, 4th Street, 5th Street, 6th Street, 7th Street, and part of 8th Street.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from fines is increased based on prior year receipts. Interest revenue is requested based on the
estimated cash balance. Revenues received from various Highway User Taxes are budgeted based on estimates from
the State. There is a significant decrease in HUTA Section 2103 revenue due to reduced tax collections at the State
level. The Road Department Services line item represents Road staff time on the maintenance of Zone of Benefits
(ZOB) and is decreased based on prior year collections. The Miscellaneous Revenue line represents fees received from
Road Permits and is increased based on prior year receipts. Transportation Permits is revenue received from permits
issued for the movement of large items, such as mobile homes, over county roads. Funding transferred in from the
Local Transportation Claim (fund #031) is requested in an amount based on available funding from that fund. Due to the
overall reduction in State revenue, the Department is requesting an increase in the General Fund contribution in order to
maintain existing services. The Beginning Balance is decreased based on year-end estimates.
Salaries and benefits lines are adjusted based on recently concluded labor negotiations and staffing levels. The
Professional Services line item represents engineering services provided by county engineering staff and the completion
of the annual road report to the State. Other adjustments to service/supply line items are based on prior year actual
costs, to meet anticipated service demands, and to adjust to the reduction in revenue. No Contingency is requested this
fiscal year.
Appropriations are requested in an amount that corresponds with available revenue. No requests for funding had been
received at the time the budget was prepared.
The revenue from court fees is adjusted based on receipts received in the previous fiscal year. The appropriation for
books is adjusted based on available revenue and in an amount sufficient to continue the subscription services at the
Library and the Jail.
Appropriations are requested in amounts that correspond with anticipated revenue and estimated administrative costs.
There are no special projects anticipated this fiscal year. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be
included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Revenue from Fire Assessments is based on the calculation of the number of properties to be assessed. The Transfers
In amount represents the County’s contribution and this amount comes from the Tobacco Settlement fund. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item represents available funding for capital improvements to fire stations and is increased
based on available revenue. The Fire Assessment Services line item accounts for reimbursing the Auditor and Tax
Collector for their staff time and associated costs with collecting and managing the fire assessment. The requested
funding in the Transfers Out – Debt Service line item is the payment on the fire engines and is reduced due to the Board
approved refinancing in the previous fiscal year. Appropriations in the Transfers Out line item in the prior fiscal year
were for costs associated with the completion of the Midpines Fire Station. No funding for this purpose is requested this
fiscal year.
Revenues are adjusted based on current assessment receipts. Appropriations are budgeted in the Fire Protection
Services line item based on available funds.
Miscellaneous Revenue represents the payment from the Merced Irrigation District. The Loan Repayments line item
reflects payment from the Coulterville Service Area sewer bonds. The Office Technician I line item is for possible staff
time provided in preparing Water Agency agendas and minutes. Remaining appropriations are requested in the
Professional Services line item.
Revenue remains stable with a small decrease in the Current Secured line item. Appropriations in the Professional
Services line item are for reimbursable work provided by Facilities Maintenance as well as any possible outside repair
service.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. The Transfer In from the General Fund represents a Board
approved loan and is to offset the cost of an agreement to conduct a rate study review. The services and supply line
items for water services are adjusted based on anticipated service needs and available funding. The Special Fees line
item is decreased based on prior year expenditures. Sewer Services include a decrease in Maintenance of Equipment
based on prior year expenditures, and an increase Laboratory Services for new testing requirements.
Miscellaneous Revenue represents money received from leasing county owned property for cattle grazing. The
appropriations for operating expenses are requested in amounts that correspond with available revenue and estimated
service demands.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections. The Transfer In line reflects funds from the Don Pedro
Utility Capital fund #532 to offset costs associated with Plant Operations staff, maintenance of equipment and the rate
review study. The Administrative Services line is increased based on anticipated charges for administrative overhead
staff time. The Special Fees line item is represents charges by the State Water Resources Control Board.
Revenue and appropriation adjustments are based on prior year collections, the estimated beginning balance and
anticipated expenses.
Revenues are adjusted based on prior year actual receipts and estimated year-end fund balance. Various service and
supply appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and anticipated service demands. The
Rents/Leased Equipment line item reflects rental of an 80-foot man-lift to for the possible need of repairing/replacing
street lights. A Contingency is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. The Transfers In amount in the previous fiscal year was a
General Fund contribution to fund a consultant for the Proposition 218 process. Appropriations are adjusted based on
available funding and includes sufficient funding in the Professional Services line for the consultant to assist with the
Proposition 218 process.
Funding from the Mariposa Pines Utility Capital fund is requested to offset the cost of the Board approved rate review
study agreement. Reimbursement for Public Works staff for maintenance work and contracted engineering services for
the rate study are reflected in the Professional Services line item. Administrative overhead support functions are
accounted for in the Administrative Services line item. A new Aerator is being requested in the fixed asset category. No
funding is being requested to be Transferred Out to the Utility Capital Fund this fiscal year.
Revenues are adjusted to reflect current collection levels. Appropriations are adjusted based on the amount of available
funding, with the Professional Services line item representing costs associated with the bulk item pick up and pine
needle cleanup programs. The Contracts line item is reflective of the contract with Total Waste for waste disposal
services.
Revenue amounts are adjusted based on actual amounts collected in the prior fiscal year, current interest rates, and
anticipated delinquencies. The Transfers In line item, represents a Board approved General Fund loan for this fund’s
portion of a contract for a rate study review. The previous year’s amount was funding from the Yosemite West Utility
Capital Fund. The majority of appropriation line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses and anticipated
service level demands. The Maintenance of Equipment – Sewer line item is decreased based on prior year expenditure
and includes the purchase of an additional pond diffuser. The Laboratory Expense line item is increased for additional
process control requirements. The Special Fees line item is increased based on fee increases from the State Water
Resources Control Board. Training & Seminars is increased for training of Plant Operations staff for services to be
provided to this District. The Transfers Out in the previous fiscal year represented the repayment of a General Fund
loan. A new Well Production Meter is being requested in the fixed assets category.
The Beginning fund balance and interest earned make up the available residual funding being requested in the
Unclassified line item for use by the Sheriff for law enforcement purposes related to illegal drug investigations.
Revenue from Equitable Sharing is the County’s share of revenue received from the Federal and State asset seizures.
The Federal Government has ended this practice and no revenue is budgeted. The beginning fund balance and interest
earned make up the available residual funding that is requested in the Unclassified line item for use by the Sheriff for law
enforcement purposes related to criminal investigation activities.
Revenue from the State Community Based Child Abuse Prevention grant is based on allocation information received
from the State. The requested amount in the Family Resource Programs is for child abuse prevention activities, while
the Transfers Out line item represents funding transferred to the Children’s Trust Fund (#374) for Child Abuse
Prevention Council activities.
Revenue is requested based upon allocation schedules distributed by the State. The Transfer Out to the Sheriff’s
operating budget helps to offset the cost of two Deputy Sheriff positions and is reduced from the previous fiscal year
based on the State’s funding allocation. The Transfer Out to the Jail and District Attorney are based on State allocations
and available funding.
No grant revenue is anticipated in this fiscal year. No Cost Allocation is budgeted as this program has little to no activity
and the Construction line item reflects available grant funds for qualified housing rehabilitation projects.
Host an open house in Coulterville to introduce North County residents to services that can be provided
currently and assess further unmet needs.
? Develop additional services for North County based on articulated community needs
Requested Changes:
Grant revenue is adjusted based on estimated unexpended 2015 grant funds and anticipated grant funding to be
received this fiscal year. The salary line items represent county employees but are in categories that correspond to the
reporting requirements of the grant. The Weatherization Worker classification was eliminated and the Maintenance
Worker classifications were added as part of the Board approved reorganization in the previous fiscal year. The
Accountant position represents a reallocation of staffing within the department. No Extra-Help hours are requested this
fiscal year based on the anticipated service demands. Appropriations for services and supplies are adjusted based on
the level of grant funding and estimated service demands.
The administration of the County’s CSBG funds was transferred to Calaveras County in fiscal year 2012-2013. There is
no new revenue anticipated to be received this fiscal year. The fund has been reconciled with the State and all
contracts have been closed. The remaining fund balance has been transferred to the General Fund as reimbursement
against the General Fund transfer that took place in a prior year. Government accounting standards this fund must be
included in the budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
The fund continues to be budgeted using the residual fund balance. The available funding is budgeted in the
subcontractor line as no client services are anticipated to be needed.
Continued community outreach growth through active participation on various committees and advisory boards.
? Market department programs through outreach, brochure distribution, and collaboration with other community
entities.
Requested Changes:
The General Fund contribution is requested to increase to keep pace with service demands and the costs of providing
these services. Salary and benefits are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor negotiations and the Board
approved salary increase to the Community Services Director. Communications is increased to account for the new
wireless connectivity (WiFi). The Marketing Expense represents a new line item to track expenses relating to the
creation, printing and distribution of program informational items. Other requested changes in appropriations are based
on prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands.
The Department is requesting a Community Services Deputy Director position. This position will provide a direct
succession and/or chain of command when the need arises as well as provide assistance with the upper management
responsibilities of the Department. The additional personnel cost would be distributed by percentages between all
programs under the Community Services’ department. This new position is not projected in the requested budget at this
time as the Human Resources Department requires Board authorization to proceed with developing a job description
and a proposed salary.
Increase to 7,400 meals served through continued community outreach.
? Continue to provide a safe and secure social atmosphere to seniors on a daily basis.
? Grow Home Delivered Meals program through community outreach.
Requested Changes:
The C-1 Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP) are
increased based on estimated increases in the number of units of service and an increase in the reimbursement rate.
The General Fund contribution is requested to increase as Federal funding levels are not keeping pace with service
demands and the costs of providing these services. Salary and benefits line items are adjusted based on the recently
176
concluded labor negotiations and the Board approved salary increase for the Community Services Director. Additional
Extra-Help hours are requested in order to order to handle the increased workload. The Insurance line item is increased
to account for workers’ compensation claims experience. The various service and supply line items are adjusted based
on prior year actual expenses, increasing costs and anticipated service demands.
The C-2 Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP) are
decreased based on a lower number of estimated service units on which the allocation is based. The remaining
revenue adjustments are based on prior year actual receipts and anticipated donation levels. The General Fund
contribution is requested to increase as Federal funding levels are not keeping pace with service demands and the costs
of providing these services. Salary and benefits line items are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor
negotiations. Extra-Help hours are requested in order to handle the increased workload. The Insurance line item is
increased to account for workers’ compensation claims experience. The Raw Food line item reflects increasing costs
due to continuing drought conditions. The Marketing Expense represents a new line item to track expenses relating to
the creation, printing and distribution of program informational items. All other adjustments to service and supply line
items are based on prior year actual expenses.
The Restaurant Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging and the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP)
are reduced based on estimate State revenues. The Voucher Reimbursement line is decreased based on program
participation decline. The General Fund contribution is requested to increase as Federal funding levels are not keeping
pace with service demands and the costs of providing these services. Salary and benefits line items are adjusted based
on the recently concluded labor negotiations and the Board approved salary increase for the Community Services
Director. The Marketing Expense represents a new line item to track expenses relating to the creation, printing and
distribution of program informational items. The adjustments to other service and supply line items are based on prior
year actual costs and anticipated service demands.
The Department is requesting an increase to personnel by creating a Community Services Deputy Director position.
This position will provide a direct succession and/or chain of command when the need arises as well as provide
assistance with the upper management responsibilities of the Department. The additional personnel cost would be
distributed by percentages between all programs under the Community Services’ department. This new position is not
projected in the requested budget at this time as the Human Resources Department requires Board authorization to
proceed with developing a job description and a proposed salary.
The Federal government has reauthorized this program for two federal fiscal years with “ramp down” language in the
legislation. Federal Fiscal Year 2015 is anticipated at the reduced funding level. The Transfer In line item was a
General Fund contribution that is not being requested at this time. The Professional Services line represents all
available funding for contracts with the Fire Safe Council and South West Interface Project. There is insufficient funding
for the continued support of the Master Gardener Program and no Transfers Out to this program is requested.
There has been limited project work to date on this project. No new revenue is requested and all available funding is
budgeted in the Professional Services line item for possible work on the project.
Continue to provide intervention services to the school district to reduce truancy rates.
? Continue to provide intervention services that help reduce suspension/expulsion of problematic students.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is requested based on preliminary State allocations. Appropriations are requested to be Transferred Out to the
Probation operating budget in a corresponding amount to partially offset the cost of a Deputy Probation Officer
responsible for this program.
The Transfers Out lines to the Sheriff’s operating budget represents funding for one Sergeant, four Deputy Sheriffs, and
one Dispatcher. The Transfers Out lines to Sheriff – RCCP, Jail, Probation and District Attorney is to offset a portion of
the salary increases contained in the current Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). The Miscellaneous Expense line
item is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund.
The Extra-Help line item funds staff for assistance with the collection of DNA evidence and remaining funding is
appropriated in the Miscellaneous Expense line item for expenses related to this program and to balance the fund.
This is a newly established fund to collect fees and track expenses associated with the Explorer Cabins project. Line
items anticipated for this project include Office Expense for printing and postage, Professional Services for consulting
and legal services, Vehicle and Fuel for field work. The Transfer Out line is to the Planning operations budget for staff
time and other administrative services associated with the project.
Extra-Help provides maintenance/repair services for the Jail facility. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is adjusted
based on available funding and to balance the fund.
The Incentives revenue from the State are not requested this year. The Transfer In line reflects possible collection of
Social Service funds repaid to the department that cannot be identified to a particular program. The Miscellaneous
Expense line item is based on available funding and to balance the fund.
Based on reconciliation and tracking needs, the fund now has three sub-funds; ASSISTANCE ADVANCE 363-0535;
ADMINISTRATIVE ADVANCE 363-0536 and ASSISTANCE REPAYMENTS 363-0537. The Assistance and
Administrative Advance sub-fund revenue amounts are requested based upon preliminary projections provided by the
State and Federal Governments. The Transfers Out for specific programs are adjusted accordingly. The Transfers Out
line item in Administrative Advance represents funding to the Probation department for assistance with carrying out Title
IV requirements and administrative redirection of funds to 2011 Realignment (Fund 433) for previous transfers in
necessary to fund expenditures until State and Federal funds are received. The Assistance Repayment sub-fund is
budgeted based on anticipated receipts. The appropriations represent the State share of the repayment that must be
refunded to the State and the Transfers out is the County share of the repayments that are used to support Social
Service programs through the Incentive Fund (#362).
Appropriations are adjusted based on the estimated year-end fund balance. The line item Discount on Tax Due is to
cover shortages of less than $10 on tax bills.
Revenue is reduced based on actual receipts from the prior fiscal year. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with
available revenue.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections and appropriations are adjusted based on available revenue
and estimated year-end fund balance.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased based on the estimated year-end fund balance and available revenue
and includes sufficient funding for the previously approved Board projects – Mariposa County Visitors’ Center sign, the
North County History Center Museum sign, and the Coulterville Visitors’ Center sign (total of $11,500). The Transfers
Out line represents the County’s contribution to the County Service Area (CSA) #3. The previous fiscal year Transfers
Out amount also included funding for the costs associated with the completion of the Don Pedro and Bridgeport Fire
Stations.
Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to reimburse the County for costs occurred in previous fiscal years,
while the estimated costs for the storage of the vehicle and defense records for this fiscal year are included in the
Miscellaneous Expense line item. The Transfer In amount in the previous fiscal year was to correct a data entry error.
Complete budgeting process as required by Government Code.
? Continue research and commence communications with LDPCSD regarding possible transfer of the Don Pedro
Sewer Zone.
? Train staff on LAFCo, as prior LAFCo staff has retired.
Requested Changes:
LAFCO fees are adjusted based upon anticipated fee receipts. No General Fund contribution in the Transfers In line
item is requested. The Professional Services line item represents costs associated with Lake Don Pedro Community
Sewer District transfer issues and other current projects. The Transfer Out to the Planning operating budget is to
account for staff time on current projects.
Revenue and appropriations are budgeted based on preliminary funding estimates from the Federal and State
Governments and to meet anticipated service needs.
Funding is again requested to be Transferred In from the Family Preservation fund (#328) to meet the required minimum
funding level for community based child abuse prevention needs and to support Child Abuse Prevention Council (CPAC)
activities. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
Revenue is based on prior year actual collections. Appropriations are budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line item
for future needs of the department and are based on available funding and the estimated year-end fund balance.
The Medical Services Providers line item represents funding available to local physicians for emergency care provided
to the indigent and for which the physician is personally liable. The appropriations in the Hospital line item are
distributed to John C. Fremont Health Care District based on a legislative formula for unreimbursed medical services
provided to the indigent. The Transfers Out line item reimburses the Health operating budget for the management of
this fund.The Transfer In line item represents a partial repayment from the Social Security Truncation fund (#419) for the
purchase of software to remove the first five digits of social security numbers from recorded documents and create a
“public record” document. Appropriation adjustments are based on available revenue, the estimated year-end fund
balance and anticipated equipment maintenance.
Appropriations are adjusted based on available funding and the estimated year-end fund balance. The Transfer Out is
to the Alcohol & Drug operating budget to help offset program costs.Miscellaneous revenue represents the possible receipt of funds from unclaimed estates and appropriations are adjusted
to balance the fund.
Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance. The
Transfer Out is to the Alcohol & Drug operating budget to help offset program costs.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item is adjusted to balance with the estimated year-end fund balance.
Appropriations are adjusted based on available revenue and estimated year-end fund balance.
Revenue received from Interest earnings is reduced based on current interest rates. The Professional Services line item
contains appropriations to continue with the preservation of historical records. The Equipment line item is for the
purchase of two replacement computers that are used for recording purposes. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is
increased to balance the fund.Appropriations are adjusted based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands. The Miscellaneous
expense line item is increased to balance the fund. No funding is being requested to in the Transfers Out line item to
the Treasurer/Tax Collector budget this fiscal year.

The funding received from sales tax and vehicle license fees (VLF) are decreased based on State estimates using a
new distribution structure. The County Medical Services Program (CMSP) VLF represents the amount withheld by the
State to fund this program. The Transfers Out line items are to offset expenses in the Health operating budget and are
adjusted to correspond with available revenue. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is used to balance the fund.
The 2011 Realignment line is decreased based on current State estimates. The Transfers Out line item is adjusted
according to anticipated needs in the affected operating budgets – Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug, and Mental
Health Services Act. The Managed Care Offset is decreased based on changes to the program as dictated by health
care reforms. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is to balance the fund.
Realignment revenue adjustments are reflective of State shifts in the funding levels of the various components of this
funding stream. The Transfers In amount in the previous fiscal year from Fund #363 was to account for reconciliation
from a previous fiscal year. Appropriations being transferred out to the Social Services, Social Service Programs, the
General Fund, Social Services Assistance Advance and In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority are increased
based on anticipated service demands. The Transfer Out to the CalWORKs Family Support line item is shown
separately for tracking purposes. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is to balance the fund.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to account for interest earnings and fees received in the previous
fiscal year, and no expenses being incurred.
The requested revenue represents a State grant provided by the Federal government for bioterrorism/public health
emergency preparedness activities. The Transfers Out line item transfers available grant funding to the Health
operating budget for eligible costs associated with the bioterrorism/public health emergency program.
Revenue and appropriations are adjusted slightly to match estimated allocations.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents accumulated interest earnings and is used to balance the fund. The
funding being transferred out to the Health operating budget is in an amount equal to the grant award.
Funding from donations received during the Gambusia (mosquito fish) distribution day are requested at the same level
as the previous fiscal year and appropriations for expenses related to the distribution day (media, bags, fish) are
adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
The fund has been separated into four sub-budget units for accounting tracking purposes: 410-0436 accounts for
Children’s and Adult’s System of Care; 410-0437 accounts for Prevention Education and Intervention; 410-0438
accounts for Workforce Education, and Training and 410-0439 accounts for Innovation. The Transfers In line item
represents funding from the Mental Health Realignment Fund (#393) that will be used to fund core services. The
adjustments to Salary and Benefit line items include recently concluded labor negotiations and a significant redistribution
of staff positions based on caseload, demands for services and available funding in concurrence with the corrective
action plan. Due to the change in accounting, revenue and appropriations are all adjusted so that corresponding
transactions can be tracked to the appropriate funding component of the fund. The Contingency line item in each subbudget
unit has been reduced to balance that sub-budget and the overall fund due to increases in Professional Service
contracts, Purchased Services and other program demands.
Revenues are adjusted based on estimated allocations from the State and Federal governments. The Transfers In
amount from Social Services Realignment (fund #394) reflects a portion of the required Maintenance of Effort, with the
majority now being budgeted in the Social Services operating budget for ease of accounting and payment to the State.
The amount of funding transferred to the Social Services operating budget (#001-0501) is increased to match the
current contract level. The PA Admin MOE line has been eliminated as this cost has shifted to the Social Services
operating budget in efforts to consolidate costs and better track the expenditure. State billing of the MOE has also been
changed to a one lump sum total. The Contingency line is being requested to balance the fund. The other adjustments
to appropriations are based on prior fiscal year actual amounts and anticipated program needs.
The County has received its allocated amount so no new revenue is requested. Appropriations are adjusted based on
the estimated year-end fund balance.
Increase collections by working closer with Probation Officers to hold clients more accountable.
? Increase delinquent collections by becoming more current on back billing and sending clients to the Franchise
Tax Board for further collection efforts.
? Reduce number of uncollectable accounts.
Requested Changes:
Revenue from Collections is estimated based on prior year receipts. The Transfers In from the Community Corrections
Program (AB 109 fund #432) is based on work and collection efforts related to this program. Changes in Salary and
Benefit lines reflect Board approved staffing changes and recent labor negotiations. Increases to the Franchise Tax
Board Fees are due to an increased number of cases being sent to this Board for collections. Increase to the Software
line item is for computer system software upgrades. Training & Seminars line item is increased to provide training to
newly hired staff. There is no net-county cost in this program.
Complete the implementation of a juvenile case management system that will reduce time spent compiling data
for reporting purposes.
? Continue to provide intensive supervision and service referrals for high risk offenders and their families.
Requested Changes:
The Grant funding is received in advance for the next fiscal year and is expected to stay at the same level. The changes
in Salary and Benefits line items reflect staff reallocation – now partially funding a Deputy Probation Officer III as well as
salary adjustments contained in the current Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). Unfunded Liability Payment
represents the new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution towards
retirement plans. This amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been
determine by an actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013
(PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future. Appropriations are
requested based on prior year actual expenditures and available funding.
Appropriations are budgeted based on anticipated revenue collections and estimated year-end fund balance. The
Transfers Out represents available funding to be transferred to the Recorders Modernization fund for the reimbursement
of the truncation software purchased several years ago.
CUPA Forum grant revenue will be transferred to the Health operating budget to offset the costs of purchasing computer
equipment used in the field by environmental health staff assigned to the CUPA program.
The Wraparound program has decreased in activity to a level that is now unsustainable as a standalone program. The
program activities have been transferred to Behavioral Health and the Transfer Out line moves all available funding to
the Behavioral Health operating budget. All positions allocated to this fund have been re-allocated to other Human
Services budgets.
Program Interest revenue line items are the interest portion of payments being received by existing loan recipients. The
Principal portions of the loans are not shown in the budget because of accounting practices and how loans are
accounted for on balance sheets. No new grant revenue is anticipated. The Miscellaneous Expense line item
represents the fund balance available for loans to qualifying Mariposa County businesses, and promotional and
operational expenses.
The Transfers Out line items represent available funding to reimburse the Health operating budget for allowable grant
expenses.
Revenue consists of interest earned and the residual fund balance. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is used to
balance the fund.
Decrease probation violations by applying rehabilitative services and appropriate supervision levels targeted at
criminogenic risk and needs.
? Provide programming opportunities and educational classes to jail inmates.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is requested in an amount provided by a State formula. Appropriations are requested in specific line items to
carry out the requirements of AB 109 as recommended by the Executive Committee of the Community Corrections
Partnership and approved by the Board of Supervisors. The Extra-Help line item will fund 960 hours of a Deputy
Probation Officer I/II, and Overtime will offset costs associated with Deputy Probation Officers and Deputy Sheriffs for
performing Probation Enforcement Apprehension Team (PEAT) operations. The Board approved contract with
Mountain Crisis Services, a subsidiary of the Alliance for Community Transformation, is included in the Professional
Services line item. The Work Program Expense line item is increased in support of the Department ‘sefforts to increase
employment related to parolee transition costs back into the community. The Education and Direct Client Services line
item is increased to support the goal to increase classes for inmates. Fixed assets include the continued Jail expansion
project. The Transfers Out line item reflects funding being transferred out to the Jail, Probation, Revenue and Recovery,
Planning and Indigent Defense, to offset costs associated with the additional job duties created by this legislation.
Contingency is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund.
Revenue estimates are based on preliminary State allocations and revenue formulas for specific programs, and are now
consolidated for ease of accounting. The Transfer In line items represent possible reclaimed program funds issued to
clients in error. Appropriations are budgeted in specific line items to be transferred out to the respective Human
Services operating budgets as eligible expenses are recorded and reported.
Decrease probation violations by applying rehabilitative services and appropriate supervision levels targeted at
criminogenic risk and needs.
? Continue to improve and enhance jail alternative programs for low risk offenders.
? Provide programming opportunities and educational classes to jail inmates.
Requested Changes:
Revenue is requested based on State allocations of the grant awards to counties. The Transfer In from Fund 444 is the
Probation Department’s share of the Drug Task Force and Project School Climate grant in support of one existing
Deputy Probation Officer I/II position.
Adjustments to salaries and benefits are reflective of the current Memorandum of Understanding. Extra-Help is
requested to assist with the anticipated workload. Overtime is increased based on prior year actual expenditures.
Unfunded Liability Payment represents the new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the
employer’s contribution towards retirement plans. This amount has been separated from the traditional employer
contribution line item as it has been determine by an actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public
Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation
in the future. Appropriations are requested in specific line items to carry out the evidence based program requirements.
The Incentives, Safety, Vehicle Expense and Training line items are increased based on anticipated needs. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to balance the fund and includes funding for the possible purchase of a
new vehicle.
Revenue is requested based on a grant awarded by the State. The Transfers Out line item reflects funding available to
be transferred to the Health operating budget once eligible grant expenses have been recorded.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted based on the existing Memorandum of Understanding. Unfunded Liability Payment
represents the new amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution towards
retirement plans. This amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been
determine by an actuarial study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013
(PEPRA) and will need to be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future. The Miscellaneous
Expense line item represents prior fiscal year unspent grant funds and is used to balance the fund. A new Vehicle was
purchased in the previous fiscal year and no new Fixed Assets are requested this fiscal year.
Revenue is requested based on the State allocation funding schedule. Funding is requested to be transferred out to the
District Attorney and Indigent Defense budgets, to offset costs related to parole revocations. The Miscellaneous line
item is used to balance the fund.
Revenue is requested based on the State grant award and appropriations are budgeted accordingly for eligible
expenses related to the program – air surveillance activities and Overtime.
Revenue is based on the estimated amount necessary to provide sufficient court security. Appropriations are requested
based on the cost of the assigned Deputy Sheriff and the estimated cost of Extra-Help Bailiffs. Salaries and benefits
are increased based on the existing Memorandum of Understanding. Unfunded Liability Payment represents the new
amortization and rate smoothing policies set by CalPERS for the employer’s contribution towards retirement plans. This
amount has been separated from the traditional employer contribution line item as it has been determine by an actuarial
study to be a new “risk pool” created by the Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) and will need to
be funded directly to avoid an underfunded situation in the future. No safety equipment purchases are anticipated. A
new vehicle was purchased in the previous fiscal year and no Fixed Assets are requested this fiscal year.
This grant project has now been completed. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in
the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
This is a onetime grant that has now concluded. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be
included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
This grant funds a portion of two Social Worker Supervisors, one full time Mental Health Assistant II, and contracted
mental health workers to provide 24/7/365 mental health crisis response. No Extra-Help is requested as all program
work is either being performed by full-time county staff or contracted work. The Transfer Out is the allowable portion of
funding for overhead expenses and is transferred to the Behavioral Health operating budget. There is no request for
Contingency funding this fiscal year as all available funding has been allocated to the Professional Services line item.
This grant partially offsets the salaries of staff assigned to Drug Task Force activities and funding is transferred out to
the District Attorney, Sheriff and Probation operating budgets according to the approved grant budget. Project School
Climate will be charged via invoice and according the Board approved contract. This fund also includes line items for
data collection, evaluation, and training.
The beginning fund balance is the residual funding from the 2014-2015 Office of Homeland Security (OHS) grant. This
grant will fund an Extra Help Office Assistant for one year. It is anticipated that in the future the County will receive
ongoing grants from OHS to further support Extra-Help staff, equipment and activities associated with the County’s
Emergency Management Center.
501: The fund balance in Fund 501 is being used to fund the Park Stairs project. The Transfer In line is a
request for General Fund dollars to replace heating and air conditioning systems, fascia boards, trimming and
painting at the Government Center.
? 502: The Courthouse Construction fund is adjusted based actual revenue receipts received in the previous
fiscal year and the residual funding for continued courthouse construction and the possible remodel of the
downstairs courtroom.
? 503: Appropriations in the MCCJF Construction are adjusted based on work performed in the previous fiscal
year.
? 506: The Mariposa Creek Project was closed in the previous fiscal year.
? 507: The Public Transportation Modernization Improvement and Service Account (PTMISA) accounted for
grant revenue and appropriations for restrooms at the Park & Ride which were approved by the Board with
Resolution LTC 12-5. This project has been completed.
? 510: Revenue and appropriations in the Sidewalk Projects are for sidewalks at Mariposa Elementary School
and along Bullion Street.
? 511: Revenue and appropriations in the County Road Projects are adjusted to account for State Transportation
Improvement Program (STIP) funding received for specific road projects. The Safe, Accountable, Flexible and
Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU) is not projected this year based on
information from Federal funding sources. The STIP funding will be used for Mt. Bullion Cutoff Phase II and
Triangle Road.
? 512: County Bridge Replacement represents funding for bridge replacement and repairs, and appropriations
are budgeted for specific bridges in the appropriate line items. The Transfers In in the previous fiscal year
represented a General Fund cash match required for the Darrah Bridge.
? 513: Represents funding and appropriations associated with Coulterville Drainage Project as well as the
employment training program (Mother Lode Job Training). Appropriations in the Transfer Out line items
represent grant overhead to the Economic Development budget and to the Engineering/Surveyor budget for
program expenses.
? 515: Disaster Recovery Initiative is ongoing bridge and road maintenance in the areas affected by the
Telegraph fire – Fund 515. Appropriations in the Transfer Out represent grant overhead reimbursement to the
Economic Development budget and reimbursement to the Engineering/Surveyor budget for project services.
? 516: No changes are requested in the Data Processing fund.
? 517: The Don Pedro Fire Station has been completed.
? 518: The Fish Camp Fire Station has been completed.
? 519: The Midpines Fire Station has been completed.
? 521: The Bridgeport Fire Station has been completed.
? 530: The residual funding in the Coulterville Utility Capital Fund is budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line
item to balance the fund.
? 532: The funding from the Don Pedro Utility Capital is requested to be transferred to the Don Pedro Sewer
Fund #316 to offset costs related to the Board approved rate study contract.
? 534: The Transfers Out in the Mariposa Pines Utility District is requested to be transferred to the Mariposa
Pines fund (#320) to offset costs related to the Board approved rate study contract.
? 535: The residual funding in the Yosemite West Utility Capital Fund is requested in the Miscellaneous Expense
line item to balance the fund.
? 540: This fund reflects residual money available for the Don Pedro Waste Water Treatment Plant.
282
? 560: Previously accounted for grant funding associated with special Airport projects. Residual funding was
transferred out to the Airport Fund in the previous fiscal year.
? 566: This fund reflects residual monies available for the Catheys Valley park extension.
Revenue from construction permits is increased based on anticipated projects occurring during the fiscal year.
Miscellaneous Revenue is anticipated to increase based on efforts to increase fees associated with the inspection of
transient rentals. General Fund support is requested in an amount necessary to offset code enforcement activities.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to account for recently concluded labor negotiations. Extra-Help is increased to allow
for additional hours for a Building Inspector position, Office Assistant I/II, and scanning staff. The Professional Services
line item represents the anticipated use of contracted audit services. The Vehicle and Fuel expense lines are based on
anticipated demand for inspections. The Software line item reflects an anticipated upgrade and yearly maintenance
costs. The Training & Seminars line is increased based on requirements to maintain International Code Council
Certifications. No Contingency is requested this fiscal year.
Determine and receive Board concurrence regarding the future direction of the landfill.
? Implement new recycling programs and update sort line equipment to increase diversion.
? Install bailer system and support equipment to save on shipping cost and increase the value of our commodities.
Requested Changes:
Fund # 601 – Solid Waste Operations: The funding from a Department of Conservation grant is anticipated this fiscal
year along with a new grant for Household Hazardous Waste. Recycling Reimbursement is expected to increase with
the implementation of the bailer. Salary and benefits are adjusted to account for recently concluded labor negotiations.
Extra Help and Overtime lines are requested at reduced amounts because of recently implemented efficiencies and full
staffing.
The Maintenance of Equipment is decreased based on the amount of anticipated repair work on heavy equipment. The
Building Maintenance line includes costs for the destruction of a monitoring well. Memberships are adjusted to actual
costs. The Professional Services line item is increased based on anticipated contracts and administrative services
provided by Public Works Administration. The Special Fees and Deposits line item is increased based on anticipated
fee increases. Rents & Leases of Equipment reflects reduced operational needs. No Soil Cover appropriations are
requested based on the use of Ferguson Slide materials being used for cover at the landfill instead of purchasing soil.
CRV Purchase line item is reduced based on prior expenditures. The Equipment line item is for the purchase of roll off
bins for at the Transfer Stations. Other line item reductions are to balance the fund. The next project is placement of
the Monitoring Wells and that line item is now requested to be funded. The Transfers Out represents funding to the
Solid Waste Heavy Equipment fund for the eventual replacement of the equipment. No Contingency is requested this
fiscal year. The Retirement of Long Term Debt represents the principal and interest payments on the USDA Loan for
the Compost Facility. The Capital Lease Principal and Interest represents payments on the bulldozer, bailer, and
compactor.
The costs to operate the Transfer Stations are shown as sub-budgets. County bins have been placed at the Transfer
Stations and county staff is now performing the hauling activities. Other appropriation line items are adjusted based on
prior year actual expenditures and anticipated service demands.
Fund #602 – Solid Waste Closure: There are no requested changes to this fund.
Continue transportation services to county residents through the Dial-A-Ride system.
? Continue meeting and exceeding fare box ratio mandates.
? Grow ridership through continued community outreach and departmental networking.
Requested Changes:
Section 5311 State funding has decreased from the previous year based on the State budget. Title III-B Transportation
funding provided through a four year agreement with Area 12 Agency on Aging is increased as there is a significant
need for senior medical transportation. The Transit Fares projected revenue is based on a conservative average of
actual receipts. No Local Transportation Claim funding is requested this fiscal year due to sufficient revenue from other
sources to meet anticipated services demands. Adjustments to salary/benefits of current personnel reflect recently
concluded labor negotiations. Extra Help and Relief Bus Driver line items are adjusted to reflect anticipated needs.
Training and Seminars is increased due to required bus driver training. A replacement vehicle was purchased in the
previous fiscal year and no Fixed Assets are requested this fiscal year. No Contingency is requested this fiscal year.
Other appropriation adjustments are based on prior year costs and to meet anticipated service demands.
The Department is requesting an increase to personnel by creating a Community Services Deputy Director position.
This position will provide a direct succession and/or chain of command when the need arises as well as provide
assistance with the upper management responsibilities of the Department. The additional personnel cost would be
distributed by percentages between all programs under the Community Services’ department. This new position is not
projected in the requested budget at this time as the Human Resources Department requires Board authorization to
proceed with developing a job description and a proposed salary.
Revenue for Hangar Space is increased based on prior year actuals. The Fuel Sales are decreased based on prior year
trends. The Miscellaneous Revenue line item reflects the land use fees for firefighting aircraft and is dependent on the
fire season. Appropriations are requested in the various line items to account for the necessary operations of an airport,
including but not limited to; communications, building and equipment maintenance, utilities, replacement of runway light
bulbs, and fuels. The Professional Services line item is for engineering services and monitoring wells. Administrative
Charges are to reimburse Public Works for management services. The Lighting Project has been completed thus no
request for funding of fixed assets. The retirement of the long term debt represents the loan repayment on hangars.
This grant has been completed all remaining residual funding was transferred out in the previous fiscal year.
Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after
transactions have ceased.
Residual funding was transferred out to the Airport budget in the previous fiscal year. Governmental accounting
regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
This grant project has been completed and no grant revenue is requested. Residual grant funding was transferred out in
the previous fiscal year. Government accounting regulations require that this budget be included in the Annual Budget
for two years after transactions have ceased.
Revenue requested is an amount based on estimated staff time and operating expenses from the previous fiscal year.
The Miscellaneous Revenue line reflects reimbursement of standby charges for afterhours work and is based on
previous activity. A General Fund contribution is requested until such time as costs are known and rates charged to the
Special Districts are revised. Salary and benefits are adjusted based on the recently concluded labor negotiations.
Extra-Help is decreased to reflect an accurate calculation of hours required. Overtime and Standby/Call back are
increased based on prior year expenditure. The Equipment and Software line items are for computer replacements.
The various service and supply line items are based partially on estimated costs for operating the division and prior year
actuals expenditures. The fixed asset is a utility trailer for transporting tools and equipment to the water /sewer plants.
Maintain over 400 vehicles and equipment and provide support for County Emergency Services.
? Evaluate and adjust the vehicle and equipment rates to accommodate the increasing costs.
? Successfully hire and fill current vacancies.
? Purchase and put into service all budgeted replacement vehicles and equipment the same fiscal year.
Requested Changes:
Revenue received from departments for maintenance on vehicles is adjusted to reflect estimated workload and actual
costs. The Non-Fleet Policy Charges reflects reimbursement from departments for additional equipment (trailer hitches,
fuel tanks, etc.) and because there are no requests at this time the line item is budgeted at a minimum. No General
Fund contribution in the Transfer In line is requested this fiscal year as Standby costs will be minimal. Salary and
benefits are increased based on the recently concluded labor negotiations. The department is requesting to do a
reorganization of staff and is currently working with Human Resources on job titles and description of duties. The
changes that will affect Fleet Maintenance are to redefine the Fleet Superintendent to Fleet Manager and reclassify an
Equipment Mechanic to Equipment Mechanic Supervisor. Any necessary salary adjustments will be reviewed by the
Board at a later date and changes to the budget will be included with the Balancing Adjustments.
The Insurance line item is increased based on claims experience calculations. Outside Labor line item reflects costs of
sending vehicles to outside vendors and is increased based on prior year actual costs. The Fire Equipment
Maintenance line item is increased based on the current maintenance schedule. Various appropriation line items are
adjusted based on available revenue and anticipated service demands. The Transfers Out line item represents the
department’s payment on the Fleet Maintenance Shop building loan. No Fixed Assets are requested this fiscal year.
The Transfer In is from the Solid Waste fund #601. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with the estimated fund
balance and revenue amounts.
The Depreciation and Replacement line items are requested for the command and patrol vehicles, and one water
tender, and are adjusted based on the depreciation schedule. The CSA#3 Replacement line item accumulates
depreciation/replacement charges for the equipment that was purchased with County Service Area #3 funding. The
funding for these line items is budgeted in appropriation line items in the Fire operating budget. The Miscellaneous line
item was used for new vehicle set-up charges and is not anticipated to be needed this fiscal year. The Vehicles line
item reflects accumulated and new funding for future replacement purchases of fire apparatus.
The Replacement and Depreciation line items are adjusted based on existing county vehicles/equipment and the
estimated cost to replace these vehicles. The vehicles to be replaced this fiscal year include five Sheriff patrol vehicles
and two trucks for a total estimated expenditure of $230,400. The Heavy Equipment replacement includes two 10-
Wheel dump trucks for an estimated cost of $400,000.
Fund #705 – General Insurance: Revenue and appropriations are adjusted to reflect the reimbursement for insurance
premiums, Group Health for Retirees costs, and Unemployment charges. The Special Insurance line item is the new
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) that was approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Fund #706 – Workers’ Compensation: Revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for
premiums and workers’ compensation medical and administrative costs. Appropriations for Workers’ Compensation
expenses are adjusted based on actual costs incurred in the previous fiscal year. The reserve in the Workers’
Compensation fund is requested at an amount equal to the previous fiscal year.
Fund #707 – Liability: Revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for premiums and
liability claims. Excess Liability premiums have increased slightly. The Reserve is funding set aside for existing and
potential claims, based on claim experience.
Revenue is budgeted in the amounts necessary to satisfy the Principal and Interest payments based on the terms of the
loan.
Revenue is adjusted based on anticipated receipts and appropriations are budgeted accordingly.
The beginning balance and budgeted reserve reflect the maximum allowable by the bond. Revenues from the bond will
now be receipted in fund #755.
The revenue and budgeted reserve are based on estimated collections and to balance the fund.
Revenue is adjusted based on anticipated receipts and funding transferred in from the Lake Don Pedro Waste Water
Treatment Plant Bond Reserve fund (#757), and appropriations are budgeted accordingly.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections, and appropriations are requested to be transferred out to the
Lake Don Pedro Waste Water Treatment Plant Bond fund (#756).
Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to satisfy the principal and interest amounts contained in the loan. The
interest payments reflect the loan refinancing in August 2014 at 2.1% interest, down from 6.49%.