Current Secured Property and Unsecured Property tax revenues are budgeted at either the same level or at a
slightly reduced amount based on current property tax values. The delinquency rate remains moderate but
revenues for delinquent payments and penalties are budgeted at the same amount due to regulations effecting
foreclosures. The Supplemental revenue line item is budgeted in a negative amount as the County is currently
experiencing tax rolls with refunds rather than increased assessments. In-Lieu Vehicle License Fee (VLF) and
Sales Tax represents the State’s Triple Flip (property tax revenue from the schools and special districts in lieu of vlf
and sales tax) per SB 1096 guidelines and are requested in the same amounts as the previous fiscal year due to no
anticipated growth in the tax roll. The County’s Sales Tax is estimated to increase modestly as business activity
remains sluggish. Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue has continued to increase every-year and is budgeted
at an increased amount, but in a fiscally prudent amount due to uncontrollable factors that could affect this revenue
stream. Revenue from Interest is greatly reduced based on current interest rates and reduction in available cash to
invest. Revenue received from SB90 mandate reimbursements is decreased based on a reduction in anticipated
funding of these mandates in the State Budget. Payment In-Lieu Taxes (PILT) authorized by the Emergency
Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (PL 110-343) is budgeted at the same amount pending receiving estimates from
the Federal Government. Cost Allocation is increased to adjust to State/Federally funded programs and non-
General Fund departments requiring more general government services than in the previous fiscal year. Funding is
requested in the Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU) Additional Capacity line item and is based on a stable level
sanitation usage. Child Support Recoupment is reduced based on revenue received to date for this program.
Medicare Part D Subsidy is funding received from California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS) for
retirees who participate in the voluntary federal outpatient drug benefit program. The amount of funding is based on
a formula that considers each local agency’s contribution toward Medicare health premiums in the previous fiscal
year and as such will vary from year-to-year. This funding is requested in an amount consistent with amounts
received in prior fiscal years. Penalties and fines received from Superior Court are adjusted based upon revenues
received to date. The Transfers In amount reflects Interest earnings in Fund 350 – Vallecito that should not have
been credited and a reimbursement of an overpayment of the estimated cash match from the Roads-Special
Projects (Fund #306).
The estimated ending Fund Balance is requested at last fiscal year’s actual amount. No change in Designation is
requested however the funding in Designation – Retirement Costs is requested to be transferred to the Designation
- Unemployment to ensure sufficient funding for unemployment charges during the fiscal year.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted in anticipation of the Board approving adjustments to Department Head
compensation and benefit packages, and the implementation of the new Mariposa County Managerial and
Confidential Organization (MCMCO) contract. The Insurance line is reduced due to older liability claims
no longer being included in the calculations used to determine department charges. The County’s portion
to retain the services of the Townsend Group for one year to assist in grant writing endeavors is again
requested in the Professional Services line item. The Mariposa 4-H Council is not able to assist with the
County booth at the State Fair, so no funding is requested in this line item. The Software line item reflects
the annual cost of the MinuteTraq Agenda hosting, maintenance, and upgrades. The cost to purchase
and install this program was included in the Technical Services budget last year, but the annual cost to
maintain this program is now appropriately budgeted here. A replacement computer was purchased for
the Deputy Clerk to the Board in the previous fiscal year and requested Equipment purchases this fiscal
year are computer tablets for the Board members to replace the aging laptops currently in use. In
anticipation of two new Board members taking office, funding to attend the California State Association of
Counties (CSAC) New Supervisor Training is requested.
Revenue is now budgeted to account for the National Park Service (NPS) sub-leasing the Stroming
Building from the County. Salaries and benefits are adjusted in anticipation of the Board approving
modifications to Department Head compensation and the implementation of the new Mariposa County
Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMCO) contract. Appropriations in the Professional Services
line item represent funding for the continuation of the SB90 claims administration services and sales tax
analysis contracts. The Rents/Leases Building now includes the monthly lease amount for the Stroming
Building that was previously shown in various Human Services budgets in the previous fiscal year.
Revenue is increased to account for the Transportation Planning portion of the audit. Appropriations are
reduced as the triennial audit was completed last fiscal year.
Standard practice is to request General Contingency at 1-percent of the County’s previous fiscal year’s
adopted operating budget which as $44,274,900.
Revenue to collect for Auditor services provided to the Mariposa County Superior Court is reduced based
on the amount of service provided in the previous fiscal year. Salaries and benefits are adjusted in
anticipation of the Board approving adjustments to Department Head compensation and the
implementation of the new Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMCO)
contract. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service demands and actual
expenditures from the previous fiscal year.
Revenues are adjusted based on actual funding received in the previous fiscal year. Funding was from
the Tax Collectors Cost fund (#390) is included again to offset the costs associated with tax billings.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted in anticipation of the Board approving adjustments to Department Head
compensation and the implementation of the new Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential
Organization (MCMCO) contract. Salary savings are also recognized in anticipation of a new hire being at
a lower step than the incumbent. Group Health for Retirees is increased to account for the medical
insurance costs of an employee who retired last fiscal year is eligible to receive this benefit. The
Publications line item represents the cost to publish Notice of Defaults and anticipated Tax Sales.
Expenses related to Lake Don Pedro Bond delinquency/foreclosure proceedings are budgeted in the Bond
Delinquent Fees line item. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service
demands and actual expenses in the previous fiscal year.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted in anticipation of the Board approving changes to Department Head
compensation, the implementation of the new Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization
(MCMCO) contract, as well as merit step increases. Minimal adjustments are made to service/supply line
items based on actual expenses in the previous fiscal year and anticipated service demands.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted in anticipation of the Board approving a change in Department Head
compensation and the implementation of the new Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential
(MCMCO) contract. The Books line item is adjusted to reflect a seven-percent increase in subscription
rates.
Salary and benefits are adjusted in anticipation of the implementation of the new Mariposa County
Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMCO) contract. Office Expense is increased in anticipation
of clerical testing and recruitment. Three of the four employee bargaining unit contracts expire in the fall
of 2012, and funding is requested to contract with a professional labor negotiator. Additionally, there is reopener
language in the MCMCO contract and funding is requested in this line item in case the MOU is reopened.
Revenue is increased based on anticipated service demands. Group Health for Retirees is reduced as a
retiree is no longer receiving this benefit. The Rents/Leases Building line item is reduced as the
department no longer requires the additional storage space.
The department is again requesting to reorganize personnel and is continuing to work with
Administration/Personnel on this request. The reorganization was initiated with the retirement of the
System Support Analyst position and subsequently leaving this position vacant. This funding was reduced
in the previous fiscal year in order to balance the General Fund, and the department has requested the
reorganization at the original calculated amount. Extra-Help is increased to account for additional clerical
support and poll workers for the General Election this fall. Group Health for Retirees is adjusted to
account for changes in medical insurance needs of retirees from this department. Costs related to the
General Election this fall in the Election Expense line item. The Software line item includes the continuing
maintenance of the voting election software system and election tally software license.
The department is proposing to establish a separate “Plant Operations” budget which will be responsible
for the maintenance of the water and wastewater plants. Due to time constraints, this budget has not
been entered separately into the AS400, but is still combined with this budget. The new “Plant
Operations” budget is intended to have no net county cost and will consist of three employees currently
budgeted in Facility Maintenance. Many of the service/supply line items are adjusted to account for
separate “Plant Operations” expenses, including a portion of the Extra-Help increase.
Revenue for Facilities Maintenance Services is increased based on anticipated service demands of
Yosemite West for road maintenance and snow plowing needs, as well as service provided to the sewer
plants. Miscellaneous Revenue is increased in anticipation of a contract with Yosemite Area Regional
Transit Service (YARTS) for maintenance at their bus stops and for maintenance/cleaning from the rental
of county facilities. Changes in salary line items are the result of merit step increases and the
implementation of the new Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization contract. Due to
time constraints, the financial impact of replacing a Maintenance Shop Worker position with a Senior
Office Assistant position that was approved in the previous fiscal year will be included with Final Budget
Adjustments.
Adjustments relating strictly to Facility Maintenance include an increase in Extra-Help to account for
general maintenance needs through out the County at various facilities. Maintenance Buildings accounts
for general maintenance and major repairs to county facilities that may arise during the fiscal year.
Equipment purchases include a computer, industrial vacuum, and a riding mower. Training & Seminars
costs are for management training, pesticide certificates, and certified pool operator.
Plant Operations service/supply requests are an increase for Memberships to account for Plant
Operations licensing; contracting with a civil engineering firm for the development of water and
wastewater maintenance plans; the rental of a sewer cleaning machine; the purchase of a hot taping
machine; miscellaneous safety equipment; equipment purchases of a computer, radios, and
miscellaneous specialty tools.
No revenue is requested as contributions towards the cost of using the E-Civis program and no
appropriations are requested for E-Civis. Staff believes that utilizing the Townsend Group is more efficient
in applying and researching available grants. The P.G. & E. Grant award represents available grant
revenue for economic development enhancements and appropriations for this grant as well as some
carry-over funds from the previous fiscal year are budgeted in the PG&E Grant line item. Salary and
benefits are adjusted to reflect the implementation of the new Mariposa County Managerial and
Confidential Organization (MCMCO) contract. The “Tools for Business” on-line service is budgeted in the
Professional Services line item, as well as not yet defined funding needs. Training & Seminars includes
attendance at three Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) workshops, the CALED annual
conference, and a Federal grant workshop that was funded by PG&E in the previous fiscal year.
This budget unit was formerly included in the Road Fund, but has been separated to better account for
specific State/Federal revenue received for Road maintenance/projects and for the auditing of certain
Road Fund expenses and overhead charges. Revenue is realized from providing engineering services for
road maintenance projects related to the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act –
A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU) funding, engineering services related to the Disaster Recovery
Initiative (DRI) Grant, review fees, and map checking and surveying services.
The Assistant Director – Operations Public Works, the County Surveyor, and all of the Engineering staff
are now budgeted here. Salary and benefits related to these positions are shown accordingly. Operating
expenses for this division are estimated and include “renting” office space from the Road Fund,
purchasing software to enable files to be shared with contractors, and purchasing additional/new
surveying equipment.
Last fiscal year, the Board approved using Tobacco Settlement money to fund the Server Virtualization
and training related to this expense, which is shown in the Transfers In line item. No funding from the
Tobacco Settlement fund is requested this fiscal year. Salaries and benefits are adjusted to reflect
implantation of the new Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization and in anticipation of
Board approved adjustments for Department Head compensation. The Communications line item is
reduced based the previous fiscal year’s actual costs. Professional Services includes Civic Plus web
hosting services, AS400 programming and upgrade support, and outside system support for server and
AS400 conversions. The Software is increased to allow for the purchase of 2010 Email clients. Training
and Seminars is increased to allow for the email upgrade and server virtualization training. Other
adjustments reflect changes based on prior year actual expenditures.
The department is requesting a fixed asset purchase – new AS400 to replace a model that is now eightyears
old and 2 backup appliances with a new backup tape drive to enable staff to retrieve data off site.
Please see the attached memorandum from the Technical Services Director for additional information on
the fixed asset requests.
Additionally, the department is requesting to promote an existing PC Technician position to an Information
System Specialist due to the need for a position that has greater responsibilities due to the recent
advancements in the County’s technology. This request has not been included in the Requested Budget,
but is anticipated to increase the budget by approximately $15,000. Please see the following
memorandums from the Technical Services Director for additional information on this request as well as
the department’s unmet needs.
Miscellaneous Transfers is the General Fund support requested for the California Energy Grant (Fund
#438) to offset expenses that were later determined not eligible for grant reimbursement. Senior Services
In-Kind represents the administrative match between the County and Area 12 Agency on Aging and based
on the amount of in-kind services being provided by the County, and is also included in an agreement
approved by the Board of Supervisors. The funding contribution to the Airport Fund is increased to
account for the managing of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) programs and projects. The
Building Department is again requesting a loan based on projected revenues in the next fiscal year and
the estimated year-end fund balance. No General Fund contribution is requested for the Solid Waste and
Recycling fund and likewise no contribution is requested to correct the Energy Grant.
The contributions to Senior Nutrition and to the Senior Service fund are based on anticipated available
federal revenue and projected year-end fund balances. General Fund support is requested to decrease in
the Road Fund Contribution line item based on separating the Engineering/Surveyor function and placing
this budget in the General Fund. Funding for the Government Center debt service fund is increased
based on the loan payment schedule.
Funding levels are requested in amounts based on allocation schedules received from the State
Department of Child Support Services. Salaries and benefits are adjusted in anticipation of the Board
approving adjustments to Department Head compensation as well as for merit step increases. The Board
approved a 0.50 Permanent Part-Time Child Support Assistant I/II position in the previous fiscal year and
this position is now budgeted. Previously, the department had used Extra-Help to assist with the clerical
work. Adjustments to service and supply line items are based on anticipated service demands and
available revenue. The Transfers Out line item represents payment to Human Services for office space.
Funding for this program has been removed from the State Budget. Government accounting practices
require that this budget remain for two years after transactions have ceased.
No funding is requested from the portion of Proposition 172 – Sales Tax that is currently allocated to the
Sheriff’s operating budget. Funding is once again included for Probation’s CalEMA grant that partially
funds an Extra-Help Advocate position, but at a reduced amount. Adjustments in salaries and benefits
reflect the implementation of the new contract with the Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential
Organization (MCMCO) and in anticipation of the Board approving adjustments to Department Head
compensation. Additionally, the budget reflects a full year’s of funding for the Senior Office Assistant
position. This position was unfunded for a portion of last fiscal year to help balance the General Fund.
The Department is currently using an Extra-Help Advocate rather than a Permanent Part-Time position
that was in last year’s budget. Group Health for Retirees is increased to reflect an employee who retired
last year and is eligible for this benefit. Post Certificate Pay is increased to reflect the hiring of an
employee who eligible to receive this benefit. The Insurance line item is increased based on claims
experience.
Revenue is based on funding included in the State Budget for this program. Salaries and benefits are
adjusted based on the new contract with the Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization
(MCMCO) and to reflect that the Victim Witness Supervisor position is allocated and funded solely in this
budget. In previous fiscal years, this position had been partially funded in the Vertical Prosecution Grant
budget. The department is also currently using an Extra-Help Advocate position rather than a Permanent
Part-Time position. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on available revenue. No Training
& Seminar appropriations are requested due to declining revenues.
Revenue received from the Federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) and appropriations associated with
this program are now budgeted in a separate fund due to the Federal Fiscal Year being different and the
timing of receiving revenue. This will allow for unspent grant funds received in one fiscal year being “rolled
over” in the next fiscal year and also allow for better accounting of grant funds by keeping these funds
separate. Likewise, funding received from the Mariposa County Superior Court for Bailiff services and the
corresponding appropriations for salaries and benefits are now budgeted in a separate fund (#440) to
allow for better accounting for these services. Funding transferred in from the Supplemental Law
Enforcement (SLESF) is increased based on this fund’s estimated year-end fund balance. SLESF offsets
the salaries two Deputy Sheriff positions. Money transferred in from Rural Law Enforcement is requested
in an amount necessary to offset the costs of one Sergeant, four Deputy Sheriffs, and one Dispatcher.
Salaries and benefits are adjusted to account for merit step increases, internal promotions at a lower step,
new hires at a lower step, current vacancies, and in anticipation of the Board approving adjustments to
Department Head compensation. A Sergeant position is no longer funded to reflect the Board approved
re-organization of the Jail by adding two additional Jail officer positions to the Jail budget. The Forestry
Contract line item represents the salaries of Extra-Help employees used to provide law enforcement
services on federal lands and is offset by revenue (Forestry Contract and BLM). Overtime is increased
based on actual costs in the previous fiscal year and more employees at a higher merit step. Group
Health for Retirees is increased based on an increase in the number of employees who have retired from
this department. Communications is increased to account for the new radio contract. The Insurance line
item is increased because of costs associated with new and existing workers’ compensation claims.
Rents/Leases Buildings accounts for leases for Animal Control, Station One in Greeley Hill, and the radio
vault on Peno Blanco and is increased to accommodate the new lease agreements. Other service and
supply line items are adjusted based on anticipated service demands and prior year actual costs.
Attached is a memorandum from the Sheriff regarding unmet needs within the Sheriff’s Departments.
Overtime is increased to account for the possible need for search/rescue, court appearances, and to
cover for vacation/sick time use. Out of Area Pay is increased because an employee assigned to this
division is eligible to receive this benefit. The Insurance line item is reduced as several substantial
Workers’ Compensation claims have now exceeded the seven-year claim experience time period and are
no longer used in determining insurance charges. River Rescue Supplies is increased to accommodate
the need to replace ropes, water rescue equipment, and hydro testing of dive tanks. Due to an increase in
the annual mileage driven, the State Share of Vehicle Expense line item is increased.
No revenue in the Paroles line item is requested as the State has suspended this funding with the
implementation of AB 109 – Community Corrections Partnership. Funding from AB-109 (Fund #432) is
requested to make the impact of adding two new Jail Officer positions cost neutral. Salaries and benefits
are adjusted to accommodate merit step increases and to recognize the two additional Jail Officer
positions that the Board approved in the previous fiscal year. No Extra-Help is requested this year. Post
Certificate Pay is increased based on more employees qualifying for this benefit. The Insurance line item
is increased to cover the cost of new and existing Liability claims. The roof on the Jail is leaking and
needs to be replaced due to health/safety standards, and the cost is budgeted in the Maintenance of
Buildings line item. Medical care needs for inmates continues to increase with some inmates having
serious on-going medical conditions and this is reflected in the Medical & Laboratory line item. Utility
expenses for the entire Sheriff’s department are budgeted here and these costs continue to escalate, this
line item is increased based actual costs from previous fiscal years and no indication that energy rates will
be declining.
Revenue received from Juvenile Hall Fees is increased based on prior year actual receipts and Extra-Help
is reduced based on the previous year’s need and the anticipated need for supervision of juveniles being
detained. Standby is increased to accommodate the need for being on call for after-hour service
demands on weeknights and weekends. Staff has determined that the maintenance contract is no longer
needed on the Fingerprint ID machine and therefore the Maintenance Equipment line item is reduced.
Other service and supply line items are adjusted based on the previous year’s actual expenses and
anticipated need for this fiscal year. The Support and Care line item is increased to reflect the fact that
more local juveniles are being placed in out-of-county facilities.
Revenue adjustments include new grant funding from the Office of Justice Programs (OJP); the
completion of the Planning Grant; and the near completion of the Stimulus grants with either no funding
requested or only the remaining grant funds budgeted. Funding from AB-109 the Criminal Justice
Realignment is reflected in the Transfers In line item and will offset the cost of two Deputy Probation
Officer I/II positions that were previously offset by Stimulus grants and the Juvenile Justice Crime
Prevention Act (JJCPA) funding. Funding received from the Wrap-Around fund for the cost of a Deputy
Probation Officer III is increased to fully fund the position, while funding from the JJCPA is reduced based
on the State’s proposed level of funding for this program. Overall there is a decrease in requested
revenue when compared with the previous fiscal year’s budget. Salary line items are adjusted to account
for positions no longer being offset of the Stimulus grant, in anticipation of the Board approving
adjustments to Department Head compensation, and merit step increases. An increase in Extra-Help is
requested to assist with the increased workload and Overtime is reduced based on actual costs from the
previous fiscal year. Benefits are adjusted to reflect that AB 1909 funding is offsetting a Deputy Probation
Officer I/II rather than the sub-budget JJCPA.
The Insurance line item is increased to reflect the cost of existing and on-going workers’ compensation
and liability claims. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on the completion of grant
programs, the previous year’s actual expenses, and anticipated need.
The sub-budget unit (001-0224-535) for the JJCPA grant provides partial funding for a Deputy Probation
Officer I/II position.
Attached is a memorandum from the Chief Probation Officer identifying unmet needs within his
Departments.
Funding received from the Emergency Planning Grants includes Cal EMA grant money. Assistance for
Hire revenue is based on the anticipated level of fire activity that the Department may receive
reimbursement for by assisting Federal and State agencies with fire suppression efforts. Reimbursement
received for Fire Marshal services is reduced based on actual receipts from the previous fiscal year and
anticipated requests for this service.
Salary and benefit adjustments are in anticipation of the Board approving adjustments to Department
Head compensation and the new contract with the Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential
Organization (MCMCO). The Insurance line item is reduced to reflect no new substantial workers’
compensation or liability claims. The Grant Match line item accounts for any “cash” matches that are
required for grants that have been awarded for the purchase of radio pagers and fire hose. County
Vehicle expense represents the depreciation/replacement charges on existing command, patrol vehicles,
Rescue 22, and one water- tender, as well as minor maintenance costs (oil changes, fuel filters, etc.).
This line item was reduced last year to defer depreciation/replacement charges in order to balance the
General Fund, and is now requested at the “normal” amount. The County Service Area #3 line item
accounts for replacement costs associated with the new fire apparatus and will slightly increase each
fiscal year. Other adjustments are based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service needs.
The Sub-Budget is offset by the Emergency Management Planning (EMP) grant and funds an Office
Assistant I/II position and an Emergency Planner position. Grant funding was extended for an additional
year in order to facilitate the purchase of an emergency generator.
Attached is a memorandum from the Fire Chief identifying unmet needs within his department.
Revenue is decreased due to the completion of grants including the Integrated Weed Management and
Invasive Weeds grants, as well as to reflect estimated State/Federal allocations. Adjustments in Salaries
and Benefits are in anticipation of the Board approving adjustments to Department Head compensation.
The Integrated Weed Management line item represents the Merced River Canyon Project funded by Title
II monies and the County’s noxious weed control program. The AARA – Invasive Weed Project has been
completed. All other adjustments are based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service demands.
Revenue from Planning Fee is increased in anticipation of a modest increase in permit applications.
Transfers In revenue represents staff time performed on LAFCO job duties. Salary adjustments are in
anticipation of the Board approving adjustment to Department Head compensation, the new contract with
the Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMC), and merit step increases. No
Extra-Help is requested as the current employees used in this capacity are retired annuitants and new
legislation prevents them from having county employment without reinstating and foregoing their pensions.
Group Health for Retirees accommodates new retirees who are eligible for this benefit. Professional
Services includes funding for the continued legal services of Abbott & Kindermann on specific planning
issues. The Fish & Game/CEQA represents California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) filing fees for
area plans and is based on two potential projects. Other service and supply line item adjustments are
based on prior year actual costs and to meet anticipated service demands.
In the sub-budget unit – General Plan, the Professional Services line item is requested to increase and
includes funding for contracts involving the sign and zoning code enforcement, Williamson Act
compliance, and mining projects.
Attached is a memorandum from the former Planning Director regarding the requested budget and unmet
needs for the department.
The only grant included in this year’s requested budget is the carry over of the 10/11 Assistance for Fire
Fighters (AFG) grant. A replacement water-tender for the Don Pedro fire station and diesel exhaust
removal systems for 5 fire stations will be purchased with the 10/11 AFG grant. Appropriations are
requested in specific line items in accordance with the grant revenue.
This grant has now been completed and the State is no longer providing funding for this program.
Residual funding was received in the previous fiscal year and this funding was transferred out to
Probation’s operating budget to offset costs that were formerly funded by this program. Governmental
accounting practices require that this budget be included for two years after transactions have ceased.
No revenue is requested as the funding for this grant was received in the previous fiscal year, but the
appropriations will be spent in this fiscal year. No Extra-Help is requested and the remaining funding will
be used as training and response stipends for volunteers.
An overpayment by the Office of Emergency Services (OES) was received in the 2009-2010 Fiscal Year.
The final audit has not yet been performed on this disaster by the State/Federal government, but staff is
requesting the appropriate amount of overpayment be budgeted to repay OES once the mistake is
confirmed and this is budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line item. The State has “closed” the
disaster in March 2012, but now has three years to complete an audit. If no notice for repayment is
received from the State by April 1, 2015, then this money may be used by the County.
Revenue from reimbursable services performed by Pubic Works Administration staff is increased based
on reimbursement for the services of the Assistant Director’s position. Salaries/benefits are adjusted to
account for a full year’s salary for the Director and Assistant Director positions, merit increases, and the
new contract with Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMCO). Overtime is
reduced based on anticipated need. The Service Agreements reflects the cost of the software
maintenance contract for the department’s cost accounting system. A replacement network printer for
the fiscal department and a replacement computer are requested in the Equipment line item. Training and
Seminars is increased to allow for the Director and Assistant Director to attend necessary conferences
and for training on the cost accounting system. The remaining requested changes are adjustments to
prior year actual costs and to meet anticipated service demands.
State and grant revenues are adjusted based upon preliminary estimates from the State and amounts of
grant awards. Health fee line items are adjusted based on anticipated service demands and actual
receipts received in the prior fiscal year. A new line item – Miscellaneous Health Fees is requested to
capture costs associated with providing inspection services for tattoo parlors, landfill, and solid waste
vehicles. Interdepartmental Revenue represents funding received from the Fire Department for the
Support and Aid for Everyone (SAFE) program. Realignment revenue coming from Vehicle License Fees
(VLF) and Sales Tax are reduced based on declining revenue received from the State last fiscal year.
Money in the Public Health Emergency and the First 5 Public Health Nurse line items are reduced based
on the remaining amount of available grant funds. Funding received from the State for Tobacco
Cessation programs is increased to recognize a “roll over” of funds from the previous fiscal year. The
Certified Unified Program Agencies (CUPA) – Aboveground Petroleum Storage Act (APSA) grant has
been completed and no funding is requested. Funding for the new program – CUPA – Underground
Storage Tank (UST) is requested in order to recognize funding from the State to provide these types of
inspection services.
Salary/benefit line items are adjusted in anticipation of the Board approving adjustmenst to Department
Head compensation, the new Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMCO)
contract, and merit step increases. Extra-Help is increased to additional clerical assistance. Funding in
Clinic Extra-Help is corresponds with available grant and State funding and is requested at a reduced
amount. The PERS Incentives line item is increased to account for employees eligible to receive this
benefit. Out-of-Class pay is requested to continue for an employee who is temporarily assuming higher
level responsibilities due to a leave of absence by another employee.
No funding is requested in the Rents/Leases Building as the department has now moved into a Countyowned
facility. The Tobacco Cessation line item is increased based on available grant funding while the
Public Health Emergency Preparedness (PHEP) is reduced due the closing of several grants. Likewise,
no operating expenses related to several CUPA programs are requested due to the ending of these grant
funded programs. No County Medical Services Program fee is anticipated this fiscal year. Other various
service/supply line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses, available grant funding, and
anticipated service demands. No fixed assets are requested this fiscal year.
Revenue received from State funded programs is adjusted to reflect changes implemented with the 2011
Realignment. Minimal funding in Other Mental Health Revenue is requested as last year’s funding
represented a cost settlement from previous fiscal years. Revenue transferred in from realignment is
reduced based on a continuing decline in available funding. No funding is being transferred in from the
Mental Health Services Act fund because of a change in the method for using on-call crisis workers during
normal work hours as well as with the corrective action currently being taken with this fund.
Salary adjustments reflect funding the System Support Analyst in the Human Services Administration
budget. Staff time for several positions is now partially funded in this budget as well as clerical staff that
support more than one function. Additionally, one Mental Health Clinician position is unfunded in
anticipation of an internal promotion. Extra-Help is reduced based on the anticipated service demands
and the previous year’s usage. Non-PERS Incentives are increased to reflect an increase in the number
of employees that qualify for this benefit while the PERS Incentives is decreased to reflect staffing level
changes. Benefits are adjusted based on changes to staffing levels. Communications is increased to
account for cellular phones and pagers that are assigned to specific employees. Appropriations are
increased in the Professional Services line item based funding a full year for a counseling agreement.
The Telepsychiatry line item is increased based on current service demands. Because of financial
constraints on other Human Services budgets, this budget is now funding a larger portion of the
Management Information System contract. Funding is included in the Rents/Leases Building line for the
Coulterville office. The Board and Care line item is reduced to recognize that citizens in the conservator
program are now paying for their own direct costs rather than the costs being “passed through” this
budget. Cost Allocation is increased to reflect the services performed by other county departments for this
function. Less funding is being transferred out to Human Services Administration for this budget’s portion
of overhead and basic operating costs (lease payment, telephone, utilities, etc.). Last year the Board
adopted Resolution #11-368 approving a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to perform the Child
Abuse, Prevention, Intervention, and Treatment (CAPIT) program “in-house.” As a result of this MOU,
funding is being transferred in from Social Services to offset the cost of providing this service.
Revenue adjustments include an accounting system change to now show all State revenue coming from
the 2011 Realignment Fund rather than directly from the State. This change was implemented last fiscal
year and is now requested accordingly. Additionally, funding received from Drug Medi-Cal
reimbursement is now included in the 2011 Realignment. The Friday Night Life Mentorship program is
not longer being funded and appropriations associated with this program are likewise not budgeted. The
Private Programs revenue line item represents the Driving Under the Influence (DUI) program, which is
now being contracted to a private provider and therefore no revenue or costs associated with this
program are included in the budget. Adjustments in salary and benefits include unallocating a Social
Worker Supervisor II, a Senior Alcohol & Drug Specialist position, and an Alcohol & Drug Assistant I
position effective September 1, 2012, due to a retirement and the discontinuance of the DUI Program.
Clerical support is now partially funded in this budget to account for actual staff time performed for this
budget. Overtime is requested based on prior year actual costs. Unemployment is budgeted as a result
of an impending layoff. Benefits are adjusted based on staffing level changes. Funding for the
Communications line item is requested to account for cell phone and pager usage by employees
assigned to this budget. The Primary Prevention Services line item is increased to reflect a full fiscal year
of the contract for counseling/rehabilitation services. Appropriations are increased in the Management
Information Systems (MIS) contract based on employee allocations. Rents/Leases Building is reduced
due to the Stroming Building now be sub-leased. Other Service/Supply line items are adjusted based
prior year actual costs and available State/Federal dollars. The Transfers Out to Human Services
Administration is reduced based on a reduction in overhead costs. No funding will be received from the
Social Services budget for CalWORKS is requested this fiscal year in order to offset the costs in the
Behavioral Health budget. This budget has no net county cost.
Revenue adjustments reflect the implementation of the 2011 Realignment funding changes and new line
items are included in the budget to indicate this revenue source. Other revenue line items are adjusted to
correspond with these new line items. Salary/benefit adjustments include unallocating two currently
vacant Social Worker IV positions and one vacant Social Worker III position, the addition of the Program
Manager position that was allocated last fiscal year, and the new contract with the Mariposa County
Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMCO). The Extra-Help line item includes the Fraud
Investigator position and Overtime is requested to increase based on the previous fiscal year actual costs.
Group Health for Retirees is increased based on the number of employees who have retired in the past
year and are eligible to receive this benefit. The department is continuing to participate in the Subsidized
Employment program and appropriations are increased to reflect the anticipated usage of this program.
Cost Allocation is increased to reflect the cost of services provided to this department by other county
functions. The department is upgrading its existing main computer system and this cost is reflected in the
Equipment line item. The increase in the amount of funding being transferred to the Human Services
Administration budget is based on the overhead administrative costs charged to this department. Funding
received from the Behavioral Health budget represents reimbursement for on-call staff time during normal
work hours, while funding is requested to be transferred out to Behavioral Health as reimbursement for
work performed in the Child Abuse, Prevention, Intervention, and Treatment (CAPIT) and CalWORKS.
No funding is being requested to be transferred to Alcohol and Drug for CalWORKS as a result of 2011
Realignment. There is no net county cost for this budget.
Adjustments to revenue reflect the full fiscal year implementation of the 2011 Realignment funding
changes. Requested appropriation changes are adjustments to available funding and anticipated service
demand. This budget has no net county cost.
Funding received from other Human Services departments is adjusted based on the level of
administrative/overhead support provided to the respective departments. Salary/benefits adjustments are
in anticipation of the Board approving changes to Department Head compensation and the new contract
with the Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMCO). Other position
adjustments include now funding the System Support Analyst position in this budget rather than the
Behavioral Health budget; the Board approved elimination of the full-time Fraud Investigator position; and
unallocating an Account Clerk III position effective September 1, 2012, in anticipation of an internal
promotion. Extra-Help is increased based on the anticipated need for clerical support for the entire
Human Services division.
Communications is reduced as costs associated with cell phones and pagers now being charged directly
to the effected departments. Appropriations in the Rents/Leases Building is reduced because of the
Stroming Building is now being sub-leased to the National Park Service. Other adjustments to
service/supply line items are based on actual costs from the previous fiscal year. Reimbursements from
other Human Services departments for these expenses are included in the Intrafund Transfers line items
as well as in the Transfer In revenue line items. This budget has no net county cost.
The Friends of the Library have indicated that they wish to increase their contribution and this is reflected
in the Donations revenue line item. No Transfers In is requested this year as this was one-time funding
from the Probation Department with AB 109 implementation money to offset the cost of keeping the
Library open on Mondays. Salary/benefit adjustments include the anticipated Board approved changes to
Department Head compensation. Requested changes to Service/Supply line items are based on the
actual costs in the previous fiscal year.
Attached is a memorandum from the County Librarian regarding the unmet needs of the department.
Minor adjustments are requested in several Service/Supply line items based on prior year actual costs and
anticipated service demands.
Revenue received from the rental of county facilities is now shown in a different revenue line item due to
accounting structure requirements and is increased as a result of the fees that the Board approved.
Revenue received from Swim Lessons is increased as a result of the increase in fees that the Board
approved, while revenue received from Water Aquatics is reduced based on actual receipts received in
the previous fiscal year. A new revenue line item to recognize money from the Fitness Over 50 program is
now budgeted as is the new Scholarship Contribution program that the Board approved last fiscal year to
recognize donations from the community to offset the cost of day camp fees for certain attendees. No
Transfers In funding is requested this year as this was one-time only funding received from the Sheriff’s
Rural Crime fund to offset the cost of a Part-Time employee. Salary/benefit adjustments reflect the
elimination of the Part-Time Recreation Coordinator as approved by the Board in the previous fiscal year,
as well as the new Mariposa County Managerial and Confidential Organization (MCMCO). Extra-Help is
increased based on anticipated use of the County’s swimming pools.
Expenses associated with the Fitness Over 50 program are now included in the Recreation Program line
item and are offset by revenue received for this program. Full depreciation and replacement charges are
now fully budgeted in the County Vehicle Expense line item. The Movie In The Park line item is increased
based on additional funding received in for this program in the previous fiscal year as well as this in this
fiscal year. All other requested changes are based upon anticipated need and prior year actual costs.
Revenue from Interest earnings is reduced based on declining interest rates and estimated cash balance.
Local Transportation revenue is increased to reflect anticipated collections based on State estimates. The
amount of funding requested to be transferred out to the specific programs is based on available funding.
Revenue from interest earnings is reduced based on the estimated cash balance and declining interest
rates. Funding is requested to be transferred out to the Transit fund to offset operating expenses and the
Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to balance the fund.
Revenue estimates are based on funding received from the State Rural Planning Assistance program and
the State Transportation Improvement Program: Planning, Programming, and Monitoring Program (STIPPPM),
and are based on allocation letter received from the State. To recognize the Board approved
Public Works reorganization that occurred in the previous fiscal year the Administrative Analyst is no
longer allocated. Reimbursement for staff time of the Assistant Public Works Director – Support Services
and to the Engineering/Surveyor budged for engineering services on STIP projects are budgeted in the In-
County Services line item. Requested appropriations in the Administration line item are to account for
services provided by Public Works administrative staff to this budget. The Unmet Needs line item is
reduced as the transit brochure project was completed in the previous fiscal year. Training and Seminars
is reduced as attendance at only one conference is anticipated. The Transfers Out line item accounts for
the required Financial Audit and is paid from the Audit budget (001-0103). The Contingency line item is
increased to balance the fund.
Revenue from the Local Transportation Claim (LTC) is adjusted based on funding and eligible funding
needs, while appropriations are increased based on revenue received in prior fiscal years and no recent
activity in the fund.
A major change in this year’s budget is the separation of the Engineering and Surveyor staff and related
expenses and revenue into a separate General Fund budget. This was done to allow for clear accounting of
State/Federal dollars that are specifically for road projects in particular the Gas Tax proceeds, and to allow for
clear identification of Road-fund labor on non-Road fund projects (Fire Stations). This requested change had
resulted in number of differences in both revenue and appropriation line items from the previous fiscal year.
Additionally, with the separation of the Engineering/Surveyor staff into a General Fund budget, the Public
Works department has strived to maintain the total cost to the County the same as in the previous fiscal year.
Another requested change is that all funding and appropriations for major road projects has been removed
from this budget and is now budgeted in Fund 511. This will allow for better accounting of revenue
designated specifically for projects as well as to better track appropriations for these projects.
Revenue received from Criminal Fines is reduced based on the previous year’s actual collections and interest
earnings are also reduced based on the estimated cash balance and current interest rates. Revenues
received from various Highway User Taxes are budgeted at the same level pending final allocation
determinations by the State. No revenue is requested in the State Transportation Improvement Program
(STIP) or any Federal programs as these revenues and corresponding expenses are now budgeted in Fund
511 to separate special road projects from “normal” operating/maintenance road programs. Money from the
State Highway Users Tax Account Section 2103 is slightly reduced based on preliminary allocations. No
revenue is budgeted in the Forest Reserve line item as the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self
Determination Act has not been reauthorized by the Federal legislature. Funding received from Federal
“grant” programs is not budgeted as the eligible projects funded by these awards have been completed. The
Road Department Services line item represents Road staff time on maintenance of Zone of Benefits (ZOB),
no funding from Road Department Review Fee is requested as this service is performed by the Engineering
staff, and Miscellaneous Revenue represents fees received from Road Permits.
Funding from the Local Transportation Claim (#031) is requested in an amount based on available funding.
The General Fund contribution is reduced as a result of separating the Engineering function into a separate
budget.
All Engineering staff and the Assistant Public Works Director – Operations are now budgeted in a separate
budget. Additionally, one Maintenance Worker III position is temporarily being underfilled at a Maintenance
Worker I/II level due to a personnel issue. The New Positions line item was previously established to account
for the Assistant Public Works Director – Operations. Extra-Help is increased based on anticipated service
demands and road projects. The Insurance line item is increased due to existing and ongoing workers’
compensation claims. The Professional Services line item is reduced and now reflects reimbursement for
engineering services performed by county Engineering staff. Funding is requested in the Professional
Services – Construction for hiring private equipment and operators for work on specific road projects. No
funding for Bridge Plan of Action (POA) line item is requested as this project has been completed.
Reimbursement for administrative overhead costs is reflected in the Administrative Fee line item. Full
depreciation/replacement costs are now budgeted in the County Vehicle line item. The need for General
Fund services was increased in part due to several emergencies that occurred in previous fiscal years and
this increase is shown in the Cost Allocation line item. Other adjustments are based on the separation of the
Engineering function and the County Road Projects from this budget, and to meet anticipated service
demands.
No change in revenue is requested and appropriations are budgeted at an amount that corresponds with
available revenue. Revenue collected in the previous fiscal year represents a reconciliation of previous
fiscal years that resulted in a correction for receipts that should have been posted to this fund. No
Contingency is requested and all available funds are budgeted in a line item that is available for eligible
expenses as approved by the Board of Supervisors. No requests for funding had been received at the
time the budget was prepared.
Revenue is increased based on receipts received in the previous fiscal year. Appropriations are adjusted
based on the estimated cost for legal subscription service and for the possible use of Extra-Help in
maintaining/organizing the Law Library.
Interest revenue is reduced based on current interest rates and estimated cash balance. Appropriations
are requested in amounts that correspond with anticipated revenue and estimated administrative costs.
Revenue is requested in the amount approved by OES and corresponds with the estimated cost of
repairs to the roads that were damaged during the severe weather of December 2010. The Transfers Out
line item represents funding being returned to the General Fund to correct the original estimate of the
cash match required for these projects.
Revenue from Interest earnings is reduced based on current interest rates and estimated cash balance
and money received from Penalties is decreased based on prior year actual receipts. The Transfers In
amount represents the County’s contribution from the Tobacco Settlement fund. The Miscellaneous
Expense line item represents available funding for repairs to existing fire stations and is reduced based on
available revenue. The Fire Assessment Services line item accounts for reimbursing the Auditor and Tax
Collector for their staff time and associated costs with collecting and managing the fire assessment.
Requested funding in the Transfers Out – Debt Service is the payment on the fire engines. No funding is
requested at this time to be Transferred Out for capital improvements to fire stations.
Revenue received Interest earnings is reduced based on current interest rates and funding received from
penalties is requested based on prior year actual receipts. The Fire Protection Services line item is based
on the estimated cost received from CalFIRE for the Amador station. No Contingency amount is
requested this year.
Interest earnings are reduced based on current interest rates. The Loan Repayments line item reflects
payment from the Coulterville Service Area sewer bonds. The Office Technician I line item is for possible
staff time provided by Administration in preparing Water Agency agendas and minutes. Professional
Services is increased to recognize the anticipated cost of funding outside legal services relating to the
agreement with the Merced Irrigation District (MID), as well as the consulting contract with MPUD.
Funding in the Non-Dedicated Funds line item reflects money available for special projects approved by
the Board of Directors. No Contingency is requested this fiscal year.
Revenue is adjusted based on actual amounts collected. Appropriations in the Professional Services line
item are for reimbursable work provided by Facilities Maintenance as well as any possible outside repair
service. Contingency is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund.
Revenue is adjusted based on the prior year’s actual receipts. Service and supply line items are adjusted
based on anticipated service needs and available funding. The Special Fees line item includes funding for
Title 22 (a regulatory compliance) and annual fees charged by the State Water Resources Control Board
(SWRCB) and the California Department of Public Health. The Bond Redemption represents the loan
repayment to the Water Agency fund. Funding is again requested to be transferred out to the Coulterville
Utility Service Fund and Contingency is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund.
Revenue from Interest earning is reduced based on current interest rates. Miscellaneous Revenue
represents money received from leasing county owned property for cattle grazing. Appropriations for
improvements to the existing horse trails and operating expenses are requested in amounts that
correspond with available revenue and estimated service demands.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts and to recognize reduced property values, while
recognizing a slight increase in revenue received from Delinquent payments. Funding received for
sanitation services are adjusted based on the number of residents and actual fees. Adjustments are
made to appropriations based on anticipated service demands and available funding. Funding is again
requested to be Transferred Out to the Don Pedro Sewer Utility Capital fund. No Contingency is
requested this fiscal year.
Revenue and appropriation adjustments are based on prior year collections and anticipated expenses.
The Professional Services line item is increased for possible maintenance/repair needs and no
Contingency is requested this fiscal year.
Revenues are adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond
with available revenue and anticipated service demands. The Department is requesting to rent an 80-foot
man-lift to for the possible need of repairing/replacing street lights, which is reflected in the Rents/Leased
Equipment line item. No new extensive lighting work anticipated at this time. Contingency is requested in
an amount necessary to balance the fund.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts and current interest rates. The Maintenance
Equipment line item is increased to allow for the purchase of aerator repair/maintenance parts, to rebuild
the lift station pumps, and marks for the sewer line and manhole covers. Reimbursement to Public Works
staff for maintenance work is reflected in the Professional Services line item. No fixed assets are
requested this fiscal year and funding is again being requested to be Transferred Out to the Mariposa
Pines Utility Capital Fund. No Contingency is requested this fiscal year.
Revenue is adjusted based upon actual receipts from the previous fiscal year. Funding in the Transfers
In line item in the previous fiscal year is a correction to a deposit error. The Board approved reducing this
Fund’s Reserve last fiscal year in order to provide additional funding for service demands. No such
request is being made this fiscal year. Appropriations are adjusted based on the amount of available
funding and the contract with Total Waste Systems for collection services.
Revenue amounts are adjusted based on actual amounts collected in the prior fiscal year and current
interest rates. The majority of appropriation line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses
and anticipated service level demands. The Maintenance Equipment – Roads is increased in anticipation
of repairs to road maintenance equipment. No fixed assets are requested this year and funding is again
being requested to be Transferred Out to the Yosemite West Utility Capital fund. The Contingency for the
Road sub-budget is requested in an amount necessary to balance the fund. No Contingency is requested
for the Sewer or Water sub-budget units.
Revenue from the State Child Abuse Prevention grant is budgeted in the Family Preservation line item.
Appropriations requested in the Family Resource Programs are for child abuse prevention activities, while
the Transfers Out line item represents funding transferred to the Children’s Trust Fund and to the Social
Services budget for reimbursement for staff time spent working on this program.
Revenue is requested based upon allocation schedules distributed by the State. Funding being
transferred out to the Sheriff’s operating budget offsets the cost of two Deputy Sheriff positions and is
increased because of the additional funding that was received in the previous fiscal year. No change in
funding is requested in the amounts being transferred to the Jail and District Attorney operating budgets.
No grant revenue is anticipated in this fiscal year. Appropriations are requested in amounts that reconcile
with revenue received in previous fiscal years. The Construction line item reflects available grant funds for
qualified housing rehabilitation projects. Due to reduced funding levels, no appropriations are requested in
the Subcontractor or the Transfers Out line items.
Revenue is adjusted based on known grant funding. The Transfers In amount in the previous fiscal year
was to reconcile the inadvertent over-spending of grant funds. No General Fund support is requested this
fiscal year. The Reserve for this fund was decreased last fiscal year to correct the negative fund balance.
The salary line items represent county employees but are in categories that correspond to the reporting
requirements of the grants, with the exception of the Weatherization Worker classification. The
department is requesting to unallocate one Eligibility Worker I/II position that is currently vacant. Extra-
Help hours are increased for work on anticipated weatherization projects. Appropriations for services and
supplies are adjusted based on the level of grant funding and estimated service demands. No Transfers
Out is requested this year to the Building Fund as the existing workload and time constraints on project
deadlines are problematic for both departments.
Revenue is estimated based on preliminary funding notices and may be adjusted as the State releases
funding. Administration of the grants is contracted to the Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency
and is reflected in the CSBG Delegate Agency line item. Other appropriation adjustments are based on
the level of grant funding and estimated service demands.
All available funding is budgeted in the Client Services line item for payment directly to clients for eligible
expenses and in the Subcontractor line item for possible subcontractor services on eligible programs.
Revenue adjustments are based on prior year receipts and anticipated donations. The requested General
Fund contribution is a slightly increased amount based upon the anticipated year-end fund balance.
Salaries/benefits are adjusted in anticipation of the Board approving changes to Department Head
compensation. Rents/Leases Building is increased based on the new lease agreement for the building.
Other requested changes in appropriations are based on prior year actual costs and anticipated service
demands.
C-1: Revenue from Area 12 Agency on Aging is reduced based on anticipated levels of funding while
revenue from the Federal Nutrition Services Incentives Program (NSIP) is slightly increased based on
preliminary funding allocations. Money from donations is reduced based on prior year actual receipts.
The General Fund contribution is requested to increase as the cost of providing this service is outpacing
revenue. Extra-Help is increased to allow for additional kitchen assistance due to an extended medical
leave of absence. Service and supply line items are adjusted based on prior year actual expenses and
approved agreements.
C-2: Funding received from Area 12 Agency on Aging is increased to reflect an increase in the number of
contracted service units. Other revenue adjustments are based on prior year actual receipts and
anticipated donation levels. The General Fund contribution is requested to slightly increase based upon
the estimated year-end fund balance and available revenue. Extra-Help is increased to allow for
additional kitchen assistance due to an extended medical leave of absence. The Raw Food line item is
increased based on an increase in the number of participants in the program and the rising cost of food.
All other adjustments to service and supply line items are based on prior year actual expenses.
Restaurant: The General Fund contribution is slightly increased based on a lower estimated year-end
fund balance. Adjustments to service and supply line items are based on prior year actual costs and
anticipated service demands.
No revenue is requested as the Federal government has not reauthorized this funding source. Interest is
reduced based on the available cash balance and current interest rates. Appropriations are adjusted
based on the remaining funding available and the Transfers Out line item represents the continued
funding of the Master Gardener program in the Cooperative Extension budget, pending Board approval.
No new revenue is requested based on anticipated project development needs. All available funding is
budgeted in the Professional Services line item for possible project development needs.
This fund was established in Fiscal Year 2007/08 when the development application was submitted and
there has been limited project work to date on this project. No new revenue is requested and all
available funding is budgeted in the Professional Services line item for legal advisement on the proposed
project.
This project was postponed by the applicant and remaining funding (less interest earnings) refunded to
the applicant. The interest earnings are requested to be transferred to General Purpose Revenue, as
Interest earnings were posted to this fund in error.
Revenue is requested based on preliminary State allocation and appropriations are requested to be
Transferred Out to the Probation operating budget in a corresponding amount.
The Transfers Out line represents funding for one Sergeant, four Deputy Sheriffs, and one Dispatcher
position in the Sheriff’s operating budget. The Transfers Out line is requested in a reduced amount
because during last fiscal year’s Final Budget Hearings, with the Sheriff’s concurrence, the Board
approved using this funding to maintain services in the Parks & Recreation budget, the Sheriff is not
requesting this action this fiscal year. Additionally, last fiscal year the Sheriff used this funding source to
replace the Jail control panel. The Miscellaneous Expense line item is requested in an amount necessary
to balance the fund.
Revenue is requested based on preliminary calculations provided by the State and the School District. A
portion of the available funding is requested to be Transferred Out to the Behavioral Health budget for
eligible program costs, while remaining funding is budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line item in
order to balance the fund.
Extra-Help is used to assist in the collection of DNA evidence and appropriations are reduced based on
prior year actual expenses. Remaining funding is appropriated in the Miscellaneous Expense line item for
possible future expenses related to this program and to balance the fund.
Revenue received from this source is now being directly deposited into Planning’s operating budget.
Governmental accounting practices require that this fund be included in the budget for two years after
transactions have ceased.
Revenue is reduced based on prior year actual receipts and current interest rates. A portion of this
funding is for Extra-Help that provides maintenance/repair services for the Jail facility. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item is adjusted based on available funding and to balance the fund.
Revenue is requested based on the allocations included in the proposed State Budget. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item is requested in an amount that is based on available funding and to
balance the fund.
Revenue amounts are requested based upon preliminary projections provided by the State and Federal
Governments, and appropriations are adjusted accordingly. The Transfers Out line represents funding to
the Probation department for assistance with carrying out Title IV requirements.
Revenue is requested based on prior year actual receipts and appropriations are increased based on the
estimated year-end fund balance. The line item Discount on Tax Due is to cover shortages of less than
$10 on tax bills.
Interest is reduced based on the estimated cash balance and current interest rates. The Miscellaneous
Expense line item is decreased based on expenditures in the previous fiscal year for construction costs
related to the four approved fire stations as well as the Server upgrade approved during Final Budget
Hearings. The Transfers Out line represents the County’s contribution to the County Service Area (CSA)
#3 for the remodel and/or repairs to existing county fire stations.
Requests for reimbursement must be made by a certain date in order to be included in the State Budget,
and for several budget cycles this deadline has been missed resulting in a negative cash balance. Staff
in the Auditor’s Department is correcting this issue. Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to
reimburse the County for costs occurred in previous fiscal years, while the estimated costs for the
storage of the vehicle and defense records for this fiscal year are included in the Miscellaneous Expense
line item.
LAFCO fees are adjusted based upon anticipated studies in Lake Don Pedro and Mariposa Public Utility
District (MPUD). The Professional Services line item represents costs associated with Municipal Service
Review (MSR) and SOI boundary studies for Lake Don Pedro Community Service District, and
annexation/reorganization proposals. Transfers Out to the Planning operating budget is to account for
staff time on any annexation proposals.
Revenue and appropriations are budgeted at the same level as the previous fiscal year based on
preliminary funding estimates from the Federal and State Governments and to meet anticipated service
needs.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts. Funding is again requested to be Transferred In
from the Family Preservation (#328) fund to meet the required minimum funding level for community
based child abuse prevention needs and support the Child Abuse Prevention Council (CPAC) activities.
Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund
balance.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections. Appropriations are budgeted in the
Miscellaneous Expense line item for future needs of the department and are based on available funding
and the estimated year-end fund balance. Last fiscal year the department received approval to replace
the Live Scan machine and no fixed asset purchase is anticipated this fiscal year.
No appropriations are requested this year as all residual money has been used to meet current animal
control operating expenses. Governmental accounting practices require that this fund be included in the
budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
Revenue from Interest is adjusted based on current interest rates. The Medical Services Providers line
item represents funding available to local physicians for emergency care provided to the indigent and for
which the physician is personally liable. Appropriations in the Hospital line item are distributed to John C.
Fremont Health Care District based on a legislative formula for unreimbursed medical services provided
to the indigent. The Transfers Out line item is to reimburse the Health budget for their management of
this fund.
Revenue from Interest earnings and recordings are adjusted based on current interest rates and actual
receipts from the previous fiscal year. The Transfer In line item represents a partial repayment from the
Social Security Truncation fund (#419) for the purchase of software to remove the first five digits of social
security numbers from recorded documents and create a “public record” document. Appropriation
adjustments are based on available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
During Mid-Year review last fiscal year the Board approved transferring funding to the Alcohol & Drug
operating budget to offset the costs of eligible expenses. No Transfers Out is requested this fiscal year.
Appropriations are adjusted based on available funding and the estimated year-end fund balance.
Last fiscal year revenue received from a welfare fraud case was deposited into this fund. No revenue is
anticipated to be received this fiscal year. Appropriations are adjusted based on available funding and
will be used for expenses that are not covered by other Human Services programs.
During Mid-Year review last fiscal year, the Board approved transferring funding to the Alcohol and Drug
operating budget to offset the cost of eligible program expenses. No Transfer Out is requested this fiscal
year. Appropriations are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund
balance.
No appropriations are requested in the Miscellaneous Expense line item as this is the third year of the
three-year agreement and all remaining funding will be transferred out to the Health operating budget.
The Transfers Out line item reflects money to the Health operating budget for tobacco cessation
education program costs.
Revenue received from Interest is reduced based on current interest rates. The Professional Services
line item contains appropriations to continue with the preservation of historical records and in the
Equipment line item the department is requesting to replace two existing computers that are used for
recording purposes.
Last fiscal year to help balance the General Fund the Board approved transferring out funding to the
Treasurer/Tax Collector budget to partially offset the cost of tax billing documents and this action is again
included in the budget. Other appropriation adjustments are based on available revenue and anticipated
service demands.
Funding received from sales tax is slightly increased based on actual receipts through the first threequarters
of the previous fiscal year, while funding received from vehicle license fee (VLF) is reduced
based on receipts received to date. The County Medical Services Program (CMSP) VLF represents the
amount withheld by the State to fund this program. Appropriations in the Transfers Out line items are to
offset expenses in the Health operating budget and are adjusted to correspond with available revenue.
Revenue is adjusted based on the 2011 Realignment and allocation estimates received from the State.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item is increased to balance the fund, and the Transfers Out line item to
eligible Mental Health programs is reduced based on available funding.
The Transfers In amount in the previous fiscal year represents a reconciliation adjustment from a previous
year. Funding is requested in the Miscellaneous Expense line item in order to balance the fund.
Appropriations in the Transfers Out line item are adjusted based on anticipated operating expenses in the
Social Services, Social Services Programs, Wrap Around Program, and In-Home Supporting Services
budgets as well as the Revenue Stabilization line item in the General Purpose Revenue budget.
Requested revenue represents a State grant provided by the Federal government for bioterrorism/public
health emergency preparedness activities. The Miscellaneous Expense line item reflects interest
earnings and residual grant funds from the previous grant award. The Transfers Out line item transfers
available grant funding to the Health operating budget for eligible costs associated with the
bioterrorism/public health emergency program.
Revenue is adjusted based on the amount of the grant awarded for the specific program. The
Miscellaneous Expense line item represents accumulated interest earnings and is used to balance the
fund. Funding being transferred out to the Health operating budget are in amounts equal to the
corresponding grant award.
Funding from donations received during the Gambusia (mosquito fish) distribution day are requested at
the same level as the previous fiscal year and appropriations for expenses related to the distribution day
(media, bags, fish) are adjusted to correspond with available revenue and the estimated year-end fund
balance.
Revenue received from Medi-Cal billings is reduced based on receipts received in the prior fiscal year.
Funding received from the State is increased based on preliminary allocation estimates received from the
State. The Transfers In line item represents funding from the Social Services Realignment Fund (#394)
that will be used to fund core services. Adjustments in Salary/Benefit line items represent Board
approved personnel actions taken last fiscal year on several positions regarding reclassifications, and
elimination of certain positions. A currently vacant Mental Health Assistant I position is requested to be
unallocated. Additionally, the department is requesting to modify the funding sources of certain positions
based on their job responsibilities and amount of work spent in various Human Services departments.
The Communications line item represents costs associated with cellular phones and pagers for
employees that are assigned to this function. The Telepsychiatry line item is increased based on
anticipated service demands for this service. Appropriations in the Rents/Leases line item represents
funding for the ROAD House, Coulterville office, and storage facilities and is reduced to reflect the sublease
for the Stroming building. Transfers Out to HS Admin represents the fund’s cost for administrative
services. In order to balance the fund Contingency is requested. Other appropriation adjustments are
based on prior year actual costs and the corrective action plan for this fund.
Revenue is adjusted based on estimated allocations from the State and Federal governments, and are
based on a specific reimbursement rate for the estimated number of claimable hours. The amount of
funding transferred to Social Services is decreased to match the current contract level. Other
adjustments are based on prior fiscal year actual amounts and anticipated program needs.
Revenue is budgeted based on anticipated collections and prior year actual receipts. Appropriations are
adjusted based on available revenue and the estimated year-end fund balance.
Revenue is adjusted based on the estimated amount of the grant award. The Miscellaneous Expense
line item represents interest earnings and residual monies from the previous fiscal year grant.
The County has received its allocated amount so no new revenue is requested and only a fund balance is
requested. Appropriations are adjusted based on the estimated year-end fund balance.
Revenue is increased based on actual collections from the previous fiscal year. Extra-Help is again
requested for additional clerical support as the program continues to evolve and is increased based on
anticipated service demands. Overhead charges are reimbursement for administrative costs and shown
as revenue in General Purpose Revenue. Fees collected by the Franchise Tax Board for access to
specific data used to obtain collections are reduced based on prior year actual expenses. Software
expenses include the annual H.T.E. license, Lexis Nexis updates, and a link to the Franchise Tax Board
and is increased to allow for the replacement of the existing JALAN software system. Other appropriation
line items are adjusted based on available funding and anticipated service demands. There is no netcounty
cost in this program.
Revenue is requested in the amount allocated to the County by the State. The salary of the Probation
Officer position is partially offset by AB 109/SB 678 money in Fund #434. No funding in the
Communications line item is requested as this expense is paid directly from the Probation budget. Grant
funding received in advance for the next fiscal year, is reflected in the Miscellaneous Expense line item.
Appropriations are requested in the Professional Services line item in order to contract for possible
counseling services. Overhead for reimbursement of administrative costs is again requested as an
allowable expense of the grant and is reduced based on the amount of support provided to this function.
Appropriations in the County Vehicle expense line item are increased to allow for the replacement of a
vehicle that currently does not have sufficient funding accumulated for replacement costs.
Revenue is requested based on the estimated number of recorded documents the department will receive
this fiscal year and appropriations are budgeted accordingly. The Transfers Out represents available
funding to be transferred to the Recorders Modernization fund for reimbursement of the truncation
software purchase.
Revenue reflects an anticipated payment from the fueling station as reimbursement for the clean up
procedures. Appropriations are requested in amounts necessary to continue with the clean up, the
monitoring at the Airport performed by a contract with American Geological, and the cost to provide
potable water.
The APSA grant program has been completed and no revenue is requested this fiscal year. Funding for
the ER grant is based on remaining grant funding available to the County. The Miscellaneous Expense
line item reflects interest earnings and unspent grant money from the previous fiscal year. The Transfers
Out line items represents funding that will be transferred to the Health operating budget to offset the costs
associated with the ER program.
Revenue received from Medi-Cal billings is reduced based on actual receipt in the previous fiscal year.
Funding adjustments in the Transfers In line items reflect the implementation of the 2011 Realignment
guidelines. The grant that increased a Permanent Part-Time (PPT) Office Assistant I/II position to fulltime
has ended, and this position is now requested to be allocated and funded at the 0.50 PPT level.
Appropriations are requested in the Communication line item to account for cell phone and pager costs
used by employees assigned to this program. Professional Services is reduced to account for a
contracted services based on current usage of this service. No Rents/Leases is requested due to the sublease
of the Stroming building. Cost Allocation calculations are now included as this department has now
been in existence for at least two years and has used county general support services. The Transfers Out
– H.S. Administration represents this fund’s portion of overhead and administrative services. The
Transfers Out – Probation line item provides funding to the Probation budget for a Deputy Probation
Officer III assigned to this program and is increased as a result of the completion of the Juvenile
Justice/Mental Health Collaborative grant that previously offset a portion of this position. Other
appropriation line items are adjusted based on estimated service demands and prior year actual costs.
Revenue is adjusted based on the remaining funding in the respective grants and the implementation of a
new grant that was recently awarded. Appropriations are adjusted to match available grant funds and are
for the services provided by VSBDC, reimbursement of county staff time, funding available for loans to
qualifying Mariposa County businesses, and promotional and operational expenses. For tracking and
reporting purposes, this funding will be transferred out to the Microenterprise Assistance Loan fund (#425)
once a loan has been approved.
Revenue reflects the interest and principal on several business assistance loans that have been awarded.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item represents loan repayments made in the previous fiscal year and
that are anticipated to be received this fiscal year.
The grant has now been completed. Government accounting practices that this fund be included in the
budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
The Miscellaneous Expense line item reflects unspent funding that may be returned and the Transfers Out
line items represent available funding to reimburse the Health operating budget for allowable expenses.
This grant program has been completed. Governmental accounting practices require that this fund be
included in the budget for two years after transactions have ceased.
As a need for this funding is identified, the County Librarian will request approval from the Board of
Supervisors to either transfer out the necessary money to the Library operating budget or will request
authority to spend directly from this fund. Until a need is identified, remaining available funding is
budgeted in the Miscellaneous Expense line item.
Revenue is requested in an amount as provided in a State formula. Appropriations are requested in
specific line items to carry out the requirements of AB 109 as recommended by the Executive Committee
of the Community Corrections Partnership and approved by the Board of Supervisors. The Transfers Out
line item reflects funding being transferred out to the Jail budget to offset the additional Jail Officer
positions that the Board approved.
Revenue is requested in line items based on the preliminary State allocations and revenue formulas for
specific programs. Funding is budgeted in specific program line items to be transferred out to the
respective Human Services operating budgets to offset the costs of these programs as eligible expenses
are recorded and reported.
Revenue is requested based on State allocations of the grant awards to counties. Appropriations are
requested in specific line items to carry out the evidence based program requirements. The Transfers Out
line item represents funding being transferred to the Probation budget to offset the cost of a full-time
Probation Officer I/II position that is assigned to this grant program..
Revenue is requested based on grant awarded by the State. The Miscellaneous Expense line item
represents interest earnings and prior fiscal year unspent grant funds. The Transfers Out line item
reflects funding available to be transferred to the Health operating budget once eligible grant expenses are
recorded.
Revenue is requested based on the State allocated grant award. The Miscellaneous Expense line item
represents prior fiscal year unspent grant funds and to balance the fund. Other appropriation amounts are
requested to fund the Deputy Sheriff position and estimated operating expenses related to this program.
Revenue is requested based on the State allocation funding schedule. The Miscellaneous Expense line
item represents prior fiscal year unspent grant funds.
Reimbursement for the costs of the air conditioners is requested as the air conditioners were purchased in
the previous fiscal year. General Fund support is being requested as some of the purchases charged to
the grant were not eligible for reimbursement. Appropriations in the Air Conditioning line item represent
the remaining amount of the project that will be released to the contractor once the project has been
signed off.
Revenue is requested based on the State grant award and appropriations are budgeted accordingly for
eligible expenses related to the program.
Revenue is requested in the estimated amount necessary to provide sufficient court security.
Appropriations are requested based on the cost of the assigned Deputy Sheriff and the estimated cost of
the Extra-Help Bailiffs.
There are no new projects requested in Fund 501, recently completed projects include the Health
remodel. The Courthouse Construction fund – 502 is adjusted based actual revenue receipts received in
the previous fiscal year and the possible remodel of the downstairs courtroom. The Forestra Bridge
project – Fund #508 has been completed so no revenue or appropriations are requested. Fund #510 –
Sidewalk Projects reflects new grant money to complete the sidewalks near the Mariposa Elementary
School. The County Road Projects – Fund #511 is established this fiscal year to account for State and
Federal funding received for specific road projects. Previously the funding and corresponding
appropriations had been included in the Road Fund. Included in this fund are the State Transportation
Improvement Program (STIP), the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A
Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU) projects such as Mt. Bullion Cutoff, Bullion Street, Mariposa Creek
Signage, Oak Grove Bridge, and Triangle Road.
The Disaster Recovery Initiative – Fund #515 is also newly established this fiscal year to account for the
$8.5 million grant that the County was awarded. Appropriations are requested in specific project line items
as well as to other departments for their project work or staff time spent on the grant project. Funds to
account for the construction of the Don Pedro - #517, Fish Camp - #518, and Midpines - #519, and
Bridgeport - #520 Fire Stations represent funding received to date as well as actual construction costs at
the time the budget was submitted. Fund #545 – Yosemite West Wastewater Treatment Plant has a
negative fund balance due to an outstanding loan to the Water Agency. Public Works staff will be working
with Administration on identifying a solution to this issue. The remaining unused funding in Youth
Facilities - #548 was transferred out to the Parks & Recreation budget last fiscal year and this fund is no
longer being budgeted. Likewise, remaining funding in the Airport Project - #560 was transferred to the
Parallel Taxiway fund last fiscal year and this fund is no longer budgeted. Unused money in the Regional
Park fund - #569 was transferred to the General Fund last fiscal year and this fund is no longer budgeted.
Remaining Proposition 40 dollars - #573 are requested to be transferred to the General Fund as the
Midpines Park Water System project has been completed. Adjustments in other capital improvement
funds are based on available funding.
Revenue from construction permits is increased slightly based on anticipated projects occurring during the
fiscal year. Miscellaneous Revenue is increased based on the amount of anticipated scanning work
performed for other county departments. Due to building activity still not generating sufficient revenue, the
department is anticipating again requiring General Fund support. No revenue from the Grant –
Assessment/Inspection for the energy grant coordinated by the Human Services Department as this is
now being conducted by private parties. Adjustments to salaries and benefits are in anticipation of the
Board approving adjustments to Department Head compensation. Extra-Help is requested to continue
with the document scanning project. The Professional Services line item represents the anticipated use of
contracted plan check services.
Attached is a memorandum from the Building Director regarding the unmet needs of his department.
Fund 601 – Solid Waste Operations: No Department of Conservation grant revenue is anticipated this
fiscal year. Revenue from Commercial and Residential Fees is reduced based on receipts received in the
prior fiscal year, and likewise the Recycling Reimbursement line item is reduced based on prior year
actual collections. Money received through the California Redemption Value (CRV) program – certain
recyclable beverage containers, is increased based on prior year actual receipts. Reimbursement for the
Wawona Pine Needle program is not requested this fiscal year and no Miscellaneous Revenue is
budgeted this fiscal year. No General Fund support is requested this year.
Extra-Help is reduced to reflect a reduction in hours and using seasonal workers more efficiently.
Overtime is decreased based on prior year actuals. Group Health for Retirees is not required this fiscal
year. Appropriations for Unemployment are budgeted based on amounts paid out in the previous fiscal
year and Accrued Benefits is budgeted as a contingency for paying out accrued vacation time to
employees who leave county employment. Maintenance Building is increased to account for anticipated
repair work on the Compost Facility ventilation. The Professional Services line item is increased to allow
for specific contracts and administrative services provided by Public Works Administration. Professional
Services Engineering is for aerial photography to measure the remaining capacity of the landfill. The
Leachate Hauling line item is increased to allow for unanticipated increases in the amount of leachate,
which may vary greatly from year to year. A new line item – Leachate Disposal is added to account for the
costs of leachate dumping fees at the Don Pedro Wastewater Treatment Plant. The department is no
longer renting a water truck with the recent purchase of the water trailer resulting in a reduction in the
Rents/Leases Equipment line item. In the previous fiscal year, the department was able to obtain enough
free soil that no additional Soil Cover will need to be purchased. Due to the additional charge for water
from the Mariposa Industrial Park, the Utilities line item increased. Equipment purchases include: a water
pump, radios, replacement computer, and roll off bins for placement at the Transfer Stations. The Fuel
line item is increased to account for the use of a roll-off truck at the Transfer Stations. No funding is
requested for the possible purchase of Land due to budget constraints. The Retirement of Long Term
Debt represents the principal and interest payments on the USDA Loan for the Compost Facility. The
Capital Lease Principal represents payments on the bulldozer, roll-off truck, and compactor.
The costs to operate the transfer stations are shown as sub-budgets. Staff is planning to place county
bins at the Transfer Stations and begin our own hauling starting in October 2012, resulting in a decrease
in the Transportation Hauling line items. Refuse received at the Fish Camp and Hornitos Transfer
Stations is minimal, and currently Solid Waste is picking up the material in a pick-up truck. Additionally,
funding is now requested in Maintenance Building line items for possible repairs at the Transfer Stations.
Other appropriations are adjusted based on prior year actual expenditures and anticipated service
demands.
Fund 602 – Solid Waste Closure: There are no requested changes to this fund.
Interest earnings are reduced based on current interest rates. Funding received from Area 12 Agency on
Aging is budgeted in an appropriate line item for State revenue and is based on the contracted service
units for transporting eligible senior for medical and personal needs. No funding from the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) is requested as this grant has been completed. The State has
included the State Transportation Assistance Program (STAP) funding in the State Proposed Budget and
is budgeted based on State allocations. Appropriations for use of a Relief Bus Driver are increased based
on anticipated service demands. Group for Retirees is increased to reflect this fund’s portion of the cost to
provide this benefit to an eligible former employee. The Depreciation line item is increased to account for
the two new buses and two Americans with Disability Act (ADA) mini vans. No Contingency is requested
this fiscal year. Other appropriations adjustments are based on prior year actual costs and to meet
anticipated service demands.
Revenue includes the fixed contribution from the FBO as well as the funding for the payment on the long
term debt of the hangars that is collected by the FBO through hangar lease payments. The Transfer In
amount represents the General Fund contribution to account for retiree costs, airport insurance, and
service contracts associated with the weather station/radio systems, and basic maintenance
requirements/costs of the runways which are still a county responsibility. The General Fund contribution is
reduced from the previous fiscal year based on the estimated year-end fund balance. The retirement of
the long term represents the loan repayment on hangars.
This project has been completed and remaining appropriations are requested to be transferred to the
Special Aviation Fund - #613 for use on specific airport projects.
Revenue is requested in the State allocated amount as well as the remaining unused money from Fund
611 in the Transfers In line item. Appropriations are budgeted to correspond with expected revenue. This
money may be used for runway and building maintenance, including the runway painting project. The
department is requesting appropriations in the Professional Services line item for a consultant to assist
with Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) regulations and issues, as well as continuing to work on the Airport
Master Plan and Capital Improvement Plan.
This grant project has been completed and no grant revenue is requested. Residual grant funding is
requested to be transferred out to the Engineering/Surveyor budget to offset staff time spent on this
project.
Revenue received from Interest earnings is reduced based on current interest rates. The Congestion,
Mitigation and Air Quality (CMAQ) grant has been completed and no revenue is budgeted. Revenue
received from departments for maintenance on vehicles is adjusted based on prior year actual receipts.
Previously reimbursement received for new vehicle set up costs were included in the Miscellaneous
Revenue line item, a separate revenue line item has now been created to account for this funding. The
new revenue line item titled Accidents represents reimbursement from insurance companies for vehicle
repairs. Non-Fleet Policy Charges is a new revenue line item that reflects reimbursement from
departments for additional equipment (trailer hitches, fuel tanks, etc.) that are requested on certain
vehicles. Salary and benefit line items are adjusted based on the new contract with the Mariposa County
Managerial and Confidential Organization. Appropriations in the New Vehicle Set Up Costs line item are
increased to correspond with the revenue line item. The new Accident line item represents costs
associated repairs needed because of accidents. No fixed assets or Contingency is requested this fiscal
year. The Transfers Out line item represents the department’s payment on the Fleet Maintenance Shop
building loan.
Depreciation and replacement charges are requested for the command and patrol vehicles, and one
water tender, are in increased because these charges were reduced last fiscal year in order to balance
the General Fund. The CSA#3 Replacement line item accumulates depreciation/replacement charges for
the new equipment that was purchased with County Service Area #3 funding. Funding for these line
items are budgeted in appropriation line items in the Fire operating budget. The Vehicles line item
reflects accumulated and new funding for future replacement purchases of fire apparatus.
Replacement and Depreciation line items are adjusted based on existing county vehicles/equipment and
the estimated cost to replace these vehicles. A list of the requested replacement vehicles and heavy
equipment is attached.
Fund 705 – General Insurance: Revenue and appropriations are adjusted to reflect the reimbursement for
insurance premiums, Group Health for Retirees costs, and Unemployment charges.
Fund 706 – Workers’ Compensation: Revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from
departments for premiums and workers’ compensation medical and administrative costs. Appropriations
for medical and administrative costs are increased due to several possible extensive claims the County
has incurred in the last fiscal year. An audit on our insurance funds determined that the County’s
Workers’ Compensation fund is under-funded. To correct this situation, the reserve in the Workers’
Compensation fund is requested to be increased but at a slightly reduced amount from the previous fiscal
year.
Fund 707 – Liability: Revenue is adjusted based on reimbursement needed from departments for
premiums and liability claims. To set aside sufficient funding for existing and potential claims the Reserve
is requested to be increased as this is the funding that is used once claims are filed and begin to accrue
expenditures.
Revenue is budgeted in the amounts necessary to satisfy the Principal and Interest payments based on
the terms of the loan.
Revenue is adjusted based on anticipated receipts and appropriations are budgeted accordingly.
Revenue and appropriation adjustments are based on prior year actual collections and to balance the
fund.
Revenue is adjusted based on anticipated receipts and appropriations are budgeted accordingly.
Revenue is adjusted based on prior year actual collections, and appropriations are adjusted based on
available funding and to balance the fund.
Revenue is requested in the amount necessary to satisfy the principal and interest amounts contained in
the loan.
