Implement measures to confirm and assure that the
county is free from the European Grape Vine Moth.
¨ Fulfill contracted requirements for work in the
following programs: Organic; Petroleum/Weighmaster;
Sudden Oak Death; Nursery inspection; Glassy Winged
Sharpshooter; Detection (insect) trapping; Pesticide Use
data entry; and Pest Exclusion.
¨ Enhance compliance by clarifying and simplifying the
pesticide use requirements for growers and other
pesticide users.
¨ Achieve a 100% inspection rate for all commercial
devices in the calendar year 2012.
Finish the re-write of the Williamson Act Ordinance,
with the assistance of other members of the Resource
Lands Protection Committee.
¨ Work with the County Health Department and the
California Department of Food and Agriculture to assist
with the development of the various Local Food efforts.
¨ Expand Fish Friendly Farming inspections, as needed,
to help growers be proactive in resource protection as
related to their farming activities.
¨ Review and update the department’s webpage on a
regular basis.
Department has requested and the CEO is recommending an additional $53,904 in Net County Cost. The department is
at risk of losing some state funding as the department has consistently been budgeted below Maintenance of Effort
(MOE) requirements for several years now. While this recommended Net County Cost still does not meet the MOE
requirement it does demonstrate an improvement in the department’s budgeted allocation. Funds will be used for extra
help and to fill the Assistant Agricultural Commissioner position no earlier than mid-year of 2012-2013.
Continue to provide prompt and courteous customer
service.
¨ Update Air Monitoring Software to improve
reliability and reduce workload.
¨ Improve outreach efforts, particularly in the Burn
Program.
¨ Implement Greenhouse Gas Regulations as
delegated by the Air Resources Board
Discover and locate all locally assessable property in
the county.
¨ Annually prepare a local assessment roll to include
the reappraisal of personal property, decline in value
assessments and any real property that has undergone a
change in ownership or contains new construction.
¨ Surrender the annual roll to the County Auditor-
Controller by July 1 of each year.
¨ Perform mandatory audits of business personal
property and fixtures.
Timely updates of parcel boundary changes for
the county’s GIS system.
The Assessor has requested, and the CEO is recommending, $89,106 in supplemental funding to cover for a position that
was vacant during Pay Period 05 and not included in the salary projections. The office experienced considerable salary
savings.
Make voter registration readily available to all who
desire to register to vote.
¨ Conduct fair and impartial elections.
¨ Produce accurate election results.
Continue to maintain the public record in a secure
and easily accessible environment.
¨ Continue to provide courteous and efficient service
to members of the public who require information
maintained by this office.
Provide accurate high quality scanned images of the
Clerk-Recorder’s records.
¨ Provide accurate high quality microfilm of Clerk-
Recorder’s records for archival storage.
Continue to provide accurate high quality microfilm
and scanned images of the Clerk-Recorder’s records.
Work towards more transparency and accountability
in county finance.The CEO recommends funding as submitted by the department. Funds that were available last year as “one-time” only
are no longer available. In addition, the department has seen a marked increase in workload. The department is
requesting and the CEO is recommending an increase of $80,000 to cover the hiring of a new Auditor position in order
for the office to adjust to higher workload levels.
The Teeter Plan budget unit will start at the Recommended Budget with the $769,205 amortized payment towards the
Teeter debt principle. This allocation will go up at Final Budget as the interest and penalties carry-over is calculated for
FY 2012-2013.The CEO recommends funding as submitted by the department. In FY 11-12 the County’s outstanding COP debt was
refinanced. Adjustments will be forthcoming at Final Budget to reflect these changes.
The CEO recommends funding as submitted by the department. For FY 2012-2013 some budget variables exist that could
be cause for contingencies to be recommended for draw down at mid-year or 3rd Quarter. Utility costs are one of these
variables after FY 2011-2012 saw the consolidation of office space throughout the County.
This budget unit will experience a slight 2.2% increase, due primarily to benefit cost increases. The budget unit will
experience some savings in this fiscal year due to a 10% reduction in compensation for a portion of the employees
during half of the fiscal year. There has been a reduction by 10% in Services and Supplies due to savings. The CEO has
lowered spending due to a reduction in compensation and savings in Services and Supplies.
Continue to assist the County with ongoing projects
and legal obligations. Provide a sound program of
preventative and proactive legal support through accurate
and timely legal advice to the Board of Supervisors,
County officers, departments, boards, and commissions,
as well as special districts governed by the Board of
Supervisors.
¨ Enforce mandated state, federal, and local laws in the
areas of planning, zoning, building, solid waste, water
quality, environmental health, and air quality.
¨ Provide the best possible legal services for the County
in litigation initiated by and against the County. Deliver
legal advocacy and collaborative support to all County
departments and offices, boards, commissions and
special districts.
Staff will continue to maintain and provide the level
of legal services currently extended to the Board of
Supervisors, County departments, boards, commissions,
and special districts. County Counsel will continue to
assist the County in reducing dependency upon outside
counsel by retaining experienced attorneys, secretaries,
and para-professional support and through employee
development and training.
County Counsel has experienced some revenue issues and staff turnover. The department has requested and the CEO is
recommending a slight increase to cover law library costs and copy machine costs.
Maintain and/or increase Performance Standards for
the year.
¨ Train and integrate all new staff into maintaining
case loads.
¨ Look at increasing the Compromise of Arrears
Program by dedicated one staff person to the program.
¨ Examine hiring additional staff due to salary cuts.
¨ Examine special programs to increase collections
such as early intervention, license release, opening one
Saturday a quarter and outreach to Public Health on teen
pregnancies.
¨ Install new computer for the entire office, August
2012, per State guidelines.
¨ Examine difference collections models strategies
proven effective in other counties.
The CEO recommends funding largely as submitted. There are some minor changes in departmental staffing and A-87
costs.
Continue to work with the Sheriff and the Chiefs of
Police to ensure that Mendocino County is a place where
people want to live, where tourists want to visit, and
where business and commerce can be safely conducted.
¨ Continue to argue for an increase in the County’s
commitment to comprehensive prosecutorial and victims’
services, services with a proven track record of enhancing
public safety.
¨ To increase public safety through new prosecution
strategies.
¨ To ensure that recidivist defendants with significant
records are removed from the local community to state
prison, instead of being housed locally as a consequence
of the realignment law.
¨ To safely and efficiently implement the new case
management system within the District Attorney’s Office,
a system shared by other county criminal justice
departments.
¨ To continue with transparency; to that end, making
available information not previously available is a priority.
Budget unit reduction tied to slightly higher budgeted 1000 series expenditures than were necessary. Department
requested and the CEO approved an additional $35,181 to cover the full cost of an extra help Assistant District Attorney
for 1 year.
Maintain Brown Act compliance, despite state effort
to abandon local assistance for this program.
¨ Continue Questys system implementation. Projects
include the revision of the County’s Agenda Summary
format, and also extending the automation process by
distributing Questys workstations out into the
departments.
This budget unit is experiencing a 22.5% cost increase related to employee benefit cost increases. The budget unit
has undergone major restructuring and efficiency operations. Services and Supplies have been reduced by one-third for
FY 2012-2013.
The CEO has no recommendations for supplemental funding.
Maintain a balanced budget for the County of
Mendocino that builds reserves and contingencies while
providing the highest quality services.
¨ Improve County communications both internally and
externally with employees, members of the public and
other interested stakeholders.
¨ Develop a 5-year fiscal outlook that determines longterm
obstacles and methods to mitigate or eliminate
their impact.
¨ Continue efforts towards regionalized training
events.
This budget unit has experienced a vacant position during Pay Period 05 that was not part of the salary projections
process. The CEO is recommending reducing down Services and Supplies combined with a minor increase in Net County
Cost so that the position can be filled.
Funds formerly provided to the County’s redevelopment agency are now redistributed back to the taxing entities via the
property tax distribution formula. This is per State of California law, chiefly AB 1x 26.
Full and complete wind-down of all activities, assets
and liabilities.
Complete the following remodels of County facilities:
o Willits Log Cabin
o Avila Center Phase II
o Willits – WISC
o General Services Agency Warehouse
o Print Shop – Evidence Storage Space
¨ Complete moving employees located in the Willits
Justice Center and review outstanding leased facilities for
possible consolidation
¨ Eliminate leased space for storage needs
¨ Roof Repairs
¨ Complete ADA repairs to the Fort Bragg Justice
Center, Juvenile Hall and Hopland Veterans Building
¨ Create a workplan for the County’s remaining
Underground Storage Tanks
¨ Complete additional Proposition 40 Parks
improvements
CEO is recommending $105,000 be appropriated to this budget unit to fund ADA accessibility.
Complete Phase 3 of the County’s Microwave
System – extending coverage in Covelo and Laytonville.
Maintain support for tourism and economic
development related activities.
Budget unit projected to have minimal changes from FY 2011-2012 spending levels.
To reevaluate this budget unit, its relation to the
Court system and its overall efficiency.
¨ To make recommendations to the Board to improve
these issues if deficiencies are identified.
Continue active field research to address the
questions generated by the emerging clientele base of
non-profit timberland owners which now exceeds 100K in
Mendocino County.
¨ Revamp UCCE Livestock and Natural Resources web
site so local producers will have more information
available to them.
¨ Complete multi-species livestock harvest and
processing financial analysis and business plan.
¨ Conduct research on eco-system services and carbon
sequestration in riparian corridors.
¨ Conduct research on Medusahead control methods.
¨ Support the winegrower community in addressing
new Frost Water Protection regulations being
implemented by the State Water Resources Control Board
by providing research-based technical information that
helps to clarify the practices and science behind using
sprinklers for frost protection.
¨ Continue to ensure the economic and environmental
sustainability of the North Coast fruit and nut industry.
Continue to streamline workflow so as to improve the
way GSA does business, as well as keeping up with
industry trends.
¨ Enhance the Copy Center operations and implement
more streamlined programmatic procedures.
¨ Continue to review all County owned real estate to
determine market those that are surplus and ready for
sale.
¨ Develop an internal Needs Assessment in order to
benchmark the standing of the Agency. Take responses
and develop a work plan for the Agency. Continue to
expand upon the online purchasing program.
¨ Utilize ideas provided by employees in the Needs
Assessment to enhance and enrich the Agency’s programs,
policies and procedures.
¨ Continue to coordinate logistical aspects of facility
consolidations, including space analysis and surplus
consolidation.
The General Services budget unit has experienced significant decline in departmental revenue. The department
requested, and the CEO is recommending slight increase to cover for revenue decline.
Update the Facility Consolidation Report.
¨ Update the Facility and Park Condition Report.
¨ Update the ADA Upgrade Report.
¨ Complete the remaining remodels and moves
according to the Facility Consolidation Report.
¨ Complete year 8 of 10-year plan for ADA remodeling
of County facilities according to the County’s Transition
Report.
¨ Develop an internal Needs Assessment in order to
benchmark the standing of the Agency after the
integration, take the responses and develop a work plan
as the Agency moves forward. Create an automated
Facility Condition Report System. Continue to maintain
facilities under the Capital Maintenance Reserve
Program.
¨ Utilize ideas provided by employees in the Needs
Assessment to enhance and enrich the Agency’s
programs, policies and procedures.
¨ Continue to review facility consolidations, including
space analysis.
Building and Grounds Division had three positions vacant during Pay
Period 05 that need to be filled. In addition, the department could
experience large increases in utility costs. The CEO has increased the
County’s appropriation for Contingencies in order to compensate for a
potential increase in utility billing during this budget cycle.
Complete the assessment and implement
recommendations for streamlining County Garage
functions and services.
¨ Surplus additional County vehicles as they are
replaced or as necessary.
¨ Continue to streamline workflow so as to improve
the way business is done as well as keeping up with
industry trends.
Garage revenues are expected to cover the cost of this budget unit.
Consolidate and move welfare check printing to the
MUNIS system off of the unsupported paybase system.
¨ Install and implement a VioP phone
system for the County Administration
Center campus and other outlying
department, in order to reduce phone
costs.
¨ PC replacement for aging and
outdated systems in many departments.
¨ Build an employee self-service
system that ties into MUNIS for
personal data updates/corrections.
¨ Put the departments that use paper based time
sheets on the online time tracking system.
Department has experienced a decline in revenues. Department requested and the CEO is recommending a $52,000
adjustment to maintain current service levels.
Program remains suspended due to lack of funds.
Continue release of web based training to County
departments.
¨ Continue to process incoming Claims Against the
County.
¨ Address any safety or hazard concerns that arise.
¨ Complete Safety Manual update and improve
evacuation policies and procedures.
¨ Streamline incident reporting procedures
Countywide.
¨ Continue to streamline workflow so as to improve
the way business is done as well as keeping up with
industry trends.
¨ Develop an internal Needs Assessment in order to
benchmark the standing of the Agency. Take responses
and develop a work plan for the Agency
¨ Utilize ideas provided by employees in the Needs
Assessment to enhance and enrich the Agency’s
programs, policies and procedures.
To continue to provide effective oversight of
government operations within the boundaries of
Mendocino County.
It is anticipated that this budget unit can continue into FY 2012-13 with an unaltered Net County Cost.
To develop programs and new strategies in order to:
¨ Increase licensing and rabies compliance
¨ Increase animal adoptions
¨ Increase returns to owner
¨ Decrease owner surrenders
¨ Reduce euthanasia rate even further
¨ Increase spay/neuter services, micro-chipping and
preventative health care promotion.
¨ Collaborate closely with the Mendocino County
Sheriffs Office and local police departments in order to
provide the most comprehensive animal care services
possible.Department has requested and the CEO is recommending a supplemental request for $34,459 to assist with low
revenues and ongoing cost increases.
To continue spay and neuter services in outlying areas
of the county as staffing will allow
¨ To work in conjunction with coastal non-profits to
provide service to low income individuals
Continue to promote community collaboration and
shared resources throughout the HHSA Branches and
continue to work with community partners.
¨ Provide consistent and accurate education to the
public on issues relevant to the health of the community.
¨ Provide oversight to internal and external partners
through use of consistent communication and audit
tools.
¨ Continue to explore and identify efficiencies and
potential shared resources with other governmental
agencies.
¨ Promote healthier lifestyles and communities
through systems, policy and environmental changes to
reduce risk factors for chronic disease, reduce health
disparities and lower health care costs.
Educate about an ordinance addressing tobacco
retailer density in at least one jurisdiction.
¨ Establish voluntary smoke-free housing policy by
working with multi-unit housing owners and managers
throughout Mendocino County.
¨ Increase healthy eating and active living among youth
and adults in Mendocino County.
¨ Build capacity for existing community coalition
through training on underage drinking, cultural
competency, and environmental prevention and by
establishing a model program to change community
practices and policies to reduce teen access to alcohol.
¨ Establish weekly Best Practice Violence Prevention
Curriculum for Kindergarteners.
¨ Provide training on prevention of bullying in schools
Department submitted budget consistent with the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) obligation.

Hold regular stakeholder meetings to discuss new
septic regulations and privatization of nonstandard septic
system inspections/monitoring program.
¨ Initiate a streamlined permit review process with
Planning & Building Services and the Department of
Transportation.
¨ Conduct bimonthly food handler certification
classes, alternating between Fort Bragg and Ukiah.
¨ Continue to gradually bring agricultural businesses
that handle reportable quantities of hazardous materials
into the permitting process.
¨ Begin the process of digitizing all DEH hard files.
¨ Complete the software transition from Access into
EnvisionConnect data base management system.
¨ Continue to post food facility inspection results
online.
Collect water samples at several popular coastal
beaches (in partnership with the Mendocino county
chapter of Surfrider Foundation).
¨ Post updated water quality information on a 24-hour
telephone line.
¨ Mail annual newsletters to businesses on DEH
inventory.
¨ Conduct routine inspections at retail food facilities,
public swimming pools, petroleum storage tanks, and
businesses that handle hazardous materials.
¨ Evaluate and permit water well and septic system
designs.
¨ Maintain an active role in the Redwood Empire
Hazardous Incident Team.
¨ Investigate citizen complaints
Department submitted budget consistent with the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) obligation.

Stabilize long-term funding. Through a continuum of
care, provide essential core services to the community.
¨ Behavioral Health and Recovery Services has formed
from the alliance of Mental Health and Alcohol and Other
Drug Programs to resolve practical issues of integration.
There is a focus on serving the needs of clients with cooccurring
disorders with the goal of preventing more
serious illnesses.
¨ Realignment affects perinatal, outpatient and drug
court budgets. With these changes in mind staff will
strive to provide the most efficient services possible.
¨ Continue to utilize and clarify where needed the
application of triage measures for the provision of adult
treatment services in the face of funding changes.
¨ Continue to serve the general public.
Relevant programs utilize stakeholder meetings to
ensure community input, and the state mandated AODP
Advisory Board is a vital link to the community.
¨ Technical assistance from funders is utilized where
possible to provide CEUs for treatment staff.
¨ Continue to provide opportunities for training and
professional development.
Department submitted budget consistent with no Net County Cost being utilized within this budget unit.
Programs within the nursing division will monitor the
health status of all individuals in the community by
providing outreach to assist individuals in accessing
health and supportive services.
¨ The Maternal, Child and Adolescent Health Five Year
Needs Assessment will continue to be utilized to develop
plans to address identified capacity needs and priorities
such as overweight children and youth, perinatal
substance abuse, child abuse and neglect and health
insurance access for children.
¨ As budget constraints continue, resources available
to sustain services and support nursing staff in the
Nursing programs will continue to be maximized. Several
Public Health Nursing positions remain vacant and
recruitment efforts have been unsuccessful which may
necessitate further changes to meet the Public Health
Nursing needs of the community.
¨ Drive-up Flu vaccination clinic will be provided (if a
large vaccine shipment is received).
¨ Continue to gather contact emails for clinics and
physicians throughout the county for dissemination of
Communicable Disease and Immunization information.
¨ Continue to follow-up on reportable diseases,
contact investigations as needed and treatment, if
applicable.
Continue to foster effective working relationships
with Sonoma County as they continue to serve as
administrators of EMS in Mendocino County.
¨ Continue to work with Fitch and Associates to
determine best method of developing a long-term,
sustainable plan of emergency medical services in
Mendocino County.
¨ Continue working with EMS stakeholders, i.e. first
responder agencies, to maintain existing emergency
medical services within the county.
¨ Ensure compliance of EMS policies, procedures,
ordinances, and laws.
¨ Enforce the County Ambulance provisions under the
Mendocino County Medical Response Ordinance
(Chapter 9.05).
¨ Integrate of State regulatory changes into local EMS
policy and procedures, as necessary.
¨ Ensure ongoing complete and competent dispatch
services for EMS related incidents.
¨ Develop uniform medical recordkeeping practices by
EMS providers leading to enhanced EMS system data
collection and analysis.
Continue working with Mendocino County Health and
Human Services Agency, County Executive Office, and
Coastal Valleys EMS staff to review and assess the current
system and assess ongoing and future needs.
¨ Build stronger, consistent and cohesive working
relationships with emergency services and other county
stakeholders for execution of tasks in countywide or MCI
events.
¨ Continue work with state regulatory entities including
the California EMS Authority, to ensure the needs and
viewpoints of Mendocino stakeholders are considered as
part of regulation development and system improvement.
Department submitted and the CEO recommends supplemental funding in the amount of $70,000 to cover increased
costs associated with a CalFire contract.
Continue the progress made during the FY 2011-12
restructuring/redesign actions.
¨ Continue to provide full-service partnership slots for
intensive “wraparound” support for the seriously mentally
ill, who are homeless or most at risk to be homeless,
hospitalized, incarcerated or placed out of county in
residential facilities.
¨ Continue to collaborate with the youth organizational
providers as the Early and Periodic Screening Diagnosis
and Treatment (EPSDT) funds are realigned.
¨ Fully implement the referral protocol to the
Federally Qualified Rural Health Clinics. Collect outcome
data and analyze at the Quality Improvement
Committee.
¨ Fully implement low cost in-county residential
programs and utilize as a resource for out of county
placements returning back to the county.
¨ Fully implement managed access to ensure all clients
enter the system through the Mental Health Branch for
standardized triage and assessment. Screen clients for
medical necessity and return clients to services. Enroll
clients in appropriate levels of care.
¨ Ensure that all contracts have scope of services that
include measurement of outcomes and efficient
standards to drive cost-effectiveness of services.
¨ Initiate RFP(s) for public private service delivery.
¨ Continue to collaborate with Mendocino County
Office of Education (MCOE) in the delivery of mental
health services to identified students.
¨ Productivity – utilize data reports to monitor and
support staff productivity goals.
¨ Forensic Treatment – continue the collaboration
with local law enforcement and the parole office to
establish forensic services and a re-entry program that
reduces recidivism rate and ensures community re entry.
¨ Continue the retooling of the Quality Improvement
Committee emphasizing data driven solutions to improve
access in quality of services.
¨ Participate in the Small County Care Integrated
Learning Collaborative which will qualify Mendocino
County for two Performance Improvement Projects
which are state mandates.
¨ Staff will continue to participate and provide
leadership in the planning, implementation and
development of restructured programs through Mental
Health Services Administration funding. The branch will
continue to focus on the provision of services to the
broadest geographical area possible and to the
historically underserved populations.
¨ Continue the process of moving mental health
records to a fully electronic record system.
¨ Decrease out-of-county placements and increase the
percentage of mental health clients living independently
within the community.
¨ Increase access to housing for the most vulnerable
clients.
¨ Strengthen the skills and capacity of the mental
health workforce through professional training available
with Mental Health Services Act -- Workforce Education
and Training Component (WET) funding.
Create a service delivery system that provides a health
care home that treats the entire person.
¨ Integrate primary care with behavioral health.
¨ Participate in pilot projects with federally qualified
and rural health centers.
¨ Reduce stigma with mental health treatment.
¨ Continue to work with organizational providers to
transform service delivery.
¨ Develop relationships with new partners.
¨ Position ourselves to be eligible for new funding
opportunities.
¨ Explore regional opportunities for service delivery.
¨ Staff will participate in intra-agency training to fully
develop systems of care. When applicable, community
partners will be invited to join in training and planning for
the most robust and sustainable services and delivery
systems.
Create a service delivery system that provides a
health care home which treats the entire person.
¨ Integrate primary care with behavioral health.
¨ Participate in pilot projects with rural health clinics
and Federally Qualified Health Centers.
¨ Reduce stigma surrounding mental health
treatment.
¨ Continue to work with organizational providers to
transform service delivery.
¨ Develop relationships with new partners.
¨ Position the County to be eligible for new funding
opportunities.
¨ Explore regional opportunities for service delivery.
¨ Provide outreach, engagement and information
about mental health services.
¨ Provide access to services for consumers, schools,
and families with children in remote rural areas and on
the coast.
Continue to attend and participate in the CMSP
Planning & Benefits Committee.
¨ Continue to provide program changes to the CMSP
program providers.
¨ Continue to collect and disburse Maddy funds to
local emergency physicians and hospitals
Department submitted budget consistent with the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) obligation
Continue refinement of data tracking system to allow
accurate evaluation of the effectiveness and success of the
interventions and activities performed by Children’s
Medical Services. This data will be reported via the state
Children’s Medical Services Performance Measures
Report.
¨ Assure smooth transition for services provided by
CHDP to Managed-Care Medi-Cal partner based on
accepted Memorandum of Understanding with
Partnership Healthplan of California.
¨ Provide focused provider outreach and education to
ensure that CCS and CHDP providers are able to
independently access critical information and resources.
¨ Provide support and resources to community
partners during transition to Managed-Care Medi-Cal.
¨ Develop a Children’s Medical Services newsletter to
be distributed to families, providers and partner agencies
with a focus on outreach, education and best practices.
¨ Expand and maintain the Children’s Medical Services
references manuals, including the CCS Procedure
Manuals and the Child Health & Disability Prevention
(CHDP) Program Manual.
¨ Continue to provide opportunities to cross-train and
enable Children’s Medical Services staff to provide a high
level of service
¨ Provided cross-program education and training to
staff, thus facilitating shared program responsibilities
that allow limited staff to meet the needs of all Children’s
Medical Services programs.
ADULT AND AGING SERVICES
¨ Plan for caseload growth, based on population
demographics and in anticipation of the aging “boomer”
population.
¨ Collaborate with community partners, public and
private, to provide excellent services to adult and older
adult recipients throughout the County.
¨ Develop additional job sites for employable General
Assistance recipients.
¨ Provide quality services to In-Home Supportive
Services clients throughout the county.
¨ Provide information and referral services to ensure
that the public is aware of services available to assist
elderly and disabled persons to remain independently in
their homes and the community.
¨ Participate in state and regional forums to remain
current with all policy and budget developments
impacting programs and the adult and older adult
population of Mendocino County.
¨ Respond to allegations of abuse and neglect in a
timely manner and coordinate with law enforcement and
other appropriate agencies.
¨ Participate in the development of the Functional
Needs Annex to the County Emergency Response Plan
and develop the role of the Special Needs Coordinator.
FAMILY AND CHILDREN SERVICES
¨ Collaborate with local community-based
organizations to further develop full spectrum alcohol and
substance abuse treatments, including residential for
clients engaged in the drug court program.
¨ Continue the drug court program.
¨ Work with the Casey Foundation Project to continue
to access data for better outcomes for children and
families.
¨ Continue to implement aspects of the System
Improvement Plan.
¨ Continue implementation of Signs of Safety (SOS) to
assure full integration with SDM, Case conferencing, and
key decision points in cases.
¨ Continue to implement programs to reduce the
number of foster children placed in other counties.
¨ Assessment of re-entry/occurrence of maltreatment
of abuse or neglect.
¨ Increased integration of Family Findings throughout
the life of the case.
¨ Working with the Tribal Court to coordinate
successful transition of dependency cases.
¨ Continue to increase quality of relationship and
effectiveness of overall reunification and services to
parents and families within the dependency system in
Mendocino County.
¨ Continue to provide professional training through
University of California, Davis to social workers.
¨ Continue support of Master of Social Work (MSW)
students through second year internships.
¨ Incorporate monthly trainings to achieve consistent
practices throughout the county.
EMPLOYMENT AND FAMILY SERVICES
¨ Expand C4Yourself features. Enhancements to the
C4Yourself system will allow customers to access forms
and documents and check the status of their benefits
without traveling to offices.
¨ Expand Medi-Cal, CMSP, Paths2Health, CalFresh
and CalWORKs eligibility services to Willits Integrated
Services Center.
¨ Provide new and innovative nutrition education to
Calfresh recipients. Plans include a nutrition education
program for veterans receiving CalFresh and extending
contracts with local community-based organizations for
nutrition education services for families enrolled in
CalFresh.
¨ Increase the number of CalWORKs recipients
engaged in unsubsidized employment.
¨ Continue to prepare for the full implementation of
Health Care Reform. This includes facilitating the
transition of Mendocino County children from Healthy
Families to Medi-Cal, (dependent upon finalized
legislation.
Author or collaborate with other WIBs, as
appropriate, to apply for Governor Discretionary
Requests for Proposals (RFPs) in order to secure funds for
adults, dislocated workers, and youth to meet workforce
development objectives.
¨ Provide technical assistance to the contractor, MPIC,
in attaining the newly mandated requirement of utilizing
25% of the Adult and Dislocated Worker formula funds
for training expenses.
¨ Revive the Workforce Investment Board Scorecard
which was out of print for 4 years due to understaffing.
¨ Compile the Comprehensive Economic Development
Strategy (CEDS) annual report.
¨ Author annual EDD requirement to amend the Local
Plan Modification on behalf of the Workforce Investment
Board/ BOS.
¨ Conduct Fiscal and Program monitoring of the
contractor MPIC.
Strengthen the new leadership team of the agency
and recipients of its programs.
¨ Continue to support the HHSA Advisory Board’s
Healthy Mendocino Initiative to bring the web based
program into existence for the County by the end of 2012.
¨ Continue to support the 2-1-1 information and
referral system for citizens of Mendocino County.
¨ Continue to provide a positive, safe work
environment through open, honest, direct and respectful
communication.
¨ Encourage staff in all training opportunities to better
their skills and professional development.
¨ Strive to improve communications to staff internally
and to the public externally.
¨ Hire a Public Information Officer to handle agency
topics with the media and to promote and educate the
public in HHSA programs and staff.
Continue to adapt program delivery to new
realignment model and develop outcome measures
where possible for programs to evaluate effectively.
¨ Implement many changes in the health delivery
system as we moved towards Health Reform.
Continue to provide quality services to families and
children in Mendocino County to support and empower
them to live healthy, safe, and sustainable lives in healthy
environments.
¨ Continue to improve the services provided by CalWORKs
Job Service to assist individuals to develop the skills and
training necessary to secure employment and exit from
public assistance.
¨ Maximize use of federal and state funds in all programs.
¨ Continue to strive to reduce the number of families
receiving public assistance and the number of children in
out-of-home foster care.
Increase in Net County Cost is related to a significant increase in the foster care caseload.
Provide quality services to In-Home Supportive
Services clients throughout the County.
¨ Participate in the CMIPS conversion and implement
necessary procedural changes and training for staff, IHSS
providers, and community partners.
¨ Support the In-Home Supportive Services Advisory
Committee.
¨ Plan for caseload growth, based on population
demographics and in anticipation of the aging “boomer”
population.
¨ Provide information and referral services to ensure
that the public is aware of services available to assist
elderly and disabled persons to remain independently in
their homes.
Budget unit is experiencing increased caseload and thus increased costs.
Review program policies incorporation best practices
across the state.
¨ Collaborate with community partners, public, and
private, to provide excellent services to recipients
throughout the county.
¨ Develop additional job sites for employable
recipients.
¨ Collaborate with members of the Continuum of Care
for the Homeless to develop housing opportunities
throughout the county
Budget unit was assigned a reduction and directed to find additional cost savings to meet the assigned Net County Cost.
Seek and implement improved and
streamlined HR related processes that
create efficiencies throughout the department and the
County.
¨ Prepare for and begin labor negotiations with
Bargaining Units for labor contracts expiring in 2012 &
2013.
¨ Review and update Civil Service Rules.
¨ Review and update various HR/personnel related
County policies.
Human Resources requested and the CEO is recommending $45,198 to cover the costs of the County’s volunteer
program and leadership training. The department made a request for two full time employees which is currently
recommended to be denied and will be reevaluated at Final Budget.
Implement a workers compensation hotline to ensure
timely notification of injuries and injury status.
¨ Meet annually with department heads to review their
workers' compensation experience and possible
prevention measures.
¨ Perform evaluation and interview process for
Workers’ Comp Third Party Administrator (through the
CSACEIA program).
¨ Continue to attend training classes to gain insight on
methods for reducing workers compensation claims cost
and frequencies.
¨ Conduct an onsite ergonomic training class (CSACEIA)
to train department designees to perform ergonomic
assessments as an early detection/prevention measure.
¨ Continue to provide the non-industrial ergonomic
evaluations.
¨ Implement changes/enhancements to the County
Medical Leave Tracker program.
¨ Continue to collaborate with the County’s
Occupational Medicine Program Providers and other
Workers’ Compensation providers to get injured workers
back to work quicker.
¨ Continue development of methods to ensure timely
receipt of injury and work status reports.
¨ Continue to improve efficiencies and streamline
program processes.
¨ Begin referral process for the use of County’s
EAP/Wellness programs for those using the Occupational
Medicine Program (Job Care) and other medical facilities
for workers comp injuries.
¨ Coordinate efforts between the Return to
Work/Workers’ Compensation and EAP/Wellness
Programs to address issues impacting employees in the
work place.
¨ Cross train Benefits Specialist in areas of the Return
to Work Program and Workers’ Compensation reporting.
¨ Update the Return to Work Program and Workers’
Compensation desk operating manual.
Continue to review/monitor the health plan for the
best possible options for providing benefits and coverage
at the least cost to the County and employees.
¨ Continue administration of the self-insured trust fund
to ensure stability and integrity of the trust.
¨ Complete 2013 Health Plan Renewal.
¨ Update Health Plan Document to reflect 2013
changes.
¨ Develop benefits “dashboard” to provide “real time”
claims data information.
¨ Negotiate hospital and network contracts to ensure
best possible discounts.
¨ Continue planning efforts for Health Care Reform
Exchange program, in conjunction with Health Plan
Consultant, identifying potential impact to County’s plan,
ensuring compliance with effective dates, communicating
findings to Board of Supervisors, Bargaining Unit
Representatives and employees.
¨ Coordinate efforts between the Return to
Work/Workers’ Compensation and EAP/Wellness
Programs to address issues impacting employees.
¨ Evaluate success of Year 2 (2013) of Wellness
incentive based plan design, impact on Health Plan and
development of Year 3 wellness incentives (2014).
¨ Perform a dependent audit.
¨ Create and distribute a Benefits Summary specific to
each employee.
¨ Review Open Enrollment Process for efficiencies
including the evaluation of an online Open Enrollment
process.
¨ Continue to strive to provide excellent service and
response times for Employee inquiries.
¨ Continue to improve efficiencies and streamline
program processes.
¨ Cross train Benefits staff in areas of Workers’
Compensation, the Return to Work Program, and
Wellness/EAP.
Continue efforts to preserve access to healthcare for
nonMedicare eligible retirees until Healthcare Reform and
Exchange Program is fully implemented in 2014.
¨ Continue to pursue Early Retiree Reinsurance
Program funds if they become available.
¨ Update Retiree Health Plan Document to reflect 2012
and 2013 changes.
¨ Negotiate hospital and network contracts to ensure
best possible discounts.
¨ Evaluate success of Plan Year 2 of Wellness Program
enhancements and incentive based plan design and
impact on Retiree Health Plan for purpose of reducing
health care costs through early detection and
preventative measures.
¨ Continue to review and monitor the plan for the best
possible options for providing benefits and coverage at
least expense to the NonMedicare eligible.
¨ Complete 2013 Retiree Health Plan Renewal and
implement Board of Supervisors directives for plan
changes for Plan Year 2013.
¨ Continue to refine communication plan to keep
retirees informed of Retiree Health issues and outcomes
through use of updates to the Human Resources website,
communications to retirees, the Retirement Office, and
attendance at the Association of Mendocino County
Retired Employees (AMCRE) meetings, as necessary.
¨ Continue to strive to provide excellent service and
response times for Retiree inquires.
¨ Continue to improve efficiencies and streamline
program processes.
Continue to support the health and wellbeing of
county employees/retirees by providing a variety of
health and wellness services striving to provide excellent
service & response times for program inquiries.
¨ Coordinate efforts between the Return to
Work/Workers’ Compensation and EAP/Wellness
Programs to address issues impacting employees in the
work place.
¨ Continue partnerships with local medical and service
providers for health/financial education and physical
activities through the Wellness Program.
¨ Provide employees and insured dependents with
enhanced easy, confidential access to EAP counseling
services.
¨ Collaborate with Information Services and the Library
to create an online, searchable wellness resource library
complete with resource photos and item descriptions.
¨ Increase participation in the wellness incentive
program to 60% of employees.
¨ Expand the role of the Employee Wellness Advisory
Committee.
¨ Organize and facilitate a Northern California Wellness
Coordinators meeting.
¨ Development of a more effective Program
Communication and Marketing Plan.
¨ Expand Biometric Screening services to include
optional colon cancer test kits.
¨ Enhance post-Biometric Screening education.
¨ Continue to improve efficiencies and streamline
program processes.
Collaborate with the Workers’ Compensation
Coordinator in the establishment of a referral process for
the use of County’s EAP/Wellness programs for those
using the Occupational Medicine Program (Job Care) and
other medical facilities for workers comp injuries.
Expand library hours at Fort Bragg, Willits, Round
Valley and Ukiah, adding Sunday hours at Fort Bragg and
Ukiah branches.
¨ All library branches will begin adding new items such
as ebooks, DVDs, literary fiction, bestsellers. They will also
begin to replace out-of-date and tattered copies of books,
audiobooks and many other items.
¨ The library will begin offering services on Twitter and
Facebook and other social networking sites.
¨ All branches will have a robust Summer Reading Club
with many events for Mendocino County children.
¨ The library branches will do more adult programming
and will provide a “discovering democracy” series funded
by CA Humanities.
Increase staffing levels to handle workload.
¨ Get all the roof leaks permanently fixed.
¨ Work on Museum Inventory Project.
¨ Implement Conservation Plan based on Conservation
Assessment.
¨ Develop Museum-standard storage solution.
¨ Expand programming for group tours and school
field trips.
¨ Display Bicentennial Stamps and Signatures
Collection.
¨ Plan and implement Willits Kinetic Carnivale in
conjunction with Roots of Motive Power Steam Festival.
¨ Create a new Native American culture exhibit,
including interactive and multi-age components, and
public programming.
¨ Relaunch the Wine History Project with the debut of
book on Mendocino County Wine Notes.
¨ Continue to display and evolve the Veterans History:
Personal Project, including addition of video and oral
history presentations.
¨ Create 2012 Vintage Toy Display.
¨ Develop and implement 2013 Community Artwork
Project.
¨ Plan and implement Mendocino Mini-Maker Faire.
¨ Create a Solar Pioneers Exhibit.
¨ Plan and implement second annual Chautauqua
Program.
Refine store inventory based on full year’s
experience with merchandise
¨ Develop “name drop” products for sale
¨ Upgrade QuickBooks and bookkeeping
arrangements to manage store as a business
¨ Install cash register/cash drawer and scanning set-up
to streamline operations
Design and install new exhibits with interactive
features.
¨ Support the exhibits, events, and education described
in the main Museum Budget Unit.
¨ Publish book on local wineries to generate income to
fund the Wine History Project.
¨ Focus on public signage to guide visitors to the
Museum.
¨ Refine advertising efforts and make greater use of
social media.
Solicit proposals for and fund fish and game
improvement projects in Mendocino County, work with
the District Attorney to secure additional funds via
prosecution of fish and game violations and subsequent
collection of fines.
¨ Continue to hold public meetings at various locations
throughout the County to increase public awareness of
Fish and Game Commission activities and expand web
page to facilitate distribution of grant applications and
associated information.
¨ Continue to solicit and evaluate proposals for
various fish and game improvement projects in
Mendocino County. Additionally, work more closely with
the Department of Fish and Game to ensure that the
County’s grant projects are consistent with the policy of
Fish and Game.
¨ Encourage public participation in Fish and Game
Commission meetings and expand public outreach efforts
through development of one or more web pages.
Continue to process the several thousand planning
and building permits and projects submitted annually.
¨ Continue to implement customer service operational
enhancements through the co-location with
Environmental Health and coordination with Department
of Transportation staff.
¨ Increase the number of “Notice & Order to Abate”
notices issued and continue to close Code Enforcement
cases.
¨ Continue the implementation of the Building
Division’s review of business license applications for
change of occupancy and health and safety issues.
¨ Continue to assist in multi-departmental review of
Williamson Act compliance.
¨ Continue the implementation of the General Plan and
Housing Element.
¨ Continue the process of updating the Mendocino
Town Plan, and continue to pursue funding for
preliminary planning studies for the Noyo Harbor, which
will serve as precursor to an update of the LCP or the
creation of a Specific Plan for the Noyo Harbor.
¨ Continue to work with MCOG, Laytonville Area,
Gualala and Westport Municipal Advisory Councils and
continue to confer with other community groups.
¨ Continue to monitor, review and implement climate
change policy directives from the State of California,
including the incorporation of Greenhouse Gas Reduction
requirements into County Planning review process.
Pursue innovative Greenhouse Gas planning strategies
that could benefit the County financially or improve the
local environment and economy.
¨ Continue to work with the Executive Office,
Environmental Health and Department of Transportation
in the implementation of coordinated service delivery to
better serve the citizens of the County and provide for an
integrated “one-stop” approach to permitting.
¨ As part of the implementation of the General Plan,
continue the preparation of a Comprehensive Land Use
and Development Code that will combine the Zoning
Ordinance, Division of Land Regulations, SMARA, the
Storm Water Ordinance and the Land Use/Resources
sections of the County Code into one comprehensive
Development Code.
¨ Continue the update process for the Mendocino
Town Plan. It is anticipated that the update will examine a
variety of issues such as: visitor accommodations,
vacation rentals, waters supply, community design,
preservation of historic structures, parking, circulation
and walkability, as well as a review of general policies and
programs associated with the current Mendocino Town
Plan.
¨ Continue to work with Green Building Committee and
develop a Green Building Ordinance for the County.
¨ Complete implementation measures called for in the
General Plan Update, specifically initiation of a new Land
Use Code update and design review guidelines and
standards.
¨ Continue to create a “seamless” experience for the
public by markedly increasing public awareness of and
participation in community planning efforts, and continue
to make the effort to incorporate underrepresented
groups into the process.
¨ Continue to seek grant funding opportunities to
augment General Fund allocations.
¨ Continue to hold cross training with Department of
Transportation, Environmental Health, Air Quality and
CalFire for a cohesive approach to a streamlined permit
process.
¨ Work with County Counsel to continue implementing
the Nuisance and Abatement Order process and
streamline the lien process.
¨ Continue to update all application forms in
cooperation with referral/responsible agencies.
¨ Continue to provide for and encourage cross training
within Planning and Building Services as to enhance
customer service to departmental clientele.
Continue to treat all members of the public,
applicants, decision-makers, and co-workers in a
courteous, respectful and professional manner.
Four positions were vacant during Pay Period 05 when the salary projections were created for FY 2012-2013, including
the Director of Planning and Building. The CEO is recommending that three of the positions be filled at this time.
Departmental revenues are projected to decline by 3% due to a stagnant economy.
Complete the Navarro River Agricultural Water Use
Inventory.
¨ Continue temperature monitoring on various streams
throughout the county, including the Russian River, Big
River, Garcia River, Albion River & Eel River.
¨ Continue to participate in the North Coast Integrated
Regional Water Management Plan.
¨ Continue to monitor, service, and analyze gauges
measuring stream flows on various rivers and streams
throughout the county, including the Big River, the Garcia
River.
¨ Continue modified implementation of Public
Outreach and education program element.
¨ Continue to perform public outreach regarding
Stormwater NPDES Phase II (Stormwater Regulations)
throughout the Ukiah Valley.
¨ Continue the SBx7-6 Ground Water Monitoring
Project in collaboration with multiple water districts
within the county.
¨ Staff to coordinate
with RCD to develop work
plan and cost estimate to
initiate the Great Ukiah
Valley Ground Water
Study
¨ Participate in the
Land Use Code Update by
developing water quality
and stormwater best
management practices
¨ Conduct surveying
for the Feliz Creek Dam
Removal Project
Mill Creek Dam
¨ Conduct required monitoring at Mill Creek Dams
Train additional extra help staff
to further reduce overtime
expenditures
¨ Further enhance evidence based
practices as it applies to detained
minors
¨ Provide Motivational
Interviewing training to all Juvenile
Hall staff
Department experienced large increases in retirement costs.
Continue implementation of Day Reporting Center
services
¨ Continue to work collaboratively with the Community
Corrections Partnership to meet realignment objectives
¨ Add prevention and intervention services for juvenile
offenders including the IMPACT Program, drug and alcohol
treatment services, and the Foundations Program for low
level drug and alcohol offenders
¨ Work with Information Services to successfully
implement Justware criminal justice software system
¨ Continue to improve data collection systems within
the Department
Probation budget unit experienced the largest increase in retirement costs of all the County departments for 12-13.
Budget unit has new revenues from AB 109; however, the budget unit also has new expenditures related to AB 109.
Overall Net County Cost increase is related to the dramatic increase in retirement related costs.
Maintain the continuity and
stability in staffing and caseloads.
¨ Assure that all measures are
taken to fully investigate and
prepare cases for trial and/or
disposition; including retaining any
experts and consultants necessary
for the complete and full
representation of all of our clients.
¨ Assure that all attorneys are
able to maintain their CLE credits and attend important
and critical educational seminars which will benefit both
the attorney and our clients.
¨ Ensure that there continues to be good
communication between the County’s Chief Executive
Officer and the public defender.
¨ Continue to make the Board of Supervisors proud of
their Public Defender’s office.
¨ Continue to provide the best criminal defense
services that are possible in Mendocino County.
An investigator position was vacant during Pay Period 05, leaving only one investigator for the office. Department has
requested and the CEO is recommending an additional $70,000 to cover this position.
The part-time Deputy Alternate Defender has
recently retired, so the Alternate Defender’s department
is seeking to fill that position to continue with continued
maximum availability for representation in juvenile
delinquent matters and to have additional coverage in the
criminal courts, as the office’s caseload has increasingly
consisted of a greater proportion of serious and/or violent
felonies and “strike” cases.
¨ The primary goal of the Alternate Defender’s staff is
to continue quality representation of its clients to the
credit of the County of Mendocino. Staff is always
encouraged to engage in continuing specialized training to
that end, as well as participating in forums that raise
awareness of the criminal justice system, its structure and
opportunities. In both representation of clients and in
training young people in the legal field through college
work study, for instance, the office will continue to
provide service with honesty, integrity and compassion,
and with respect for the dignity and individuality of each
client.
Funds for a position that was vacant at the time of the Recommended Budget will be brought forward at Final Budget
public hearings.
Work with the new Retirement Administrator to
prioritize program and project objectives within budget
and human resource limits.
¨ Complete the project to address over and under
payments by members, including reimbursement and/or
collection from members in a manner consistent with
Internal Revenue Service regulations.
¨ Working with tax counsel, actuary and external fiscal
auditor, complete the review of historical excess earnings
declarations and uses of funds, and determine any
corrective action that may need to occur and be reported
to the Internal Revenue Service.
¨ Review the association’s funding policy with its
actuary, specifically: 1) to review the smoothing of gains
over the next four years and the impact on the volatility
of employer contribution rates; and 2) to re-examine
amortization of Unfunded Accrued Actuarial Liability
(UAAL) to determine alternatives to lengthy periods of
negative amortization.
¨ Conduct a reorganization study to determine if a fulltime
fiscal officer is needed given the association’s
requirement to produce monthly and annual financial
statements, conduct and independent fiscal audit,
produce a Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
(CAFR), report to the State Controller’s Office, maintain its
own accounting system and practices, and execute its
own cash management plan.
¨ Complete the project to convert the association’s
data to an electronic format and prepare a business
continuity and resumption plan.
Increase Resident Deputy Sheriff positions in the
Round Valley, Long Valley and on the South Coast.
¨ Continue with methamphetamine education program
throughout the entire County.
¨ Continue to work with Native American Tribal Police
Departments to improve the overall working relationship
between established law enforcement agencies in
Mendocino County and Tribal Police Departments.
¨ Create a safer location for court ordered child
exchanges in Willits, Fort Bragg and Ukiah. These locations
will be digitally recorded and well marked to prevent
domestic violence incidents from occurring during any
child exchange situations.
¨ Complete the microwave radio system which is in its
fourth state of improvement.
Sheriff-Coroner budget unit has been able to establish Designated Reserves for the use of the Sheriff’s Office during FY
2012-2013. Departmental staff project a positive carryover balance at the end of FY 2011-2012.
Continue to use resources to employ computer
technical employee, who assists with immediate needs as
well as assists in researching and installing necessary
technologies.
¨ Utilize funding to complete unfunded
communication mandates
¨ Replace two K-9s, which will retire within the next 12
months after many years of service to the citizens of
Mendocino County.
Continue to work to prevent overcrowding caused by
AB 109.
¨ Replace inoperable video recording system
throughout facility.
¨ Improve mental health services within the
correctional facility.
¨ Increase number of inmates on home detention,
thus decreasing overall jail population.
¨ Increase staffing within correctional facility.
¨ Promote three Corrections Deputies to the rank of
Deputy Sheriff and send them to the Police Academy.
Sheriff-Coroner budget unit has been able to establish Designated Reserves for the use of the Sheriff’s Office during FY
2011-2012. Departmental staff project a positive carryover balance at the end of FY 2011-2012. Using the zero-based
personnel cost projections; there was some shift from Budget Unit 2510 – Jail towards Budget Unit 3010. For FY 2012-
2013, this department is expected to come in on budget.
The goal of the Jail COPS fund is to have available
funding for unanticipated equipment maintenance and
replacement. If those needs do not arise, the funds may
be used to enhance jail operations.
Continue EOC Development with improved
technology and services.
¨ Improving County response preparation by training
current county employees for specific tasks.
¨ Finalize Special Needs Population development plan.
¨ Improve tsunami education on entire coast of
Mendocino County, working with Humboldt State
University and National Weather Service.
¨ Remodel Emergency Operation Center.
¨ Updating County Emergency Operation Plan,
including all four cities in final plan.
Continue to coordinate Department efforts to
minimize County Maintained Road impacts to the natural
environment by reducing sediment production and
improving and removing barriers to fish migration.
¨ Continue to improve timeliness of review for initial
processing of land development referrals.
¨ Continue seeking grant opportunities for funding of
improvements to County Airports through the Airport
Improvement Program.
¨ Continue seeking grant opportunities for funding
drainage and habitat improvements within the County
Maintained Road System.
¨ Strive to enhance public safety and facilitate
commerce through the Permit Program.
Budget unit was able to come in at the assigned Net County Cost. Budget unit experienced some cost increases to
related to employee benefit increases.
Maintain a substantial preventive maintenance
program that includes: drainage and culvert
improvements, chip seal program, base repairs with
asphalt overlays along with vegetation management.
¨ Continue to replace old, non compliant, on and off
road equipment, while maintaining the goal of reducing
total fleet size
¨ Increase safety training to further reduce injuries
¨ Deliver prompt, efficient, professional customer
service to the public
Line item 827802 was reduced down by $1,353,958 and applied towards County debt outside of the Road Fund. Prior to
this fiscal year, the transfer from BU 1000 had always been assumed to be a fixed percentage of property tax revenues.
This is not the case. BU 1000 transfers to the Road Fund are under the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
The Department went to bid on six 2006 storm
damage event projects in FY 2011-12 that will be
constructed in summer of 2012 (in FY 2012-13). The sites
are generally those where engineering, design,
environmental, and other pre-construction work was
completed in FY 2010-11.
¨ Storm damage projects ready for construction in FY
2012-13 include:
1) East Side Calpella Road, M.P. 3.70
2) Mendocino Pass Road M.P. 2.74
3) Mountain View Road, M.P. 14.45
4) Orr Springs Road M.P. 28.55
5) Orr Springs Road M.P. 32.39
6) Orr Springs Road M.P. 37.05
7) Sunset Drive M.P. 0.30(Road Fund)
¨ MCDoT staff has received funding through the ER
program to repair County Maintained Roads damaged
during the March 2011 series of storms for 10 sites. All of
the projects will be constructed by contractor forces with
State and Federal funding, in the coming three to five
years, depending on environmental and other project requirements. Projects not completed during FY 2012-13
will be advanced as far as feasible and constructed in
future years:
Emergency Relief Funding for “on-system” roads:
1) Bell Springs Road M.P. 17.64
2) Bell Springs Road M.P. 17.67
3) Branscomb Road M.P. 17.30
4) Comptche Ukiah Road M.P. 8.25
5) Comptche Ukiah Road M.P. 8.50
6) Mountain View Road M.P. 14.04
7) Mountain View Road M.P. 14.51
8) Mountain View Road M.P. 15.36
9) Mountain View Road M.P. 15.40
10) Mountain View Road M.P. 20.59
¨ The Governor’s Office didn’t include “off system”
(FEMA funded) projects in their emergency declaration for
the 2011 storms.
¨ Continue to restore the existing road system to predisaster
conditions to ensure that the roads stay open and
safe for the traveling public.
¨ Continue to perform storm damage repairs that are
vital to the well-being of the traveling public in the most
efficient manner possible.
¨ Support, through training and collaborative input, our
high-potential employees who constitute the next
generation of MCDoT staff personnel and managers.Budget Unit draws off the County Road Fund, not County General Fund.
Feliz Creek Bridge Replacement: (1) construct
replacement bridge to prepare for removal and proper
disposal of old bridge.
¨ School Way Bridge Replacement: (1) complete right
of way acquisition, (2) construct replacement bridge, and
(3) prepare for removal/proper disposal of old bridge.
Eureka Hill Road Bridge/Seismic Retrofit: (1)
complete environmental clearances, (2) complete
required right of way acquisition, and (3) advertise and
award construction contract.
¨ Brooktrails Second Access: (1) reprogram Plans
Specifications and Estimates (PS&E) funds to augment
existing Project Approval and Environmental Documents
(PA&ED) funds, (2) modify existing consulting engineer
agreement to best use available funds under the PA&ED
subphase, and (3) conduct the analyses/studies
addressed under the modified agreement.
¨ Orchard Avenue Extension: upon notification of
successful grant application, conduct project feasibility
study (though consulting engineer agreement).
¨ East Side Potter Valley Road Widening and
Reconstruction preliminary work, M.P. 2.40 to M.P. 6.42
(environmental permits, right of way acquisition for 98
parcels and utility relocation for 130 poles).
¨ Bridge Major Preventive Maintenance –
Countywide federally funded project.
¨ Complete all pre-construction activities, including
surveying, engineering design, environmental clearance
and right of way acquisition for replacement of seven
rural bridges, including: North State Street Bridge over
Ackerman Creek, Briceland Road Bridge over Mattole
River, East Hill Road Bridge over Davis Creek, Hill Road
Bridge over Mill Creek, Muir Mill Road Bridge over
Baechtel Creek, Philo Greenwood Road Bridge over
Navarro River, Reeves Canyon Road Bridge over
Forsythe Creek, and Sherwood Road Bridge over Rowes
Creek.
¨ Begin pre-construction activities, including
surveying, preliminary engineering design,
environmental clearances and right of way acquisition
for the College Gateway project that includes widening
Ackerman Creek Bridge on North State Street and
intersection enhancements at North State Street and
Hensley Creek Road.
¨ Complete all pre construction activities, including
surveying and preliminary design engineering,
environmental clearances and right of way acquisition
for Branscomb Road Pedestrian Bridge over Ten Mile
Creek.
¨ Provide engineering support to construct a new bridge
on Reeves Canyon Road at M.P. 2.30 a collaborative effort
between MCDoT and Mendocino County Resource
Conservation District (MCRCD).
Budget unit draws off the County Road Fund, not County General Fund.
Work with aviation consultant to complete the
Airport Layout Plan Update
¨ Implement the Pavement Management System Plan
¨ Continue to work productively with the aviation
community and Covelo Flying Club to identify and resolve
airport issues, maintain facilities and enhance safety
¨ Continue to provide support facilities for local fire,
emergency and rescue services
¨ Continue to retain existing funding sources and seek
new funding sources for capital improvements and
facilities maintenance
¨ Continue to support the part-time efforts of
Administration Division and Land Improvement Division
staff who administer airport programs
Work with the Airport Consultant to complete the
Airport Layout Plan Update and implement the Airport
Pavement Management System Plan.
¨ Maintain current operations and provide a safe
modern transportation facility for the public in the
County and North State region.
¨ Work productively with the Little River Airport
Advisory Committee to identify and resolve airport
issues, maintain facilities and enhance safety.
¨ Continue to provide support facilities for local fire,
emergency and rescue services.
¨ Continue to retain existing funding sources and seek
new funding sources for capital improvements and
facilities maintenance.
¨ Continue to provide support to the contracted
Airport Supervisor and the part-time efforts of Land
Improvement staff who apply their efforts to airport
matters as limited airport resources permit.
Design and implement Caspar -Alternate
Leachate Disposal system to reduce disposal costs.
¨ Complete South Coast closure design and
possibly go the construction contract in 2013 or
2014.
Enhance collection activities for delinquent
unsecured property taxes by utilizing collection options
not currently in use.
¨ Review office operations to ensure staff is being
utilized in the most efficient manner
Identify accounts deemed uncollectible either due to
age, no assets, or where unable to locate the debtor and
request discharge of accountability for accounts where
the cost to collect does not warrant the expense.
¨ Review office operations to ensure staff is being
utilized in the most efficient manner.
Budget unit has experienced a one-third drop in revenues due to changes in state law, lower than expected revenues
and unanticipated vacancies. Department submitted FY 2012-2013 budget with what it deems as an attainable revenue
level. This budget unit has been merged with BU 2010 Court Collections for FY 12-13.


