Implement measures to assure that the county is free
from the European Grape Vine Moth.
¨ Conduct delimitation for Light Brown Apple Moth and
prepare for possible quarantine activities.
¨ Adjust programmatic assignments and train two (2)
new Biologists in multiple programs.
¨ Fulfill contracted requirements for work in the
following programs: Organic; Sudden Oak Death; Nursery
inspection; Glassy Winged Sharpshooter; Detection
trapping (three (3) different programs); Pesticide Use data
entry; Pest Exclusion; and Petroleum.
¨ Maintain 100% commercial device inspections for
annually inspected devices.
¨ Monitor and amend, as needed, the Approved Source
program.
¨ As a member of the Resource Lands Protection
Committee, present an updated re-write of the county’s
Williamson Act Ordinance to the Board of Supervisors for
their consideration.
¨ Acquire a Bell Prover for vapor meter testing.
¨ Update and improve the Department’s web page.
ADMINISTRATIVE –
Develop and implement a
Plan for continued training
of District personnel,
including the County’s
Leadership Initiative.
¨ PERMITTING –
Implement current Plan for
assisting permit holders
with future compliance
requirements of the state
Air Toxics Control Measure for Stationary, Portable, and
Agricultural Diesel engines.
¨ AIR MONITORING – Increase efficiency of the air
monitoring network to improve and enhance reporting
and data collection.
¨ BURN PROGRAM – Increase public education and
outreach to reduce the number of illegal burning
incidents.
¨ GRANT PROGRAM – Begin solicitation of public and
private sector projects for the replacement
of older Diesel engines for Carl Moyer
Program, Year 15 and 16 grant funds.
¨ TRACTOR REPLACEMENT PROGRAM –
Implement a Program for the replacement of
older Diesel powered agricultural tractors..
¨ Database Enhancements – Develop and
implement a Plan to add Tracking Modules
for Grant projects, Smoke Management
Plans and Asbestos demolition/renovation
projects.
Discover and locate all locally assessable property in
the county.
¨ Annually prepare a local assessment roll that
includes the reappraisal of personal property, decline in
value assessments and any real property that has
undergone a change in ownership or contains new
construction.
¨ Surrender the annual roll to the County Auditor-
Controller by July 1 of each year.
¨ Perform mandatory audits of business personal
property and fixtures.Make voter registration readily available to all who
desire to register to vote.
¨ Conduct fair and impartial elections.
¨ Produce accurate election results.
Continue to maintain the public record in a secure
and easily accessible environment.
¨ Continue to provide courteous and efficient service
to members of the public who require information
maintained by this office.
Provide accurate high quality scanned images of the
Clerk-Recorder’s records.
¨ Provide accurate high quality microfilm of Clerk-
Recorder’s records for archival storage.
Continue to provide accurate high quality microfilm
and scanned images of the Clerk-Recorder’s records.
Continue to participate in the review of the County’s
Policy 1 – Purchasing policy and implement any revisions.
¨ Begin a review of County Policy 18 - Travel and Meal.
¨ Review and reorganize Auditor-Controller staff
duties in order to more effectively plan for succession.
¨ Continue to expand the vendor E-Payables system.
Focus on customer service while maintaining
collections.
¨ Continue to examine collection models that have
proven effective in other counties.
¨ Provide timely information to staff on both State and
Federal performance measurers.
¨ Reach out to Health and Human Services Agency to
coordinate case opening for all aided cases.
¨ Continue to utilize the Compromise of Arrears
Program as an effective took to reduce arrears.
¨ Continue to examine the impact of the Affordable
Care Act as it relates to Health Care requirement for
clients.
Ensure all Deputy County Counsels are well trained and
prepared to represent the County. This will be done by
sending deputies to trainings on a regular basis, including
training specifically geared towards the areas of law in
which they represent the County.
¨ Continue to have a proactive approach to risk
management, which means to be involved with and
available to all Department Heads and the Board of
Supervisors on all projects as well as to also continue to
provide the same type of service for
employment/personnel matters.
Continue to provide high quality legal advice and
representation to the county as a whole as well as to
individual departments. To be reachable and accessible by
the Board of Supervisors, the Chief Executive Officer and
all Departments Heads whenever they have legal
issues/questions. Will provide timely, coherent legal
advice and assist the County and the departments to
achieve their goals.
¨ To reduce the need for use of outside counsel even
further by ensuring that all Deputy County Counsels, as
well as all legal support staff, are thoroughly trained and
up to date on all the latest laws and practices in their
fields. In addition, advocating for adding a paralegal
position to the County Counsel's Office will further the
goal of reducing use of outside counsel. (Although this
office handles the majority of the County's legal business,
some work is occasionally handled by outside counsel.)
The Chief Executive Officer recommends $238,586 additional Net County Cost for 2.0 FTE existing positions not included
in the salary projections.
The District Attorney will continue to be hardpressed
to provide full and adequate coverage for all
legal obligations. However, the professional and support
staff of the District Attorney’s Office continue to step up
to the plate and focus on public safety.
¨ Operational policies will continue to be under review
to ensure compliance with changing laws and
conformance with best practices.
¨ District Attorney’s Office will continue a good
working relationship with the Sheriff and all local police
chiefs. Will also, continue to be on the “cutting edge” of
marijuana policy and prosecution in order to protect
medicinal marijuana patients and punish those who seek
profit at the expense of the needs of others. Violent,
serious and sex offenses will continue to be prosecuted
as priority number one in the office, despite limited
resources.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending a net increase of $134,938 to the Net County Cost to cover operational
costs which includes Community Corrections Realignment revenue in the amount of $111,950.
Complete the development and implementation of the
agenda automation process, including electronic
transmittal, routing, and approval of all agenda items.
¨ Develop a new Agenda Item Summary document and
associated staff resources, including an agenda item
submission guide and informational County web page.
¨ Continue to identify and provide Clerk of the Board
staff with development opportunities.
¨ Continue to improve the public’s access to Board of
Supervisors’ records through online resources.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase of $86,330 to cover the cost of insurance increases and fill the
vacant Deputy Clerk of the Board position which is necessary to efficiently and effectively run the Clerk of the Board
office.
Continue working toward the development of a 5-
year fiscal outlook that determines long-term obstacles
and methods to mitigate or eliminate their impact.
¨ Develop a system of departmental performance
standards
¨ Development of additional County Financial policies
¨ Continue funding the 5-Year Capital Improvement
Plan as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
¨ Continue to monitor and maintain the County’s
credit rating.
¨ Continue to pay off debt.
¨ Continue to improve sustainability by building a
County General Reserve that is in line with national
standards.
¨ Improve public access to Board of Supervisor’s
records through expansion of the Questys document
management system.
¨ Continue succession planning through expansion of
the Leadership Development Initiative.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending approval of a $42,720 increase to cover increases in copying, printing, and
special department expenses.
Complete additional Prop 40 Parks improvements.
¨ Continue to work toward completion of projects
listed in the 5-year Capital Improvement Plan.
¨ Eliminate leased space for storage needs.
¨ Complete the site cleanup at two former UST sites.
¨ Continue to work toward completion of the deferred
maintenance list.
¨ Prepare San Hedrin Powerline annual inspection and
maintenance plan coordinated with PG&E.
¨ Implement comprehensive County-wide facility
HVAC system repair and operating compliance program:
o Create and/or update as-built HVAC drawings of
each facility
o Assess and correct deficiencies to optimize
performance
o Installation of remote HVAC system monitoring
to maintain cost effective operation
o Train Facilities Maintenance staff on the
installation and operation of remote HVAC unit
controls
Implement comprehensive County-wide facility
electrical system repair and compliance program:
o Create and/or update as-built electrical
drawings of each facility
o Determine actual panel loads vs design loads
o Implement repairs/modifications to ensure
safety and code compliance requirements are
met
¨ Assess County-wide facility roof inventory in order to
prepare comprehensive roof repair plan.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending $1,363,339 to continue funding capital improvement projects as prioritized
by the General Services Agency and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Relocate radios at Cahto into a new State owned
facility at the site.
¨ Relocate radios at San Hedrin into a better location
to ensure equipment longevity at the current site.
¨ Complete Phase 3 of the County’s Microwave
System – extending coverage in Laytonville.
On-going evaluation to ensure high quality services
are being provided to the public, the Court, and criminal
justice agencies in Mendocino County.
Livestock & Natural Resources
¨ Complete the Spring Wheat Variety project and
share the findings. Organic wheat is a specialty crop in
California. One of the key pieces in successfully
increasing the production and profitability of organic
wheat on the North Coast is identifying appropriate
varieties. Organic production practices differ from
conventional practices and those differences influence
variety selection.
¨ Hold at least one Sheep Shearing school at the
Hopland UC Research & Extension Center.
¨ Conduct a Wool Classing school at the Hopland UC
Research & Extension Center.
Pomology
¨ The Pomology program continues to focus on
updating practices to reduce labor need and cost, and
provide added revenue to growers.
Viticulture
¨ Continue to work on both biological and chemical
control of new leaf hopper pest.
¨ Work with new wine grape promotional organization
to educate growers on various technical subjects.
¨ Assist growers in managing limited water supplies
during this year’s drought.

University of California (UC) 4-H
¨ Grow the UC
4-H Club program
enrollment by
10%.
¨ Continue
success with
outreach in the
afterschool
programs, charter
schools and
activities with tribal partners.
Forestry and Wildlands-
¨ Add two new Advisors to support Mendocino and
Lake Counties. The disciplines will be; Youth, Families
Community Advisor and a Small Farm Advisor.
Mendocino County Master Gardener
¨ Maintain and continue the growth of the two groups
by continuing to alternate classes between the Coast and
Ukiah.
¨ Complete re-certification program in a timely manner
and use it to assess volunteer contributions and reenergize
those with unrealized potential.
¨ Strengthen connections with other community/school
gardeners both Inland and on the Coast.
¨ Strive to better serve Mendocino County
communities and build public awareness of the MG
program and the resources it offers.
¨ Coordinate with Lake County on at least one
significant garden-related seminar in Ukiah such as the
well-attended seminars on aquatic plants that were taught
the year before at Parducci Winery and Mendocino Coast
Botanical Gardens (MCBG).
Food Systems
¨ Expand regional food systems research, education,
and extension activities that strengthen connections
between farmers and consumers, expand access to local
food, and support the viability of agriculture.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase of $44,630 for staff costs not included in payroll projections.
Continue to participate in the County’s Leadership
Initiative.
¨ Begin the analysis of GSA's current service delivery
systems and where improvements need to be made.
¨ Finalize and implement the new County Policy No. 1
– Purchasing, Leasing and Contracting Policies and
Procedure including the roll out of an ongoing training
program for departments.
¨ Creation of automated electronic resources
associated with County Policy No. 1 – Purchasing, Leasing
and Contracting Policies and Procedure.
¨ Begin revamping the County’s Copy Center to
provide enhanced digitalization services to departments.
¨ Finalize the Mendocino County Clean Energy
Program and begin the roll out of the program Countywide.
¨ Update the County’s Procurement Card (PCard)
Program.
¨ Begin Phase I of the County-wide document imaging
program.
¨ Utilize the Leadership Committee process to review
County Policy Nos. 18 – Travel and Meal Policy, 22 –
Information Technology (IT) Policy and 44 – Sustainable
Practices Policy.
¨ Work with a local Real Estate Agent on the surplus
and sale of various County properties.
¨ Work with Health and Human Services Agency –
Social Services to being the process of clearing out their
surplus via the new online system.
¨ Enhance the administrative services related to
Veterans’ Memorial Buildings including automation of
resource documents, enhanced public relations, and
streamline facility access.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends an increase in the Net County Cost for insurance costs, copier costs, office
expenses, and a decrease in revenue from other agencies.
Continue to participate in the County’s Leadership
Initiative.
¨ Begin the analysis of General Services Agency’s (GSA)
current service delivery systems and where
improvements need to be made.
¨ Begin efforts to complete the backlog of deferred
maintenance.
¨ Install and upgrade HVAC system controls for County
facilities in order to provide efficiency and monitoring by
GSA.
o Provide training to staff for installation and
operation of HVAC remote controls.
¨ Perform air balance surveys for all County facilities
with HVAC systems to determine HVAC deficiencies.
o Design system modifications as necessary to
ensure appropriate operating characteristics.
o Install HVAC units and/or ductwork.
o Install control systems.
o Balance systems.
¨ Update electrical as-builts to ensure safe operation
of County facilities.
o Design appropriate electrical distribution plan to
allow necessary operation of County facilities.
o Coordinate with GSA Information Service
Department for appropriate UPS/IT Equipment electrical
requirements.
¨ Create a long range County facilities maintenance
plan.
¨ Complete ADA remodeling of County facilities
according to the County’s Transition Report.
¨ Update the Capital Improvement Plan.
¨ Complete the backlog of deferred maintenance.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending a net increase of $176,035 to fill one vacant Custodian position and the
anticipated increase in the cost of utilities and office expenses.
Implement a continuous long term maintenance
system for all fleet vehicles.
¨ Design an inventory control system for on hand
consumables (brake pads, capilers, etc.).
¨ Input previous vehicle maintenance records in the
new Fleet Maintenance software.
¨ Replace the Underground Storage Tank monitoring
system.
¨ Upgrade the fuel inventory monitoring system.
¨ Upgrade the GasBoy card reader System.
¨ Continue to purchase new vehicles and surplus older
vehicles.
Continue to participate in the County’s Leadership
Initiative.
¨ Begin the analysis of GSA's current service delivery
systems and where improvements are necessary.
¨ Install and upgrade the existing temporary wireless
links from Spanish mountain to several County facilities.
This will improve the performance and long term
maintainability for this critical equipment.
¨ Provide an employee self-service portal to access
Munis for personal updates and corrections.
¨ Consolidate and move the welfare check printing to
Munis and off of the unsupported paybase system.
¨ Update the County’s virtual server components in
order to maintain reliability and serviceability.
¨ Replace 130 computers in Child Welfare Services and
upgrade operating system to Windows 7.
¨ Update the 50+ computer systems in HHSA/Social
Services Adults to bring it to current standards.
¨ Connect Department of Transportation yards in
Boonville, Point Arena, Laytonville, and Little River
Airport to the County’s network, via links to the
microwave backbone.
¨ Deploy e-trackit system for Planning and Building
Services’ online permit system for the public access via
the internet.
¨ Install and configure a Polycom video conferencing
system for the Sheriff's Office to connect multiple
agencies in the County, including Ukiah Police
Department, Willits Police Department and Fort Bragg
Police Department.
¨ Migration from current pension system to the new
Pension Gold system that the Retirement Association is
implementing.
¨ Implement and deploy ePayables for the Auditor to
allow electronic payments from outside vendors via the
internet.
¨ Re-configure the Department of Motor Vehicles
circuits to the faster IP based from the old 56k modems
currently in use.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending $96,984 additional Net County Cost to cover cost of an Information System
Technician position in the hiring process and the cost to cover on-going technical training for IT staff in order to maintain
existing County systems and upgrades as they occur.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends a Net County Cost allocation of $290,000 for vehicle replacement.
Convert to new Liability/WC claims system.
¨ Complete Low Gap Park fitness course replacement
in conjunction with Facilities and Central Services
Divisions.
¨ Streamline claims processing with integration of
paperless filing system.
¨ Continue user expansion of web based training for
Sexual Harassment, Ethics, NIMS and general Safety.
¨ Provide Risk Management in-service for Department
Heads/Managers.
¨ Develop a robust evacuation and safety drill
calendar.
¨ Continue to process claims against the County.
¨ Address any safety or hazard concerns that arise.
¨ Continue reviewing and drafting safety procedures
for the County Safety Manual.
¨ Continue to provide various liability and safety
trainings to County departments.
¨ Continue to streamline workflow to improve the way
business is done as well as keeping up with industry
trends.
Continue to provide effective oversight of
government operations in Mendocino County.
Increase licensing and rabies compliance.
¨ Increase successful animal adoptions.
¨ Continue to increase returns to owner.
¨ Continue to decrease owner surrenders.
¨ Reduce euthanasia rate.
¨ Increase the number of successful adoptions
through post-adoption follow-up.
¨ Increase spay/neuter services, micro-chipping and
preventative health care promotion.
¨ Collaborate closely with Mendocino County Sheriff’s
Office and local police departments to provide the most
comprehensive animal care services possible.
¨ Continue to build close working relationships with
non-profit animal rescue groups.
¨ Collaborate with County Office of Emergency
Services to revise Small Animal Evacuation Plan.
¨ Collaborate with the Spay-Neuter Assistance
Program (SNAP) to provide low cost spay/neuter options
to low income individuals.
¨ Collaborate with the American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) National
Disaster Response Team to
help prepare local rescue
groups and the public for
response to a disaster.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase of $45,000 to remodel the HazMat facility adjacent to the
animal shelter.
To increase animal services in outlying areas of the
county as staffing will allow.
¨ To repair the Care-A-Van so that it can safely and
effectively serve rural areas of the County.
¨ To work in conjunction with county non-profit
organizations to provide service to low income
individuals in rural areas of the county.
¨ To work in conjunction with county non-profit
organizations to provide service to low income
individuals.
Continue to serve on the Healthy Mendocino
committee for promotion and content of the Healthy
Mendocino website.
¨ Continue recruitment for a Mendocino County
Public Health Officer (PHO).
¨ Continue to explore opportunities for shared
resources with Sonoma County.
¨ Provide oversight to internal and external partners
through use of consistent communication and audit
tools.
¨ Increase healthy eating and active living among the
citizens of Mendocino County.
¨ Youth working with Public Health staff will continue
to be presenters about their efforts to create healthy
food environments at the Childhood Obesity Conference.
¨ Continue to research and apply for grants that
promote prevention and public health wellness in
Mendocino County.
Department submitted budget consistent with the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) obligation
Continue to provide education to the community
regarding healthy nutrition.
¨ Continue to advocate for access to healthy foods for
vulnerable populations.
¨ Continue to work with community partners to
encourage fresh food purchases from local farmer’s
markets.
¨ Continue to collaborate with the Mendocino County
Food Policy Council.
Finalize all projects and complete end of grant
reports.
Continue to work on how to reduce chronic diseases
by promoting healthier community environments and
healthy lifestyles, focusing on population groups
experiencing the greatest burden of chronic disease.
¨ Work to reduce risk factors for chronic disease by
promoting good health, reduction of health disparities
and encourage health care.
¨ Work to eliminate second hand smoke danger in
multi-family housing units.
¨ Continue to provide Chronic Disease Self-
Management classes.
¨ Continue to provide safe walking and bicycling
environments.
Work to expand the definition of tobacco products
to incorporate smokeless tobacco products.
¨ Work to decrease tobacco product advertising in
store windows in Fort Bragg.
¨ Continue to educate on the link between advertising
and increased tobacco use among youth.
¨ Work to increase youth involvement in the
community advisory group for the Tobacco Control
Program.
Continue to reduce the number of collisions and
injuries that involve bicycles and pedestrians in traffic
situations in Ukiah and Willits.
¨ Implement school bicycle helmet policies in areas of
high bicycle and pedestrian traffic.
¨ Work with youth groups to assess helmet usage.
¨ Work with youth groups to assess distractions, such
as texting while walking.
¨ Work with youth groups to advocate for increased
enforcement of safe biking and pedestrian laws to provide
support for walkable and bikeable communities.
¨ Collaborate with Willits and Ukiah School Districts,
Sheriff, California Highway Patrol, Willits and Ukiah Police
Departments to provide eight bicycle rodeos to train
school children in safe bike handling skills.
Continue to work with Planning and Building Services
to more efficiently serve the needs of the public.
¨ Hold regular stakeholder meetings to discuss new
septic regulations and to initiate development of Local
Area Management Plan required by State regulations.
¨ Collaborate with Planning and Building Services to
present workshops concerning stormwater pollution
prevention requirements and compliance strategies.
¨ Promote water conservation measures, including grey
water use and rainwater catchment, through public
outreach and collaborative efforts with community
organizations.
¨ Deliver presentations on methamphetamine labs and
large-scale marijuana grow operations to community
groups and local law enforcement and fire agencies.
¨ Conduct bi-monthly food handler certification classes,
alternating between Ukiah and Fort Bragg.
¨ Continue to help provide funding to Ukiah Unified
School District school gardens program, and provide
support to other districts that wish to initiate similar
programs.
¨ Continue to develop Cottage Food program and
provide additional public education and outreach.
¨ Continue to promote the marketing of local produce
by participating in the Food Hub Advisory Council.
¨ Complete the software transition from Access to
EnvisionConnect database management system.
¨ Assist local businesses to comply with State
requirement for electronic reporting of CUPA (hazardous
materials) data.
¨ Collect water samples for bacteria testing at several
popular coastal beaches (in partnership with the
Mendocino County chapter of Surfrider Foundation).
¨ Post updated ocean water quality information on a
24-hour telephone line, informing the public when
bacteria levels are sufficiently high to impact recreational
usage.
¨ Continue to post food facility inspection results
online.
¨ Continue to oversee proper closure of two municipal
landfills.
¨ Mail annual newsletters to businesses on DEH
inventory.
¨ Conduct routine inspections at retail food facilities,
public swimming pools, active and closed solid waste
facilities, petroleum storage tanks, and businesses that
handle hazardous materials.
¨ Evaluate and permit water well and septic system
designs.
¨ Maintain an active role in the Redwood Empire
Hazardous Incident Team (REHIT).
¨ Investigate citizen and Cal EMA complaints.
Department submitted budget consistent with the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) obligation.
Continue to provide Family Dependency Drug Court
(FDDC) like services when the FDDC grant ends on
September 30, 2014.
¨ Continue to participate in the Care Coordination
Collaborative to increase care coordination between
primary care, mental health services and alcohol and
other drug services.
¨ Continue to provide on-going professional training
for all staff.
¨ Become eligible for new funding opportunities
.
¨ Continue the development and refinement of the
CALWORKS Alcohol and Other Drug services.
¨ Continue the development and refinement of AB109
Alcohol and Other Drug services.
¨ Continue outreaching and educating the community
on Alcohol and Other Drug services.
¨ Continue Intake Screening Enrollment process to
better serve clients.
¨ Collaborate and coordinate services with community
partners.
Department submitted budget consistent with the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) obligation.
Continue to deliver Alcohol and Other Drug
Prevention education to all Fort Bragg seventh graders.
¨ Continue to strengthen and enhance community
partnerships.
¨ Expand education regarding the hazards surrounding
the misuse of prescriptions medication.
Continue to strengthen and expand partnerships with
community-based organizations.
¨ Continue to acknowledge local businesses that
demonstrate a standard of excellence when it comes to
preventing access of alcohol to youth.
Provide health education and health promotion
policies, programs, processes, and interventions to
support chronic disease prevention and wellness.
¨ Provide information on public health issues and
functions through multiple methods to a variety of
audiences.
¨ Develop Action Plan as part of Maternal, Child, and
Adolescent Health (MCAH) five-year needs assessment in
collaboration with related community stakeholders.
¨ Continue to recruit for Supervising PHN and Senior
PHN if positions continue to be vacant.
Complete and submit MCAH five year needs
assessment to California Department of Public Health.
¨ Continue to provide services and consultation to
community partners in order to accomplish the mission
of the program.
Continue to assist participants achieve optimum
growth and development through access to nutritious
and fresh food.
¨ Continue to teach activities including: education to
families on how to provide healthy foods, provide
positive nutrition role models, and learn to understand
behavior cues from infants.
¨ Continue to encourage participation in preventative
health care and how to access community resources to
maximize a child’s potential.
¨ Continue to provide enhanced breastfeeding
education and support through participation and
leadership with coastal and inland breastfeeding
coalitions.
Continue to provide outreach and education on
disaster planning to community partners.
¨ Continue to distribute grant funding to community
partners for education on disaster planning.
¨ Increase participation of skilled nursing facilities in
disaster planning.
Increase the number of HHSA leadership staff who
have completed IS 300,400 by two.
¨ Contractor to continue to provide Emergency
Preparedness training to County employees in order to
maintain high degree of compliance.
¨ Revise and improve plans for response to medical
surge and recovery.
Continue working with EMS stakeholders, i.e. first
responder agencies to maintain existing emergency
medical services within the County.
¨ Ensure compliance of EMS policies, procedures,
ordinances and laws.
¨ Enforce the County Ambulance provisions under the
Mendocino County Medical Response ordinance
(Chapter 9.05).
¨ Select contractor to
design a Request for
Proposal for an Exclusive
Operating Area.
¨ Continue to work with
the oversight committee
throughout the Request for
Proposal process.
¨ Continue to sustain the
fragile EMS system.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase of $200,000 to provide advanced life support services to rural
areas of the County.
Continue working with the ASO’s to improve and
enhance specialty mental health services.
¨ Continue to provide oversight and monitoring of the
Administrative Service Organizations.
¨ Continue to provide full-service partnership slots for
intensive “wraparound” support for the seriously
mentally ill, who are homeless or most at risk to be
homeless, hospitalized, incarcerated or placed
out-of-county in residential facilities.
¨ Continue to participate in the Care Coordination
Collaborative to increase care coordination between
primary care, mental health services and alcohol and
other drug services.
¨ Have on-going fiscal and clinical/Medi-Cal related
training for Katie A. staff.
¨ Increase access to housing for the most vulnerable
clients.
¨ Expand the 11 O'clock Court Calendar to the Coast
Communities and search for funding options for this
program.
¨ Continue to provide on-going professional training
for all staff and providers.
¨ Continue the process of moving BHRS records to a
fully electronic record system.
¨ Decrease out-of-county placements and increase the
percentage of BHRS clients living independently within
the community.
¨ Work to be eligible for new funding opportunities
.
¨ Reduce stigma and discrimination with mental
health treatment
.
¨ Continue the development and refinement of the
CalWORKs mental health services.
¨ Continue the development and refinement of AB109
mental health services.
¨ Continue outreaching and educating the community
on specialty mental health services.
¨ Track the developments of the Mentally Ill Offenders
Crime Reduction Act and apply for funding.
Research and apply for grants to allow for additional
funding opportunities.
¨ Continue to improve the Mental Health Advisory
Board.
¨ Collaborate with Partnership Health Plan to create an
MOU and working relationship that creates a “No wrong
door” for access to services.Implement the MHSA Innovation Project.
¨ Continue participation in Care Coordination
Collaborative with community partners.
¨ Transition North Bay Suicide Prevention duties from
Regional facilitation to County Mental Health facilitation.
¨ Continue process with MHSA Housing Project.
¨ Continue outreach with State campaign material
(flyers, brochures, pamphlets, etc) for the following
mental health outreach and education projects: Know
the Signs, Each Mind Matters and Directory Change.
¨ Create a service delivery system that provides a
health care home which treats the entire person.
¨ Integrate primary care with behavioral health.
¨ Participate in learning Collaborative with Rural
Health Clinics and Federally Qualified Health Centers.
¨ Reduce stigma surrounding mental health treatment
through community outreach and education.
¨ Review and apply for grants to allow for new funding
opportunities.
¨ Provide outreach, engagement and information
about BHRS services to communities within the county.
¨ Provide access to services for consumers, schools
and families with children in remote rural areas and on
the Coast.
Involvement with sustaining Realignment funding for
the residual indigent population.
¨ Continue to attend and participate in the CMSP
Planning and Benefits Committee and governing board.
¨ Continue to provide program changes to the CMSP
providers.
¨ Continue to collect and disburse Maddy funds to
local hospitals and physicians for uncompensated
emergency room services.
¨ Continue to monitor impacts of health care reform
and Section 17000 obligations.
Continue refinement of data tracking system to
accurately evaluate the effectiveness and success of the
interventions and activities performed by Children’s
Medical Services. This data will be reported via the State
Children’s Medical Services Performance Measures
Report.
¨ Provide focused provider outreach and education to
ensure that CCS and CHDP providers are able to
independently access critical information and resources.
¨ Provide continued support and resources to
community partners related to Managed Care Medi-Cal
and the CCS carve-out.
¨ Expand and maintain the Children’s Medical Services
References Manuals, including the California Children’s
Services Procedure Manuals and the Child Health &
Disability Prevention Program Manual.
¨ Continue to provide opportunities to cross-train and
enable Children’s Medical Services staff to provide a high
level of service.
¨ Hire Senior Program Manager and Occupational
Therapist to replace or fill vacancies.
Continue to assure smooth transition for services
provided by CHDP to Managed Care Medi-Cal partner
based on accepted Memorandum of Understanding with
Partnership Healthplan of California.
¨ Complete 2 additional CHDP facility reviews.
¨ Continue to provide excellent to families and care
providers.
ADULT AND AGING SERVICES
¨ Ensure collaborative efforts and staff training to
successfully implement the Affordable Care Act with the
case management and payroll systems required for In
Home Support Services.
¨ Plan for caseload growth, based on population
demographics and in anticipation of the aging “boomer”
population.
¨ Collaborate with community partners, public and
private, to provide excellent services to adult and older
adult recipients throughout the County.
¨ Develop additional job sites for employable General
Assistance recipients.
¨ Provide quality services to In-Home Supportive
Services clients throughout the county.
¨ Provide information and referral services to ensure
that the public is aware of services available to assist
elderly and disabled persons to remain independently in
their homes and the community.
¨ Participate in State and regional forums to remain
current with all policy and budget developments
impacting programs and the adult and older adult
population of Mendocino County.
¨ Respond to allegations of abuse and neglect in a
timely manner and coordinate with law enforcement and
other appropriate agencies.
FAMILY AND CHILDREN’S SERVICES
¨ Continue Katie A. implementation.
¨ Have on-going fiscal and clinical/Medi-Cal related
training for Katie A. staff to better serve clients.
¨ Support Redwood Children’s Services in the opening
of an in-county level 14 group home to serve our highest
level needs children and youth.
¨ Continue efforts to keep children placed locally.
¨ Ensure Structured Decision Making (SDM) tools are
fully and consistently utilized throughout life of referrals
and cases in conjunction with Safety Organized Practices
(SOP) tools.
¨ Enhance Social Workers’ comfort with using Safety
Organized Practices (SOP) tools in the field with clients to
help develop a broader understanding of the family’s
capacity to provide safety for the child, help the family
clearly understand Family and Children’s Services’
concerns and develop a mutually agreed upon safety plan
for needed behavior changes.
¨ Continue to provide Family Dependency Drug Court
(FDDC) like services when the FDDC grant ends on
September 14, 2014, including substance abuse
treatment and continued collaboration with community
partners.
¨ Implement a Continuous Quality Improvement
Process in social work practice.
¨ Enhance use of foster care nursing staff in Family and
Children’s Services cases that involve medical issues
including participation in case conferencing and
accompanying social worker staff in field visits.
¨ Ensure full compliance for Child Health and Disability
Prevention (CHDP) medical and dental exams for foster
youth and all necessary follow up is attended to.
¨ Perform Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ) on all
foster children under the age of 5 to ensure children
receive necessary referrals for physical, medical and
developmental needs.
¨ Implement tracking program and collaboration with
schools to monitor school attendance and educational
success of the foster youth.
EMPLOYMENT AND FAMILY ASSISTANCE SERVICES (EFAS)
¨ Expand outreach to community senior centers and
schools to enhance CalFresh benefit accessibility.
¨ Expand Employment Services Resource Center
services to the WISC.
¨ Provide new and innovative nutrition education to
Calfresh recipients. Plans include a nutrition education
program for veterans receiving CalFresh and extending
contracts with local community-based organizations for
nutrition education services for families enrolled in
CalFresh.
¨ Increase the number of CalWORKs recipients engaged
in unsubsidized employment.
¨ Continue full implementation of Health Care Reform.
¨ Implement Family Stabilization in Mendocino County
to support families in engaging in long term plans to self
sufficiency.
DISASTER RESPONSE TEAM (DRT)
¨ Conduct annual membership drive to recruit team
members to build and strengthen the team and to replace
members who retire or otherwise leave the team to
assure coverage for disasters that require shelters for
displaced citizens.
¨ Provide training for new recruits and refresher
courses for current DRT members to assure that the team
is trained and ready for response in times of disasters.
This includes training for the Special Needs Population
response staff to adequately cover such needs in a shelter
situation.
¨ Participate in county-wide drills in conjunction with
the Mendocino County Office of Emergency Services
(OES).

¨ Respond to hazardous weather situations, disasters,
shelter needs and work cooperatively with the OES and
Red Cross.
¨ Ensure Memorandums of Agreement are signed by all
community partners to maintain clear agreements and
procedures as related to Functional Needs for Special
Population Needs during disaster situations.
The goals of the program are to help participants: 1)
Obtain and remain in permanent housing; 2) increase
skills and/or income; and 3) achieve greater
self-determination.
In accordance with the U.S Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) and the Mendocino
County Continuum of Care (CoC), the Transitional Housing
Program will continue to promote individuals and families
to procure permanent housing.
¨ The Mendocino County CoC through the Homeless
Services Planning Group (HSPG) will be focusing on seeking
increased permanent housing options in the northern
county areas.
¨ Transitional Housing services will continue to
collaborate with community agencies to support
participants with obtaining employment to establish
greater independence.
¨ Leadership will continue to participate in leadership
skill building as offered.
¨ Leadership will continue to participate in County
Policy review projects.
¨ Leadership will continue the work on the process to
Public Health Accreditation.
¨ Leadership will continue active participation and
involvement in the Partnership Health Plan of California.
¨ Leadership will continue to hold All Staff Check-in
meetings throughout its offices in the County.
¨ Leadership will work with managers, employees and
community partners to write a current Strategic Plan for
2015-2020 to guide programs and staff through the
upcoming five years.
¨ Continue to train both its management and
employees for disaster response.
¨ Staff Resources plans to continue assessment of its
services and structure, making adjustments where
needed to provide better customer service both internally
and externally. Update trainings such as the Supervisor’s
Core Competency series for its supervisory staff and also
updating of the new employee orientation meetings for
all new HHSA staff. Staff Resources will also produce
HHSA procedures that encompass the entire Agency
bringing consistency for all employees.
¨ Staff Resources will work to create an Agency wide
staff evaluation format that will include a 360 degree
process.
¨ Special Investigations Unit will work to establish an
early fraud prevention and detection program to identify
public assistance fraud as soon as possible. The unit will
also work to assist in the Fair Hearing process and Cal
Fresh administrative disqualification hearings.
¨ Contract Unit will hold an annual contract writing
training and quarterly trainings on special topics. The unit
will also work to establish a grant oversight process for
the Agency.
¨ Communication Coordinator will continue to work on
maintaining media contacts. Consistent and frequent
promotion of HHSA programs for public education will
continue. The Coordinator will also work to improve
internal communications with employees and promote
education of all programs among HHSA staff.
¨ HHSA will institute a universal employee
identification badge for all staff of the Agency. This will
allow for a consistent and unified identification of HHSA
staff, thus providing safety, security and easy
identification of employees.
¨ HHSA will work with County Counsel and the General
Services Agency on a Request for Proposal for Emergency
Medical Services and an Exclusive Operating Area for
inland Mendocino County.FAMILY AND CHILDREN’S SERVICES
¨ Continue to maximize use of Federal and State funds
in all programs.
¨ Continue to utilize all available funding sources to
support these programs.
¨ Successfully interview clients to determine
appropriate eligibility for funding.
¨ Continue to reduce the number of overpayments by
ensuring timely communication with the Placement Unit
regarding changes in placements and children returning
home to a parent.
¨ Continue to reduce the number of children in out-ofhome
placements.
¨ Improve collaboration and communication between
the Foster Care Eligibility Unit and Family and Children’s
Services Social Workers to ensure accuracy of on-going
eligibility determinations.
¨ Continue quality assurance efforts to ensure Foster
Care support cases are in compliance with State and
Federal regulations.
¨ Ensure Foster Care eligibility workers receive ongoing
training.
EMPLOYMENT AND FAMILY ASSISTANCE SERVICES
¨ Continue to provide quality services to families and
children in Mendocino County to support and empower
them to live healthy, safe, and sustainable lives in healthy
environments.
¨ Continue to reduce the number of families in need of
receiving public assistance.
¨ Focus on outreach to sanctioned families with the
collaborative efforts of the Employment Specialists,
Mental Health services, and Support staff.
¨ Provide enhanced and focused support and services
to participants to overcome barriers directly related to
alcohol and other drug use.
¨ Provide enhanced and focused support and services
to participants to overcome barriers directly related to
mental health needs.
¨ Implement Family Stabilization with focus on
housing, nutrition, and barriers to employment.
Build/restore a Job Search Resource Center in
Willits which will be available to CalWORKs Job Services
(CJS) participants. This will provide services related to
new job search, employment preparation, employment
readiness and employment retention.
Provide quality services to IHSS clients throughout
Mendocino County.
¨ Continue to implement necessary procedural changes
and training for staff, IHSS providers, and community
partners to use CMIPS2.
¨ Support the IHSS Advisory Committee.
¨ Plan for caseload growth, based on population
demographics and in anticipation of the aging “boomer”
population.
¨ Provide information and referral services to ensure
that the public is aware of services available to assist
elderly and disabled persons to remain independently in
their homes.
¨ Continue to provide resource and referral assistance
to consumers impacted by the Affordable Care Act, in
compliance with the “no wrong-door” policy.
Develop additional job sites for employable General
Assistance recipients.
¨ Continue to review program policies for incorporation
of best practices from across the State.
¨ Collaborate with community partners, public and
private, to provide services to recipients throughout the
county.
¨ Collaborate with members of the Continuum of Care
with the support of the Homeless Services Planning Group
to develop transitional and permanent housing
opportunities throughout the county.
Continue to implement various aspects of the
electronic recruitment, examination and certification
processes through NEOGOV system.
¨ Assess the feasibility of utilizing the Performance
Evaluation component of NEOGOV.
¨ Work with CalHR to implement the conversion of
Interagency Merit System (IMS) to Approved Local Merit
System (ALMS) for grant-in-aid departments.
¨ Participate in labor negotiations with various
Bargaining Units for expiring labor contracts.
¨ Conduct Classification studies requested by various
departments.
¨ Seek and implement improved and streamlined HR
related processes that create efficiencies throughout the
Department and the County.
¨ Continue the ongoing effort to update classification
specifications.
¨ Review and update Civil Service Rules.
¨ Review and update various HR/personnel related
County policies.
¨ Develop and implement County-wide workforce
analysis, succession planning and leadership training
program.
¨ Develop standardized County-wide training
opportunities that provide for and support the
development of County employees.
Refresh and promote the utilization of County’s
Internship Program.
¨ Review and update written examinations for various
County classifications.
¨ Participate in the County’s Communication Plan by
developing and implementing improved HR
communications.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends an increase of $123,529 to cover the cost of filling the vacant Human Resource
Analyst position and an increase in Professional and Special Services.
Continue meeting with Department Heads to review
the Worker’s Compensation experience.
¨ Offer a Worker’s Compensation 101 refresher course.
¨ Continue to attend training opportunities.
¨ Revise/update the Return to Work policy.
¨ Review claim trends to determine departments’
needs and possible trainings.
¨ Continue to collaborate with departments on
Temporary Modified Duty assignments to return
employee’s to work timely.
¨ Improve tracking of first-aid claims.
Continue Employee Trainings for Health Benefits in
order to build an understanding of how the County’s
health plan works. Thus facilitate the employees having
knowledge that can be used to embrace ownership in the
health plan and to take a more pro-active approach to
monitoring billings enabling appreciation of the value of
the employees’ benefits.
¨ Continue to increase Open Enrollment participation
¨ Implement established processes to monitor
employee hours and prevent the County from receiving a
penalty for non-compliance in Affordable Care Act (ACA)
play or pay.
¨ Continue researching ways to reduce Health Plan
costs without impacting benefits.
Increase participation in the wellness incentive
program to 65% of employees.
¨ Distribute to all employees the Incentive Program
Survey to evaluate incentive program.
¨ Launch the online virtual lending library to all
employees via “Get Ready for the Next Chapter in Your
Health & Wellness” communication campaign.
¨ Coordinate efforts between the Return to
Work/Workers’ Compensation and EAP/Wellness
Programs to address issues impacting employees in the
work place.
¨ Collaborate with the Health Benefits and Return to
Work program to begin offering Benefits Newsletters to
employees/dependents for the purpose of
communicating health care reform information/updates
as well as information to help members become smarter
medical care consumers.
¨ Develop and implement a campaign to educate
employees how to incorporate healthy activities into daily
breaks.
¨ Continue partnerships with local medical and service
providers for health/financial education and physical
activity opportunities, including the collaboration with
Fitness Centers and Weight Management Programs for
discounted rates.
Provide employees and insured dependents with
enhanced easy, confidential access to EAP counseling
services.
¨ Analyze the potential for eligible dependents to
gain access to the Healthy Roads website.
Finalize e-rate funding and contracts to provide high
speed internet at all locations and WiFi for the
Bookmobile.
¨ Facilities upgrades at all branches.
¨ Finish the new website.
¨ Installation of upgraded computers at all locations
for both staff and the public.
¨ Additional Internet access to the public with the
addition of 15 ChromeBooks and laptops.
¨ Security service for the Ukiah Library.
¨ Encourage local community members to
mentor and teach in their areas of expertise and
passion in the libraries as volunteers.
¨ Establish a literacy program in every library.
¨ Continue to weed and update collection so that
all collections will be current, relevant and
community based.
Expand outreach programs into the currently
under-serviced demographics and create literacy
programs for the Hispanic community.
¨ Develop and implement programs at branch
Libraries that encompass author visits, music and art
shows, computer classes and labs, and expanded teen
programming.
Collections: Achieve professional staffing to manage,
conserve, and curate the Museum’s collections with
restoration of the fifth position of Collections Manager.
Strengthen and expand efforts to inventory, document,
conserve and properly store Museum archives,
photographs, digital history, and artifacts. Arrange for
summer interns.
¨ Solar Pioneers: Install exhibit about the experiments,
products, and adventures of early creators and
adopters of solar energy.
¨ Facilities: Have the major roof leaks throughout the
Museum repaired and the Storage area fixed.
¨ Civil War Sesquicentennial: A major focus in 2015
will be on the impact of the Civil War on Mendocino
County and hosting a nationally touring exhibit on Lincoln
and the Constitution.
¨ Return of the Frolic: The Frolic collection will be
returned to the Museum, which will launch the initial
planning for a major new exhibit in 2016.
¨ Development of Educational Programming: Expand
and deepen the Museum’s educational programs for
schools, tour groups, and others. Develop materials
consistent with Common Core to accompany exhibits.
¨ Continuation of Seasonal Events and Other Ongoing
Projects and Permanent Exhibits
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase of $98,131 to cover the cost of utilities, communications,
collection related travel, special department expense for Collection Specialists, funding the Program Specialist position
previously approved, and $74,000 to fund the Museum Curator position.
Completion of a Low Impact Development (LID)
Technical Manual for Construction projects within the MS4
area and continued implementation of the LID element of
the MS4 permit.
¨ Development and implementation of a CASGEM
Groundwater Monitoring Plan for the Ukiah Valley Basin.
¨ Hiring of a Water Resources Specialist to oversee the
Construction Site Runoff Control and LID Programs as
required in the MS4 permit.
Continue to maintain support for budgeted
economic development activities.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase of $45,000 as requested by the Department to increase the
Business Improvement District (BID) match.
Continue to support public education and research
through the new Commission website and public lecture
series.
¨ Continue to support community-based activities to
improve fish and wildlife habitat and propagation
¨ Continue efforts to increase public participation in
Commission meetings and initiatives.
¨ Continue to represent the County, within and
outside the County, at meetings, conferences and public
hearings, and with regulatory agencies, relating to fish
and wildlife.
Begin systematic approach to complete tasks
identified in the General Plan, Housing Element, and
Ukiah Valley Plan.
¨ Continue efforts to identify and implement improved
processes that result in efficiencies and enhanced
customer service. Continue implementation of online
permitting system to allow online viewing of project
status and issuance of simple permits. Use technology to
facilitate project review between Coastal and Inland
offices.
¨ Continue focused effort to close backlogged code
enforcement cases (approx. 1,000 cases) while addressing
new cases.
¨ Complete Housing Element Update.
¨ Commence digital archiving of over 50 years of
accumulated building permits, blueprints, planning
application files, project plans, and administrative
records. Establish comprehensive indexing system to
facilitate access to, and retrieval of digitized archives.
The Chief Executive Officer recommends an increase in Net County Cost of $386,143. Of this amount $207,542 is to
cover staff costs for the Workforce Investment Act Program. This program was previously housed and funded in Budget
Unit 5010-Health and Human Services Agency/Social Services. The requested amount covers the required match to the
federal grant. The additional $162,542 funds three Planner positions currently in the hiring process.
Finalize and submit for approval the amended
WIB/LEO/Administrative Staff Partnership agreement to
reflect the move of the WIA unit to the Department of
Planning and Building.
¨ Update and resubmit the request for High-
Performance Local Board (HPB) certification.
¨ Continue technical assistance to the WIA program
service provider in attaining the newly mandated
requirement of utilizing 30% of the Adult and Dislocated
Worker formula funds for specific training expenses.
¨ Compile the Comprehensive Economic Development
Strategy (CEDS) annual report.
¨ Conduct the Fiscal and Program monitoring of the
contractor, per the State directive.
¨ Award contract for WIA program service delivery.
Continue efforts to recruit and train extra-help staff,
which provides staffing flexibility, and reduces overtime.
¨ Remain responsive in adapting to changes in mental
health services to ensure that adequate levels of service
are being provided.
¨ Complete curriculum for garden project for detained
youth as future vocational training and to qualify as
elective high school credits in gardening and/or
landscaping.
¨ Complete Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
compliance for entire facility.
¨ Continue Federal Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA)
compliance and training requirements.
¨ Identify and upgrade where necessary security
cameras and video equipment.
Continue to look for opportunities to improve upon
availability of mental health services offered.
¨ Continue the productive relationship with the
Community Corrections Partnership.
¨ Continue to recruit and train highly qualified
Probation Officers to allocated staffing levels.
¨ Develop a standardized training program for all
Probation Officers to enhance officer safety, effectiveness
and provide career development.
¨ Complete web-based Lexipol Policy and Procedure
Manual.
¨ Ensure compliance with CPOC’s corrective action
plan for the reinstatement of Title IV-E claiming.
¨ Formalize and implement contract with Contractor
to ensure Title IV-E compliance and funding preservation,
as well as fulfill training requirements.
¨ Add two 4x4 vehicles and replace three additional
aged, worn cars.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase in Net County Cost of $221,979 to cover the cost filling three
current vacancies and the anticipated reduction of Title IVE revenue.
Maintain the continuity and stability in staffing and
caseloads.
¨ Assure that all measures are taken to fully investigate
and prepare cases for trial and/or disposition; including
retaining any experts and consultants necessary for the
complete and full representation of all clients.
¨ Assure that all attorneys maintain CLE credits and
attend important and critical educational seminars which
will benefit both the attorney and clients.
¨ Ensure that there continues to be good
communication between the Chief Executive Officer and
the Public Defender.
¨ Continue to provide the best criminal defense
services that are possible in Mendocino County.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending a net decrease in this Department of $11,583 as the result of additional
staff costs offset by Community Corrections Realignment revenue.
To continue the practice of efficient, dedicated and
thorough legal defense.
Includes Auditor adjustment for positions not listed on salary projection. Department projects salary savings of $30,702
due to entry level hires.

Complete member information integrated automated
system project.
¨ Continue modernization of Charters and Policies.
¨ Study the requirements of implementation of
document imaging.
¨ Provide members with education to equip them for
retirement.
CONTINUE THE FOLLOWING INITIATIVES:
¨ Be in the “Business” of Public Safety and Public
Service, to ensure the safety of residents and visitors.
¨ Proactive approach to crime fighting and crime
prevention.
¨ Thorough criminal Investigations.
¨ Individual and organizational accountability.
¨ Individual career development.
NEW INITIATIVES TO COMPLETE:
¨ The build-out and use of Mobile Data Terminals
(MDT) for patrol vehicles to enhance communications
networks.
¨ Equipment repair and replacement on the Countywide
Microwave System (Grant).
¨ The Willit’s Sub-Station move.
¨ Consider a Village of Mendocino Sub-Station.
¨ Remodel the Communication Center for ergonomic
enhancements.
The Chief Executive Officer recommended adjustments include the addition of two new Public Safety Dispatcher
positions and one new Information Systems Technician, remodeling the Mendocino Substation and the dispatch center,
and fifteen new patrol vehicles. The cost of the recommendations is offset by the addition of Federal grant funding and
salary savings due to retirements.
Continue to employ Sheriff’s Technology Specialist.
¨ Continue to fund unfunded communications
mandates.
Continue to train K-9's in all aspects of search and
seizure.
¨ Continue to promote the K-9 Program within the
Community.
Establish a large off-site garden to offset food costs.
¨ To prepare for future jail expansion - contract for a
CEQA study of the land the jail facility resides and
prepare a real estate due diligence packet.
The recommended increase funds five positions currently in the hiring process including three Corrections Deputies, a
Sheriff’s Services Technician and a Cook.
The goal of Jail & Rehabilitation Center - COPS is to
have funding available for unanticipated equipment
maintenance and replacement, or to enhance overall Jail
Operations.
Completion of a resource data base that includes
resources from non-profit organizations assuring
Mendocino County follows Federal Emergency
Managements “Whole Community” objective.
¨ Quarterly Emergency Operational Center (EOC)
exercises and trainings that includes County Staff, Fire
Departments, and the Ukiah, Fort Bragg, and Willits Police
Departments.
¨ Continue communication improvements.
¨ Upgrades to the Emergency Operational Center.
¨ Continue training of Mendocino County staff in
Incident Command Structure.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending $25,062 to fully fund the Office of Emergency Services and meet the
required County match.
Continue to coordinate Department efforts to
minimize County Maintained Road impacts to the natural
environment by reducing sediment production and
improving and removing barriers to fish migration.
¨ Continue to improve timeliness of review for initial
processing of land development referrals.
¨ Continue seeking grant opportunities for funding of
improvements to County Airports through the Airport
Improvement Program.
¨ Continue seeking grant opportunities for funding
drainage and habitat improvements within the County
Maintained Road System.
¨ Strive to enhance public safety and facilitate
commerce through the Permit Program.
¨ Strive to facilitate orderly development through the
land development process and permitting functions.
¨ Strive to improve the development review and
application process for the public through better
communication and coordination with other County
departments.
¨ Continue training staff in permit processing,
construction inspection, plan checking and development
review skills to develop a versatile staff which is crosstrained
to perform a variety of
division functions.
¨ Continue the maintenance of all
three Mill Creek Dams.
¨ Install a backup valve on the
secondary line for the Upper Mill
Creek Dam.
Maintain a substantial preventive maintenance
program that includes: aggressive “crack sealing”
program, drainage and culvert improvements, chip seal
program, base repairs with asphalt overlays, and
vegetation management.
¨ Continue to replace old, non-compliant, on- and offroad
equipment, while maintaining the goal of reducing
total fleet size.
¨ Increase safety training to further reduce injuries.
¨ Continue to maintain bridge and drainage structures
throughout the County.
¨ Deliver prompt, efficient, professional customer
service to the public.
Construct 2011 storm damage Permanent
Restoration projects at the following locations:
• Bell Springs Road M.P. 17.64 & 17.67
• Comptche Ukiah Road M.P. 8.25 & 8.50
• Branscomb Road M.P. 17.30
• Mountain View Road M.P. 20.59
¨ Complete design, environmental, and rights-of-way
acquisition work on the remaining five 2011 storm
damage Permanent Restoration sites with construction
expected to begin in summer/fall 2015. These include:
• Comptche Ukiah Road M.P. 20.80
• Mountain View Road M.P. 14.04 & 14.51
• Mountain View Road M.P. 15.36 & 15.40
¨ Continue to restore the existing road system to predisaster
conditions to ensure that the roads stay open
and safe for the traveling public.
¨ Continue to perform storm damage repairs that are
vital to the well-being of the traveling public in the most
efficient manner possible.
¨ Support, through training and collaborative input,
the high-potential employees who constitute the next
generation of Department staff personnel and managers.
East Side Potter Valley Road Widening and
Reconstruction (M.P. 2.40 to M.P. 6.42): complete
environmental mitigation work; complete right-of-way
acquisition for 98 parcels and the relocation of 144 utility
poles.
¨ Safe Routes to School (Calpella) – complete the
design, environmental clearance and right-of-way
acquisition work for a bike lane and sidewalk on the east
bound lane of Moore Street, from Calpella Elementary
School to North State Street, a connection across Moore
Street at Third Street, and a bike lane and sidewalk on the
south bound lane of North State Street, southerly to join
an existing sidewalk. Construction is expected in summer
2015.
¨ Pedestrian Safety Improvements (Ukiah) – construct
curb, sidewalk and crosswalk enhancements near Grace
Hudson Elementary School on South State Street at
Jefferson Lane and at Fircrest Drive in summer 2014.
Bridge Projects
¨ Seismic Retrofit Program: Three bridges remain for
completion under the program:
o School Way Bridge Replacement (CR 236, M.P.
1.31, over West Fork, Russian River) – the
Department will begin construction in summer
2014 with completion expected fall 2015.
o Moore Street Bridge Seismic Retrofit (CR 229B,
M.P. 0.45, over West Fork, Russian River) –
complete rights-of-way acquisitions from
property owners and begin construction summer
2015.
o Eureka Hill Road Bridge Seismic Retrofit (CR 505,
M.P. 4.92, over Garcia River) – complete
preliminary engineering, including
environmental clearances (NEPA and CEQA) and
environmental permitting, and begin acquiring
rights-of-way from property owners.
¨ North State Street Bridge over Ackerman Creek (CR
104, M.P. 0.75) -- continue preliminary engineering
activities, including preliminary design and
environmental clearances for the replacement of this
bridge.
¨ Branscomb Road Pedestrian Bridge over Ten Mile
Creek: complete preliminary design, surveying,
geotechnical investigations and environmental work and
begin acquiring rights-of-way from property owners.
¨ Bridge Preventive Maintenance: This Federallyfunded
county-wide project provides funding for major
maintenance in lieu of bridge replacement. The Eel River
Road Bridge over the main stem Eel River (CR 240B, M.P.
6.20) will have a major joint seal replaced and two
bridges on Branscomb Road over South Fork of Eel River
(CR 429, M.P. 9.95 and 10.50) east of Wilderness Lodge
Road will receive surface treatment.
Toll Credit Program – Bridge Replacement
¨ Complete all pre-construction activities, including
engineering design, environmental permitting and rightsof-
way acquisition for the replacement of five bridges,
including: East Hill Road Bridge over Davis Creek, Hill
Road Bridge over Mill Creek, Muir Mill Road Bridge over
Baechtel Creek, Reeves Canyon Road Bridge over
Forsythe Creek, and Sherwood Road Bridge over Rowes
Creek.
¨ Continue preliminary engineering activities,
including preliminary design and environmental
clearances for the replacement of eight bridges,
including: Briceland Road Bridge over Mattole River,
Wilderness Lodge Road Bridge over Dutch Charlie Creek,
Windy Hollow Road Bridge over Garcia River, Reynolds
Highway Bridge over Outlet Creek, Philo-Greenwood
Road Bridge over Navarro River, Lambert Lane Bridge
over Robinson Creek, Usal Road Bridge over Usal Creek
and Powerhouse Road Bridge over Williams Creek.
Secure Airport Improvement Program (AIP) funding
for South Airport Road Realignment Project construction
from FAA.
¨ Secure Airport Improvement Program (AIP) funding
for design and construction of the Airport Pavement
Rehabilitation project from FAA.
¨ Continue to work productively with the aviation
community and Covelo Flying Club to identify and resolve
airport issues, maintain facilities and enhance safety.
¨ Continue to provide support facilities for local fire,
emergency and rescue services.
¨ Continue to retain existing funding sources and seek
new funding sources for capital improvements and
facilities maintenance.
¨ Continue to support the part-time efforts of
Administration Division and Land Improvement Division
staff who administer airport programs.
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending a Net County Cost of $8,318 for maintenance costs at the airport.
Secure Airport Improvement Program grant funding
for capital improvement projects from FAA (includes
replacing rotating beacon and tower, replacing AWOS AV,
security fencing and gates).
¨ Implement the Airport Pavement Management
System Plan by designing Taxiway Rehabilitation Project.
¨ Secure Airport Improvement Program grant funding
for Taxiway Rehabilitation Project construction.
¨ Maintain current operations and provide a safe
modern transportation facility for the public in the
County and North State region.
¨ Work productively with the Little River Airport
Advisory Committee to identify and resolve airport
issues, maintain facilities and enhance safety.
¨ Continue to provide support facilities for local fire,
emergency and rescue services.
¨ Continue to retain existing funding sources and seek
new funding sources for capital improvements and
facilities maintenance.
¨ Continue to provide support to the contracted
Airport Supervisor and the part-time efforts of Land
Improvement staff who apply their efforts to airport
matters as limited airport resources permit
The Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase of $8,529 as Federal grant match for the Taxiway Pavement
Project.
Complete South Coast closure design acceptance
by the NCRWQCB and Cal Recycle and possibly go to
construction in 2015. Mendocino County
Environmental Health Division, serving as Local
Enforcement Agency (LEA), put together a meeting
between MCDoT, the California Integrated Waste
Management Board (CIWMB), and the NCRWQCB. The
hope is that these state agencies will provide
recommendations and/or direction on the criterion
needed for a submittal of a final closure and post
closure plan and design. MCDoT’s Land Improvement
Division Civil Engineer/Project Manager is preparing an
RFP which will lead to the hiring of a landfill consultant
to provide professional services to prepare Amended
Closure And Post Closure Plans (Updated Plans) and
Updated Non-Water Corrective Action Plans (CA Plans)
for Caspar and Laytonville Landfills and Updated Non-
Water Corrective Action Plans (CA Plans) for South
Coast Landfill. SWT Engineering has prepared contract
Plans, Specifications, and Estimates (PS&E’s) to
construct the final closure improvements at South
Coast landfill possibly in the coming year.
¨ MCDoT staff plans to replace up to three older
existing ground water monitoring well pumps at the
landfills in FY 2014-15
MCDoT met with staff from the North Coast Regional
Water Quality Control Board (NCRWQCB) to evaluate Sub-
Surface Water Collection Program at the Closed Caspar
Landfill on November 26, 2013. Present were Fort Bragg
City Manager, Contract County Solid Waste Director,
County Transportation Director, and a representative of
Geo-Logic Associates who met with NCRWQCB about the
recommended "Pilot Program" to test effects on
stopping ground water collection.
¨ Exploring possible reuse of collected water for dust
control at the landfill to help reduce disposal cost (albeit
minimally +/- 10%). Eligibility needs to be checked for a
general discharge permit for “highly treated water.”
The Net County Cost reduction is due to a decrease in insurance costs, an increase in revenue and a reduction to
Professional and Special Services expense. The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as
submitted.
Continue to find ways to utilize staff in the most
efficient manner.
¨ Enhance collection activities for delinquent
unsecured property taxes by utilizing collection options
not currently in use.
¨ Review business practices for the anticipation of a
new property tax system
Continue to review office operations to ensure staff is
being utilized in the most efficient manner after merger of
the Treasurer-Tax Collector and Court Collections.
¨ Increase the number of Abstract of Judgments filed
with the Recorder in order to effect the collection of
court-ordered debt.
