Implement measures to assure that the county is free
from the European Grape Vine Moth.
¨ Adjust programmatic assignments and train new
Biologist in multiple programs as well as mentoring and
training the new Assistant Agricultural Commissioner.
¨ Fulfill contracted requirements for work in the
following programs: Organic; Sudden Oak Death; Nursery
inspection; Glassy Winged Sharpshooter; Detection
(insect) trapping; Pesticide Use data entry; and Pest
Exclusion.
¨ Maintain 100% commercial device inspections for
annually inspected devices.
¨ Finalize and make operational an Approved Source
program in the county.
¨ As a member of the Resource Lands Protection
Committee, present an updated re-write of the County’s
Williamson Act Ordinance to the Board of Supervisors for
consideration.
¨ Acquire a Bell Prover for vapor meter testing.
There is an increase to the Net County Cost in this Department which includes an adjustment to insurance costs and the
Chief Executive Officer recommendation to add $27,655 which will fully fund the existing 2.0 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)
Trapper positions.
Administrative –
Develop and implement a
plan for training of District
personnel.
¨ Permitting - Develop and
implement a plan for
assisting permit holders with
compliance requirements of
the state Air Toxics Control
Measure for Stationary,
Portable, and Agricultural
Diesel engines.
¨ Air Monitoring – Increase efficiency of the software
of the air monitoring network to improve and enhance
reporting.
¨ Burn Program – Increase public education and
outreach to reduce the number of illegal burning
incidents.
¨ Grant Program - Begin solicitation of public and
private sector projects for Carl Moyer Program, Year 15
grant funds for the replacement of older Diesel engines.
¨ Tractor Replacement Program - Develop and
implement a Program for the
replacement of older Diesel powered
agricultural tractors.
¨ Database Enhancements -
Develop and implement a Plan to add
an Emissions Inventory Module for
calculating both potential to emit and
actual emissions data for stationary
sources and a Grants Tracking Module
for grant projects funded through
each specific funding source.
This is not a General Fund budget unit. Budget includes an Auditor adjustment. The Chief Executive Officer recommends
approval of this budget as submitted.
Discover and locate all locally assessable property in
the county.
¨ Annually prepare a local assessment roll that
includes the reappraisal of personal property, decline in
value assessments and any real property that has
undergone a change in ownership or contains new
construction.
¨ Surrender the annual roll to the County Auditor-
Controller by July 1 of each year.
¨ Perform mandatory audits of business personal
property and fixtures.
Executive Office staff met with the Assessor to gain a better understanding of the Department’s needs. In order to
address the Proposition 8 and unassessed valuation backlog, several necessary changes were identified. The addition of
staff will allow a redistribution of the workload, producing improved outcomes and help to improve succession planning.
Department is requesting and the Chief Executive Officer is recommending $85,800 additional funding to fill 1.0 Full
Time Equivalent (FTE) Real Property Appraiser I/II position and to promote an existing Real Property Appraiser I to the
Appraiser II level. Another identified need is updated parcel maps. It is hoped that the addition of the GIS Technician
position in General Services Agency - Information Services will allow for the necessary staff time to work on this much
needed project. Lastly, the replacement of the County property tax system will help the Assessor’s Office by improving
system efficiency and interoperability between County departments. The Executive Office will continue to work with the
Assessor’s Office to identify further options to improve productivity, and will return at Final Budget in September with
further recommendations.
Make voter registration readily available to all who
desire to register to vote.
¨ Conduct fair and impartial elections.
¨ Produce accurate election results.
Reduction in Net County Cost reflects a slight decrease in insurance costs. The Chief Executive Officer has recommended
and the Department agrees to increase anticipated revenue due to election services related to the upcoming primary
election.
Continue to maintain the public record in a secure
and easily accessible environment.
¨ Continue to provide courteous and efficient service
to members of the public who require information
maintained by this office.
There is a slight decrease to the Net County Cost in this budget unit due to an adjustment to the cost of insurance. The
Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Provide accurate high quality scanned images of the
Clerk-Recorder’s records.
¨ Provide accurate high quality microfilm of Clerk-
Recorder’s records for archival storage.
Continue to provide accurate high quality microfilm
and scanned images of the Clerk-Recorder’s records.
Participate in development of parameters and
requirements for more efficient property tax system to
replace existing failing system.
¨ Issue the County’s Audit Report again by December.

Slight decrease in Net County Cost due to insurance cost reduction. The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of
this budget as submitted.
The Net County Cost decrease is due to a combination of insurance cost increases, no Tax and Revenue Anticipation
Notes (TRANs) activity, no Southwest Boarder Patrol payment, and Chief Executive Officer recommendations as follows:
addition of $277,000 for potential litigation; and a $5,000 allocation to continue to fund Mendocino County’s portion of
the regional program coordinator for the Food Systems Network program.
Decrease in Net County Cost due to Board’s voluntary compensation reduction and insurance cost reductions. The Chief
Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Focus on customer service while maintaining
collections.
¨ Continue to examine collection models that have
proven effective in other counties.
¨ Provide timely information to staff on performance
standards.
¨ Continue to be aggressive on the Compromise of
Arrears Program (COAP) to reduce arrears.
¨ Examine the possibility of collecting child support at
court.
¨ Reopen small office in Fort Bragg ½ day a month.
¨ Continue to examine issues concerning the
Affordable Care Act as it relates to medical support for
Child Support cases.
There are decreases in departmental billing and A-87 costs.
Continue to assist the County with ongoing projects
and legal obligations. Provide a sound program of
preventative and proactive legal support through accurate
and timely legal advice to the Board of Supervisors,
County officers, departments, boards, and commissions,
as well as special districts governed by the Board of
Supervisors.
¨ Enforce mandated state, federal, and local laws in the
areas of planning, zoning, building, solid waste, water
quality, environmental health, and air quality.
¨ Provide the best possible legal services for the County
in litigation initiated by and against the County. Deliver
legal advocacy and collaborative support to all County
departments and offices, boards, commissions and
special districts.
¨ Provide the best possible advice to Human
Resources and individual departments regarding
employment and personnel matters.
¨ Staff will continue to maintain and provide the level
of legal services currently extended to the Board of
Supervisors, County departments, boards, commissions,
and special districts.
¨ County Counsel will continue to assist the County in
reducing dependency upon outside counsel by retaining
experienced attorneys, secretaries, and para-professional
support and through employee development and
training.
Chief Executive Officer is recommending an increase of $5,811 to cover the actual cost of a newly filled position, and an
increase of $1,200 to cover required education and training costs for staff. County Counsel has requested the addition of
1.0 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Legal Secretary. The Executive Office is not recommending the position at this time due to
the department already having 2.0 FTE Legal Secretary positions, however, the request will be reevaluated prior to final
budget.
Due to increased workload, realignment, and the
inability to add new positions at this time, the District
Attorney will continue to be hard-pressed to provide full
and adequate coverage for all legal obligations. However,
the professional and support staff of the District
Attorney’s Office continue to step up to the plate and
focus on public safety.
¨ Operational policies will continue to be under review
to ensure compliance with changing laws and
conformance with best practices.
¨ District Attorney’s Office will continue a good
working relationship with the Sheriff and all local police
chiefs. Will also, continue to be on the “cutting edge” of
marijuana policy and prosecution in order to protect
medicinal marijuana patients and punish those who seek
profit at the expense of the needs of others. Violent,
serious and sex offenses will continue to be prosecuted
as priority number one in the office, despite limited
resources.
There is an increase of 11.92% to the Net County Cost in this budget unit due to increases in operating costs and the loss
of one time revenues. The Executive Office staff and the District Attorney identified additional revenue which resulted in
lowering the recommended Net County Cost by $173,907. Executive Office staff will continue to work with the District
Attorney throughout the upcoming year to identify additional reductions wherever possible.
Maintain Brown Act compliance, despite state effort
to abandon local assistance for this program.
¨ Continue Questys system implementation. Projects
include the revision of the County’s Agenda Summary
format, and also employing the latest version of Questys,
CMx, to provide increased efficiencies in agenda
automation.
¨ Improve public access to Board of Supervisor’s
records through expansion of the Questys document
management system.
¨ Work to digitize the Board of Supervisors microfilm
records.
Decrease in Net County Cost due to compensation and insurance cost reductions. The Chief Executive Officer
recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Continue working toward the development of a 5-
year fiscal outlook that determines long-term obstacles
and methods to mitigate or eliminate their impact.
¨ Implementation of the 2013-2014 Capital
Improvement Plan as approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
¨ Fully restore funding to the Department of
Transportation.
¨ Continue to improve the County’s credit rating.
¨ Continue to pay off debt.
¨ Continue to improve sustainability by building a
County General Reserve that is in line with national
standards.
¨ Improve public access to Board of Supervisor’s
records through expansion of the Questys document
management system.
¨ Continue succession planning through expansion of
the Leadership Development Initiative.
Slight decrease in Net County Cost due to insurance cost reduction. Chief Executive Officer recommends filling 1.0 Full
Time Equivalent (FTE) Administrative Analyst II to coordinate data collection and State reporting for all Community
Corrections Partnership (CCP) departments and participating agencies if realignment funding for this position is
approved by the CCP.
Complete additional Prop 40 Parks improvements
¨ Complete projects listed in the 5-year Capital
Improvement Plan
¨ Eliminate leased space for storage needs
¨ Move employees located in the Willits Justice Center
¨ Begin site cleanup at 2 former UST sites
¨ Began and/or completed the following remodels of
County facilities:
o Avila Center Phase III
o Ukiah Library Improvements
Chief Executive Officer is recommending $1,316,036 to fund projects as prioritized by the General Services Agency and
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Complete Phase 3 of the County’s Microwave
System – extending coverage in Covelo and Laytonville
Chief Executive Officer is recommending $1,316,036 to fund projects as prioritized by the General Services Agency and
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
On-going evaluation to ensure high quality services
are being provided to the public, the Court, and criminal
justice agencies in Mendocino County.
Livestock & Natural Resources
¨ Continue to update and expand the new UCCE
Livestock & Natural Resources web site with rangeland
information on other livestock species using the same
format as the Range Beef Cattle web site.
¨ Conduct extended interviews of ranchers for the
Rangeland Stewardship study that is part of the Ecosystem
Services project.
¨ Monitor the rangeland seeding trial that reclaims
Medusahead infested rangelands and hold a field day.
¨ Conduct at least one Sheep Shearing School.
¨ Finish Navarro Watershed Ag. Water Use report with
Glenn McGourty Viticulture advisor.
Viticulture
¨ Work on both biological and chemical control of new
leaf hopper pest.
¨ Work with new wine grape promotional organization
to educate growers on various technical subjects.
¨ Complete the Navarro Watershed Study.
¨ Continue to develop a long-range plan for the UC
Hopland Research and Extension Center developing the
Center as a north coast science wine center.
Pomology - Continue to ensure the economic and
environmental sustainability of the Mendocino County
fruit and nut industry.
University of California (UC) 4-H - Grow the UC 4-H
program and especially in the outlying areas. Follow up
on the opportunities with the Three Rivers Charter
School and Willits Charter School in doing 4-H activities in
an afterschool setting.
Forestry and Wildlands
¨ Implement the newly designed e-learning
curriculum.
¨ Work with the Redwood Forest Foundation to secure
a Safe Harbor Agreement for the Usal Forest.
¨ Expand e-learning opportunities to foresters and
landowners in Mendocino County.
Net County Cost reduction of 10.18% is due to lower cost of insurance and hiring staff at a lower salary step. The Chief
Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Continue to streamline workflow as to improve the
way GSA does business, as well as keeping up with
industry trends.
¨ Enhance Copy Center operations and implement
additional procedures to streamline operations.
¨ Continue to review all County owned real estate to
determine market value of those that are ready for sale.
¨ Develop an internal Needs Assessment in order to
benchmark the standing of the Agency.
¨ Continue to improve upon the online purchasing
program.
¨ Utilize ideas provided by employees in the Needs
Assessment to enhance and enrich the Agency’s programs,
policies and procedures.
¨ Continue to enhance the Countywide surplus
property program.
Increase in Net County Cost to offset removal of purchasing card fee revenue and to cover estimated increases in copier
costs.
Update the Facility Consolidation Report
¨ Update the Facility and Park Condition Report
¨ Update the ADA Upgrade Report
¨ Continue with facility remodels and moves according
to the Facility Consolidation Report
¨ Complete year 9 of the 10 year plan for ADA
remodeling of County facilities according to the County’s
Transition Report
¨ Develop an internal Needs Assessment in order to
benchmark the standing of the Agency after the
integration, and develop a work plan as the Agency
moves forward.
¨ Create an automated Facility Condition Report
System.
¨ Continue to maintain facilities under the Capital
Maintenance Reserve Program.
¨ Update a 5-year Capital Improvement Plan
¨ Utilize ideas provided by employees in the Needs
Assessment to enhance and enrich the Agency’s
programs, policies and procedures
¨ Continue to review facility consolidations, including
space analysis
This budget unit’s Net County Cost reflects an increase of 14.17% which includes a reduction to insurance costs and the
following Chief Executive Officer recommendations: increase of $269,500 to cover projected utility costs; $86,665 to fill
2.0 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Custodian positions; and $63,033 to cover existing operations.
Continue the assessment and implement
recommendations for streamlining Garage functions and
services.
¨ Surplus additional County vehicles as they are
replaced or as necessary.
¨ Continue to streamline workflow to improve the way
business is done as well as keeping up with industry
trends.
Due to insurance cost reductions, this budget unit is projected to have a contribution to the General Fund in Fiscal Year
2013-2014 of $10,289. The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Consolidate and move public assistance check
printing to Munis and off of the unsupported paybase
system.
¨ PC replacement for 200+ general funded computers
that are 8+ years old and no longer meet minimum
system requirements.
¨ Replace the outdated telephones at Social Services
to allow faster speeds to desktop computers which will
improve performance and maintenance. The existing
telephones are 12+ years old and are limiting the
performance and reliability of the systems.
¨ Consolidate file storage that is now located on
multiple server systems. This will improve reliability and
performance.
¨ Install and upgrade the existing temporary wireless
links from Spanish Mountain to several County facilities.
This will improve the performance and long term
maintainability for this critical equipment.
¨ Finish the migration of Munis reporting from the old
Oracle database to the current SQL system.
¨ Upgrade the critical firewall that connects the
County to the State network. The current system is very
old and no longer supported. This link to the State is
critical for Social Services, Adult Services, Child Support
and other County departments.
¨ Provide an employee self-service portal to access
Munis for personal updates and corrections.
¨ Upgrade the County’s email system to current
releases and enhance functionality for mobile devices
and tablets.
Net County Cost includes an Auditor adjustment to insurance and the following Chief Executive Officer
recommendations: fill 1.0 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) IT Technician for the Library and increase revenue from the Library
to pay for the position; addition of $71,564 to fill the vacant GIS Technician position; and increase of $6,631 to the 1000
Series – Salaries and Employee Benefits to remain status quo excluding funding for extra help. The Department has
requested to fill an additional IT Technician position which the Chief Executive Officer is not recommending at this time.
Continue to expand the use of web based training to
County departments.
¨ Continue to process Claims Against the County.
¨ Streamline the Authorized Driver’s Training Program.
¨ Address any safety or hazard concerns that arise.
¨ Continue reviewing and drafting Safety Procedures
for the County Safety Manual.
¨ Continue to provide various Liability and Safety
trainings to County departments.
¨ Continue to streamline workflow to improve the way
business is done as well as keeping up with industry
trends.
¨ Develop an internal Needs Assessment in order to
benchmark the standing of the Agency. Take responses
and develop a work plan for the Agency.
¨ Utilize ideas provided by employees in the Needs
Assessment to enhance and enrich the Agency’s
programs, policies and procedures.
Continue to provide effective oversight of
government operations in Mendocino County.
There is a slight decrease in Net County Cost due to an Auditor adjustment to insurance costs. The Chief Executive
Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Collaborate with North Coast Opportunities and
Noah’s Wish to host advanced Animal Rescue and
Disaster Preparedness training for public.
¨ Increase licensing and rabies compliance.
¨ Increase animal adoptions.
¨ Increase returns to owner.
¨ Decrease owner surrenders.
¨ Reduce euthanasia rate.
¨ Increase spay/neuter services, micro-chipping and
preventative health care promotion.
¨ Collaborate closely with Mendocino County Sheriff’s
Office and local police departments to provide the most
comprehensive animal care services possible.
¨ Continue to build close working relationships with
non-profit animal rescue groups.
The Net County Cost reflects a reduction to insurance costs. The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this
budget as submitted.
To continue animal services in outlying areas of the
county as staffing will allow.
¨ To work in conjunction with county non-profit
organizations to provide service to low income individuals
Continue to serve on the Healthy Mendocino
committee for promotion and content of the Healthy
Mendocino website.
¨ Continue to recruit for a part-time Public Health
Officer for Mendocino County.
¨ Continue to explore opportunities of shared
resources with Sonoma County.
¨ Provide oversight to internal and external partners
through use of consistent communication and audit
tools.
Educate about an ordinance addressing tobacco
retailer density in at least one jurisdiction.
¨ Establish voluntary smoke-free housing policy by
working with multi-unit housing owners and managers
throughout Mendocino County.
¨ Increase healthy eating and active living among youth
and adults in Mendocino County.
¨ Build capacity for existing community coalition
through training on underage drinking, cultural
competency, and environmental prevention and by
establishing a model program to change community
practices and policies to reduce teen access to alcohol.
¨ Continue to research and apply for grants that
promote prevention and public health wellness in
Mendocino County.
Continue to work with Planning and Building Services
to more efficiently serve needs of public.
¨ Hold regular stakeholder meetings to discuss new
septic regulations and to initiate develop of Local Area
Management Plan required by State regulations.
¨ Conduct bi-monthly food handler certification
classes, alternating between Ukiah and Fort Bragg.
¨ Continue to help provide funding to Ukiah Unified
School District school gardens program, and provide
support to other districts that wish to initiate similar
programs.
¨ Continue to develop Cottage Food program and
provide additional public education and outreach.
¨ Continue to post food facility inspection results
online.
¨ Complete the software transition from Access to
EnvisionConnect database management system.
Assist local businesses comply with State requirement
for electronic reporting of CUPA (hazardous materials)
data.
¨ Continue to oversee proper closure of 2 municipal
landfills.
¨ Collect water samples at several popular coastal
beaches (in partnership with the Mendocino County
chapter of Surfrider Foundation).
¨ Post updated water quality information on a 24-hour
telephone line.
¨ Mail annual newsletters to businesses on
Environmental Health inventory.
¨ Conduct routine inspections at retail food facilities,
public swimming pools, petroleum storage tanks, and
businesses that handle hazardous materials.
¨ Evaluate and permit water well and septic system
designs.
¨ Maintain an active role in the Redwood Empire
Hazardous Incident Team (REHIT).
¨ Investigate citizen and Cal EMA complaints.
Department submitted budget consistent with the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) obligation.
Establish Adolescent Treatment sites as certified
satellites of the Administrative site for AODP, offering
more comprehensive treatment for adolescents at school
campuses and allowing for Drug Medi-Cal/minor consent
billing.
¨ Continue Alcohol & Other Drug Treatment services
in Ukiah and on the Coast for those with co-occurring
disorders, for those with criminal justice referrals, and
for parents whose substance use disorder interferes with
their parenting.
¨ Build capacity for existing community coalition
through training on underage drinking, cultural
competency, and environmental prevention and by
establishing a model program to change community
practices and policies to reduce teen access to alcohol.
Inform and educate about Public
Health issues and functions.
¨ Provide health education and
health promotion policies, programs,
processes, and interventions to support prevention and
wellness.
¨ Provide information on public health issues and
public health functions through multiple methods to a
variety of audiences.
The EMS Agency will provide subject matter
expertise and assistance to the Mendocino County
Executive Office and selected consultant in actions
identified in Phase 1 of the EMS System Improvement
project as appropriate for increasing system quality,
accountability and financial sustainability.
¨ The EMS Agency will advocate for funding to
purchase Automatic External Defibrillators (AEDs) for
public access placement. Access to early bystander CPR
and AED intervention is critical for victims of Sudden
Cardiac Arrest (SCA). SCA victims in rural and remote
locations within Mendocino County areas likely to have
such access.
¨ Continue development of a web-based storefront for
stakeholder access to EMS Agency services and support.
Phase 2 improvements over the pre-existing site include:
1) Online credentialing and payment options; 2) Webbased
forms for incident reporting; and 3) Updates to
HTML based policy/protocol documents formatted for
mobile device access.
¨ The EMS Agency will work in conjunction with
system stakeholders to plan and develop a recognition
process for system successes. This process may include
semi-public recognition events and/or public award
presentations to identified individuals in the EMS System
providing excellent service to the communities they
serve.
¨ Continue working with EMS stakeholders, i.e. first
responder agencies to maintain existing emergency
medical services within the county.
¨ Ensure compliance of EMS policies, procedures,
ordinances and laws.
¨ Enforce the County Ambulance provisions under the
Mendocino County Medical Response ordinance
(Chapter 9.05).
Ensure ongoing complete and competent dispatch
services for EMS related incidents.
¨ Continue to build stronger, more consistent and
cohesive working relationships with emergency services
and other county stakeholders for execution of tasks in
countywide or Mass Casualty Incidents (MCI) events.
There is an 18.11% reduction to the Net County Cost which includes an insurance cost adjustment and the removal of
one-time funding allocated in Fiscal Year 2012-2013 for the Phase I feasibility study for the Emergency Management
System Exclusive Operating Area (Ambulance Services Project). Should the decision be made to go forward with Phase II,
this budget unit will require an additional $56,000 in Net County Cost, and will be reevaluated for final budget.
Continue the progress made during the FY 2012-13
restructuring/redesign actions.
¨ Continue to provide full-service partnership slots for
intensive “wraparound” support for the seriously mentally
ill, who are homeless or most at risk to be homeless,
hospitalized, incarcerated or placed out-of-county in
residential facilities.
¨ Continue to collaborate with the youth
organizational providers as the Early and Periodic
Screening Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) funds are
realigned.
¨ Fully implement the referral protocol to the
Federally Qualified Rural Health Clinics. Collect outcome
data and analyze at the Quality Improvement
Committee.
¨ Fully implement low cost in-county residential
programs and utilize as a resource for out-of-county
placements returning back to the county.
¨ Fully implement managed access to ensure all clients
enter the system through BHRS for standardized triage
and assessment. Screen clients for medical necessity and
return clients to services. Enroll clients in appropriate
levels of care.
¨ Ensure that all contracts have scope of services that
include measurement of outcomes and efficient
standards to drive cost-effectiveness of services.
¨ Initiate RFP(s) for public private service delivery.
¨ Continue to collaborate with Mendocino County
Office of Education (MCOE) in the delivery of BHRS
services to identified students.
¨ Productivity – utilize data reports to monitor and
support staff productivity goals.
¨ Forensic Treatment – continue the collaboration
with local law enforcement and the parole office to
establish forensic services and a re-entry program that
reduces recidivism rate and ensures community re entry.
¨ Continue the retooling of the Quality Improvement
Committee emphasizing data driven solutions to improve
access in quality of services.
¨ Staff will continue to participate and provide
leadership in the planning, implementation and
development of restructured programs through BHRS
Administration funding. The Branch will continue to focus
on the provision of services to the broadest geographical
area possible and to the historically underserved
populations.
¨ Continue the process of moving BHRS records to a
fully electronic record system.
¨ Decrease out-of-county placements and increase the
percentage of BHRS clients living independently within
the community.
¨ Increase access to housing for the most vulnerable
clients.
¨ Strengthen the skills and capacity of the BHRS
workforce through professional training available with 
Mental Health Services Act – Workforce Education
and Training Component (WET) funding.
¨ Create a service delivery system that provides a health
care home that treats the entire person.
¨ Integrate primary care with behavioral health.
¨ Participate in pilot projects with federally qualified
and rural health centers.
¨ Reduce stigma with mental health treatment.
¨ Continue to work with organizational providers to
transform service delivery.
¨ Develop relationships with new partners.
¨ Work to be eligible for new funding opportunities.
¨ Explore regional opportunities for service delivery.
¨ Staff will participate in intra-agency training to fully
develop systems of care. When applicable, community
partners will be invited to join in training and planning for
the most robust and sustainable services and delivery
systems.
¨ The Mental Health Request for Proposal (RFP) to
contract out mental health services was released in
October of 2012. The RFP announced the intent of the
County HHSA Mental Health to explore how current
mental health services maybe delivered in an alternative
way from past practices of the County administering the
services. The scope of services include, not limited to, the
improvement, expansion and management of the safety
net of services for the most severely persistently mentally
ill adult and youth, who are severely emotionally disabled.
Key elements, include not limited to, integration of
mental health and primary care services, development of a
housing continuum, care management, crisis services, the
delivery and management of out patient services. The
selection and award to the contractor(s) is expected to be
completed during the Fourth Quarter of FY 2012/13. The
County will provide continued oversight of the
contractor(s) through the implementation and course of
contracted services.
¨ Federal Affordable Care Act - BHRS is a participant in
the countywide Health Care Referral Work Group. Areas of
focus include, not limited to, the following:
• Health systems service integration including, not
limited to, primary care and behavioral health (mental
health and substance abuse) services
• Establishment of the “Medical Home”;
• Outreach and engagement to facilitate client
enrollment and maintenance of benefits;
• Collaboration with BHRS and Partnership Health
Plan (PHP) in the implementation and follow-up on
the Partnership Health Plan/Mental Health
Memorandum of Understanding;
• Clinical and Fiscal Outcomes – Monitoring and
measuring the achievement of quality clinical and
fiscal outcomes while reducing costs through the
management and delivery of integrative care; and
• Medi-Cal Expansion – It is estimated that there
will be an increase of 5,291 new enrollees in the
Medi-Cal program in Mendocino County of which, an
estimated 458 – 616 new enrollees will be
candidates for Mental Health Services and an
estimated 294- 396 new enrollees will be candidates
for substance abuse use services.
Create a service delivery system that provides a
health care home which treats the entire person.
¨ Integrate primary care with behavioral health.
¨ Participate in pilot projects with rural health clinics
and Federally Qualified Health Centers.
¨ Reduce stigma surrounding mental health
treatment.
Continue to work with organizational providers to
transform service delivery.
¨ Develop relationships with new partners.
¨ Position the County to be eligible for new funding
opportunities.
¨ Provide outreach, engagement and information
about BHRS services.
¨ Provide access to services for consumers, schools,
and families with children in remote rural areas and on
the coast.
Hold regional meetings for Stakeholders to obtain
input on the impacts and concerns of Health Care
Reform.
¨ Will be involved with local lobbyist to sustain
Realignment funding for the residual indigent population.
¨ Continue to attend and participate in the CMSP
Planning & Benefits Committee and governing board.
¨ Continue to provide program changes to the CMSP
providers.
¨ Participate in the stakeholder meetings to assess the
impacts of Realignment funding for the CMSP
population.
¨ Continue to collect and disburse Maddy funds to
local emergency physicians and hospitals.
Continue refinement of data tracking system to allow
accurately evaluate the effectiveness and success of the
interventions and activities performed by Children’s
Medical Services. This data will be reported via the State
Children’s Medical Services Performance Measures
Report.
¨ Assure smooth transition for services provided by
CHDP to Managed Care Medi-Cal partner based on
accepted Memorandum of Understanding with
Partnership Healthplan of California.
¨ Provide focused provider outreach and education to
ensure that California Children’s Services (CCS) and Child
Health and Disability Prevention (CHDP) providers are
able to independently access critical information and
resources.
¨ Provide support and resources to community
partners during transition to Managed Care Medi-Cal.
¨ Develop a Children’s Medical Services Newsletter to
be distributed to families, providers and partner
agencies.
¨ Expand and maintain the Children’s Medical Services
References Manuals, including the CCS Procedure
Manuals and the Child Health and Disability Prevention
(CHDP) Program Manual.
¨ Continue to provide opportunities to cross-train and
enable Children’s Medical Services staff to provide a high
level of service.
¨ Complete 2 additional CHDP facility reviews.
ADULT AND AGING SERVICES
¨ Continue to work with staff to use the Case
Management Integrated Payroll System to serve clients in
the most expeditious manner possible.
¨ Put in place the necessary policies, procedures and
staff training to fully implement changes to the case
management with the new payrolling system as well as
ensuring compliance with the Affordable Care Act.
¨ Worker with consumers to implement and assist in
the “no wrong-door” access to medical coverage in
compliance with the Affordable Care Act.
¨ Plan for caseload growth, based on population
demographics and in anticipation of the aging “boomer”
population.
¨ Collaborate with community partners, public and
private, to provide excellent services to adult and older
adult recipients throughout the County.
¨ Develop additional job sites for employable General
Assistance recipients.
¨ Provide quality services to In-Home Supportive
Services clients throughout the county.
¨ Provide information and referral services to ensure
that the public is aware of services available to assist
elderly and disabled persons to remain independently in
their homes and the community.
¨ Participate in state and regional forums to remain
current with all policy and budget developments
impacting programs and the adult and older adult
population of Mendocino County.
¨ Respond to allegations of abuse and neglect in a
timely manner and coordinate with law enforcement and
other appropriate agencies.
FAMILY AND CHILDREN’S SERVICES
¨ Collaborate with local community-based
organizations to further develop full spectrum alcohol and
substance abuse treatments, including residential for
clients engaged in the drug court program.
¨ Continue the drug court program.
¨ Work with the Casey Foundation Project to continue
to access data for better outcomes for children and
families.
¨ Continue to implement aspects of the System
Improvement Plan.
¨ Continue implementation of Safety Organized
Practices (SOP) to ensure full integration with SDM, case
conferencing, and key decision points in cases.
¨ Continue to implement programs to reduce the
number of foster children placed in other counties.
¨ Assessment of re-entry/recurrence of maltreatment
of abuse or neglect.
¨ Increase integration of Family Findings throughout
the life of the case.
¨ Work with Tribal Courts to coordinate successful
transition of dependency cases when appropriate.
¨ Have an Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) liaison to
help continue effective collaboration with tribes to ensure
child safety, coordinate services and increase successful
reunifications for mutual clients.
¨ Continue to increase quality of relationship and
effectiveness of overall reunification and services to
parents and families within the dependency system in
Mendocino County.
¨ Continue to provide professional training through
University of California, Davis to social workers.
Continue support of Master of Social Work (MSW)
students through internships.
¨ Incorporate monthly trainings to achieve consistent
practices throughout the county.
Employment And Family Services
¨ Complete the transition of Healthy Families
applicants into the Medi-Cal program, as appropriate. Full
transfer of Healthy Families children into Medi-Cal in our
county is scheduled for August, 2013.
¨ Train community-based application assisters to help
community members to navigate Covered California
websites and to understand their health insurance
options.
¨ Participate, in collaboration with neighboring
counties, in Covered California’s Outreach and
Educational Grant Programs.
¨ Put in place the necessary policies, procedures and
staff training to implement changes to eligibility
mandated by the Affordable Care Act.
¨ Per State directive, provide in-reach to seniors and
families with Medi-Cal enrolled children to encourage
participation in CalFresh.
¨ Expand the Welfare-to-Work participant workshops
to better prepare CalWORKs recipients for employment,
and to increase the County’s Work Participation Rate
¨ Increase the number of trained and proficient
Eligibility staff by conducting back-to-back induction
classes in September of 2013 and January and April of
2014.
¨ Increase staff training opportunities and strengthen
succession planning. EFAS will work with UC Davis on
having staff attend inter-county trainings on program and
professionalism.
Social Services Disaster Response Team (DRT)
¨ Implement Shelter Training for new recruits and
refresher course for current DRT members to assure that
the team is trained and ready for response in times of
disasters.
¨ Continue to participate in County-wide drills.
¨ Continue to train DRT members for maximum
knowledge for disaster response.
¨ Continue to train DRT Special Needs Population
response staff to adequately cover such needs in a shelter
situation.
¨ Continue to respond to hazardous weather
situations, disasters, shelter needs and work
cooperatively with Red Cross of Sonoma County.
¨ Conduct the annual membership drive to secure as
many DRT members as possible.
Author (or collaborate in applications requiring
regional participation), with the NorCal Workforce
Partnership Consortium and other appropriate WIBs, to
apply for Governor Discretionary Requests for Proposals
(RFPs) in order to secure additional competitive funds
for adults, dislocated workers, and youth to meet
workforce development objectives.
¨ Continue technical assistance to the contractor,
MPIC, in attaining the newly mandated requirement of
utilizing 25% of the Adult and Dislocated Worker formula
funds for specific training expenses.
¨ Compile the Comprehensive Economic Development
Strategy (CEDS) annual report.
¨ Conduct the Fiscal and Program monitoring of the
contractor, per the State directive.
¨ Implementation (beginning phases) of Information
Services infrastructure merger of Workforce Investment
Act Programs and State EDD- CalJOBs.
¨ Assess the efficiency of the current method of
program service delivery.
Establish a Base Year from which to measure against
in order to comply with State law AB 1881 that requires
Health and Human Services Agencies to monitor and
report outcomes to show improved services provision
and/or administrative efficiencies gained by becoming an
integrated Agency service delivery structure.
¨ Complete and submit to the State, the Agency three
year operations plan.
¨ Work to increase the number of line staff to be
“shadowed” by Agency leadership to improve and
strengthen internal relationships.
¨ Increase the ability to prevent fraud and improve
program accountability at the earliest stages possible to
prevent both losses to the county and harm to the
community.
¨ Implement and fully utilize the Katie A intensive
treatment program to prevent the removal of children
from their families, improve the lives of both parents and
children, reduce placements and their associated costs,
and prevent future homelessness.
¨ Plan for the implementation of the Federal
Affordable Care Act (ACA)/Health Care Reform that begins
on January 1, 2014. Reports to the Board of Supervisors
by the Agency and community partners will occur
throughout FY 2013/14 as information is available and
plans are devised for the County of Mendocino.
¨ The Agency will work to further implement key
elements of the recent Communication Plan released in
2013 for the County of Mendocino.
Continue to provide quality services to families and
children in Mendocino County to support and empower
them to live healthy, safe, and sustainable lives in healthy
environments.
¨ Continue to improve the services provided by CalWORKs
Job Service to assist individuals to develop the skills and
training necessary to secure employment and exit from
public assistance.
¨ Maximize use of Federal and State funds in all programs.
¨ Continue to strive to reduce the number of families
receiving public assistance and the number of children in
out-of-home foster care.
¨ Continue to utilize all available funding sources to
support these programs.
Includes 1991 Realignment reimbursement of prior General Fund expenditures. The Chief Executive Officer recommends
approval of this budget as submitted.
Provide quality services to In-Home
Supportive Services clients throughout the County.
¨ Continue to implement necessary procedural changes
and training for staff, IHSS providers, and community
partners to use Case Management Information and
Payroll System 2 (CMIPS2).
¨ Support the In-Home Supportive Services Advisory
Committee.
¨ Plan for caseload growth, based on population
demographics and in anticipation of the aging “boomer”
population.
¨ Provide information and referral services to ensure
that the public is aware of services available to assist
elderly and disabled persons to remain independently in
their homes.
¨ Provide resource and referral assistance to
consumers impacted by the Affordable Care Act, in
compliance with the “no wrong-door” policy.
The County share of the funding formula for this budget unit includes 1991 Realignment dollars. The realignment
revenue is intended to help contain General Fund expenditures. Realignment funding fluctuates annually. The increase in
Realignment funds this year reimburses the General Fund expenditures in prior years that were higher than the State
formula intended. The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Develop additional job sites for employable General
Assistance recipients.
¨ Continue to review program policies incorporation of
best practices across the state.
¨ Collaborate with community partners, public, and
private, to provide excellent services to recipients
throughout the county.
¨ Collaborate with members of the Continuum of Care
for the Homeless to develop housing opportunities
throughout the county.
Seek and implement improved and streamlined HR
related processes that create efficiencies throughout the
Department and the County.
¨ Prepare for and begin labor negotiations with
Bargaining Units for labor contracts expiring in 2013.
¨ Review and update Civil Service Rules.
¨ Review and update various HR/personnel related
County policies.
¨ Develop and implement County-wide workforce
analysis, succession planning and leadership training
program.
¨ Develop standardized County-wide training
opportunities that provide for and support the
development of County employees.
¨ Refresh and promote the utilization of County’s
Internship Program.
¨ Continue the ongoing effort to update classification
specifications.
Review and update written examinations for various
County classifications.
¨ Review and update/refresh New Employee
Orientation and other new employee processes.
¨ Participate in the County’s Communication Plan by
developing and implementing improved HR
Communications.
Net County Cost includes a slight decrease to insurance costs. Department has requested and the Chief Executive Officer
is recommending the following Net County Cost increases: addition of $65,000 to cover the cost of the Labor Negotiator
contract; $40,000 for professional service agreements; and $25,000 for employee training.
Implement changes/enhancements to the County
Medical Leave Tracker program.
¨ Continue to collaborate with the County’s
Occupational Medicine Program Providers and other
Workers’ Comp providers to get injured workers back to
work quicker.
¨ Continue development of methods to ensure timely
receipt of injury and work status reports.
¨ Continue to improve efficiencies and streamline
program processes.
¨ Begin referral process for the use of County’s
Employee Assistance Program/Wellness programs for
those using the Occupational Medicine Program (Job
Care) and other medical facilities for workers comp
injuries.
¨ Continue to attend training classes to gain insight on
methods for reducing workers compensation claims cost
and frequencies.
¨ Continue to provide the non industrial ergonomic
evaluations
¨ Perform evaluation and interview process for
Workers’ Compensation Third Party Administrator
(through the California State Association of Counties -
Excess Insurance Authority program).
¨ Conduct an on-site ergonomic training class (CSACEIA)
to train department designees to perform ergonomic
assessments as an early detection/prevention measure.
¨ Continue to attend trainings.
¨ Increase use and awareness of workers’
compensation hotline.
¨ Continue to reduce temporary disability costs by
continuing to provide modified duty.
Continue to review/monitor the Health Plan for the
best possible options for providing benefits and coverage
at the least cost to the County and employees.
¨ Continue administration of the self-insured trust fund
to ensure stability and integrity of the trust.
¨ Complete 2014 Health Plan Renewal.
¨ Develop benefits “dashboard” to provide “real time”
claims data information.
¨ Continue planning efforts for Health Care Reform
Exchange program, in conjunction with Health Plan
Consultant, identifying potential impact to County’s plan,
ensuring compliance with effective dates, communicating
findings to Board of Supervisors, Bargaining Unit
Representatives and employees.
¨ Continue to strive to provide excellent service and
response times for Employee inquiries.
¨ Continue to improve efficiencies and streamline
program processes.
¨ Cross train Benefits staff in areas of Workers’
Compensation, the Return to Work Program, and
Wellness/EAP.
¨ Evaluate success of Year 2 (2013) of Wellness
incentive based plan design, impact on Health Plan and
development of Year 3 Wellness incentives (2014).
¨ Review Open Enrollment Process for efficiencies
including the evaluation of an online Open Enrollment
process.
¨ Perform a Dependent Audit.
¨ Create and distribute a Benefits Summary specific to
each employee.
¨ Coordinate efforts between the Return to
Work/Workers Compensation and EAP/Wellness
Programs to address issues impacting employees.
Continue to provide Retirees with information as it
becomes available regarding alternative health care
options through the Federal Health Care Reform
exchange scheduled to be implemented January 1, 2014.
¨ Continue to keep Retirees informed of closure of
Health Plan.
Increase participation in the wellness incentive
program to 60% of employees.
¨ Distribute all employee Incentive Program Survey to
evaluate incentive program.
¨ Launch the online virtual lending library to all
employees via “Get Ready for the Next Chapter in your
Health & Wellness” communication campaign.
¨ Coordinate efforts between the Return to
Work/Workers Compensation and EAP/Wellness
Programs to address issues impacting employees in the
work place.
¨ Collaborate with the Health Benefits and Return to
Work program to begin offering Benefits Newsletters to
employees/dependents for the purpose of
communicating health care reform information/updates
as well as information to help members become smarter
medical care consumers.
¨ Collaborate with Public Health to bring flu shot clinics
on-site to County employees.
¨ Develop and implement a campaign to educate
employees how to incorporate healthy activities into their
daily breaks.
¨ Continue partnerships with local medical and service
providers for health/financial education and physical
activity opportunities, including the collaboration with
Fitness Centers and Weight Management Programs for
discounted rates.
¨ Provide employees and insured dependents with
enhanced easy, confidential access to EAP counseling
services.
Hire a Collection
Development
Manager and
centralize Collection
Development at the
Ukiah Branch Library
which will save
money, wages, and
put materials on the
shelves in a rapid and
consistent manner.
¨ Weed and update collection so that all collections will
be current, relevant, and community based.
¨ Install self-check machines in all branches and other
technologies to enhance the user experience and free up
staff for customer oriented interactions.
¨ Hire an Information Technology Library professional
to bring all technology up to 21st century library standards
using the Edge Benchmarking tools.
¨ Bring high speed internet to all branches and the
bookmobile. Work towards eliminating the digital divide
for everyone in Mendocino County by supporting the
Broadband initiatives, particularly those that propose
fiber-optic Internet connections to Library facilities and
Mendocino County communities.
¨ Create a virtual branch with emphasis on tools users
can take advantage of where and when it is most
convenient for them.
¨ Create the Summer
Reading Program with
educational goals that are
relevant to all ages and stages
of life.
¨ Add one full-time children
and young adult librarian to the
staff, for a total of three
librarians to cover the County.
¨ Update, clean up, and reorganize
the libraries. Provide a
welcoming, accessible,
comfortable, and safe
environment that is flexible and
adaptable to changing library
services and technology, incorporating the following:
o Inviting Entry Ways
o Smaller Circulation and Reference Desks
o Teen Rooms
o Quiet Reading Rooms/Areas
o Meeting Rooms with appropriate technology for
community use
¨ Promote reading among residents of all ages by
providing programming based on books and by
expanding readers’ advisory services. This would include
such initiatives as:
o Book a Librarian
o Book discussions
o Displays and booklists
o Seed Bank
o “Mendocino Reads” (One Book – One County)
initiative
o Surprise Experience Zones and Programs
¨ Locate and convince local community members to
mentor and teach in their areas of expertise and passion
in the libraries as volunteers.
¨ Create areas to display local artists and artwork for
viewing by the public.
o Create policies and procedures for art and
informational displays.
¨ Create and implement an information gathering
strategy to identify the needs and wants of the
community through public meetings. Communicate this
plan to Library staff, County leaders, and the community
by creating and implementing a Strategic Plan.
¨ Market the Library’s services in the community by
accomplishing the following:
o Secure a color multi-function machine for
internal creation of marketing materials in a
prompt and efficient manner.
o Create methods of communicating with the
public in every community through print, radio,
and Internet news media.
o Create a website specific to the Library, as well
as a “Virtual Branch.”
Build a mailing list for electronic communications
and create a consistent newsletter, annual
report, and other informational materials.
¨ Create a Plan for Sustainability of the Mendocino
County Libraries, including research on restructuring to
ensure the vitality and financial security of the Library
system.
o Create a Library Foundation with the goal of
assuring sustainable funding for all Mendocino
County Libraries and future and capital planning.
o Attract and have access to donations and grants
to provide enhancements to the Library
identified in the future Strategic Plan.
¨ Develop a staffing model that supports all initiatives
including rewriting job descriptions to reflect the Library’s
values, service model and tasks.
¨ Provide training for
the following: essential
staff skills, including how
to provide excellent
internal and external
customer service;
expanded technology
training to support the
needs of the community;
and how to work with
difficult situations and
customers. This training
will enable the Library to
foster a culture that supports problem solving, creativity,
and innovation. It is essential that staff understand and
exhibit twenty-first century skills.
¨ Assess organizational strengths and weaknesses:
o Evaluate the changes needed in the structure and
operations of both the Library and Library
Advisory Board in order to efficiently and
effectively implement the above strategies.
o Evaluate Library Advisory
Board operations, size and
structure, and bylaws.
Determine the desired
talents for Board members
and involvement of non-
Board volunteers.
o Determine the proper role
of the Friends of the Library
and work to implement
changes as necessary.
o Use the Strategic Plan to drive development of
the Library’s Annual Operating Plan and Budget
as well as the spending plan for donations.
This is not a General Fund budget unit. Budget includes Chief Executive Officer recommended addition of 1.0 Full-Time
Equivalent (FTE) Librarian I/II position.
Staffing: Increase Museum staff positions, where
possible, in order to address critical documentation,
collections management, exhibit coordination, and
conservation requirements.
¨ Facilities: Address roofing and other critical facility
issues.
¨ Artifacts and Archives: Achieve appropriate
professional staffing to manage, conserve, and curate
the Museum’s collections; with appropriate staffing and
resources, take on at least one major conservation
issue from start to finish.
¨ Native American Cultures Exhibit: Fabricate, install,
and open the new permanent exhibit, and provide
coordinating public and educational programs.
¨ Museum Volunteer Partners (MVPs): Continue to
gather, nurture, and appreciate these wonderful
people.
¨ Frolic Shipwreck Collection and Exhibit: Engage in a
major collaboration with Chico State University’s
Undergraduate Museum Studies Program for a
maritime archaeology exhibit in Chico. This project
would involve a comprehensive review of the
Museum’s Frolic holdings and archives, de-installation
of the present exhibit, loans to the Chico State
University Museum, and re-design and installation upon
its return to the County Museum in 2014. This is an
incredible opportunity for cataloguing, conserving, and
enhancing one of the Museum’s centerpiece exhibits.
¨ Singing the Golden State: Install and open this
traveling exhibit, with coordinating public and
educational programs.
¨ Internship Program: Provide supervision to
summer graduate interns to assist with the Museum
Inventory Project and conservation projects, as well as
the Frolic project with Chico State.
25.77% Net County Cost increase includes an insurance cost adjustment and the following Chief Executive Officer
recommendations: $3,500 increase to utility costs; $10,000 funding for conservation care interns; and $55,935 to fill 1.0
Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Supervising Staff Assistant or similar position as recommended by Human Resources. The
Chief Executive Officer has requested a financial audit and a staffing needs assessment by Human Resources. The
Department has requested 1.0 FTE Senior Program Specialist. The Chief Executive Officer is not recommending that at
this time; however the request will be reviewed prior to final budget.
Support the County’s compliance with National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit
requirements.
¨ Implementation of the CASGEM County
Groundwater Monitoring Program.
¨ Feliz Creek dam removal project site monitoring and
annual reporting.
¨ Integrate Water Agency staff position into Planning
and Building Services’ Technical Support Unit.
This is not a General Fund budget unit. Budget includes Chief Executive Officer recommendation to add $2,000 for the
Inland Water Power Commission for annual dues and website development.
Continue to maintain support for budgeted
economic development activities.
This budget unit was formerly housed within the Executive Office and has been transferred to Planning and Building
Services. It provides funding for the Economic Development & Finance Corporation (EDFC) contract and required
Business Improvement District (BID) matching funds. The Chief Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as
submitted.
Support public education and research through a
new Commission website and public lecture series.
¨ Support community-based activities to improve fish
and wildlife habitat and propagation.
¨ Increase public participation in Commission
meetings through
teleconferences and webinars.
¨ Improve communication
with the public regarding the
Request for Proposals and grant
review process; develop
transparent review policies and
procedures.
¨ Continue to represent the
County at meetings,
conferences, and public
hearings within and outside the
County regarding County fish and wildlife habitats,
communities, and populations.
¨ Continue to liaise with Department of Fish and
Wildlife agencies operating within the County in support
of increased public participation in scientific research and
conservation relating to fish and wildlife.
¨ Sponsor an annual County dinner and fundraiser to
raise additional fish and wildlife preservation funds and
promote interagency communication with key
community leaders and the public on fish and wildlife
issues.
Continue efforts to “Enhance Customer Service,
Streamline the Permit Process, and
Foster Interdepartmental
Collaboration”; and implement
online permitting for simple
building permits.
¨ Lead implementation of the
County’s Storm Water
Management Plan (SWMP), as
required by the MS4 Permit.
¨ Bring the 2013 Building Code to
the Board of Supervisors for
adoption.
¨ Compile list of outstanding projects/tasks from
implementation of the General Plan, Housing Element,
Ukiah Valley Area Plan, and Mendocino Town Plan; work
with the Board to prioritize allocation of resources.
¨ Complete Policies & Procedures Manual for Code
Enforcement.
¨ Continue focused effort to close backlogged code
enforcement cases (2,010 as of April 1, 2013).
¨ Begin focused effort to reduce outstanding number
of issued building permits which have not resulted in a
final inspection and have subsequently expired.
¨ Initiate program to ensure planning staff receive
regular training in land use and environmental review.
This budget unit has a Net County Cost increase of $4,256. The increase is a combination of insurance reductions of
$38,144; a designated reserve contribution of $50,000; and the following Chief Executive Officer recommendations: an
additional $147,911 to promote three existing planning staff to Planner III; extra help to assist in processing the code
enforcement backlog; and filling vacant Planner positions.
Continue efforts to recruit and train extra-help staff,
which provides staffing flexibility, and reduces overtime.
¨ Complete staff training in CPR and first aid.
¨ Provide perishable skills training to all staff, in
compliance with State standards.
¨ Remain responsive in adapting to changes in mental
health services to ensure that adequate levels of service
are being provided.
¨ Introduce a yoga program for detained youth as a tool
to assist in managing daily stress.
¨ Expand the garden project to provide additional
activities for youth, and as a source of healthful vegetables
for the Juvenile Hall kitchen.
There is a slight Net County Cost reduction which includes an adjustment to insurance costs and the Chief Executive
Officer has recommended, and the department agrees, to the addition of Youthful Offender Block Grant Revenue to
assist with the cost of staff training.
Continue to provide additional training to meet the
additional responsibilities of Public Safety Realignment.
¨ Continue to look for opportunities to improve upon
availability of mental health services offered.
¨ Continue the productive relationship with the
Community Corrections Partnership.
¨ Add two 4x4 vehicles and replace three additional
aged, worn vehicles.
¨ Work with outside agencies to identify and promote
programs which will best serve the varied needs of the
people of Mendocino County.
Maintain the continuity and stability
in staffing and caseloads.
¨ Assure that all measures are taken
to fully investigate and prepare cases for
trial and/or disposition; including
retaining any experts and consultants necessary for the
complete and full representation of all of the clients.
¨ Assure that all attorneys are able to maintain the
required CLE credits and attend important and critical
educational seminars which will benefit both the attorney
and the clients.
¨ Ensure that there continues to be good
communication between the Chief Executive Officer and
the Public Defender.
¨ Continue to provide the best criminal defense
services that are possible in Mendocino County.
The reduction in Net County Cost for the Public Defender’s budget is the result of an adjustment to the cost of insurance
and the following Chief Executive Officer recommendations: the addition of .5 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Staff Assistant;
filling of .5 FTE Investigator position; and the addition of State Realignment revenue.
To continue the practice of efficient, dedicated and
thorough legal defense.
The Net County Cost increase of 2.6% in this budget unit is due to a combination of a reduction to insurance costs, a
salary correction and a Chief Executive Officer recommendation to add .5 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Staff Assistant.
Enhance communications and customer service
provided by the Association through increased interaction
and information sharing with the plan sponsors to better
educate them about funding and other Association issues.
¨ Increase the effectiveness of internal operations
through assessing technology needs; completing the IRS
Voluntary Correction Program; pursuing staff
development, cross-training and succession planning.
¨ Establish optimal board governance through a review
of existing charters and policies to identify gaps and adopt
needed governance policies and conduct annual fiduciary
training for the Board of Retirement.
¨ Explore ways to ensure prudent management of
contributions and investment of retirement fund assets
including a review of the portfolio’s asset allocation and
re-evaluate the existing actuarial funding methods and
assumptions.
Create an organizational environment that
emphasizes that we are in the “Business” of Public Service.
¨ Use a proactive approach to crime and its effects,
which emphasize public safety and prevention.
¨ Conduct thorough reporting, professional
investigation, and apprehension of suspects.
¨ Ensure the safety of the residents and visitors of
Mendocino County through effective and safe
operations of the Mendocino County Jail.
¨ Promote Individual and organizational accountability.
¨ Promote Individual career development and
organizational support of knowledge and growth.
¨ Relocate evidence storage facility, and there-by
reduce Mendocino County lease expense.
¨ Relocate Willits Sub-Station, and reduce Mendocino
County lease expense.
The Net County Cost includes the use of Indian Gaming grant revenue, an insurance cost reduction, a reduction in
overtime costs based on Fiscal Year 2012-2013 levels, a reduction to Salary and Employee Benefits due to hiring
timelines for vacant positions, and the use of designated reserve funds budgeted in Fiscal Year 2012-2013 but not used,
and after consultation with the Sheriff and the General Services Agency Director, the Chief Executive Officer is
recommending the addition of 1.0 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Information Systems Technician $56,192.
Continue to employ Sheriff’s Technology Specialist.
¨ Continue to fund unfunded Communications
mandates.
Train new K-9’s in all aspects of search and seizure
Continue to work on developing innovative yet
appropriate Public-Safety oriented solutions to mitigate
the overcrowding in the Jail.
¨ Implement the equipment upgrade for the Program
Logic Control Center to improve overall Jail security and
efficiency of operation.
¨ Continue to apply for Public Safety Realignment
Funds to mitigate Jail overcrowding.
The goal of Jail & Rehabilitation Center - COPS is to
have funding available for unanticipated equipment
maintenance and replacement, or to enhance overall Jail
Operations.
Continue community education/outreach in disaster
preparedness.
¨ Continue to partner with Federal/State/Local
partners with Tsunami Readiness Program.
¨ Activate the Disaster Council to review new
Emergency Plans and annexes.
¨ Seek Board of Supervisors approval of newly drafted
Emergency Operations Plan.
¨ Multijurisdictional discipline exercises of new
Emergency Operations Plans.
¨ Continued efforts to partner with Federal and State
Emergency Management Agencies.
¨ Continue Incident Command training of all county
personnel per National Incident Management System
guidelines.
¨ Continue to develop Disaster Service Worker systems
through volunteer coordination/training.
¨ Continue to identify and purchase
equipment/resources for first responders.
This budget unit is grant funded and requires a dollar-for-dollar County match. In prior years the match was provided by
the Jail. Due to staffing changes within the program, that is no longer possible. The Chief Executive Officer recommends
allocating discretionary revenue to match grant funding in the amount of $117,909.
Gualala Underground Utility District: Facilitate the
complete conversion of overhead utility services to
underground services and removal of all poles.
¨ Fish Rock Road Sediment Reduction Project:
Complete remaining roadway berm removal and
roadway reshaping and surfacing by County Forces.
Obtain permits and install culverts (by contractor) by end
of summer 2014.
The Garcia River Watershed is listed as “water
quality impaired” due to sediment on the 303(d) list. On
January 3, 2002, the Regional Water Quality Control
Board (RWQCB) adopted the Total Maximum Daily Load
(TMDL) Action Plan into the Water Quality Control Plan
for the North Coast Region (Basin Plan) in order to
address sedimentation that is affecting the beneficial
uses of the watershed. On October 4, 2005, the North
Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board approved
the Mendocino County Department
of Transportation’s Erosion Control
Plan and Site Specific Management
Plan to satisfy the requirements of
the TMDL Action Plan.
This project implements the County Site Specific
Management Plan (SSMP) and Erosion Control Plan (ECP)
towards compliance with the Action Plan for the Garcia
River Watershed Sediment TMDL. This means the
implementation of sediment reduction treatments on Fish
Rock Road have been identified in the Department’s Direct
Inventory of Road Treatments (DIRT) Database – a Five
Counties effort. Approximately 17.4 miles of road is
associated with the project. Project Funding: Total -
$1,060,735 (CWA 319(h) - $787,552 and County Match -
$273,183).
The Net County Cost for this budget unit includes a slight decrease in insurance costs. The Chief Executive Officer is
recommending additional funding in the amount of $29,000 for the Mill Creek Dam inlet valve replacement.
Transportation Department is in the process of a factory warranty review for replacement of the valve and the cost may
be less than projected. The Executive Office will review prior to final budget.
Maintain a substantial preventive maintenance
program that includes: an aggressive “crack sealing”
program, drainage and culvert improvements, chip seal
program, base repairs with asphalt overlays, and
vegetation management.
¨ Continue to replace old, non-compliant, on- and offroad
equipment, while reducing total fleet size.
¨ Increase safety training to further reduce injuries.
¨ Deliver prompt, efficient, and professional customer
service to the public.
The Department plans to go to bid on seven 2011
storm damage event-related projects in FY 2013-14 that
will be constructed in the summer or fall of 2013. The sites
are generally those where engineering, design,
environmental, and other pre-construction work was
completed in FY 2012-13.
¨ Storm damage projects ready for construction in FY
2013-14 include:
1) Bell Springs Road M.P. 17.64 & 17.67
2) Branscomb Road M.P. 17.30
3) Comptche Ukiah Road M.P. 8.25 & 8.50
4) Mountain View Road M.P. 15.36 & 20.59
5) Tomki Road M.P. 0.34 (Road Fund)
MCDoT staff has received funding through the ER
program to repair County Maintained Roads damaged
during the March 2011 series of storms for 11 sites. All of
the projects will be constructed by contractor forces with
State and Federal funding, in the coming three to five
years depending on environmental and other project
requirements. Projects not completed during FY 2013-14
will be advanced as far as feasible and constructed in
future years.
The Governor’s Office didn’t include “off-system”
(FEMA funded) projects in its emergency declaration for
the 2011 storms. Unfunded road storm damage from the
2011 storm event still exists on other off-system County
Roads such as Old Coast Highway, Tomki Road, Low Gap
Road, and many other county maintained roads. Without
the Governor’s proclamation, these off-system roads
can’t make use of the FEMA funds for repair. Only local
funds are available for this work. Consequently, the
Department has been and will continue making the
repairs with our local dollars.
¨ Continue to restore the existing road system to predisaster
conditions to ensure that the roads stay open
and safe for the traveling public.
¨ Continue to perform storm damage repairs that are
vital to the well-being of the traveling public in the most
efficient manner possible.
¨ Support, through training and collaborative input, our
high-potential employees who constitute the next
generation of MCDoT staff personnel and managers.
Rubberized Chip Seal Project: This project uses a
layered ruberized chip seal slurry seal as a final surfacing
on:
• Old River Road MP 11.94-14.44
• Deerwood Drive MP 0.00-0.57
• Deerwood Drive Ext. MP 0.00-1.81
• South Dora Street MP 0.00-0.91
• Oak Court Road MP 0.00-0.35
• Oak Knoll Road MP 0.00-0.17
• Laws Avenue MP 0.00-0.40
• Tedford Street MP 0.00-0.14
¨ Seismic Retrofit Program: The three bridges remaining
for completion under the program are School Way bridge
(CR 236, over the West Fork, Russian River —
replacement), Moore Street bridge (CR 229B, M.P. 0.45,
over the West Fork, Russian River — retrofit) and Eureka
Hill Road bridge (CR 505, M.P. 4.92, over the Garcia River
— retrofit). Environmental clearances (NEPA and CEQA)
have been achieved for the School Way bridge project
and the County has received Caltrans authorization to
proceed with the right-of-way phase. Preliminary
engineering is underway for the other two bridges,
including completion of required environmental studies.
All three projects are expected to bid in FY 2013-14.
¨ Brooktrails Second Access. Due to the complexity of
the project, the Agreement work is being performed in
three phases: Phase 1, Supplemental Feasibility Study;
Phase 2, Project Approval and Environmental
Documentation; and Phase 3, Final Design.
Phase 1 of the Agreement work scope, which included
conducting a Trip Diversion Study (funded by the MCOG)
to address traffic on Sherwood Road, is completed. The
Trip Diversion Study resulted in a modified set of
alternative Second Access routes to be further defined and
analyzed. The environmental and geotechnical studies
have now commenced.
A major increase in project funding will be needed to
complete the project’s Phase 2 and Phase 3, and to
accomplish the right-of-way and construction.
¨ East Side Potter Valley Road Widening and
Reconstruction preliminary work, M.P. 2.40 to M.P. 6.42
(environmental permits, right-of-way acquisition for 98
parcels and utility relocation for 130 poles).
¨ Bridge Major Preventive Maintenance – county-wide
federally funded project.
¨ Complete all pre-construction activities, including
engineering design, environmental clearance and right-ofway
acquisition for replacement of eight bridges,
including: North State Street Bridge over Ackerman Creek,
Briceland Road Bridge over Mattole River, East Hill Road
Bridge over Davis Creek, Hill Road Bridge over Mill Creek,
Muir Mill Road Bridge over Baechtel Creek, Philo
Greenwood Road Bridge over Navarro River, Reeves
Canyon Road Bridge over Forsythe Creek, and Sherwood
Road Bridge over Rowes Creek.
¨ Moore Street – Calpella Elementary School Bike and
Pedestrian project: MCDoT was awarded state Safe
Routes to School funding for the design, environmental
clearance, and right-of-way acquisition as well as the
construction of a portion of the project for the Calpella
area. Phase 1 will allow for construction of a bike lane
and sidewalk for the east bound lane on Moore Street,
from the Calpella Elementary School to North State
Street, and on the west side of North State Street,
southerly to join an existing sidewalk to the south.
¨ Transportation Enhancement (TE) Pedestrian facilities
at two County Schools: The Branscomb Road Bridge and
the Grace Hudson School Zone are both on schedule and
construction will be completed in FY 2014-2015.
Complete CEQA/NEPA clearance for South Airport
Road Realignment Project (to remove conflict with
Runway 10 Runway Safety Area Conflict) and Taxiway
Extension Project.
¨ Secure Airport Improvement Program (AIP) funding
for South Airport Road Realignment Project from FAA.
¨ Implement the Pavement Management System Plan.
¨ Continue to work productively with the aviation
community and Covelo Flying Club to identify and resolve
airport issues, maintain facilities, and enhance safety.
¨ Continue to provide support facilities for local fire,
emergency, and rescue services.
¨ Continue to retain existing funding sources and seek
new funding sources for capital improvements and
facilities maintenance.
¨ Continue to support the part-time efforts of
Administration Division and Land Improvement Division
staff who administer airport programs.
There is a minimal reduction to the Net County Cost of this budget unit due to an insurance cost adjustment. The Chief
Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Secure Airport Improvement Program grant funding
for capital improvement projects from FAA.
¨ Implement the Airport Pavement Management
System Plan.
¨ Maintain current operations and provide a safe
modern transportation facility for the public in the
County and North State region.
¨ Work productively with the Little River Airport
Advisory Committee to identify and resolve airport
issues, maintain facilities and enhance safety.
¨ Continue to provide support facilities for local fire,
emergency, and rescue services.
¨ Continue to retain existing funding sources and seek
new funding sources for capital improvements and
facilities maintenance.
¨ Continue to provide support to the contracted Airport
Supervisor and the part-time efforts of Land
Improvement staff who apply their efforts to airport
matters as limited airport resources permit.
¨ Maintain a safe, operational airport and improve
facilities using Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) –
Airport Improvement Program (AIP) grant funds,
California State Division of Aeronautics (DOA) grant funds
and American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
funding programs.
There is a minimal reduction to the Net County Cost of this budget unit due to an insurance cost adjustment. The Chief
Executive Officer recommends approval of this budget as submitted.
Design and implement Caspar -Alternate Leachate
Disposal system to reduce disposal costs. This work is
underway by consultant Geo-Logic Associates.
¨ Complete South Coast closure design acceptance
by NCRWQCB and Cal Recycle and possibly go to
construction in 2014 or 2015. Mendocino County
Environmental Health Division, serving as Local
Enforcement Agency (LEA), arranged a meeting
between MCDoT, the California Integrated Waste
Management Board (CIWMB), and the North Coast
Regional Water Quality Control Board (NCRWQCB).
The hope is that these state agencies will provide
recommendations and/or direction on the criterion
needed for a submittal of a final closure and postclosure
plan and design.
MCDoT’s newly assigned Land Improvement
Division Civil Engineer/Project Manager has prepared
an RFP which led to the hiring of landfill consultant
SWT Engineering, using BU 4511 funds. SWT
Engineering will prepare contract Plans, Specifications,
and Estimates (PS&E’s) to construct the final closure
improvements in the coming year – the consultant is
on target with the project timeline. Additionally, in a
step bringing South Coast Landfill to full closure, three
additional gas migration monitoring probes were
installed on June 11 and 12, 2012. The Landfill
Biological Resources Assessment consultant was on
site in early August 2012. Quarterly water quality
monitoring and gas detection monitoring continues.
The Net County Cost reduction is due to a decrease in insurance costs, an increase in revenue and reduction to
professional and special services expense.
Review office operations to ensure co-located staff is
being utilized in the most efficient manner.
¨ Enhance collection activities for delinquent
unsecured property taxes by utilizing collection options
not currently in use.
Reduction in Net County Cost is the result of a slight increase in insurance costs and the removal of one time funding
allocated in Fiscal Year 2012-2013 to complete the new front security counter. The Chief Executive Officer recommends
approval of this budget as submitted.
Transfer backlog of delinquent accounts from former
private collection agency to the department’s current
private collection agency.
¨ Update the procedure, forms and calculations used in
ability to pay evaluations to determine eligibility for fee
waivers, payment plans, and indigent defense and make
recommendations to Court for reimbursement of
associated costs.
The Net County Cost reflects a slight decrease in insurance costs. In addition, the Chief Executive Officer has
recommended, and the department agrees, to revise anticipated forfeiture and penalty revenue based on current year
projections.
