In alignment with the 2016-17 strategic focus area, "Mono best place to work," employees
are our most important asset and when we have unanticipated resources our first priority
must be to invest in programs that attract and retain the best talent. If our workforce is
inadequate, whether because we cannot attract workers or compensate our employees
fairly, this County will lack the resources to best serve the public and accomplish our
strategic goals. Therefore, Finance and Administration recommend this policy item to set
aside a total of $541,830 in an Economic Stablization Fund, as resources for completing a
comprehensive salary survey and fund resulting salary adjustments and reorganization
costs.
1. $5000 - Eastern Sierra Inter-agency Visitor Center (ESVC). Formerly called the InterAgency Visitor Center,
Mono County historically provides an annual contribution of $10,000 to support the operation of the ESVC, a
multi-agency "gateway to the Eastern Sierra" Visitor Center in Lone Pine. The Tourism Commission contributes
$5000 annually and the Board has traditionally provided $5000 from the General Fund. This request to transfer
the Board's portion of $5000 allows Tourism to coordinate the total EAVC contribution with one contract and
one transaction.
2. $5000 - California State Fair Exhibit. While this is a high-traffic venue in which to promote county attractions
to the public in Northern California, additional funding is required to add this special exhibit to the trade show
budget, which is committed to a full complement of consumer travel/fishing shows.
Create fund for the June Lake Community Center to offset improvement costs.
This is a request for one-time funding of $2,500 for a memorial bench and plaque that
honors the late Kathy Delhay, a Lee Vining High School graduate and member of the class
of 1974. In 1975, Kathy was tragically killed when a deputy's firearm accidentally
discharged during a robberty attempt at the Mammoth Lakes Safeway store. This
department is advocating on behalf of Shaun Filson, also a member of the Lee Vining High
School class of 1974, whose letter was heard by the Board of Supervisors last May. Shaun
has requested the bench be located in an epic location noted for its serenity and/or
expansive view of the mountains, a view which represents the "Pride of the Eaastern
Sierra" which kathy Delhay embodied.
Film Commission Marketing/Support, $5,000 -- With the newly expanded California Film & Televison
Tax credit in effect, and filming interest in the Mono County on the rise, the effort to continue
marketing our region as a highly accessible, film-friendly destination is more important than ever.
Funding will allow advertising in the international location industry publications which are distributed
at high-profile film festivals, such as Cannes, as well as in other key industry publications. It will
provide the opportunity for representation of Mono County at industry events and locations
conferences, to enhance our photo and video libraries, to help support local film festivals, and to
collaborate on location industry familiarization tours with local and regional partners.
Community Event Marketing Fund (CEMF) - $40,000. Three years ago, the Community Event Marketing Fund
(originally "Local Program Funding") was re-established as a grant program to help local community groups
market their tourism-based events to target audiences outside Mono County in order to drive overnight visits
and create animation. The Mono County Economic Development, Tourism & Film Commission manages this
grant program, ranging from $20,000 to $40,000 annually with dozens of non-profits receiving funding to assist
in the expanded marketing of their respective events. As proven by Walker's annual ATV Jamboree, the June
Lake Triathlon, Bridgeport Trout Tournament and Ghosts of the Sagebrush Tour in Lee Vining – just a few
events that received grant assistance in their formative years – events have excellent potential to grow every
year and they do motivate people from outside the county to travel to the Eastern Sierra. The CEMF program is
a foundational initiative that requires a multi-year commitment in order to see successful results.
Mono County Historical Societies - $6,000. Last year, the Board chose to allocate a small amount
of financial support for our local non-profit historical societies in order to assist with the operation and
promotion of museums and other historical/cultural programs. The Economic Development
department developed the Historical Societies Grant Fund and issued a total of $6,000 among five
local historical societies. The program allowed new websites to be built, software to be
purchased,and fundraising projects and events to take place. The assistance allows our county to
share our roots and our culture with visitors from around the world. Museums are also the landmarks
that visibly display the identity, pride, and narrative of each of our communities, honoring the lives of
the original people who were part of their beginnings.
Friends of the Inyo Trails Maintenance - $8,500. Over the past two years, the collaborative
arrangement between Mono County and Friends of the Inyo has allowed the provision of significant
improvements to many key hiking trails in the region. Please see the proposed trail improvement
and maintenance plan for 2016-17, attached.
Air Service Subsidy Request. Mammoth Lakes Tourism (MLT) is requesting county support for the
2016 Spring/Summer/Fall Air Service "Minimum Revenue Guarantee" (MRG) in the amount of
$100,000. This is an increase from the last three years' contribution of $50,000. A letter from MLT
Executive Director, John Urdi, explains that the summer 2015 subsidy came in at $641,192-- the
County contributed $50,000, the TBID contributed $376,192, and the remainder came from MLT
budget and reserve account in the amount of $215,000. Summer air service continues to show
steady enplanements, with almost 8,000 passengers using air service to travel to and from Mono
County in the spring, summer, and fall of 2105. The county's support is critical to maintaining access
to our region for the destination visitor from domestic and international markets.
Software for electronic filing and automated processing of Form 700 Statements. This
software will also assist the County Counsel's Office in maintaining and updating Conflict of
Interest Codes for the county and special districts.
Replacement of Elections Processing hardware and software. The current system was
acquired prior to the 2004 elections, and was scheduled to be replaced in 2014. Total cost
to purchase outright a new system would be $321,748. This proposal is for an eight year
lease at $66,393 per year, for a total cost over eight years of $531,144. Included in the
lease agreement are costs that would not have been captured inan outright purchase,
including: Annual license fees; Annual hardware warranty fees; Election setup and support
for one election per year for eight years.
Last year Mono County IT was notified that our existing Adtran VoIP phone system would
not be supported after 2018. Additionally, our existing Avaya phone system is 16 years old
and is beginning to show signs of age and be difficult to support. The overall cost to replace
both of these systems is going to be well beyond $25,000, however our intention is to make
incremental investments toward replacement over the next several years to ensure that we
at least have a system that is under maintenance and within warranty.
Make improvments at Mono Lake Park to parking, path of travel, and restroom interiors
includes materials for the project.
Digital imaging of historic recorded documents. This policy item goes hand in hand with the
policy item dealing with records preservation, and covers digitally scanning the same 57
volumes as will be preserved under the other request.
Preservation of historic recorded documents. Includes removing records from bindings, deacidifying
records, and encapsulating in plastic sheets. This is a long term project which will
involve almost 300 volumes, and cost in excess of $567,000. The current proposal covers
57 volumes, at a cost of $127,000.
Electronic Recording of Documents. Will provide an interface for title companies, law firms,
government agencies and other interested parties to file documents electronically for
recordation. This will reduce processing time for Recorder's staff, and also save time and
document delivery costs for consumers.
Jail Architecture Services - Including a Needs Assessment Study or equivalent. If the
preferred option is both technically and financially feasible and politically supported,
could include assistance with grant applications and preparation of plans and
specifications.
Several Motor Pool vehicles have reached or exceeded their useful mileage. As a result
Motor Pool is requesting the following replacements:
Specialty Vehicles
1. Replace one ROAD 2009 Ford diesel F-250 4x4 pickup truck with over 166,000 miles with
a new Ford gasoline powered F250 4x4 pick up truck for $35,000;
2. Replace one FACILITIES 2009 Ford diesel F250 4x4 pickup truck with over 161,000 miles
with a new Ford gasoline powered F250 4x4 pickup truck for $35,000;
3. Replace two SHERIFF Ford Expeditions all with mileages that will exceed their useful
mileage with five new Chevy Tahoe Police Pursuit Vehicles for approximately $152,000;
4. Replace one PROBATION 2002 Dodge 4x4 Durango with over 132,000 miles with a new
Ford 4x4 Explorer for $34,000.
Last year Public Works installed an oil/water separator at the Bridgeport shop to prevent oil
from infiltrating groundwater when vehicles, equipment and parts are washed in preparation
for maintenance work. This year Public Works is requesting a system be installed at the
Crowley shop where south county Motor Pool vehicles are maintained. Engineering,
materials and construction are required.
