For Public Health & Safety, we will continue to provide timely and professional public
assistance, whenever possible.
? Continued Animal Control presentations throughout the County. Continued pre-entry animal
vaccinations, continued volunteer training program.
? Continue our work including the public to assist in finding homes for our adoptable animals
Resolve all assessment appeals, with emphasis on the appeals filed prior to 2015, and
with special emphasis on the remaining high-value appeals (Ormat, Mammoth
Mountain Ski Area, that date back to 2010 and 2012, respectively). At this time there
are 136 assessment appeals pending, and of those, 69 were filed in the current fiscal
year, and 61 of the total are either Ormat or MMSA. We expect to resolve the
majority of these assessment appeals, and the success will be measured by number of
appeals left to be resolved one year from now.
? Recruit, hire, and retain an experienced, competent, and qualified Assistant Assessor.
This task is to take place after Mono County hires a CAO and a Human Resources
Director.
? Continued staff training for certification maintenance and skills, knowledge, and
career growth.
? Continued conversion of paper data to electronic data.
Provide staff and training in a partnership with Mammoth Hospital/Sierra Park Clinic to
further execute our mandates related to Health Care Reform and Whole Person
Wellness.
? Increase service to mental health and psychiatric service delivery in Walker/Coleville
and Bridgeport
? Visual Health Record (VHR) Implementation
? Continue with Workforce Development by providing educational and other training
opportunities to staff.
? Explore opportunities engage with other County Departments in order to provide cost
effective, comprehensive service delivery
? Continue to align with County Strategic Plan
Support Healthy People in Healthy Communities
Workforce Wellness
Strengthen County Culture
All Alcohol and Drug staff will be proficient in Motivational Interviewing and
other evidence based practices
? Continue training staff to provide a culture that promotes Harm Reduction
? Continued Implementation of Drug Medi-Cal
? Mammoth Hospital partnership—warm hand-off referral system
? Continue to align with County Strategic Plan
Support Healthy People in Healthy Communities
Workforce Wellness
Strengthen County Culture
Continue health care integration mandate with Mammoth Hospital
? Mono North Star mandates – collaboration with Mono County Office of Education for
Student Mental Health
? Inter-Agency trainings – provide comprehensive, state of the art trainings to County and
Community Agencies
? Transitional housing project – with Community Corrections Partnership (CCP)
? Partner with Mono County Economic Development Department to create a continuing
education “destination”
? Continue to align with County Strategic Plan
Support Healthy People in Healthy Communities
Workforce Wellness
Strengthen County Culture
Attend workshops, conferences and required training pertinent to job functions, as budget allows.
? Using Modernization Funds, contract for conversion of digital-only official documents to film for
permanent retention; offset some salary costs for both Ruth Hansen and Walt Lehman with the facets of
their jobs and apply to the use of these funds.
? Continue working on internal efficiencies.
Continue fine tuning Granicus (video streaming software) and either upgrade Novus to be more compatible
with Granicus or, alternatively, switch to a Granicus Agenda Software program.
? Work on going completely paperless, as much as possible, within the confines of the Brown Act. This will
reduce the amount of time staff spends copying agendas and will also decrease the cost spent on paper and
in some instances, postage.
? Consistently meet deadlines associated with agenda preparation, posting agendas, minutes and meeting
attendance. Continue processing all paperwork in a timely fashion.
Prepare for and execute a special election for the Town of Mammoth Lakes in October, 2015 and the June,
2016 primary which includes, but is not limited to the following:
o Updating voter registration database.
o Preparing required filing forms and candidate’s guide for schools and special districts..
o Reviewing pertinent sections of the Elections Code.
o Preparing Ballots and Sample Ballots.
o Equipment programming and testing.
o Securing polling places and pollworkers and conducting pollworker training.
o Providing required reports to the Secretary of State.
o Organizing the elections team consisting of staff members from the Elections, IT, Community
Development, and Public Works Departments.
o Processing new voter registration cards.
o Processing vote-by-mail ballots.
o Publishing required notices.
o Providing, receiving and reviewing candidacy papers for schools and special districts.
Page 26
o Setting up/tearing down polling places.
o Conducting the official canvass that includes the 1% manual tally.
o Bringing the Certified Statement of Vote before the Board for approval.
o Be aware of and problem-solve election specific issues as they arise.
? Due to large turnover in staff, continue to attend pertinent trainings, seminars and workshops relating to
Elections.
? Due to number of registered voters in Chalfant, the Elections Department may be working to open an
entirely new polling place in that area. There is a possibility that Swall Meadows may also require the
opening of a separate polling place. This includes, but is not limited to:
o Securing building for polling place use.
o Ensuring polling place is ADA accessible; complete surveys regarding same.
o Hiring and training additional poll workers to staff this location.
? Work on hardware and software issues while watching current legislation that will dictate the future of
California Elections and determine what type of equipment and locations will be necessary.
? Using HAVA monies ($20,000 this year), work closely with IT to improve our Elections Website regarding
accessibility. This will include both Election and IT staff time spent on this as well as any additional
software purchases.
? Continue overall mitigation efforts regarding polling place accessibility.
? Throughout process, be mindful of finding ways to become more efficient.
The following items highlighted with an * are goals that in whole or part address strategic plan priorities
identified by one or more Supervisors:
- Work with county staff, contractors, and the public alike in support of continued expedited services for
Round Fire recovery efforts.*
- Implement new permit software in an effort to expand on-line services and capabilities for the
permitting public.*
- Obtain certification as a Certified Energy Analyst to better implement new state energy standards.
- Confer with the newly formed construction board of appeals to establish appeals board procedures and
protocols.*
- Continue to work with the Mono County ADA Task Force in support of bringing existing, nonconforming
County structures into compliance with applicable ADA and accessibility standards.
- Continue to work with the Mono county Energy Task Force in support of reducing the County’s energy
costs and to promote energy and cost savings programs for the public.
Page 30
- Continue to pursue educational outreach events with the public.*
- Update and expand informational hand-outs available to the public at both the Bridgeport and
Mammoth permit offices, and have such information available on the Building Division website.*
- Continue to pursue continuing education and ICC certifications for Building Division staff.
- Continue to provide quality and timely inspection services, plan review services, and customer service
to the public.*
Process Reclamation Plans and environmental documents for two new county aggregate pits and
Blackpoint Cinder Mine.
? Collect back reclamation inspection fees from Caltrans.
? Work to develop new Code Compliance module with Innoprise software and integrate with other necessary
departments.
? Work with USGS to develop Joint Funding Agreements to continue Long Valley Hydrologic Advisory
Committee (LVHAC) monitoring plan including wells on for CD 4.
? Finalize reclamation at one Caltrans mine and have DOC OMR deem it reclaimed.
? Continue to perform departmental functions, as summarized above.
Continue to provide staff support to the LVHAC, including setting agendas and chairing meetings.
? Work with plant operators to formalize future funding agreements; and pursue reimbursement of staff time
as a part of monitoring costs.
? Work with USGS to develop Joint Funding Agreements to continue LVHAC monitoring plan.
? Coordinate with BLM to integrate comprehensive CD4 monitoring plan.
? Work with the LVHAC to add two new monitoring wells as a part of an expanded monitoring plan.
Anticipated activities related to the Housing Authority this fiscal year include:
? Participation in potential revisions and activation of the Housing Mitigation Ordinance
? Receive Community Development Block Grant award for Housing Needs Assessment and
Housing Mitigation Ordinance Update.
? Initiate Housing Needs Assessment and Housing Mitigation Ordinance Update.
? Manage Sub-recipient Agreement with Mammoth Lakes Housing for HOME award of
$700,000 for first time homebuyers.
? Review Section 8 Housing program.
Conclude review and update of Sphere of Influence/Municipal Service Reviews, including supporting
CEQA documentation, in concert with the general plan and regional transportation plan updates.
? Assist Mono City and Lee Vining FPDs conduct a reorganization review, including investigating a
potential merger of the two districts.
? Respond to application activity, including application processing, such as a FPD merger.
? Work with Inyo LAFCO in coordinating health care district service review and possible reorganization
study.
? Reflect LAFCO policies in the Mono County General Plan update.
? Review plans, projects and environmental documents for LAFCO concerns, including the Inyo Forest Plan
update.
It is expected that the Commission will continue a similar level of activity this year. In addition to considering
routine planning permit applications, the Commission will be conducting workshops on the General Plan Update
and will conduct one or more hearings to develop recommendations to the Board of Supervisors on the adoption of
an update environmental impact report and General Plan.
It should be noted that with Commissioner Dan Roberts serving as president of the California County Planning
Commissioners Association, Mono County will be hosting the 85th annual CCPCA conference in June
Lake in October.
The following items highlighted with an * are goals that in whole or part address strategic plan priorities identified
by one or more Supervisors:
? Building on favorable USFWS decision to not list sage grouse as threatened, continue to efforts mitigating
grouse impacts, including refining Bi-State Action Plan implementation programs, working with applicants
to avoid habitat impacts where feasible, and adopting general plan guidance for sage grouse mitigation.
Fund these activities through grants from BLM and other sources. Continue to coordinate responses to
listing and critical habitat designation proposals of the USFWS.*
? Continue to pursue funds to implement Bridgeport Main Street Revitalization Project, including planning
for a multi-agency visitor center.*
? Participate in facilities planning via the project review process, and prepare Regional Transportation
Improvement Program for the LTC.*
? Work with Finance to develop new permitting module with Innoprise software and thus reduce permit
software costs.
? Conclude update of the General Plan, including Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), other mandated
elements and policy priorities (energy, telecommunications, integrated waste, capital facilities, strategic
planning, sage grouse and resource efficiency) and make available in innovative easy-to-use electronic
format. Prepare and certify supporting comprehensive Environmental Impact Report (EIR) in manner that
facilitates streamlined processing.*
? Using federal grant, conclude development of Hwy 395 Scenic Byway Corridor Enhancement Plan,
including identifying community themes and central business district guidelines, community gateway signs
on Hwy 395 corridor, interpretive and trail opportunities, scenic corridor marketing plan, and website
content.*
? Process planning applications and environmental documents in a timely manner.*
? Provide staff support to the Local Transportation Commission, including related committees such as
YARTS, Social Service Transportation Advisory Council, and Eastern California Transportation Planning
Partnership. Conduct audit and implement the Overall Work Program, including adoption of the RTP and
the Regional Transportation Improvement Program.*
? Staff Airport Land Use Commission and pursue Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan update funding.
? Staff the Planning Commission, Regional Planning Advisory Committees, LDTAC, and Collaborative
Planning Team (including Land Tenure Subcommittee). *
? Participate on the energy task force and address energy initiatives, such as proposed federal utility corridor
plans.
? Staff the Local Agency Formation Commission and integrate update of spheres of influence and municipal
service reviews with general plan update (see also LAFCO budget).
? Conduct monthly coordination meetings with applicable departments, including Economic Development,
Public Works, Finance and Environmental Health
? In concert with Public Works and County Counsel, conclude grading, water efficient landscape ordinance
& subdivision ordinance updates
? Continue to provide broad range of customer services at South County counter and assistance in
Bridgeport.*
? Continue trails planning for communities, including the Mono Basin, June Lake and Antelope Valley (grant
funded). Develop a Project Initiation Document (PID) equivalent for a Down Canyon Trail in June Lake.*
? Update the Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP) with funding provided by the BLM and LTC.*
? Conduct CEQA analysis and general plan policy development for potential water transactions related to the
Walker Basin Restoration Program, with funding provided by NFWF if awarded.
? Conduct agricultural inventory and policy development with funding provided by Strategic Growth Council
Sustainable Agricultural Lands Program.*
? Participate in response to drought conditions as needed, including ongoing CASGEM monitoring, IRWMP
participation, sustainable groundwater management planning and landscape ordinance update.*
Page 50
? Assess the status of the suspended housing mitigation ordinance and adjust as necessary, with funding
provided by CDBG grant funds, if awarded (see Housing Authority).*
Advance Countywide Strategic Planning;
? Continue addressing long term solid waste issues supported by appropriate county departments;
? Continue long-term California Air Resources Board (CARB) funding plan;
? Work with Economic Development Department to continue refining State of the County event;
? Continue to provide Human Resources support for as-needed vacancies while maintaining current hiring
freezes;
? Continue to provide the County with high-performing, skilled employees for positions;
? Ensure the continued use of best practices; provide team building and professional development of staff;
? Recommend a balanced budget for FY 2015-2016;
? Continue efforts to look for energy (solar) and water efficiency and cost savings for county buildings;
? Continue partnering with other local government agencies;
? Continue development of internal improvement to HR processes; i.e. Personnel Requisition Form, Exit
Form, Application Form, New Employee Orientation handbook, Evaluation Forms and system;
? Continued completion and signing of new labor agreements;
? Continue to recognize employees;
? Continue to look for cost savings in County leases and spaces occupied, both north and south campuses.
Continue to provide professional development opportunities for staff;
? Pass annual Trindel Evaluation;
? Ensure a safe and healthy environment for county employees while reducing injuries and injury related
time away from work;
? Continue to ensure the success of the County Safety program and utilize benefits of our Trindel
membership;
As mentioned above under “major accomplishments,” the County Counsel’s Office primarily supports and assists
other departments in accomplishing their projects. Thus, our “goals and objectives” are not exclusively our own
department’s projects, but rather are other department’s projects with respect to which we expect to play a
significant role. Here are some examples:
? Continue to provide a high level of support, assistance, and representation to Board of
Supervisors, County departments, commissions, boards, officers and other local entities where
authorized
? Support Interim CAO and/or assist new CAO and HR Manager when hired
? Participate in remaining MOU negotiations with bargaining units (PSO and DPOU)
? Draft and implement new records retention policy
? Negotiate and draft lease with MCOE for shared office space with DSS
? Assist with mine reclamation issues with Standard Industrial Minerals
? Assist with South County facilities long term planning / negotiations
? Assist with preparation of bid documents, RFPs, RFQs and contracts for public facilities projects
including Memorial Hall renovations, streets projects, office remodeling projects, etc.
Page 61
As for measuring when a goal is accomplished, we generally view “accomplishment” as reaching a point where
there is no apparent need for further legal services with respect to a matter.
*Complete the expansion of the Mammoth Office space to house the Investigation Unit and
continue to explore cost saving ways to reduce the cost of investigations and prosecutions on a
per case basis.
*Explore funding to support a new investigator position.
*To complete the implementation of our Case Management System.
*To continue to DO THE RIGHT THING FOR THE RIGHT REASON ALL THE TIME.
The Goals go toward providing a safe community for our residents and visitors.
*To secure additional funding to help support an additional Investigator to help run this
program.
*To run the program a full capacity in order to address the methamphetamine issues
within the county.
The Goals of this program go toward providing a safe community for our residents, youth and
visitors.
*To engage more participation from allied law enforcement in order to have the program
fully running and successful
*To begin construction of the transitional house in order to move forward in providing
services to individuals that come into the program
The Goals of this program go toward providing a safe community for our residents, youth and
visitors.
The newly restructured Economic Development department will work to develop a more diverse
and sustainable year-round economy for Mono County, thus stimulating increased revenue
growth for local businesses, creating jobs, attracting new industry and new individuals to work
and play here. Focusing primarily on Business Retention & Expansion -- one of the key
strategies as recommended in the Economic Development Strategic Plan – the following goals
are proposed:
? County-wide Economic Development Strategic Plan – Based on feedback from RPAC
groups, Chambers, Commission, Board, and Business Retention & Expansion Survey,
revise Economic Development Strategic Plan for Board adoption. Ensure fit with County
Strategic Plan.
? State of the County – Organize and implement “State of the County, Part II” event for
the business community in late fall. Explore possibility of producing a Mono County
Economic Status report or similar.
? Leverage Digital 395 – Work with Mono County IT department to create educational
and/or grant opportunities for local business to expand their capacity using high-speed
broadband.
? Office for A Day – Work with Mono County IT department and local landlords to
explore the potential of turning vacant commercial space into temporary office space for
visiting professionals.
? Establish Inventory -- Work with Community Development and GIS to establish an
inventory of available/private land and buildings, zoning issues, and infrastructure that
can be accessed by potential investors.
? Outreach to Visitors – Develop and implement relocation communication to visitors
through existing tourism marketing tactics and channels by August 1, and expand website
content/reach and social media presence. Create testimonial videos and/or community
videos.
? Technical Assistance & Training/Customer Service Training – Working with
Mammoth Lakes Chamber of Commerce, apply for USDA funding in order to build a
team of paid consultants/experts to provide training and assistance to small businesses
throughout Mono County.
? Conduct Business Retention & Expansion Survey – Working closely with Mammoth
Lakes Chamber of Commerce, conduct a comprehensive survey of small businesses to
determine needs and prioritize services.
? Staff Education and Training – Enroll staff in at least three Economic Developmentspecific
training programs/seminars/conferences.
? Incentive Program – Working closely with county departments and local Chambers of
Commerce, research and developm potential incentives to attract non-tourism related
start-ups, small businesses, and high-tech firms.
? Workforce Investment Act (WIA) – Continue to provide consulting, marketing, and
support for workforce services programs, funded by WIA through Social Services.
Implement the most cost effective way to enhance the fish population in Mono County while still
providing a quality fishing experience for anglers.
? Provide staff support to the Mono County Fisheries Commission and their mission of Fish and
Wildlife Enhancement, Education, Promotion and Networking.
? Continue the Mono County Trophy Trout Stocking program.
? Continue to work with other government agencies such as the California Department of Fish and
Game on fish and wildlife issues, policies and regulations.
To ensure the availability of a minimum of $3,500 for payment to Eastern Sierra Wildlife
Care (ESWC) until March, 2016.
? Strive to ensure that expenditures from this fund focus on high priority projects for nonprofit
and/or governmental entities.
Transient Occupancy Tax for Quarters 1-3 indicates a 4.7% increase over FY 2013-14, and the highest
Q1-3 TOT since 2008-09. If Quarter 4 for FY2014-15 remains flat with Q4 2013-14, then total annual
TOT is projected to show a 43% increase year-over-year. The primary goal for Tourism in this next fiscal
year is to increase overnight visitation to the region, particularly in the shoulder seasons, in an effort to
maintain this upward trend.
GOAL: To continue to drive overnight and day visits to Mono County to increase TOT and visitor
spending in Mono County.
STRATEGY #1: Improve and increase communication and marketing of the brand message which
brings awareness to name/location “Mono County - California’s Eastern Sierra” and to the top
three reasons people visit – outdoor recreation opportunities, scenic beauty, and to see the region’s
natural wonders and historic attractions.
? Visitor Guide – Maintain increased distribution and newly expanded Improve Mono County
Visitor Guide by generating advertising revenue. Revitalize photography and content.
Eastern Sierra Fall Color Guide – Collaborate with partners (Inyo, Bishop Chamber, and
Mammoth Lakes Tourism) to continue Certified distribution of regional Fall Color Guide.
Motor Touring Guide – Secured RTP grant to update, print, promote and distribute.
? Website – Continue to work on design and launch of a new tourism website with accessible and
responsive platforms in order to increase functionality and keep updated with new search engine
algorithms.
? Social Media – Continue to provide social media/online marketing training to local business, and
to encourage lodging partners to expand online engagement through international booking
engines. Expand social media reach by 25% through increase exposure to Mono County’s
Facebook/Twitter outreach with targeted promotion and advertising to capture and engage key
influencers; continue monthly E-Newsletters to growing database of 22,000 contacts.
? Trade shows Attend 8 tourism trade shows and at least 1 film locations show in order to continue
to meet potential visitors face-to-face in key markets, increasing and replenishing visitor database
with qualified leads, and distributing Visitor Guides, Scenic Event Calendars, and other primary
marketing materials, and raising awareness of Mono County as a premiere outdoor recreation destination. Maximize co-operative presence at the shows with Yosemite Gateway Partners,
High Sierra Visitors Council, Mammoth Lakes Tourism, and other US 395 corridor businesses
and agencies.
? Advertising; Continue to promote Mono County on both a national and regional level in key
publications (Visit California’s Official Visitor Guide and niche pubs like Western Outdoor
News). Participate in co-op ads when possible with regional and tourism partners. Sponsor
CaliforniaFallColor.com.
? Public Relations – Increase effort to secure editorial in major travel-based and lifestyle
publications, both print and online, as well as in niche publications by issuing targeted press
releases and story ideas that push shoulder season travel to Mono County. Focus is to position
the US Highway 395 resort corridor as the premiere road trip in America. Other interestgenerating
stories include family-friendly and dog-friendly vacation options, June Mountain’s
“Kids Ski Free” promotion, Seasonal themes (Fall Colors, Spring Fishing, Winter Festivals),
Hiking, High Altitude Training, Film-friendly destination for locations, special events, etc. Mono
County will also attend Visit California’s annual LA Media Event.
? Fulfillment – Optimize interaction with visitors and potential visitors through 800-line/website
requests for information, and reader response from print advertising.
? Film Commission (Policy Item: $5000) – Leveraging the current momentum and new
FilmMonoCounty.com website, actively continue promoting Mono County as a film-friendly,
accessible destination. Bring at least two incremental commercial productions to Mono County,
generating an estimated $50,000 and a return on investment of 10:1. Support the Inyo National
Forest Service in their goals to provide excellent service and turn-around times for permitting this
time-sensitive market. Support the momentum created by the inaugural Mammoth Lakes Film
Festival.
? Community Event Marketing Fund (Policy Item: $40,000) – Continue the grant program which
directly provides support and assistance to communities, and thus the county overall, by growing
existing tourism-related events. Previously known as “Local Program Funding,” this program has
a proven track record of successfully supporting non-profit organizations to increase participation
in established tourism-related events and/or to launch new events or programs that ultimately
drive overnight visitation to communities.
? Historical Societies (Policy Item: $6,000) – Develop grant program to provide funding for local
historical societies and museums.
? Local Outreach: Continue a monthly Tourism/Economic Development Newsletter for tourism
partners and stakeholders; present tourism initiatives at RPAC’s and Chambers of Commerce.
STRATEGY #2: Expand reach to additional regional and international markets.
? Focus on 100% optimization of all programs, tools, and marketing channels available through
Visit California by increasing communication and building relationships with marketing/
PR/Social Media/International sales staff. Provide one in-person presentation to Visit California.
? Work closely and strategically with Mammoth Lakes Tourism and Mammoth Mountain Ski Area
on media/travel trade familiarization trips and cooperative advertising promotions in Northern
California, SoCal, Las Vegas, Denver, and on travel trade sales missions
? Work closely with High Sierra Visitors Council to ensure optimal representation at international
travel shows and with contracted French travel broker, Mn’O.
STRATEGY #3: Improve and develop co-operative and collaborative regional partnerships.
? Increase access to, and improve outdoor recreation product by continuing to develop positive
working relationships with US Forest Service, IAVC, regional visitor centers, community chambers of commerce, Friends of the Inyo, Caltrans, Inyo County, City of Bishop, High Sierra
Visitors Council, Visit California, Mammoth Lakes Tourism, etc.
Maintain fiscal discipline
? Implement and convert payroll system to Innoprise with live employee entry and time-tracking
? Implement Community Development, Work Management, Miscellaneous Account Receivable and Tax
modules to Innoprise financial infrastructure
? Complete financial audit and have FY 2014-15 audited financial statements available prior to Dec 31, 2015
Page 93
? Continue to provide meaningful professional training for department personnel
? Continue emphasis on reducing Finance Department’s error rates
? Continue to meet all State, Federal, and other reporting and financial deadlines
? Continue to refine collections effort to improve revenues
? Continue to improve fiscal services provided to LTC, Community Development, and the Paramedic
program
? Maintain quality results in the Treasury Pool in a difficult economic market
? Continue to maintain and build our relationship with Oak Valley Community Bank
? Amend the Mono County Business License Ordinance to allow a fee exemption for applicants who are
doing business in Mono County for 1 day or less
? Renegotiate new service contracts on all machines.
? Replace 4 older copy machines.
? Continue to insure each department’s copier needs are met.
? Continue to look for additional ways to reduce costs.
Provide excellent customer service to the citizens of Inyo/Mono Counties.
Page 113
Respond quickly and effectively to issues and/or complaints.
Maintain our 100% rate of inspection for all weighing and measuring devices within Inyo and Mono Counties to ensure equity for all transactions.
Bring device registration fees to realize more effective cost recovery for our Weights & Measures Division.
Begin testing of retail Liquid Propane Gas meters in-house.
• Continue Education as a Veterans Claim Representative to provide better job of advocacy and claims work
• Continue having a close working relationship with other county/government agencies
• Continue outreach efforts outreach by providing booths/ID cards at Fairs, Posts as needed
• Continue Coordinating transportation to VA Medical Centers
• Continue process of becoming completely automated by scanning and uploading claims directly into the VA
System
Technology Division Goals:
? Complete implementation of County Finance System and move off legacy systems
? Establish new management plan for public safety radio network
? Implement VoIP phone service and Unified Messaging for all County locations
? Connect Whitmore Animal Shelter and Chalfant Community Center to County network
? Replace Video Conference equipment in Bridgeport Board Chambers
? Expand use of Office 365 to management team members
? Implement Disaster Recovery plan for Mammoth and Bridgeport sites
? Install generator at Mammoth Lakes data center
? Upgrade core network switches in Mammoth locations
GIS Division Goals:
? Finalize Centerline data clean-up
? Develop user interface for Pavement and Asset Management System (PMS/AMS)
? Implement Public Safety Application Framework for dispatch, law, and EMS personnel
? Develop Highway 395 Scenic Byway application
? Develop broadband access and adoption application
To finalize and implement Graduated Sanctions and Incentives procedures for adult
offenders pursuant to evidence based practices.
? Plan and execute Common Ground Strategic Planning (Weisbord) for all probation
employees for a final product of mission, vision and 5, 10 and 20 year plan and webbased
dashboard
? Prepare a comprehensive multiagency report for realignment through the Community
Corrections Partnership (CCP) to be approved by the Board of Supervisors
Page 127
? Continuation of the CCP plan to initiate an educational, programmatic and treatment
program under AB109 in the community and jail
? Plan and execute the continuation of staff development in Integrative Management and
Leadership
? Design a user friendly website to obtain services and to educate and assist
undocumented aliens in attaining citizenship if eligible (80% accomplished)
? Fully implement and go live with the CMS system, connecting to RIMS, the Superior
Court, District Attorney, and Sheriff’s Office to give access to all justice partners to our
system to increase communication (Mono County is the model for the state)
? Post strategic planning, begin re-write of department policies and complete by 15/16
? Research urinalysis laboratory vendors and strike new contract currently funded under
offender self-pay and SB678
? Implement Drug Court; begin planning for Juvenile Drug Court
Plan and execute Common Ground Strategic Planning for all juvenile probation
employees for a final product of mission and vision and a 5, 10, 20 year plan
? Research, design and provide a tri-county 40 hour training in Juvenile Competency and
Restoration, psychological assessments and DSM-V
? Prepare a comprehensive multiagency plan through the Juvenile Justice Coordinating
Council specifically focusing on prevention of delinquency
? Train a second juvenile officer on the JSORRAT-II (Juvenile Sexual Offender Recidivism
Risk Assessment Tool-II and Containment Model as required by statute
? Plan and execute the continuation of staff development in Integrated Management and
Leadership
? Design a Youth and Families website to obtain services and to educate and assist
undocumented aliens in attaining citizenship if eligible (50% complete)
? Fully implement and go live with the Case Management System, connecting to RIMS
(local area law enforcement site), the Superior Court, District Attorney, and Sheriff’s
Office to give access to all justice partners to our system to increase communication
(Mono County will be a model for the state)
? Improve and comply with Title IVE and participate in state and federal audits
? Implement the Racial and Ethnic Disparity (RED) grant from 2015 – 2017
? Redesign the PC 1000 program for drug offenses due to Prop 47 and changes in drug
offense sentencing
Assist Mammoth Hospital to complete the transition to electronic lab reporting through
CalREDIE, as allowed through the CDPH timeline.
? Complete the data entry into California Immunization Registry (CAIR), the online immunization
registry to completely eliminate paper based immunization records, approximately only 200
records remaining.
? Maintain flu vaccination program and community outreach by holding flu clinics in every
community and every school within Mono County.
? Remain vigilant in monitoring emerging infectious diseases so Mono County can thwart new
outbreaks.
? Train additional public health nurse in the immunization program in order to have back up for the
primary nurse.
? Initiate a new oral health outreach by distributing prenatal oral health baggies to all positive
pregnancy tests done at the Health Department
? Assist all daycare centers and schools in implementing the new law eliminating personal beliefs
exemptions for children.
? Implement changes related to the Affordable Care Act into Public health infrastructure.
Page 138
? Participate in the TOML program to advocate for accommodations for special needs children.
? Attend MLR (Mammoth Lakes Recreation) meetings to continue fostering interest for Shane’s
Inspiration Playground for special needs children.
? Continue monthly updates and case management improvements for CCS program.
? Provide annual education to DSS staff and Sierra Park Pediatrics staff.
? Continue efforts to provide improved vision and dental care to Managed Care Medi-Cal children
in Mono County.
? Collaborate with TOML Recreation Department and local teens on the newly established Youth
Advisory Council to address health and wellness initiatives such as recreation programming for
teens, expansion of sex education, reduction of teen drug and alcohol use, and development of
communication channels for teen resources.
? Implement comprehensive sex education programs throughout Eastern Sierra Unified School
District on subjects including reproductive anatomy, contraception, teen pregnancy, HIV/STDs,
access to services, and emotional wellness in sexual relationships.
Hire a contractor to lead a Government Authorized Alternate Care Site planning mtg,
tabletop and functional exercise
? Hire a contractor to lead a community resilience project
? Lead the annual Statewide Medical and Health Exercise with local, regional, and state
partners on an intentional release of anthrax
? Acquire sufficient PPE to respond to a case/s of an emerging infection
? Upgrade our Public Health DOC
? Train staff on creating an Incident Action Plan (IAP) in the DOC
? Develop a MHOAC Toolkit
? Develop patient and resource tracking processes
? Develop local polices for sheltering of persons with medical needs
? Participate in quarantine training for rural jurisdictions
? Perform a quarterly communications drill
? Develop a local Medical and Health Multi-Agency Coordination Group (MAC)
Continue to support transition of multiunit housing to smoke free policy through technical
assistance and policy advocacy.
? Advocate for the Healthy Stores Healthy Communities Initiative in collaboration with the State
Public Health Department.
? Assess community readiness for advancement of smoke free policy on county campus and in the
unincorporated Mono County.
? With collaboration of the County government and employees, develop a county wellness policy.
Implementation plan for EMS AD HOC Committee Recommendations.
? Work with Megan Mahaffey, our financial specialist, to streamline the agency’s budget and line
items, to have a more transparent and practical budget.
? Continue and improve upon Reserve EMT recruitment, and assure our messages and needs are
being seen by the most qualified candidates, in a much larger applicant pool.
? Continue the process of our agency becoming an EMT class provider and gaining approval from
ICEMA.
? Finalization and implementation of “phase one” of the AED Program, and to identify funding
sources/grants for this endeavor.
? Provide training to all EMS personnel in Rope Rescue, Emergency Vehicle Operation, SCBA
utilization, Swift Water Rescue, and Pediatric Advanced Life Support.
Page 149
? Move forth on any recommendations made by the EMS Ad Hoc Committee that would be
possible this fiscal year.
Construction engineering, contract administration, and inspection of the following projects:
? June Lake Streets
? Oversight of Rock Creek Road Rehabilitation
? Oversight of Convict Lake Road Rehabilitation
Planning, project management, and engineering design of the following projects:
? Complete Pavement Management System update.
? Prepare Project Study Reports for 2016 STIP cycle.
? Initiate preliminary engineering for the Airport Road Rehabilitation Project.
? Initiate grant applications for a significant bridge project.
? See Airports Goals
Land Development:
? Process White Mountain Estates Phase 2 Tract Map
Complete ALPs for both Bryant Field and Lee Vining Airport.
? Continue working with LADWP on long term lease for Lee Vining Airport (current lease expires
08/31/15).
? Apply for grant funding for engineering and right-of-way acquisition for the Stock Drive Realignment
project at Bryant Field.
? Assist Community Development grant application for a County-wide Airport Land Use Compatibility
Plan (Mammoth-Yosemite, Lee Vining Airport, and Bryant Field).
? Continue to analyze cost/benefit of options to build and maintain hangars.
The goals for the 2015-2016 Campground budget are to “Continue ongoing overall maintenance of the
campground as well as focus on adding more bear boxes to existing campgrounds.”
An inventory of the needs for the campground such as road repairs, spring rehabilitation, septic storage
tank removal, picnic benches, etc. has been compiled and we will monitor campground revenues to pick
away at these improvements.
Ongoing Projects
? Memorial Hall – Upstairs Renovation includes ADA restrooms and ADA lift.
? Bridgeport Biomass Boiler Project-complete planning, permitting, and RFB process.
? Bridgeport Campus Relocation which entails remodeling the Bridgeport Office of Education
as well as remodeling the Twin Lakes Annex building and moving staff from multiple
departments to multiple facilities.
? Davidson House-develop a scope of work, budget, environmental compliance, collaborate
with Community development on planning component
Continue updating the Mono Lake Cemetery and Bridgeport Cemetery site plans by contacting as many
families as possible to confirm their family plot reservations. Any reservations that cannot be confirmed will be
left in place and details on unclaimed reservations will be addressed in the ordinance.
? As funding permits, install development staking at the Mono Lake Cemetery then the Bridgeport Cemetery to
assist with plot layout for burials.
? Progress Report: The first reading of the Cemetery Ordinance is anticipated for July/August 2015 along with
discussions of the potential for Cemetery plot fees.
Implement/facilitate volunteer conservation projects at Conway Ranch
? Implement 2015 Operations Plan
? Develop 2015 Annual Report and 2016 Operations Plan
? Compile historic data relating to water quality and water quantity
? Initiate long-term planning efforts for the future of Conway Ranch which will result in the development
and adoption of a Plan, and may include the development of an RFP for aquaculture activities, or other
elements as directed by the Board.
Complete crack sealing and slurry seal in the June Lake Highlands as part of the June Lake Streets Project.
Initiate a preventative maintenance project with information from the updated Pavement Management System and
engineering studies.
Utilize Road Department Staff to perform maintenance and support Road fund.
The facilities division emphasis for this budget year is to focus on projects and practices that incorporate
aspects of the strategic plan. For example, protecting natural resources and reduced energy use and cost
are areas that we will continue to emphasize. Projects include:
? ADA Restroom Accessibility improvements at Walker Park Restrooms, Benton Park Restrooms.
And Gull Lake Park Restrooms. These ADA projects are contingent upon receiving CDBG grant
funding for implementation.
Page 172
? The Biomass boiler project: staff will create scope of work develop plans, secure permits, and
Request for bids for this construction season.
? Bridgeport campus relocation involves consolidation of facilities which will both significantly
reduce energy use and cost.
? Lee Vining Road Shop paint exterior.
? Memorial Hall remodel project
? Davison House remodel project staff will create a scope of work, budget, and environmental
compliance as well as collaborate with community Development on planning component.
? 1/2 Basketball court at Chalfant Park.
? Work with the Energy Task Force to complete professional Energy Audits on a selection of Mono
County Facilities including solar installation feasibility, make decision on next step and research
funding sources for implementation of audit recommendations.
We will also continue to focus on refining our existing maintenance systems which include weekly
inspections of playgrounds, quarterly inspections of Community Centers and existing facilities, bi-annual
maintenance and inspection of heating and cooling systems county wide. The aforementioned inspections
will also contribute to increased energy efficiency and cost savings. The plan is to continue to improve the
implementation/ documentation of the aforementioned inspections and maintenance to strive for a
seamless transition from season to season. Lastly, we would like to continue to focus on ADA
accessibility projects, Capital Improvement Projects, and Grant Funded projects which allow us to lessen
facilities impact on the general fund.
Purchase Board approved replacement vehicles that are economical and fuel efficient
2. Continue with CARB compliance
3. Install oil/water separator at Bridgeport shop
4. Reduce overall fuel consumption by 5%
5. Ensure a sufficient number of pool cars are available for staff use
Reduce fuel consumption by 5%.
2. Increase cross training of all staff to provide better overall capabilities/response
3. Continue with employee recognitions
4. Assist BLM with Sage Grouse habitat improvements. BLM has grant funds available.
5. Reduce overall emissions on Road equipment
6. Work towards a viable asphalt maintenance schedule/program
7. Focus road maintenance work in Zone of Benefit (ZOB) areas to increase revenue to Road. Available
revenue in the ZOB’s has increased due to limited snow removal the past three winters. After conferring
with our Engineer to determine the potential scope of work in each ZOB the Road staff can focus their
efforts this year in the ZOB’s to improve road conditions as well as increase revenue returns to the Road
fund.Obtain revised Solid Waste Facility Permit for Walker Landfill.
? Acquire Pumice Valley Landfill property and re-submit Solid Waste Facility Permit application.
? Continue to pursue agreements with Town of Mammoth Lakes on Solid Waste needs.
? Explore solid waste alternatives for after Benton Crossing Landfill closes--engage regional partners in
discussions of long-term needs and identify opportunities for efficiencies.
? Expand recycling efforts at Transfer Stations.
? Complete Transfer Station and Franchise negotiations and renewals.
Construction engineering, contract administration, and inspection of the following projects:
? June Lake Streets
? Oversight of Rock Creek Road Rehabilitation
? Oversight of Convict Lake Road Rehabilitation
Planning, project management, and engineering design of the following projects:
? See Airports Goals
? Airport Road Rehabilitation Project
Continue to seek grant opportunities to expand service capabilities.
? Work within the budget to fill vacant deputy sheriff positions while still maintaining quality service.
? Establish a Community Advisory Board to provide input and response for the Sheriff’s Office.
? Relocate the Emergency Operations Center to an assessable and practical location.
? Partner with local first responders to build an Incident Management Team.
? Obtain training for all employees that:
o Maintains POST mandated requirements.
o Enhances emergency response capabilities.
o Provides career development.
Continue to provide regular boating patrol on all assessable lakes.
? Continue to enforce California boating laws which include:
o Boating under the influence
o Vessel registration
o Life jacket requirements
o Wake speeds
o California Fish and Game regulations
o Investigations of boating related collisions
? Continue to perform safety activities which include:
o Assisting stranded vessels
o Providing education on safety to the public
o Assist Search and Rescue operations
o Provide immediate assistance to capsized vessels and any occupants
o Assist the Mono County Coroner with body recoveries
Work with the Superior Court to keep court security cost within awarded state revenue.
Continue to host and participate in Unified Command and continue to foster relationships with allied
agencies.
? Implement an Emergency Management succession plan. This will require in depth training so as to create a
seamless transition.
? Create an Incident Management Team. This team will serve on-scene to manage and mitigate the threat of
catastrophe as well as to serve first responders and citizens of the County.
? Work to modernize the County communications system. The current Mono County Public Radio System is
failing due to aging technology, lack of proper maintenance and failure to train non-traditional first
responders in proper system use. It is imperative that the communication system is reliable.
Continue to maintain the orderly daily operations of the jail.
? Enhance employee safety and jail operations to keep up with AB 109 length of inmate stay issues.
? Continue to work with cooperators to improve dispatch services.
? Continue to support Mono County Public Work’s projects with the Inmate Work Program.
? Continue to support the communities, non-profits and allied agencies by providing inmate labor.
? Meet or exceed all STC training requirements with emphasis placed on employee safety, facility
security, and legal updates and mandates.
? Attend conferences and trainings to stay current on legal mandates, thus reducing Mono County’s
exposure to liability.
Continue to respond to a wide variety of missions in a professional manner.
? Continue to recruit volunteers that are dedicated to public service.

With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the changing demands for the agency’s
services, DSS continues to move towards implementing a “no-wrong-door” policy that provides
clients access to all of the programs and benefits they need and are eligible for as quickly and
efficiently as possible. Policy and staffing changes to meet this need include transitioning the
Eligibility Supervisor and two Eligibility Worker staff into the Integrated Caseworker (ICW) position
classification. ICW staff assist clients with both eligibility programs and workforce services.
Restructuring will expand our ability to reach and to serve the community.
? Put into place best practices for client caseload management, including implementation of in-take and
on-going caseloads to allow continued successful implementation of Health Care Reform.
Streamlining our processes will allow staff to evaluate eligibility determinations more timely, reduce
workload fatigue, and improve overall customer service.
? Focus on community outreach efforts in an attempt to reach families who are eligible for nutrition
support but are not receiving CalFresh benefits.
? Fully and successfully implement the new Child Welfare Services Federal Case Reviews. Beginning
in August 2015, Mono County will be completing annual qualitative case reviews for child welfare
services, as required by law. These case reviews, coupled with the quantitative data already available,
will be part of a larger continuous quality improvement (CQI) effort in the county and in the state.
? Continue efforts to provide intensive child welfare services for older foster youth between the
ages of 18-21 (i.e. non-minor dependents). As a result of legislative changes under AB 12, these
Page 206
older dependents receive intensive case management, which includes monthly face-to-face visits
and more specialized advocacy in housing, education, and employment issues as child welfare
workers manage the youths’ transition to adulthood.
? Continue foster family home recruitment – a critical need in Mono County. Work with community
partners; California Welfare Directors Association (CWDA), and Fresno Community Care
Licensing to ensure as efficient an application and licensing process as possible.
? Actively serve as a member of the Mono County Racial and Ethnic Disparity Steering Committee
with a common goal of reducing racial and ethnic disparity within the juvenile justice system.
Promote community engagement to achieve this common goal, including serving in a leadership
capacity on the Mammoth Lakes Community Hispanic Advisory Committee.
? Consistently represent the county in the larger California Welfare Directors Association (CWDA)
body and provide feedback to statewide policies and proposed legislation.
A central goal of the Mono County CAPC in FY 2015-16 will be to increase the number of Child
Abuse and Neglect Mandated Reporter Trainings offered in Mono County.
? Continue expansion and promotion of the Protective Factors framework in the county.
Efficient and effective emergency communications across partner organizations is an area of
focus for FY 2015-2016. We have budgeted for additional funds for FY 15-16 for the purchase
of hand-held radios, one stationed at all seven community centers which are the primary sites for
shelters, and at each of the Social Service offices in Walker, Bridgeport and Mammoth. This will
allow us to have an assigned radio channel for operations so that shelter managers and shelter
coordinators can have immediate, on-going contact once a shelter is opened.
? Continue to partner with the American Red Cross to provide emergency preparedness training for
residents in the Walker/Coleville, Bridgeport and Mammoth Lakes areas.
Increase the availability of transportation services for seniors through increased transportation grant
funds.
? Continue to offer activities and services that help older adults to live as independently as possible;
promote healthy aging and community involvement; and link family members to resources to support
their vital care giving role.
? Continue implementation of the Healthy Ideas Program for seniors, expanding the reach and depth of
services to the senior community, while creating greater connection to existing services and supports.
Page 219
? Continue collaborative partnership with Inyo County through the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on
Aging to benefit senior programs and outreach, and achieve program delivery efficiencies where
possible.
? Continue to seek assistance from a variety of funding sources to support Senior Program services.
Expand the On-the-Job Training program to include: contracts with additional businesses throughout
the county; accurate record documentation of client career interests; effective relationships with
businesses to provide potential employee referrals to assist business staffing requirements; and impart
incentives for companies to train and promote existing employees. The OJT program provides clients
with an opportunity to build skills while earning money, and it also acts as a catalyst for businesses to
hire, promote, and augment their personnel. The program provides a critical county link to employers,
so that WIA clients not only have job search and job preparation resources, but also connections to
employers that are looking to hire and train individuals.
? Continue our partnership with the Mono County Economic Development Department in order to
leverage resources, staffing, and expertise to further our mutually compatible goals of ensuring longterm
economic success and self-sufficiency for Mono County.
? Implement a Subsidized Employment Program (SEP) for Mono County employers and Welfare to
Work Participants. SEP could offer employment in a private or public sector for which the employer
receives a subsidy from CalWORKs to offset some or all of the wages and costs of employing a client
for up to six months.
? Develop a Workforce Resource Room in the Sierra Center Mall by reconfiguring existing department
office space with computers, printers, and a job board. This will facilitate a seamless service model in
that a client would be able to look for work, develop their resume, and apply for jobs in the same
location. Staff will assist job seekers with job searches and resources. Meeting these needs would
increase the number of individuals that receive workforce services, and help direct them to the
appropriate resources, businesses, and educational programs. This service will be provided for a
limited number of part time hours, from 1-5pm each workday.
? Job Search assistance, especially for the aged and technologically challenged, has been identified as a
major barrier for clients pursuing employment despite vast knowledge, expertise, and work
experience. Workforce staff will maintain accurate and complete job postings while matching listed
jobs with client goals. Staff will focus on job availability, client career interests, and client contact in
order to facilitate job obtainment.
? Implement the new State-mandated Online CalWorks Appraisal Tool (OCAT). This web-based
intensive appraisal tool is used during the CalWORKs Welfare-to-Work (WTW) early engagement
process to appraise clients for needs, barriers, strengths, and capacity to work. This in-depth appraisal
tool will help staff work with clients to address issues that may affect an individual’s ability to
participate in work activities.
? Partner with the Economic Development Department and Chamber of Commerce in creating a hiring
preference program for those who graduate with a certificate of completion from the four-module
Workforce Education program offered by the Mono County Office of Education in Mammoth Lakes
and Walker.
Continue implementation of the Mono County WRAP Program in partnership with the Departments of
Behavioral Health, Probation, and Public Health, to reduce the risk of out-of-home placement and
recidivism of children and youth.
