The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the County
Administrative Office (CAO) is $64,253,409, a net decrease of
$4,833,386 or 7.0%. The reduction primarily reflects replacement
of General Fund Contributions (GFCs) with revenue from cost
recoveries from other departments as part of the Auditor-
Controller's new indirect charge back program. In addition, the
Recommended Budget reflects a reclassification of expeditures
between categories to more approprately classify transfers from the
General Fund to other funds for debt service, captial projects
construction, support for road projects and other transfers. The
techinical changes resulted in a decrease to Other Charges of
$33,254,444, which includes a Cost Allocation Plan credit of
$4,756,304 and an increase in Other Financing Uses of $28,557,136.
The Department also experienced some areas of expenditure
growth. Salary and benefits expenditures increased by $424,840 as
a result of the increasing cost of employee health insurance and, to
a lesser degree, County contributions to the Public Employees
Retirement System (PERS) for employee pensions. In addition, two
positions were added to the Department to meet essential
operational needs related to fleet services and surplus operations.
These positions are supported by departmental charges. Fleet
Administration continues to address overdue replacement of
vehicles within the Vehicle Asset Management Program (VAMP)
leading to an increase of $348,528 in capital asset cost. Another

area of expenditure growth is in the appropriation for
contingencies, which increased by $829,435 in compliance with
County General Financial Policies.
Recommended General Fund revenues are $214,513,058, an
increase of $11,143,885, or 5.5%. The increase in revenue reflects a
estimated 5.5% increase in secured property assessed valuations
and continued growth in Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
collections.
Budget Impacts
The CAO's FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes the
elimination of 1.0 vacant Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Secretary
position in Fleet Administration. In addition, funding for
legislative advocacy and grants management have been reduced by
$163,000 due to budget constraints.The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the CAO's
Departmental Division is $3,874,510, a decrease of $5,557,978. The
decrease is primarily the result of an accounting change that
resulted in the replacement of $4,754,304 in GFC with revenue
from departmental cost recoveries as part of the Auditor-
Controller's new indirect charge back program. The increase of
$424,840 in Salaries and Benefits is due to increased cost for
employee health insurance and County paid PERS retirement
contributions, and the addition of two positions discussed earlier.
FY 2016-17 revenues declined by $225,503 to $448,422 due to a
decrease in grant funding of $36,000 for the Office of Emergency
Services (OES) and decreased charges for services within the Fleet
Administration division.
ADMINISTRATION & FINANCE: The FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget for the Administration & Finance Division
is $2,427,114. This amount reflects an increase of $48,283 in salary
and benefits mainly due to increased healthcare costs. Expenses in
services and supplies also grew by $46,488 due to increased charges
for the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) upgrade and
restoration of essential training. The Recommended Budget also
reflects a Cost Allocation Plan credit of $3,679,983 as well as
$240,341 in interdepartmental reimbursements for personnel
services provided to Fleet Administration.BUDGET & ANALYSIS: The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget
for the Budget and Analysis Division is $1,150,976. Increases in
salary and benefit costs of $82,533 occurred due to increased
healthcare costs and annual step increases. Services and Supplies
increased by $28,818 resulting from the addition of the OpenGov
software agreement via an augmentation. Increases were offset by
a reduction to Other Financing Uses of $21,327. Organizational
changes in the Division include the reallocation of a Business
Technology Analyst II to an Associate Administrative Analyst
during FY 2015-16.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: The FY 2016-17 Recommended
Budget for the Contracts/Purchasing Unit is $209,927, a decrease
of $770,020. The decrease is the result of a Cost Allocation Plan
credit of $861,924 offset by salary and benefit cost increases of
$125,541 and a $17,120 increase to Services and Supplies.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL & LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS: The FY
2016-17 Recommended Budget for the Intergovernmental &
Legislative Affairs (IGLA) Division is $1,290,446. This represents a
decrease of $93,595. An increase of $93,920 in Salaries and
Benefits was offset by the reduction in contracts for legislative
lobbyist and other professional services.
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (OES): The Recommended
Budget for the Office of Emergency Services is $1,065,910. Revenue
decreased from $250,000 to $214,000 for FY 2016-17 due to a
reduction in grant funding.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT & STRATEGIC
ADVOCACY: The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the
Office of Community Engagement & Strategic Advocacy (OCESA)
is $532,017. Increases of $23,951 for salaries and benefits and
$1,074 in services and supplies were partially offset by a reduction
in Other Financing Uses of $9,140, for a net increase of $15,885.
FLEET ADMINISTRATION: The FY 2016-17 Recommended
Budget for Fleet Management is $5,679,698. An accounting change
resulting in a Fleet Cost Allocation Plan credit of $318,176,
combined with inter/intrafund reimbursements and the fuel sales
revenues realized through the Monterey County Office of
Education fuel agreement, resulted in a net GFC credit of $334,990.
Included in the Recommended Budget is the elimination of 1.0 FTE
Secretary.
Fleet Administration provides services to entities within the
government and as such, the budget is totally derived from charges
for services rendered. It operates on a full cost recovery basis and
does not receive any GFC.
SHUTTLE SERVICES: The Recommended Budget for Shuttle
Services is included within the Resource Management Agency's
Recommended Budget, however shuttle services remains under the
direction of Fleet Administration. The FY 2016-17 Recommended
Budget is $247,470, reflecting an increase of $84,119 due to the
addition of 1.0 Shuttle Driver. In FY 2017-18, shuttle service will
once again be budgeted under the CAO.
VEHICLE ASSET MANAGEMENT PROGRAM: The
Recommended Budget for the Vehicle Asset Management Program
is $2,216,694. Vehicle purchases are based on the estimated
monthly vehicle lease payments made by respective County
departments to replace their vehicles once they have reached their
useful life. The monthly payment is calculated based on the useful
life of the vehicle. The amount budgeted for vehicle purchases in
FY 2016-17 is $5,048,526. Revenue in the amount of $63,778 is
estimated from vehicles sold at auction. The staff associated with
this unit are budgeted in Fleet Administration (Unit 8451).
Budget Impacts
The CAO's Recommended Budget for FY 2016-17 includes the
elimination of 1.0 vacant FTE Secretary position in the Fleet
Administration Division.
To avoid staffing reductions as a result of increased employee
benefit costs, contracts in IGLA for lobbyist activities and grant
management were reduced by $163,000.
A 1.0 FTE Mechanic III was added to the Fleet Administration
Division and is funded through charges for service.
A 1.0 FTE Surplus Worker was added to the Contracts Purchasing
Division as an essential position to the operations of the County
surplus program. The position was staffed in FY 2015-16 in a
temporary capacity.ADMINISTRATION & FINANCE/BUDGET & ANALYSIS:
Update, develop, and recommend fiscal policies to assure the
financial stability of the County.
Collaborate with departments to produce periodic financial reports
and annual Three-Year Financial Forecasts for the Board of
Supervisors.
Develop and recommend to the Board of Supervisors' principles
and strategies for development of the FY 2017-18 Recommended
Budget.
Continuously improve the Recommended Budget Book to provide
greater transparency and user-friendliness.
CONTRACTS/PURCHASING: Provide the Contracts &
Purchasing Academy for County staff each quarter. During the
same period of time Contracts/Purchasing will provide two
sessions of the Contracts & Purchasing Academy to outside public
agencies. Provide County staff with two additional RQN (online
Agreement tracking system) training sessions.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL & LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS: Track
implementation of the Board's Strategic Initiatives/Key Objectives,
and coordinate with the Board/departments to support the
following:
Board/Department Heads Strategic Workshop.
Sustainability/Go Green! Monterey County Program.
Development FY 2017-18 Legislative Program.
Managing for Results performance measurement program.
Responsive media relations, emergency communications and
community insight into County issues.
Strategic Grant Services Program to obtain funding for priority
projects.
Serve as CAO liaison to the Resource Management Agency and
Agricultural Commissioner; manage/oversee the Office of
Emergency Services, Parks, Emergency Communications and
Economic Development departments.
Staff Board Committees: Legislative, Capital Improvement,
Alternative Energy and Environment; CAO representative to Ad
Hoc Water Committee.
Complete special projects as directed by the Board/CAO.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT & STRATEGIC
ADVOCACY: Continue to refine and build upon the Monterey
County Gang Violence Prevention Initiative's Action Plan for
Building Safe and Thriving Communities, its strategies, short and
long term goals , objectives and outcomes with ongoing
recommendations on the implementation to the Board of
Supervisors.
Continue with the development and implementation of Governing
for Racial Equity (GRE).
FLEET ADMINISTRATION: Fleet Management will continue to
evaluate vehicle utilization through FY 2017-18 by department to
assist in the development of a plan to "right-size" fleet sizes based
on current and projected utilization.The Recommended Budget for FY 2016-17 is $10,463,922. This
represents a net decrease of $1,805,872 from the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget. The reduction in recommended expenditures
reflects the new indirect cost recovery program implemented for
FY 2016-17 by the Auditor-Controller. Under this program, Human
Resources Department (HRD) will receive cost recoveries, reflected
as expenditure offsets and decreasing overall expenditures.
The Recommended Budget includes $230,621 in recommended
augmentations, including the restoration of a Senior Clerk-
Confidential, restoration of an Administrative Services Assistant,
restoration of a Secretary to a 1.0 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE), and
$30,000 for legal consultation services to assist with labor
negotiations.
Revenue related to the benefits fund decreased $20,958 from the
FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. Costs for benefit administration and
claims continue to exceed revenue from County and employee
premiums and charges for services resulting in a reduction to the
benefits fund balance of $912,645.
For FY 2016-17, General Fund Contribution (GFC) will be utilized
for the Learning and Organizational Development (LOD) in the
amount of $639,424. In the prior year, LOD has been funded
through departmental charges that were reflected as expenditure
reimbursements resulting in no use of GFC.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget provides the resources necessary to
maintain current service levels in most departmental functional
areas.
A Supervising Personnel Analyst was moved from Employment
and Information Systems to Labor and Employee Relations. A
Senior Personnel Analyst was moved from Labor and Employee
Relations to Employment and Information Systems. The position
changes were made to better align the organizational structure to
the departmental needs. In addition, a vacant Personnel
Technician-Confidential added in FY 2014-15 to replace existing
personnel being located offsite to work on the Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) upgrade was eliminated as the position was not
assigned to the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) project.The Recommended Budget for FY 2016-17 is $260,975. This
amount reflects budgeted expenditures of $4,128,417 offset by a
cost plan charge credit of $3,653,780 and reimbursement of
$213,662 for positions related to the Enterprise Resource Planning
(ERP) project.
For FY 2016-17, General Fund Contribution (GFC) will be utilized
for Learning and Organizational Development (LOD) in the
amount of $639,424. In the prior year, LOD has been funded
through departmental charges that were reflected as expenditure
reimbursements resulting in no net use of GFC.
Increases in health benefits and workers' compensation costs were
offset by the elimination of a Personnel Technician assigned to the
ERP project for a net decrease to salary and benefits of $38,921.
This decrease is impacted by an associated decrease in the
reimbursement in other charges for the position. The net effect is
an increase of $88,464 in GFC funded salary and benefits. Costs in
services and supplies increased $134,338 due to additional costs for
outside legal counsel related to negotiations and an increase in the
charge for general liability insurance.
Budget Impacts
EMPLOYMENT & INFORMATION SYSTEMS:
A vacant Personnel Technician was eliminated from the FY 2016-
17 budget. The position was added in FY 2014-15 to provide
resources for the Enterprise Resource Planning project to be
funded through the project. Alternate personnel were assigned to
better align with project and departmental needs.
LEARNING & ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Funding for temporary positions that have been essential in the
Learning and Organizational Development organization has been
eliminated.Continue to seek opportunities to improve the County's Human
Resources function to meet the ongoing HR needs of County
departments in an efficient and effective manner. Continue to
build on the Department infrastructure with recruitment,
classification and compensation work to meet the ongoing
challenges and needs of the organization in a more effective,
efficient and strategic manner.
LABOR AND EMPLOYEE RELATIONS:
Engage in and complete successful negotiations with sixteen (16)
bargaining units with open labor contracts.
Develop and conduct training for departments on application of
negotiated Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) revisions.
Settle all grievances within the time limits set forth in the
applicable MOU while working to limit arbitrations.
EMPLOYMENT AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS:
Complete implementation of the re-engineering of position
control/management and leave of absence processes.
Establish and enhance relationships with departments to
understand and anticipate their needs.
Develop and/or improve departmental HR processes and services
based upon identified customer needs.
LEARNING & ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Work with the Department Head Training Advisory Committee to
strategize and develop programs that support succession planning,
career development, writing skills and leadership development.
Add new electives to the training offerings that align with Board of
Supervisors, departmental leadership strategies and employee
survey requests.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS:
Monitor the Affordable Health Care Act for changes and
implementation guidance.
Provide multiple on-site, County specific, retirement training
sessions.
Revise the New Hire Orientation program to better coordinate
with the on-boarding process.
Finalize Leave of Absence processes and create user guides for both
management and employees.DENTAL: The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Dental is
$5,191,100, an increase of $852,100 due to a combination of
increased costs of the benefits and an anticipated increase in the
number of employees who will utilize the benefits. Costs for this
unit are allocated to County departments and employees based
upon utilization and plan design.
VISION: The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Vision is
$896,000, a decrease of $41,800. Costs for this unit are allocated to
County departments and employees based upon utilization and
plan design.
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE: The FY 2016-17 Recommended
Budget for Employee Assistance is $89,100. Costs for this unit are
allocated to County departments based upon utilization and plan
design.
DISABILITY: The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Disability
is $219,500, an increase of $2,150. Costs for this unit are allocated
to County departments based upon utilization and plan design.
UNEMPLOYMENT: The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for
Unemployment is $709,000, an increase of $31,920 based on
anticipated use of the benefits. Costs for this unit are allocated to
County departments based upon utilization and plan design.
MISCELLANEOUS BENEFITS: The FY 2016-17 Recommended
Budget for Miscellaneous Benefits is $478,247, an increase of
$163,247. Miscellaneous Benefits include Dependent Care
Assistance Plan (DECAP), Alternate Benefit Option (ABO) and
other benefit administration fees. Costs for this unit are allocated
to County departments based upon utilization and plan design.OPEB: This unit accounts for contributions to the California
Employer's Retiree Trust Fund (CERBT) for pre-funding Other
Post Employment Benefit s (OPEB). The FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget for this unit is $2,620,000, an increase of
$1,875. Costs for this unit are allocated to County departments
based upon actuarially determined contribution rates, in addition
to the cost of the required actuarial report.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the
Economic Development Department (EDD) is $25,244,141 an
increase of $2,864,268 over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget.
Anticipated Revenue is $20,596,012, an increase of $2,659,959 from
the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. These increases are primarily due
to an increase in the East Garrison Project. The Recommended
General Fund Contributions (GFC) increased by $302,882, which
includes $142,753 in additional County contributions for the
Development Set-Aside (DSA) program.
Of the total $25,244,141 budgeted funds, $23,773,314 are restricted
funds to be utilized for specific grants or programs. The East
Garrison Project (Fund 406) increased by $2,074,247 reflecting the
beginning of Phase II for the facilities fire station.
Budget Impacts
Due to the need to constantly review, monitor and research $22
million in loans, and to ensure the County is in compliance with the
Grant requirements. The EDD has requested an augmentation for a
full time Housing Analyst I position. However, due to fiscal
constraints the Recommended Budget does not include increased
County contribution to meet this need. The loans have various
restrictions and monitoring needs. With the current staffing there
has not been time nor resources to address all these loans.
In addition, the Recommended Budget does not fund the
Department's request for $100,000 for professional services and
memberships to establish working relationships with non-profit
organizations so as to foster and build Economic Development
activities and opportunities within Monterey County.Participate in the City of Salinas/Civic Center Downtown
Revitalization Plan.
Support the City of Marina as a recipient of $10,000 through the
Dover-Kohl grant program for their proposal to enhance and create
an economically vibrant downtown center.
Continue to partner with the Economic Opportunity Committee
working groups to implement the Economic Development Strategic
Plan for the County of Monterey and the Comprehensive Economic
Development Strategy (CEDS) with a focus on the following
economic base industries or "Pillar" industry groups: (1)
Agriculture, 2) Education, 3) Military Support, 4) Research
(primarily Marine and Water Technology), 5) Tourism, 6) Wine
Corridor), and continue existing Small Business assistance,
expansion and funding services.
Support the workforce strategy that creates pathways of economic
opportunity and prosperity for residents.
Align with strategic partners, public and private, in order to
strengthen economic development efforts and provide support and
resources to enhance the County's collaboration.
Enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the
County and Cities to partner with each city to allow the County to
lead business retention, expansion and attraction.
Evaluate return on investment of County funds expended on
economic development efforts.
Continue to develop and promote Monterey County as a
destination for eco-recreation and wellness.
Develop an implementation plan for a multi-department
countywide economic development strategy.
Pending Issues
Since the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency, the Economic
Development Department (EDD) has lost $3 million in annual tax
increment revenue from redevelopment funding which contributed
to covering operating costs in the Department. The Department
requests that the Board revisit the purpose and successes of both
the Housing Program and the Economic Development Program.
Funds only exist for one or the other, but not both, without an
augmentation. This decision will provide overall direction to the
Department to best serve and allow EDD to continue its mission to
ensure that residents are being served as described in the Board's
Strategic Initiatives.The Recommended Budget for the Equal Opportunity Office
(EOO) totals $227,202 in appropriations and General Fund
Contributions (GFC). The reduction from the FY 2015-16 Adopted
Budget reflects cost recoveries from other departments as part of
the Auditor-Controller's new indirect cost recovery plan. Aside
from this technical adjustment, the Recommended Budget
increases $58,401 next fiscal year for EOO and includes restoration
of an Equal Opportunity Analyst that would have been reduced to
half-time without the additional funding as a result of cost
pressures.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget for Equal Opportunity Office covers
the fixed operational costs of the Equal Opportunity Office.
However, due to rising costs associated with salary and benefits and
internal charges, the budget does not cover costs for any
unexpected expenditures associated with investigations. nor does it
provide enough funding to continue the contracted classroomsstyle
training. The Equal Opportunity Office will launch online
training modules  that can be used to supplement the classroomstyled
training.The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to provide sexual
harassment training to all employees to fulfill the requirement of
Government Code 12950.1 and County policy. The EOO will
implement Phase II of the Equal Opportunity and Non-
Discrimination/Diversity training, which educates on the
prevention of unlawful discrimination, harassment and retaliation.
Through our contract with LawRoom, the EOO will be launching
online training to managers and supervisors on Accommodating
Workers with Disabilities.
The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to work with
Department Heads on the their departments' Equal Opportunity
Plan to ensure compliance with the County's Equal Opportunity
Plan and assist with their good faith efforts to achieve a diverse
workforce.
The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to collaborate with
Human Resources and departments to recruit, hire and retain
qualified women and minorities in accordance with the County's
Equal Opportunity Plan.
The Equal Opportunity Office will continue to work closely with
departments to resolve discrimination complaints at the earliest
level possible to decrease the number of formal complaints. The
Department will continue to receive, address and investigate
complaints of discrimination, harassment and retaliation as
mandated by State and Federal laws and County policy.The Recommended Budget for the Auditor-Controller totals
$1,572,867 in appropriations, $439,511 in estimated revenue and a
General Fund Contribution of $1,133,356 which represents a
decrease of $3,929,531 from FY 2015-16. The decrease is due to an
accounting change that resulted in a Cost Plan credit (details
provided in County Overhead Recovery unit 8005). The
Recommended Budget includes the deletion of 1.0 vacant Chief
Deputy Auditor Controller- Internal Audit position and the
addition of five positions in Systems Management which were
previously under the Information Technology Department.
Budget Impacts
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the Auditor-Controller
includes augmentations for 1.0 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)
Database Administrator III and 4.0 FTE Software Programmer
Analyst III. These positions were previously supervised by the
Information Technology Department though they were solely
focused on the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system and
housed in the Auditor-Controller's Office. They will now be under
the Auditor-Controller's direct supervision. This request was made
in the interest of long term efficiency, customer service and
maintenance of the County's complex ERP System. These positions
will be included in the Department's cost allocations effective FY
2017-18.The Office of the Auditor-Controller previously had three Internal
Auditors and a Chief Deputy-Internal Audit positions. However,
due to reductions in the past, the Office eliminated the Chief
Deputy-Internal Audit and two of the Internal Auditor positions. In
an effort to cover Board requested internal audits and audits
directed by the Auditor-Controller, private firms were contracted
for internal audit work, but it has not proven totally cost effective

or efficient. The Office of the Auditor-Controller received a reinstatement
of 1.0 FTE Chief Deputy-Internal Audit in FY 2015-16.
However, the lack of Internal Auditor positions is not conducive to
recruiting a Chief Deputy. To meet budgetary constraints, the
Office of the Auditor-Controller has again relinquished the Chief
Deputy-Internal Audit position. According to State Government
Code, the Office of the Auditor-Controller should have a fully
staffed Internal Audit division.Continue to improve Accounts Payable (AP) procedures by
utilizing more tools available in the Advantage system and improve
the knowledge level of AP users on AP specific guidelines in
Advantage system.
Continue working together with Contracts/Purchasing staff to
improve vendor information accuracy by updating existing forms
and procedures, training staff, cleaning up vendor master list, etc.
Continue to provide training in auditing, process flow, bargaining
unit Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) as it pertains to payroll timekeepers and
f inance managers and continue education on travel
reimbursements through payroll to comply with the County's travel
policy and IRS.
Continue to develop Auditor-Payroll staff by providing targeted
education, cross-training and coaching to ensure services can be
provided without interruption.
Continue standardizing MOUs and process to minimize unique
configurations and eliminate configurations that accommodate one
or only a couple of employees.
Continue reconciliations of payroll accounts with process flow for
monthly process and design and implement more user friendly
InfoAdvantage Reports for payroll.
Develop, update and design policies and procedures as they relate
to retirement reconciliation, payments and reporting and continue
education and training on compliance with CalPERS retirement
policies.
Collaborate with Information Systems (IT) in the development of a
database containing legacy payroll data to allow payroll staff to be
more effective in serving departmental needs.
Collaborate with Human Resources in the Leave Management Reengineering
project to update payroll processes for the Family and
Medical Leave Act, Workers' Compensation, and all other leave of
absences as well as collaborate with Human Resources Benefits
staff to manage health programs for policy, design, deduction,
expensing and reconciliation to ensure accuracy and collection
process for Departmental expenses.
Implement Kronos Timekeeping and Telestaff scheduling system at
the Sheriff 's Office and complete interface between Kronos
Workforce software and HRM Advantage for Natividad Medical
Center.
Continue implementation of Affordable Care Act reporting with
continual reform changes for reporting process.
Continue to develop Monterey County specific procedures using
Tax Managers Subcommittees Property Tax Manual as a basis.
Continue use and training on Megabyte's new .net format as
programs are released to the user counties and continue crosstraining
staff for greater efficiency in processing and providing
property tax services.
Look into providing more information for taxpayers on the
Auditor-Controller website, such as school general obligation
bonds and Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund (RPTTF)
payment reports.
Continue implementation of the Redevelopment Dissolution Bill
(SB107).
Provide support for the ERP Upgrade from version 3.7 to version
3.10 by gathering process information and test scenarios.ANNUAL AUDITS: The Annual Audits recommended
appropriation is $602,472 with reimbursement totaling $295,136
and a resulting contribution from the General Fund totaling
$307,336. This budget includes funding for the annual independent
audit of the County's financials which is required by the State
Government Code and the County's Bond Indentures. The Unit
also includes funding for sales and use tax audits, SB 90 Mandate
services and contracted audits required by the Auditor-Controller.
COUNTY OVERHEAD RECOVERED: Effective FY 2016-17,
countywide indirect costs will be allocated to operating
departments of all funds (details provided at unit level).
ENTERPRISE RESOURCE PLANNING PROJECT: The Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) Project recommended appropriation
totals $11,132,807. The departmental reimbursement totals
$7,705,026 for a net of $3,427,781. The ERP fund includes
appropriations for the upgrade of CGI Technologies Advantage
Systems from version 3.7 to version 3.10. The appropriations for
the Advantage Upgrade are offset by charges to County
departments, offices and agencies. The appropriation includes
funding for Board of Supervisors' approved agreement with CGI
Technologies (Statement of Work No. 12).
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION DEBT SERVICE:
The Long-Term Borrowing appropriation totals $19,071,969, which
is offset by total estimated revenues of $19,071,969.
SHORT-TERM BORROWING: The Recommended FY 2016-17
Budget does not include appropriations, as the County's strong
cash position renders the County ineligible for using Tax Revenue
Anticipation Notes (TRANs) for short term borrowing needs. As
the County has not needed TRANs for the previous five year
period, it has no impact on the County's ability to meet short term
cash needs.The Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 for the
Treasurer-Tax Collector's (TTC) includes appropriations of
$7,586,408, reflecting an increase of $442,051 (5.8%). To maintain
current service levels, salaries and benefits costs total $5,111,059,
increasing by $271,093 (5.3%). Services and supplies expenditures
total $3,042,306, increasing by $216,192 (7.65%). Increased
expenditures are largely the result of non-discretionary cost
changes in Public Employees' Retirement System (PERS)
retirement, workers' compensation, healthcare insurance, and
internal technology/systems charges , including capital
improvement costs distributed to all departments based on total
allocated positions. These four cost areas collectively account for
over 70% of the TTC's increased funding requirements in the
pending year.
The Recommended Budget includes estimated revenues totaling
$6,195,944, increasing by $442,275 (7.7%). The level of revenue
assumes the estimated maximum allowable cost recovery for
services.
Budget Impacts
The Treasurer Tax Collector expects to maintain current service
levels despite increases in non-discretionary costs and internal
service charges. Though a number of the TTC's functions are
supported by cost recovery through the services provided, the TTC
continues to work diligently to offset annually escalating charges
through careful monitoring of actual expenditures throughout the
course of the fiscal year, in an effort to minimize additional cost
impacts to other public agencies that rely on departmental services.

Review departmental performance measures with division
managers, and revise as necessary to assure continuing relevance to
core functions and responsibilities of the Department and
individual divisions.
Continue to increase efficiencies as opportunities arise, by
improving automated processes both intra-departmentally and
with external stakeholders.
Continue the implementation of a succession plan that identifies
critical functions, improves process documentation and
encourages staff to seek educational and professional development
training.
Continue Phase II implementation and trouble-shooting banking
service contracts to maintain a strategic redundancy in banking
operations and increase efficiency and security of operations.
Continue testing and implementation of remaining Office 365
functions throughout the TTC's operational units.
Implement the Countywide banking and credit card use policy, and
coordinate the movement and centralization of all banking and
credit card services within the Office of the Treasurer-Tax
Collector.
Upgrade CUBS application hardware to ensure the integrity of the
Revenue division billing and collections operations.
Implement enhanced software/systems solution to improve the
department's ability to meet its mandate for enforcing the County's
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) Ordinance, maximizing
capabilities to identify visitor-serving operations in unincorporated
areas of Monterey County, and increasing collections of TOT
revenue.
Install eight additional TracNet licenses to Account Clerk work
stations to replace information access previously available through
the Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS).The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the
Assessor-County Clerk-Recorder's Office includes total
appropriations of $9,216,720, representing a $1,429,335 increase
from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. Appropriations for Salaries
and Benefits increased by $632,043, mostly attributed to higher
costs for employee benefits. Services and Supplies increased by
$145,547, primarily due to Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
upgrade charges. In addition, the Recommended Budget reflects
the increased charges of $668,139 as part of the Auditor-
Controllers' new indirect charge back program.
Revenues are estimated at $4,592,395, an increase of $697,401 from
the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. The increase is due to a $551,269
increase in Charges for Ser vices , $126,132 increase in
Intergovernmental Revenues, and a $20,000 increase in Licenses.
The FY 2016-17 General Fund Contributions (GFC) of $4,624,325
represents an increase of $731,934 from the FY 2015-16 Adopted
Budget, primarily reflecting the indirect cost changes, as well as an
augmentation of $101,382 to restore an Appraiser II position.
Budget Impacts
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget provides the basic
resources to maintain FY 2015-16 service levels in the Assessor-
County Clerk-Recorder's Office. Workload on staff has seen a
continual increase as appeals and more Proposition 8 reviews are
requested.
From FY 1999-00 to FY 2007-08 assessed valuations in Monterey
County increased by an average of 8% per year. Property values,
however leveled off in FY 2008-09 and in FY 2009-10, the local Tax
Roll declined for the first time in the history of the County of
Monterey. The Assessor's Office will again review the value of all
residential properties in the County of Monterey and will also
conduct an extensive review of commercial properties with current
base year values. It is estimated that 15,000 properties will receive
Proposition 8 reductions this year, a decline of over 5,000.
Assessment Appeals, although still at a higher than normal level,
declined significantly in FY 2015-16. The Assessor's Office will
review all Proposition 8 reductions on an annual basis until base
year values have been restored.
During the FY 2016-17 budget development process, the Assessor's
Office requested funding to restore two Appraiser II positions in

the amount of $202,764. The Recommended Budget restores both
of the Appraiser II positions and provides increased funds of
$101,382 to support one position.The Department is currently participating in the State-County
Assessors' Partnership Program, a three year pilot program to
support County property assessment efforts. The success of the
program shall be determined by the Department's ability to capture
property tax revenues for local K-14 schools and offices of
education that might otherwise escape recognition and collection.
The Department seeks continued support in the required dollar-todollar
match of the annual $200,000 grant awarded.recording in the local and national level. Until recently, traditional
technology required that the recording process involve the delivery
and recordation of only original paper documents. Electronic
recording facilitates the transmission, acceptance, recordation, and
return of real property documents reducing the time it takes to
record and return a document while also saving paper and
streamlining internal operation systems.
The Recorder's Office will continue to work toward becoming
compliant with Government Code section 27301. This requires the
redaction of all social security numbers located on real property
documents recorded from January 1, 1980 through and including
December 31, 2008 by December 31, 2017.
The Office will continue with its internal conversion of paper vital
record certificates into electronic images.
The Recorder's Office will continue its preservation project of all
real property, vital record, and map books.
The County Clerk-Recorder's Office will continue to pursue
upgrading its current recording, filing, cashiering system to a webbased
system to assist in its efforts of providing modern and
efficient services to taxpayers.
The County Clerk-Recorder's Off ice will continue it s
reorganization efforts in conjunction with the Assessor's Office
with the goal of establishing cross trained staff that will be able to
take advantage of an established career ladder that will also assist in
succession planning.
The Office will continue to provide quality customer service to all
taxpayers taking into consideration comments noted on our survey
cards.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the Office
of the County Counsel is $31,502,744, a decrease of $1,750,731
from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. Costs for salaries and
benefits grew by $643,925 due to cost increases for employee health
insurance and pension benefits, as well as salary step advances.
The Recommended Budget also reflects a Cost Allocation Plan
credit of $1,762,118 resulting from accounting changes as part of
the Auditor-Controller's new indirect charge back program.
Budget Impacts
Historically, the Department experienced budget surpluses,
however, the last couple of years have been challenging due to
increases in salaries, pension benefits and healthcare costs. Rising
non-discretionary costs have also impacted the Department with
increases in costs for Information Technology Infrastructure
Replacement and the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Upgrade.
These increases have eroded the Department's operational
flexibility.
Due to the various cost increases, the Department had to reduce
staffing by six positions to balance its budget. The Recommended
Budget restores four of the positions, including three filled Deputy
County Counsel and one vacant Deputy County Counsel, at a cost
of $679,346. However, due to the County's funding constraints, the
Recommended Budget does not restore a filled Office Assistant II
and vacant Management Analyst III.The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for County Counsel
Departmental is $3,142,248, a decrease of $1,059,899. The
Recommended Budget includes increased costs for employee
benefits and a Cost Allocation Plan credit of $1,762,118 as part of
the Auditor Controller's new indirect charge back program. The
Recommended Budget also includes $1,650,046 in expenditures for
Risk Management, offset by reimbursements of $1,659,564 from
the General Liability Internal Service Fund (ISF) and Workers'
Compensation ISF.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget for County Counsel is intended to
provide funding to maintain prior year service levels.
The Department faced challenges due to increased cost in salaries,
healthcare, Information Technology Infrastructure Replacement,
and the ERP upgrade. To offset increased costs, the Department

Effectively advise and represent the County's legal interests.
Provide timely, responsive, and competent legal advice to all
representatives in order to enable them to effectively carry out their
functions and achieve their goals.
Defend County land use, General Plan and other actions in the
event of legal challenge and prosecute code enforcement violations.
Successfully manage and conclude tort claims and litigation in a
fair manner, which respects both the rights of claimants and
litigants and provides fiscal accountability to the public.
Resolve cases early, as appropriate, to reduce County costs.
Provide timely invoices to clients to maximize increased revenue
and interfund reimbursements to balance the Department's budget.
Maintain the professional and technical competence of all
employees through appropriate continuing education, modern
technology, and electronic case management and assignment tools
to provide innovative solutions to legal problems.
Assist Natividad Medical Center within the dynamic healthcare
environment.
Develop a legally defensible medical and adult use marijuana
regulations and fee program. Create a tax measure for all
marijuana uses.
Create a Groundwater Sustainability Agency and commence
drafting a sustainability plan.
Assist in stabilizing and enhancing the activities at Laguna Seca
Raceway.RISK AND FINANCE: Work to improve the confidence level for
Workers' Compensation and General Liability from a 70% level to
80% to ensure that the County is adequately funded to cover the
open/pending and future claims.
WORKERS' COMPENSATION & GENERAL LIABILITY:
Continue to work with the County's third party claims
administrators and independent actuarial services providers,
regarding workers' compensation, general liability, enterprise risks
and property insurance programs. Work to have a 95% to 100%
closing ratio on workers' compensation claims.
CONTRACT REVIEW: Properly shift, transfer or assume
contractual risk in a manner that adequately protects the County's
interests. Diligently review departmental, insurance, indemnity
and limitation of liability contract language. Complete review of at
least 300 contracts.
SAFETY: Reduce claim costs by ensuring departments are properly
trained to complete and submit accurate incident investigations.
Identify and pursue potential subrogation opportunities, when
applicable. Continue the trend of reducing the number of injuries
countywide, by at least 5% from 542 to 514. Conduct an emergency
evacuation drill at the Government Center. Begin preparing an
evacuation plan for Schilling Place. Place Safety Coordinator/
Investigators within the Sheriff 's Office and NMC to work in
partnership to increase safety awareness.
ERGONOMICS: Continue to mitigate worksite injuries by
routinely evaluating worksites and work practices that may lead to
development of work-related musculoskeletal disorders.
Implement hazard prevention and control measures that will
effectively minimize, or abate entirely, the risk factors revealed
through worksite analysis. Reduce the financial toll on the County
for direct and indirect medical, administrative and workers'
compensation costs, and reduce loss experience, as it relates to
repetitive motion injuries and cumulative trauma disorders.
Continue to offer ergonomic services to County employees and
thereby improve the County's overall industrial injury and disability
management. Increase the number of employees completing inclass
or online ergonomics training by 5% from 568 to 596
employees completing training. Submit a new Request for
Proposals to improve and diversify the use of the ergonomic
consultants and hire one additional consultant to assist with the
increasing ergonomic evaluation requests.The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the Clerk of the Board's
Office includes $932,217 in total appropriations and estimated
revenue of $20,000. The General Fund Contribution (GFC) of
$912,217 reflects additional appropriations of $85,192 over the
prior fiscal year due the newly allocated countywide indirect costs.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes a reduction of
$3,058 for the worker's compensation program and $2,463 for
general liability. The Clerk of the Board built its requested budget
based on the charges published earlier in the year by Risk
Management, which funded the programs at an 80% confidence
level. The Recommended Budget adjusts budgeted amounts to the
current 70% confidence level County policy. Costs for salaries and
benefits decreased from the prior fiscal year due to the filling of a
vacancy at a lower step than budgeted. There is no change in
anticipated revenue for Assessment Appeals applications from the
prior fiscal year.
Budget Impacts
The GFC allocation allows the Department to maintain FY 2015-16
service levels and to continue to meet the service needs of the
public, County departments, special districts, as well as public
agencies, while providing the highest level of customer service
possible.Recommended appropriations for the Elections Department total
$4,446,673, a decrease of $1,011,339 from the Fiscal Year (FY)
2015-16 Adopted Budget, based upon a Presidential Election
occurring in November 2016. Services and supplies decreased due
to one scheduled election, as opposed to two in the current FY. The
proposed budget reflects this reduced volume of ballot and voter
guide printing and mailing services, publication of notices, and poll
workers.
Estimated revenues from services decreased by $120,000 for a total
revenue of $913,500 in FY 2016-17. The County's General Fund
Contribution (GFC) to the Department is $3,533,173, a decrease of
$891,339 from the previous year which funded the November 2015
and June 2016 presidential primary election, as well as three
unscheduled local elections. Since the Department administers all
Federal, State, County, and local elections, expenditures and
revenues vary based on the number and type of scheduled and
unscheduled elections in a given year.
Budget Impacts
The record number of voter registrations will increase costs for
staffing, printing and mailing, and office supplies. Voter
registrations must be entered and processed by staff and the
Program Manager in charge of registration will be recruiting and
training temporary staff to ensure the higher volume of new voters
are entered in a timely manner per election code prior to the close
of registration in October of 2016. Likewise, turnout on election
will be higher and polls are expected to continue serving voters
long after closing time as long as they arrive by 8pm, which will
increase overtime costs for poll workers stationed at precincts and
for staff who will have to wait for all returns at the County office.
A larger order of ballots and voter guides will be printed and mailed
corresponding to a higher estimated turnout and a larger number
of office supplies will be ordered for polling locations to avoid
running out of voting materials.The Department seeks to implement 26 new pieces of legislation
while minimizing impact to local jurisdictions. In addition,
Elections will conduct the November 8, 2016 Presidential Election.
The Department will continue to redesign bilingual services and
associated materials; improve the content of and access to
Department procedures; and employ the Department's website as a
means for the public to easily access information. It will monitor
State legislation that is in line with the Board's Legislative Priorities
such as those that permit jurisdictions in California, including
counties, to conduct all-mail ballot elections. Likewise, it will
continue to develop the public observer panel and the VAAC in an
effort to improve transparency, access, and public education
activities.
The Department anticipates introducing process efficiencies as it
occupies its new Schilling facility at the end of the fiscal year.
Pending Issues
SPECIAL ELECTIONS: The potential for the Governor to call a
statewide special election to occur within the remaining budget
year or the following year remains unknown. Under existing law,
elections conducted on behalf of the State are not reimbursable.
VOTING SYSTEMS: The Department continues to review new
voting systems to replace our current aging system. Due to limited
grant funding available, several possible options have been
suggested, including lease arrangements or additional equipment
that would complement the County's existing accessible voting
technology required under HAVA.
Two new election laws waiting to be implemented early in 2017 are
the Election Day Registration and Automated Voter Registration at
the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). The cost to implement
these two laws is under review.The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget provides $16.1 million in
appropriations for the Emergency Communications Department
financed by $13.8 million in revenue, $1.8 million in General Fund
Contributions (GFC), and $546,618 of fund balance for the Next
Generation (NGEN) Radio Project. The Recommended Budged
includes $12.3 million for emergency communications operations
and $3.8 million for the Next Generation (NGEN) Radio Project.
The recommended appropriations represent a decrease of $2.2
million compared to the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget, which is due
to anticipated lower equipment spending and lower costs related to
the NGEN project as it nears completion in FY 2016-17.
Revenues reflect a decrease of $3.0 million compared to the FY
2015-16 Adopted Budget, which is due to an expired grant of $1
million, which funded the purchase and installation of a Computer
Aided Dispatch system in FY 2015-16. Additionally, the financing
for NGEN is $1.4 million lower due to lower anticipated costs as
the project nears completion. The Department plans to use
$546,618 in Fund Balance to cover the financing requirement for
the NGEN project.

The Information Technology Department (ITD) Fiscal Year (FY)
2016-17 Recommended Budget includes expenditures of
$23,811,689, financed by internal County reimbursements of
$23,186,279, and revenues from external sources of $770,342 an
increase of $86,222 over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. ITD also
received a credit of $2,497,473, part of the new Auditor-
Controllers' accounting charge back program, leading to a surplus
of $1,771,337.
The Recommended Budget for ITD comprises two areas,
Operations and Capital Improvements Projects (CIP). Operational
expenditures represent the costs included in the rate structure,
while the CIP expenditures are directly passed through to the
customers benefiting from each of the respective projects.
The majority of ITD expenditures are reimbursed via ITD's County
department customers in the amount noted above of $23,186,279.
The Recommended Budget reflects increased costs for Salaries and
Benefits and Services and Supplies. The $1,148,677 increase for
Salaries and Benefits is due to the increase costs for employee
benefits, along with increased funding for vacation buybacks and
payout of employee leave credit for separation from County service.
With regard to operations, FY 2016-17 Services and Supplies
reflects an increase of $1,642,412. Part of the increase is due to
annual licensing for Office365, server and storage costs, and the
additional Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) charges of $106,845.
CIP costs for FY 2016-17 total $3,108121. This is a decrease of
$1,042,010 from FY 2015-16 Adopted Budgeted CIP amount. The
reduction between the two fiscal years is mainly due to completion
of Office365 in FY 2015-16.
Budget Impacts
Even though all costs are covered by rates, and ITD remains
balanced without the need for GFC.
In an effort to better serve our customers' ITD's needs. The
Department eliminated one vacant Data Center Operations
Technician III position

ITD is working with Emergency Communications to secure two
sites to complete the implementation of the Next Generation Radio
System (NGEN), if either site cannot be secured, the project could
be delayed.
ITD is continuing to audit Charter and AT&T cable franchises and
Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) fees.
The ITD data center roof leaked during the FY 2015-16 rainy
season. The roof was temporarily patched and is not scheduled to
be replaced until FY 2018-19. The replacement date should be
accelerated due to the continuing concerns over the roof.
Policy Considerations
AB 2257 was recently introduced and would require online posting
of an agenda by a local agency to have a prominent direct link to
the current agenda itself. The bill would require the link to be on
the local agency's internet web site homepage, not in a contextual
menu on the homepage, and would require the agenda to be posted
in compliance with a specified section of law. California State
Association of Counties (CSAC) and California County
Information Services Directors Association (CCISDA) have taken
opposition to the bill. Author: Brian Maienschein
Email retention policy and procedures are being reviewed by
County Counsel. The policy and procedures would set email
retention periods and require email users to manage their email. It
is expected the policy and procedures will be brought to to the Board
of Supervisors (BOS) in the first quarter of FY 2016-17.

Enterprise Applications will complete migration of all County
SharePoint sites from the SharePoint 2010 locally hosted server to
SharePoint Online by the end of the second quarter of the fiscal
year and retire the on premise servers. BI and analytical software
functionality will be extended to other departments, along with
enhanced search capabilities and workflow features of SharePoint
Online. In addition, leveraging the Tier 2 licensing structure of
Office 365, the Enterprise Applications Team will work with
departments to utilize SharePoint mobility features.
ITD Billing system enhancements for receipt of payments, accounts
receivables, and year-to-date details. ITD Billing will be
incorporated with ServiceNow enhancements for asset
management for the Radio Shop along with outside agencies web
access. Finalize the design and begin development and
implementation of the billing and asset tracking data warehouse for
expanded data analytics capabilities and improved customer
reporting.
Web Services will enhance both the County external and Infonet
websites in response to user survey and feedback forms. DSS and
Treasurer-Tax Collector websites will be migrated to the new
Content Management System. The new Monterey County
Government Channel (MGTV) website with live video streaming
and on-demand video playback capabilities will launch early this
coming fiscal year.
Comcate product used by Board of Supervisors' staff will be
upgraded to include the Citizen Mobile Applications. Unified Fee
Schedule Por tal will be developed and launched when
requirements are finalized by the Clerk of the Board. Uploads to
the Administrative Policies website, Sunshine Ordinance web site
and Fraud Reporting sites will continue as requests are received.
GIS Services will continue to collaborate with the department
heads GIS Subcommittee, County Counsel, and the GIS Technical
Advisory Committee to maintain the current environment and
continually improve GIS services. This includes development of
labor saving GIS apps that target specific tasks or queries, as well as
exploring the adoption of mobile workforce technologies, and fleet,
asset, and personnel tracking.
Department Applications Support: Project Charter for the DSS/
Health Joint Analytics Management Solution (JAMS) for enterprise
data management will be completed. Work on this project will be
coordinated closely with the Enterprise Applications Team to
ensure consistency of data warehousing and management
technology and processes throughout the County.
Natividad Medical Center (NMC) will receive an upgrade to their
E2Lite application as well as an upgrade of and training on the
NMC Payroll Application.
Migration of MS Access applications for remaining departments
will be completed before or shortly after the start of the new fiscal
year. Migration of the MS Access backend databases from SQL
2005 to SQL 2012 is required to ensure continued support from
Microsoft.
ERP Support will continue to support the 3.7.02 production of the
ERP applications with respect to interfaces, batch jobs, reports and
Adobe forms. This includes monitoring all ERP application
modules and systems, resolving issues as they arise, support testing
and implementation of patches and fixpacks from the ERP vendor
and continuously improving processes and configurations where
applicable and feasible.Enterprise Distributed Systems (EDS): Complete the migration of
all County users to Office 365. Upgrade County Print Server
Environment to create redundancy in the event of component
failure. Upgrade County file services hardware to include fault
tolerance and high availability functions. Provide infrastructure
support for Schilling Place construction and user moves.
Data Center Operations: Assume additional responsibility for
server patching duties to augment capabilities of EDS to support
strategic planning and deployment of infrastructure systems.
Provide continued support of the AMS 3.7 ERP application.
Provide enhanced operational support of I Series Hardware
platform in support of County Recorder/Assessor applications.
RRC: Continue migration of new records to the center and perform
review of record indexing practices to enhance search capabilities
for County departments. Develop more efficient and effective
records retrieval services in support of expanded use of the facility
by County departments.
Procurement: Oversee the replacement of the ITD building roof,
develop plans for next generation Uninterruptable Power Supply
(UPS) and power distribution systems in support of the County's
Data Center. Continue to provide support for the procurement of
ITD commodities in support of the mission of all County agencies.
Provide needed support for Schilling Place project as needed.The Department proposed a budget to meet the available General
Fund Contribution (GFC) funding that was significantly impacted
by a dramatic increase in costs for the upcoming fiscal year. The
Recommended Budget provides appropriations of $25.8 million, an
increase of $1.7 million compared to the FY 2015-16 Adopted
Budget. The increase in appropriations is primarily due to the
newly allocated countywide indirect cost of $1.0 million, as well as
increases in retirement contributions and increased healthcare
costs, totaling $666,892. The Recommended Budget has a GFC of
$11.2 million and program revenues of $14.6 million. To meet this
level of GFC, one vacant position was removed from the
Department's budget.
The Recommended Budget includes $246,978 in augmentation to
restore operating expenses, such as trial related expenses, that had
been reduced to meet the baseline GFC funding.
The Recommended Budget does not include requested
augmentations for six new positions: two Legal Secretaries, a Legal
Assistant, a Legal Typist, a Deputy District Attorney and an
Assistant Chief Investigator, totaling $646,527.
The County Administrative Office reduced the budget for Workers'
Compensation and General Liability Insurance by $104,257 to
reflect the current funding policy.
Budget Impacts
Despite the improving economic conditions in both the County
and the State, significant fiscal challenges exist as revenue sources
are not keeping pace with increasing costs. New and expanding
technological challenges, for areas such as body camera videos, will
require additional resources that the Department does not
currently have available, which are reflected as augmentations
requested by the Department.Collaborate with other State and local agencies to devise new
approaches to disrupting gang violence. The damage that gang
violence inf licts on the County's residents requires law
enforcement and the community to keep searching for a
coordinated approach to this most pressing problem.
Increase in-house training. To the extent in-house training can
meet both mandatory and necessary training of attorneys,
investigators and support staff, it will be a far less expensive
alternative.
Implementation of a new computer software interface between the
Department's Case Management System, Prosecutor by Karpel,
with the new Case Management System being utilized by several
police agencies in the County, known as TrackNET. When
implemented, criminal case files will be digitally uploaded to the
system, eliminating the requirement of paper files.
Work with the Superior Court in the implementation of their new
Case Management System, known as Odyssey, which begins
implementation in FY 2016-17. While the Courts are phasing in
the implementation over many months, this first phase will be an
important step in creating a paperless criminal justice process.
Pending Issues
TRACKNET: The Sheriff 's Office is utilizing a new case
management system, known as TrackNET. The Department is
training staff members on the use of the new system and this new
technology holds a great deal of promise. Additionally, it has the
capability to interface directly with the Department's case
management system, Prosecutor by Karpel, which has the potential
to greatly improve productivity.
DIGITAL EVIDENCE: The Department is currently working with
other District Attorneys across the State to assess the ongoing issue
of processing digital evidence. As a direct result of the increased
use of body cameras and the implementation of Proposition 47,
offices across the State are facing dramatic increases in the
processing and handling of digital evidence. Additional staff are
needed to properly handle and process digital evidence. The
Department has requested four new support staff positions to
handle the growing amount of digital evidence. The additional
positions are not included in the Recommended Budget due to
County budget constraints.
RELOCATION: The Department has been housed in modular
units in Salinas and in office facilities at the Monterey Courthouse
for approximately 13 years, expecting to be there for only two years.
The issue of appropriate office space for the District Attorney's
Office continues to remain one of the Department's most pressing
issues. The current construction and renovation of the East/West
Wings will provide an improved work location for the Department.
SERVICE LEVEL REDUCTIONS - IMPACT ON PUBLIC
SAFETY: Despite the improving budget situation for the State over
recent months, the complexity and severity of budget issues
throughout the State remain a significant risk to the funding of
District Attorney programs and raise a cloud of uncertainty around
the potential negative impact on the community. As the economy
improves, the Department intends to continue advocating for
service level restorations to improve safety for County citizens.
REALIGNMENT: The implementation of AB109 in October 2011,
shifting State prisoners to local authorities, has led to a profound
change in how the criminal justice system and the public safety
agencies protect the community. The elimination of parole and
return of State prison inmates to local authorities for management
continues to challenge the entire County. The recent
implementation of Proposition 47, where significant reductions in
the severity of many offenses were approved, has many in law
enforcement concerned for the safety of citizens. The long-term
impact on the District Attorney's office and the entire community
remain uncertain. The unknowns for realignment and Proposition
47 present a significant challenge in planning for the future.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the
Department of Child Support Services (DCSS) includes
appropriations of $11,156,499, financed by $11,140,443 in revenue
and a General Fund Contribution (GFC) of $16,056. As required
by legislation effective January 1, 2000, this budget has been
submitted to the State for approval.
Budget Impacts
The Department of Child Support Services is funded with 34%
State funds and 66% Federal funds based on a reimbursement
process of claimed expenditures. However, since 2003-04 the State
has funded local child support agencies on a "status quo" basis. As
such, it does not address the ongoing fiscal pressures related to the
ordinary cost-of-doing-business, personnel, healthcare, increased
charges for information technology, the Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) upgrade, general liability insurance, and workers'
compensation.
Due to all the various cost pressures and static revenues, the
Department's staffing level has decreased 44% from 167 positions
in FY 2002-03 to 98 positions in FY 2016-17.
The Department requested an augmentation of $111,209 to retain
five positions (three vacant and two filled). The Recommended
Budget provides $25,587 in additional funding to restore the two
filled positions. However the Recommended Budget for FY 2016-
17 also contains a reduction of four vacant positions, including the
three vacant positions included in the augmentation request.
Restoration of these positions would require an additional,
$111,209 in GFC and avoid a possible reduction in collections.

The Recommended Budget for the Public Defender of $11,764,562
is financed mostly with General Fund Contributions (GFC) of
$11,053,562, which is an increase of $620,660 over the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget. The Recommended Budget includes $11,611,562
from the General Fund and $153,000 from the Local Realignment
(Fund 022).
The recommended appropriations represent an increase of
$688,794 over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. The increase in
appropriations is due to rising costs, including $346,283 in new
charges under the Auditor-Controller's new Indirect Cost
Chargeback Program, as well as an increase in trial related expenses
of $122,319 due to expected high profile cases and an increase in
salaries and benefits, specifically, rising healthcare costs of
$162,396.
The Recommended Budget includes augmentation requests
totaling $347,974, including $68,628 to retain a filled 1.0 Full Time
Equivalent (FTE) Office Assistant, and $241,846 to restore 1.0 FTE
Management Analyst I and 1.0 FTE Public Defender Investigator
III. It also includes $37,500 for the replacement of aged computers.
The Recommended Budget also includes an augmentation for 0.5
FTE Account Clerk in the ADO, which will be funded by an
increase in State Prison Reimbursements.
Budget Impacts
The Department will experience significant countywide cost
increases which will strain its ability to maintain service levels.
Increased health costs, Information Technology (IT) charges, and
other cost increases will reduce the Department's operational
flexibility.
The Recommended Budget does not include $533,100 for the
Department's requested addition of 2.0 FTE Deputy Public
Defenders, 1.0 FTE Public Defender Investigator II, and 1.0 FTE
Accountant I. Nor does it include funding for the remainder of
recommended new positions resulting from the Department's
Caseload/Workload Benchmark Analysis.
The staffing and organizational structure concerns documented in
a previously submitted Caseload/Workload Benchmark Analysis
cannot be addressed given the available financial resources. The
Department's one, three, and five year business plan will be
deferred despite the expenditure of considerable County financial
resources and time.Housing employees in Modular Unit #4 remains a concern for the
Department. The Department has expressed concern about the
limited bathroom space and the need to convert storage space into
work units. These issues will be addressed as part of the County's
strategy to move employees out of modular units into permanent
structures.
Policy Considerations
Due to rising costs and countywide funding constraints, the
Department has been unable to move forward with its requested
staffing augmentations identified in its recent caseload / workload
study.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the
Sheriff 's Office includes $105.9 million in total appropriations.
This represents an increase of $10.6 million over the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget. Revenue is estimated at $43.6 million, a $1.5
million net increase. The recommended General Fund
Contribution (GFC) totals $62.3 million or an increase of $9.1
million compared to FY 2015-16. The increase in appropriations is
primarily due to the newly allocated countywide indirect cost of
$4.7 million, $1.9 million to support the mid-year adjustment to
hire 11 Deputy Sheriffs and six Custody Control Specialists, $1.7
million for the vehicle asset management program to replace high
mileage patrol cars , as well as increases in retirement
contributions, health insurance premiums, and various other
allocated costs totaling approximately $4.4 million. The increase in
revenues reflects increased Public Safety Sales Tax revenue and
reimbursements, partially offset by the expired Federal Community
Oriented Policing Services (COPS) grant.
The Recommended Budget includes $5.9 million in augmentations
including $4.2 million to retain 41 positions at risk due to
aforementioned cost pressures and $1.7 million to continue
funding for the replacement of patrol cars.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes a reduction of
$487,422 for the workers' compensation program and $248,303 for
the general liability insurance program. The Office built its
requested budget based on the charges published earlier in the year
by Risk Management, which assumed a change in County policy to
fund these programs at the "80% confidence level" rather than the
current 70% confidence level. Increasing the confidence level
would have increased the funding requirements for these
programs. The Recommended Budget adjusts budgeted amounts
for these programs to match current (70% confidence level) County
policy.
The Recommended Budget includes a total of 454.0 positions,
representing an increase of 6.0 positions over the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget, which authorized 448.0 positions. Six Custody
and Control Specialist positions were added during the current

year. Due to fiscal constraints, the Recommended Budget does not
include funding at this time to support three vacant positions: a
Correctional Sergeant in the Jail Operations Unit, a Sheriff 's
Records Supervisor in the Jail Support Unit, and a Sheriff 's
Sergeant in the Special Operations Unit. Currently, 21 vacant
safety and professional positions in various units are budgeted at
75% of step 1 pay rate. In addition, the funding for recommended
augmentations to restore 21 vacant positions assumes an average
hire date of October 1, 2016.
Budget Impacts
Retaining current staffing levels in the Recommended Budget amid
a multitude of cost pressures leaves little flexibility to respond to
emerging needs. For example, the Jail is old and has not been
maintained appropriately, often requiring emergency repairs. Also,
the Recommended Budget may not include sufficient funding for
vacation payouts, payments to employees upon separation from
County service, or employee overtime. In addition, the Sheriff's
Office's ability to address staffing shortages in the jail, as well much
needed programs and facilities upgrades, will be significantly
impacted as a result of current fiscal constraints.
During FY 2016-17 the Sheriff 's Office will continue to explore
increased funding from other sources such as the Affordable Care
Act, Capital Improvement Program and grants to address some of
the inmate medical costs as well as long-deferred equipment and
facility needs that are critical to the continued provision of public
safety services. However, additional actions may be needed in FY
2016-17 to address staffing needs , facility repairs and
improvements, and expanded inmate programs.Major goals for FY 2016-17 include:
Complete the Next Generation Public Safety Radio Project
(NGEN).
Continue to work with the Information Technology Department to
take over more responsibilities for radio management and
troubleshooting.
Continue to participate in the vehicle replacement program to
replace aged and unsafe patrol vehicles.
Continue to expedite and further streamline hiring processes.
Complete and maintain all contracts up to date and in compliance
with County policies and procedures.
Expand the SCVSC.
Repave the South County Station parking lot.
Complete the lighting upgrade for the South County Station.
Purchase and install a backup generator for the South County
Station.
Purchase a safe or weapons rack to secure rifles and/or shotguns at
the Coastal Station.Monterey County is in the initial stages of drafting an ordinance
governing commercial cannabis activity. Preliminary versions of
the draft ordinance will create additional demands upon Sheriff's
Office resources to locate, investigate and eradicate growers,
manufacturers and distributors of medical marijuana who choose
to operate outside the regulations of the ordinance and/or State
law. Additionally, there will be a need to assist regulatory agencies
in the enforcement of the ordinance to ensure their personnel's
safety. This program will require one additional Sheriff's Sergeant,
four additional Sheriff 's Deputies and one additional Records
Specialist. Should the restrictions in the preliminary draft be
loosened and the areas of operations for commercial cannabis
activity be expanded in the final ordinance, additional demands
upon Sheriff's Office resources will result.
One of the top priority augmentation requests was to add two
Forensic Evidence Technicians (FETs) in the Investigations
Division. In 2005, the unit was staffed with four FETs and one
Supervising Forensic Evidence Technician (SFET). Currently, the
unit is comprised of one SFET. The daily workload is far more than
the current staffing can accommodate, creating a backlog and
overtime. Additionally, because of the staffing shortage, the
Deputy Crime Scene Investigators (CSI) are being tasked with
assisting the SFET. This creates shortages on Patrol as the CSIs are
pulled away from their assigned duties.
The Office needs to restore the Records Director position. The
Records Division provides a wide variety of services for the
Sheriff's Office and other law enforcement agencies. There are
many laws that pertain to releasing information to the public and
other agencies. A Records Director is needed to interpret these
laws and make sure the Division is following all of these laws. The
Records Director ensures the Division is moving in the right
direction as far as technology is concerned. The Records Director
knows the Division, is able to align the goals of the Division with
the goals of the Sheriff's Office as a whole, manages the Division
budget, and looks at future needs, including personnel needs.
The Recommended Budget does not include the Department's
requested augmentation to add one Senior Personnel Analyst. In
FY 2011-12, the Office eliminated an Associate Personnel Analyst
position in exchange for centralized support, leaving one Personnel
Technician-Confidential to perform the day to day duties and
responsibilities for the Office.
As a Department with over 40 different programs, 24/7 operations,
and a complicated payroll with over 20 different special pays and
454 positions, the Sheriff 's Office states that it needs additional
human resources support to help with document processing and
performance and disciplinary situations that require senior level
analyst oversight and leadership.
Inmates housed in the County Jail are eligible to have inpatient
medical services covered by State Medi-Cal Inpatient Prisoner
Eligibility Program (MCIP). The Sheriff's Office was tasked by the
County Administrative Office to come up with a plan to enroll
patients into the MCIP and put together a comprehensive program,
leveraging grant funding from Medi-Cal Administrative Activities
(MAA), to enroll all prisoners into the MCIP, and to return them to
County Managed Care Medi-Cal status prior to release. The
Department states that it requires five new positions (two Deputy
Sheriffs, two Eligibility Workers, and one Accounting Technician)
to perform this workload. These positions are not included in the
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget. Per the enabling legislation
for this program, the Sheriff must agree to perform the enrollment
function.
In addition to coverage for current services, there is a retroactive
component to this legislation that allows the MCSO to go back to
November 2011 to claim eligible expenses from that time on
forward. Significant savings would occur under this program, and
the Sheriff's Office feels this should be combined with a Medi-Cal
eligibility program for all inmates being released to improve the
overall health of our community. This would allow probationers to
have access to medical care and maintenance medications on day
one of their release from custody, which is critical for those with
chronic physical or mental health issues.
The Office has requested seven additional Deputy Sheriff positions
be added to the Corrections Operations Bureau in order to comply
with the Hernandez litigation settlement accepted by the County.
With the acceptance of the settlement, the Office is required to
comply with new policies and procedures concerning medical care,
mental health care, dental care, inmate programming and
education, and security standards. Additionally, the design of the
current jail facility requires more Deputy Sheriff positions in order
to deal with inmates incarcerated with mental health issues and
increased sentences and criminal sophistication of many of the
inmates due to AB109.
Although the Monterey County Jail is already operating
significantly over capacity, two issues are creating additional
pressures on this facility. Both the Federal Court ruling and State
Realignment legislation have resulted in increased numbers of
inmates with longer sentences to be housed in the Jail. Given the
current overcrowded condition, any increase in inmates requires
the release of other inmates until the construction of new facilities

is completed. In the meantime, the Office will continue to
implement strategies to address understaffing, provision of medical
services and facility improvements that will result in additional
expenditures for County Jail operations.
Corrections Operations Bureau has a fleet of three buses used to
transport inmates to court and to other penal institutions. The
oldest bus was built in 1984, and the others in 1988 and 1991. In FY
2012-13, one of those buses was replaced with a new bus. The two
remaining buses do not comply with State diesel particulate
admission standards. The Sheriff's Office needs funding to replace
one of these buses at a cost of $210,000.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $67,869,375,
financed by $45,357,981 in program revenue and $22,511,394 in
General Fund Contribution (GFC). The Recommended Budget
includes increased appropriations of $3,350,860 compared to the
FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. The recommended increase in
appropriations is due to a newly allocated countywide indirect cost
and rising cost pressures primarily in salary and benefits necessary
to retain existing workforce. The Recommended Budget includes
requested augmentations in the amount of $2,022,577 to support
the retention of 20 filled positions, which could no longer be
funded within existing resources due to cost pressures (discussed
later).
The Recommended Budget of $67,869,375 continues to reflect two
fund sources: the Local Realignment (Fund 022) budget of
$21,735,163 and a General Fund budget of $46,134,212. Pursuant
to State legislation, the Fund 022 Recommended Budget is a pass
through fund for receipt of AB 109 Public Safety Realignment
monies. Probation's AB 109 positions and operations are paid from
the General Fund and reimbursed from Fund 022 as expenses are
incurred. The funding associated with these realigned
responsibilities is shared with other community corrections
partners, including the Sheriff's Office, District Attorney, Office of
Employment Training, Health and Social Services in the form of
operating transfers from Probation to the recipient departments.
The Recommended Budget includes a net increase of General Fund
Contribution (GFC) totaling $3,022,449. This increase includes
$1,192,817 for a charge back program implemented by the County
Auditor-Controller to charge costs for overhead departments to
general fund operating departments effective Fiscal Year 2016-17.
The remaining $1,829,632 of increased GFC represents
augmentations to support the retention of 20 filled positions in the
Evening Reporting Center, Juvenile Hall units, Home Supervision
and Community Service Work Program, the Peninsula satellite
Probation office, Youth Center in-custody programs and
supervision, and the juvenile Placement Intervention Program and
juvenile Intake unit. Note that augmentations of $2,022,577 were
funded with an increase in program revenues of $192,945 and
$1,829,632 in increased GFC.
Other changes include a reduction of $103,752 for the workers'
compensation program and $34,093 for the general liability
insurance program based on updated funding criteria; and a

modest increase of $328,411 in program revenue due to a small
augmentation in State revenue apportionments and an increase in
Proposition 172 sales tax revenue.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget includes the reduction of 2.0 vacant
and unfunded positions, one Probation Officer II in the Alternative
Programs unit and one Probation Officer II in the Adult Probation
unit, due to loss of grant funding. It also includes the reallocation
of an existing Principal Office Assistant to a Personnel Technician-
Confidential in the Administration unit to support the high level of
personnel activity within the Department.
The Department experienced various expenditure increases
compared to the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget, including $2,255,231
for retirement costs, employees step advances, workers'
compensation insurance, and higher employee health care costs.
Further increases include: $154,707 for medical services for wards,
maintenance contracts and State custody housing; $268,290 for the
Enterprise Financial System upgrade; and $113,616 for Information
Technology capital infrastructure upgrade and data circuit line
support. The net result of these costs is a $2,791,844 increase in
baseline budget funding requirements for FY 2016-17. These cost
pressures constrain future capability and flexibility in assigning
resources to maintain the necessary level of services, particularly in
consideration of the increase in the Department's span of control
for adult and juvenile offenders.The Probation Department is dedicated to achieving and
maintaining the following goals:
Continue to participate in the process of constructing a new, more
functional juvenile detention facility.
Improve the quality of life for youth, seniors and families by
preventing and reducing the frequency, severity, and impact of
criminal and delinquent behavior among adults and juveniles who
come within the jurisdiction of the Probation Department.
Enhance public safety programs throughout Monterey County
through collaboration and cooperation with other departments and
agencies and by the development of new and innovative methods to
address the issues of public safety.
Expand services to the young adult population and address specific
needs, e.g. mental health, substance abuse and vocational training.
Continue to enhance the collection of probation fees in
collaboration with the Treasurer's Revenue Division.
Continue to serve as the lead agency to maintain core functions
and expand the Silver Star Resource Center as a "one-stop"
program for gang prevention and intervention.
Continue to serve as the lead agency for the Juvenile Justice Crime
Prevention Act programs.
Continue to serve as the lead agency for the Community
Correction Partnership, and for the implementation of the
Community Correction Plan focusing on evidence-based probation
supervision strategies and programs.
Continue to enhance data collection capabilities in the Case
Management System to track, monitor and report data on its
juvenile and adult populations, and to analyze and evaluate the
success of programs and program participation. Develop new data
requirements for realigned adult and juvenile populations.
Continue to participate in data sharing efforts as required by law,
such as the State's Supervised Release File (SRF) and SmartJustice
initiatives, and the local Justice Partners Data Sharing project.
Expand the Medi-Cal Administrative Activities (MAA) program.
Pursue funding opportunities to expand the Veterans' Treatment
Court.
Pending Issues
The State's Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) to the County level,
implemented on October 1, 2011, continues to impart major
operational changes in the Adult Division's operations. The
realignment significantly increases Probation's span of control on
non-non-non (non-serious, non-violent, non-sex offenses, and
without any prior conviction) adult offenders, as well as offenders

released to local authority under Post Release Community
Supervision (PRCS) status. Funding allocated at the State level was
formalized through Senate Bill 1020 which was approved in July
2012, and in September 2015, the formula for Statewide
programmatic base funding allocations was finalized through the
State's Realignment Allocation Committee (RAC) with
concurrence by the State Department of Finance. This affected
how State funds are distributed to the local County level. The RAC
will revisit the issue of allocation of growth funds in three to five
years to set a permanent growth formula.
The operational and financial impact of the State-mandated Static-
99R assessment for adult sex offenders continues to be evaluated.
Further, the cost of Global Positioning System monitoring for highrisk
sex offenders while on probation continues to be absorbed by
the Department.
The Department is incurring additional costs for mandated core
training required by Title 15 for part-time and temporary Juvenile
Institutions Officers. Increasing mandated Standards and Training
for Corrections (STC) costs challenge the Department's ability to
cover all training expenses.
Due to the implementation of Proposition 21, juveniles facing adult
court proceedings continue to generate additional costs associated
with extended detention in Juvenile Hall. Depending on the
number of arrests and the court processes, the Department's
budget is constrained to absorb these increased costs in FY 2016-
17.
The annual Department of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) placement rate was
established in July 2012 at $24,000 per juvenile, a significant
increase over prior years. This placement cost will continue to
impact costs next fiscal year, based on the amount of youth in State
custody and their commitment time.
The Continuum of Care Reform will affect the length of stay in outof-
home placement for juvenile wards of the Court; Probation will
be involved in activities to facilitate and expedite the child's return
to a family-type setting with the use of resource families.Continue to foster a close working relationship with County
officials and the Board of State and Community Corrections
(BSCC), to maximize readiness to proceed with the design and
construction for a new Juvenile Hall facility on the existing site.
Continue the Monterey County Juvenile Offender Health Services
(JOCHS) Program, a collaborative re-entry and transition center
for youth detained in Juvenile Hall. The center is designed to be a
"one-stop" program for youth and their families/guardians to
receive family and community reunification services, integrated
behavioral health care, assistance with Medi-Cal eligibility
determination, academic services and referrals, and expedited and
coordinated contact with the supervising Probation Officer.
Continue to expand the cognitive behavior and programming
services available to detained youth within the facility, to include
moral re-cognitive therapy.
Collaborate with community based organization California Youth
Outreach (C.Y.O.) to provide a Community Reentry Program
through Cognitive Behavior Intervention (C.B.I.) services to help
better prepare the youth for community reentry.
Continue to train staff and providers and refine infrastructure to
ensure compliance with the Prison Rape Elimination Act (P.R.E.A.).
Develop a program in conjunction with Monterey County Office of
Education (MCOE) for residents eligible to attend online college
courses.Improve data collection and outcome measurements to evaluate
effectiveness of the Youth Center program and services, to ensure
appropriate programs are offered to offenders.
Continue the Department's enhancements of evidence-based
practices by: providing proper programming dosage based on
assessed risk to reoffend; enhancing detention alternatives for
technical violations, ensuring swift, certain, and just consequences,
without excessive incarceration for aftercare youth; developing a
sanctions and incentives matrix for juvenile offenders; and
continuing to develop expertise of sworn staff in delivering
evidence-based practices.
Continue to train staff and providers and refine infrastructure to
ensure compliance with the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA).
Develop a program in conjunction with Monterey County Office of
Education whereby residents at the Youth Center and Juvenile Hall,
who have graduated from high school or who have received a GED
can take online college courses.
Provide First Aid and Health Education classes for Youth Center
residents.
Collaborate with California Forensic Medical Group (CFMG) and
Natividad Medical Center (NMC) to implement a tattoo removal
program for the Youth Center.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the
Agricultural Commissioner's Office includes $10,773,746 in total
appropriations. This represents an increase of $977,450 over the FY
2015-16 Adopted Budget. Revenue is estimated at $7,174,888, a
$775,771 net increase. The recommended General Fund
Contribution (GFC) totals $3,598,858, or an increase of $201,679.
The increase in GFC is due to the change in accounting for indirect
costs. The rise in revenue is attributable to increases in funding
from the California State Department of Pesticide Regulation and
the California Department of Food and Agriculture. Health care
costs and implementation of new capital projects represents the
largest increase in expenditures.Promote and protect agriculture, the environment, and public
welfare. Assure consumer and business confidence in the
marketplace through uniform enforcement of laws and regulations.
Pending Issues
Revenues are increasing at a slower rate than expenditures,
presenting budgetary challenges in FY 2016-17. The Department
continues to support State and Federal activities, especially as
related to pest exclusion and facilitation of commerce. The
Department currently issues approximately 7,000 Phytosanitary
Certificates annually for shipments related to Light Brown Apple
Moth (LBAM) quarantines and over 22,000 total Phytosanitary
Certificates.
The Department will work with the California Department of Food
& Agriculture (CDFA) to continue exclusion and detection efforts
for the European Grape Vine Moth the Asian Citrus Psyllid, Glassywinged
Sharpshooter and other target pests. Quarantines for the
LBAM are impacting trade with Canada and Mexico and will require dedication of resources to maintain these markets. The
status of funding to cover the costs associated with some of these
programs is uncertain. Reduction in funding levels could
significantly impact these efforts and may require local resources to
protect the County's agriculture and maintain export markets.
There is a continuing focus on regulation of pesticide use,
especially fumigants, and particularly around school sites. This will
result in a continuing dedication of staff resources to pesticide use
enforcement issues and community outreach efforts.
A number of important land use issues and implementation of the
2010 General Plan will continue to require dedication of staffing
resources.Implement Phytosanitary Certification activities facilitating trade
with other states and countries especially related to Light Brown
Apple Moth.
Monitor issues related to water quality and collaborate with
stakeholders, other departments and agencies as appropriate.
Emphasis on selection, training and retention efforts for all
positions to maintain core service levels and for succession
planning.
Direct pesticide enforcement resources to fumigants and related
issues.
Respond to emerging and ongoing pest exclusion and quarantine
activities, particularly those related to the Light Brown Apple
Moth, Glassy-Winged Sharp Shooter, European Grapevine Moth,
Asian Citrus Psyllid and preventing introduction of other exotic
insects, pests and diseases. Continue to work with Parks
Department and Water Resources Agency on the detection and
exclusion of the Quagga Mussel from the waters of the County.
As resources allow, continue collaboration with other departments
and agencies on education and outreach related to resource
conservation issues (such as erosion) and water quality in concert
with our pesticide use enforcement efforts.
Continue to direct limited, available resources through our
Monterey County Weed Management Area to work cooperatively
on the control of noxious weeds in the County and coordinate
efforts of, and obtain funding for, weed management efforts.
Collaborate specifically with Parks and Water Resources Agency on
weeds and other pests of mutual interest, as resources allow.
Increase protection of the County's residents, businesses and
visitors through fair and equitable enforcement of weights and
measures laws, and the adoption of a price verification scanner
ordinance.
Support of the Board of Supervisors' Agricultural Advisory
Committee; and, collaborate with the Resource Management
Agency on land use issues.
Suport the implementation of the County's General Plan on
matters pertaining to agriculture.
Develop uniform guidelines for the County's Williamson Act
program, including revisions to the compatible uses allowed in
agricultural preserves.
Support Agricultural education efforts, including Monterey County
Ag Education (Farm Days), AgKnowledge (executive agricultural
training), and the Monterey County Fair.

The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the Resource
Management Agency (RMA) totals $162,400,452 in appropriations
financed by $135,298,064 in program revenues, $9,694,194 in
General Fund Contributions (GFC) and $17,408,194 in other fund
balances.
The Recommended Budget decreases the prior year level of GFC by
$5,187,032 attributable to the indirect charge back. Effective in FY
2016-17 the Office of the Auditor-Controller is implementing an
indirect costs charge back process for operating departments
within the General Fund. Under this program the Auditor-
Controller will process a charge document to place the expense of
service departments within the operating departments and remove
the expense from service departments.
The Recommended Budget includes $472,400 in recommended
augmentat ions, including $387,290 for General Plan
implementation and 1.0 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Shuttle Driver.
The augmentation for the General Plan implementation is funded
through redirection of existing RMA resources that previously
supported two vacant assistant director positions.
While there appears to be a decrease in Salary and Benefits of
$189,547 from FY 2015-16, in order to balance the budget for the
Road Fund, a total of 27 positions were deleted, including 22 vacant
positions and five filled positions. These reductions were made as a
result of increased costs of $351,344 for workers' compensation
insurance and $768,585 for flexible benefit costs. In the Road Fund,
one road project (Blanco Road Overlay) which was funded by
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) allocation is being deferred in
order to save $2.6 million due to several emergency projects from
the 2016 winter storms which is projecting to erode the Road Fund

Balance by $1.2 million by the end of FY 2015-16. These funds will
avoid further cuts to the Road Fund and restore eight filled of the
12 Road Fund positions identified for reduction due to loss of
revenue and cost increases.
Expenditures for Services and Supplies increased by $2,761,517 due
to cost increases in four main areas: Building Maintenance
associated with the Schilling Place occupancy, internal transfer of
staff charges between RMA units, the Information Technology
Department (ITD) and Enterprise Resource Project (ERP) Capital
Project and Upgrade charges, professional services for consultants
and external equipment rental charges. In other charges, there was
an increase of $1.2 million for the Countywide Cost Allocation Plan
(COWCAP) to General Fund operating units. This increase was
offset by staff reimbursements associated with Architectural
Services staff costs supporting construction projects.
The increase in Capital Assets spending in FY 2016-17 includes the
costs of construction for projects in the Road and Bridge
Engineering (Fund 002) and Facilities Master Plan Projects (Fund
404). It includes such projects as the new Juvenile Hall ($22.8
million), road and bridge construction ($22.3 million) and Jail
Housing Project ($42.2 million) which are funded by grants and
local funds. Other projects include 1441 Schilling Place Tennant
Improvements ($13.9 million) and East & West Wing Renovation
($1.4 million) which are funded by Certificates of Participation
(COPs).
Based on current business levels, the RMA expects an increase in
Permit Revenues of $1,688,868 from construction and development
activities in the County.
The $11,534,538 variance under Revenue from Use of Money and
Property reflects the budgeting of COPs for work performed on the
Schilling Place and East and West Wing projects which at the time
assumed COPs reimbursement of actual expenditures. However,
the Auditor-Controller's Office recognized the full COP issuance of
$52 million in FY 2015-16 as Debt Issuance and therefore no Debt
Issuances associated with the COPs are anticipated in FY 2016-17.
Even though there is an overall significant increase in
Intergovernmental Revenues of $64,446,686, which is attributable
to grant funding for two major Capital Improvement Projects, the
new Juvenile Hall and Jail Expansion Project, what it does not show
is the continued decline of State Highway User Tax (HUTA). This
revenue source funds the maintenance projects in the Road Fund.
In FY 2016-17, the amount of HUTA is expected to decline by an
additional $495,418 in FY 2016-17 to only $8.3 million. As a
comparison this equates to a 33% drop in funding received in FY
2013-14 of $12.6 million.
Revenues captured under Charges for Services are projected to
increase by $1,912,982 and includes Special Assessments and
Sanitation fees from the County Service Areas (CSAs) and County
Sanitation Districts (CSDs) based on current and projected revenue
receipts in FY 2015-16; health fees associated with increased focus
on pursuing code violators based on current and projected revenue
receipts; road and bridge maintenance and engineering supporting
non-Road Fund activities such as Job Order Contracting projects,
drainage projects, open space maintenance for the CSAs, operating
and maintaining the CSDs, and development application reviews
based on current and projected revenue receipts.
Miscellaneous Revenues include developer reimbursements, and
revenues received from copies, revenue receipts from other non-
County entities and contributions. The increase of $833,879 is
attributable to two projects - Davis Road Bridge project and
includes one-time revenues from Fort Ord Reuse Authority
(FORA) and one-time contributions from the Library Department
for the San Lucas Library.
Other Financing Sources increased by $8,335,779 and is
attributable to operating transfers into RMA associated with the
Indirect Charge back allocation; the Road Fund allocation of the
Transient Occupancy Tax; and the transfer of matching funds
associated with the Jail Housing Addition and new Juvenile Hall
grant projects.
Budget Impacts
The Agency continues to experience significant increases in nondiscretionary
costs, including: negotiated pay and earned annual
step increases, employee health insurance costs, general liability
insurance, property insurance, vacation buy backs, annual charges
for ITD, Capital Improvements, the ERP Upgrade, and indirect
chargeback (COWCAP) charges. With no growth in GFC in recent
years, the Agency has had to divert funds from service delivery
outlined below to cover these internal cost increases.
To cover increased costs within the limits of the County
Administrative Office's preliminary baseline GFC level, RMA is
relying on the use of one-time revenues of $746,727 comprised of
grants and permit fees. RMA removed $313,985 of estimated costs
associated with vacation buy back from its budget. RMA plans to
return to the Board in FY 2016-17 for support if it cannot manage
employee leave payments within its appropriations. While the use
of one-time funds will fill the funding gap for FY 2016-17, RMA
will need to identify recurring revenues or an increase in GFC in
the following year in order to fill the funding gap created by these
uncontrollable increased costs, plus any additional increases that
arise in FY 2016-17.
There are several activities that were not included in the Agency's
budget requiring the submittal of augmentation requests totaling
$8.9 million and includes the following:
Augmentation request to fund "Mission Critical" activities totalling
$260,000 to fund the purchase of a Hydro Vac unit vehicle to flush,
clean and maintain the culverts, catch basins and connective pipes
that make up the NPDES storm drain systems.
Augmentation request to fund "Base Level Maintenance" activities
totalling $3.5 million and includes requests for: $352,800 premitigate
flood risk; $350,000 update Pavement Management
System; $50,000 tree services for increased need due to drought;
$1.3 million for General Plan implementation; $255,000 for
projected increased utility costs in shared County facilities;
$250,000 Historical Boronda tree maintenance; $558,000 Carmel
Lagoon Sandbar Management & Flood Prevention; $1.5 million for
Schilling Place maintenance and operations and utilities; $146,071
backfill for two positions; and $85,112 for a full-time shuttle driver
(this Operating Unit will be managed by the CAO's office).
Augmentation requests from "Outside Funds requesting General
Funds" total $452,420 Backfill Road Fund for impact to positions.
Augmentation requests that are "Not Mandated" total $1.3 to
include $100,000 to develop a Major Component Replacement
Program for County facilities; $175,000 for four Pedestrian
Activated Crossing Beacons (Intelligent Traffic Systems); $500,000

for Traffic Signal at the corner of W. Alisal St. and Capital; $386,726
for a Fire Plan Review/Inspection and Fuel Mitigation Grant
Coordinator; $117,767 additional Water Resources Biologist; and
an augmentation to backfill for funding loss in the amount of $1
million for Emergency Repair Reserve for the County's roads and
bridges.
Of the $1.7 million requested for the General Plan Implementation
(GPI) and Long Range Planning augmentation, the County
Administrative Office includes $387,290 in the Recommended
Budget to be used towards completing the following GPI
Ordinances: Long Term Sustainable Water Supply Ordinance (PS-
3.2) for $76,075; Water Conservation Ordinance (PS-3.10, PS-3.11,
PS-3.12, CV-5.3) for $44,195; Development Impact Ordinance (S-
5.11 and S-6.3) for $73,895; Chualar Community Plan (LU-1.19 et
al.) for $50,000; Climate Action Planning (OS-10.11 and C-3.1) for
$15,000; Community Noise Ordinance (S-7.1 and Cach-3.2) for
$50,000; Hazard Database Mapping & Visual Sensitivity Maps (OS-
3.4, S, OS-1.11, et al.) for $50,000; Public Notices for $28,125 (75
notices x $375 average per notice).
Prior Year Accomplishments
Prior year accomplishments are presented at the Division level.
Budget Year Goals
Budget year goals are presented at the Division level.
Pending Issues
The Road Fund (Fund 002) is a special revenue fund created to
capture revenues legally restricted for road work such as
construction and maintenance on roads and bridges within the
unincorporated areas of Monterey County, pursuant to State law.
The fund balance in the Road Fund has steadily eroded in recent
years as the revenue from the County's Highway Users Tax (HUTA)
decrease and overhead expenses increase. It was anticipated during
FY 2016-17 Budget development that there would be $1.2 million
of one-time funds from Fund 002 uncommitted fund balance that
would carry over into FY 2016-17 to be used to offset operating
costs. However, RMA's response to the 2016 winter storms has
further complicated the financial condition of the Road Fund. The
Road Fund unassigned fund balance is anticipated to be completely
depleted by the end of FY 2015-16 (June 30, 2016).
In May 2016, RMA presented to the Board of Supervisors a report
regarding the 2016 Winter Storms and the negative impact
(approximately $2.2 million) these storms had on the County's
Road Fund uncommitted fund balance. RMA is recommending the
Board approve the use of one-time funds by redirecting the FY
2016-17 Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) allocation that was
identified for the Blanco Road Overlay project in the amount of
$2.6 million towards sustaining operations and avoiding staff
layoffs within the Road and Bridge field maintenance group.
Projects that were planned to be performed using the TOT funds
may need to be deferred. The use of one-time funds is not
sustainable and unless additional revenue sources are identified
during FY 2016-17, additional reductions will be necessary in the
Road Fund for FY 2017-18.
In FY 2016-17, the Board will consider adopting a Medical
Marijuana Ordinance for the permitting and regulation of
cultivation, processing and distribution activities associated with
the new medicinal marijuana industry. Adoption of such an
ordinance will result in increased workloads for departments
tasked with regulation and enforcement of these new activities.
Departments will be developing for Board consideration a staffing
plan necessary to meet the anticipated demands of this increase in
workload. Without additional staffing for this new program,
increased backlogs in permit application processing and code
compliance cases are anticipated.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $241,098,735, an increase of $12,999,623 from
the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. Approximately $12.5 million of
the growth is attributed to enhanced capacity in Behavioral Health
and Clinic Services Bureaus in the form of increased County staff
and funding levels of contracted providers to better serve the needs
of the community due to the implementation of the Affordable
Care Act (ACA). The Recommended Budget is financed by
$223,186,442 in revenues, $12,185,647 in fund balance, and
$5,726,646 in General Fund Contribution (GFC).
The Recommended Budget includes consolidation of the Public
Guardian/Administrator/Conservator budget units from 8118,
8119, and 8120 into one budget unit (8118). Additionally, budget
unit 8466, Bienestar Integrated Clinic in King City, is not budgeted
due to closure of the clinic since behavioral health patients
accessing services in King City are already linked to primary care
providers in King City.
The Recommended Budget includes 1,078.05 Full Time Equivalent
(FTE) positions, a net increase of 52.27 positions from the FY 2015-
16 Adopted Budget. The Recommended Budget includes
augmentations for 62.0 new FTEs to meet community needs.
These positions are fully funded by outside funding sources as
follows: Health Administration (2.0 FTEs) for expanded facility
oversight and security plan development and non-technical
support to the Human Resources unit; Behavioral Health (9.0
FTEs) for expanded Behavioral Health services; and Clinic Services
(51.0 FTEs) for expanded primary care services. The 62.0 new
positions were partially offset by reductions of vacant positions in
programs facing fiscal constraints.CLINIC SERVICES: The implementation of the Affordable Care
Act in January 2014 has resulted in approximately 40% of Monterey
County residents being eligible for Medi-Cal, of which
approximately 130,000 are enrolled in Medi-Cal Managed Care.
This, coupled with the newly insured through the Covered
California, has created a huge demand for access to primary care
services in County clinics. In addition, in May 2016 all remaining
uninsured up to 18 years of age (approximately 6,000 to 8,000
youth) were eligible for full scope Medi-cal, thus further impacting
the demand for primary care services.
Construction of new facilities is critical in order to meet the
increased demand for services in a manner that meets regulatory
criteria for quality, access and patient satisfaction. Planning for
new clinic construction and expansion is in process to serve
communities in Seaside and Salinas. Under a lease agreement with
Community Hospital Properties, construction for a new 18,500
square foot clinic in Seaside is expected to commence in August
2016 with completion in December 2017. Staff will continue to
explore options for expanding services in the Alisal and East Salinas
community.
The Bureau continues to work with other safety net providers to
provide additional primary care capacity for these newly insured
patients.
CLINIC SERVICES/BEHAVIORAL HEALTH: Mental health was
recently identified as one of the primary cost drivers in the Medi-
Cal system in California. This year, the Clinic Services and
Behavioral Health Bureaus will continue to implement a
coordinated IMPACT Model of Care designed to accommodate
patients with mental health diagnoses in the most appropriate
healthcare settings. Clinic Services remodeled existing space at the
Laurel Internal Medicine Clinic in May 2016 to accommodate
staffing for increased services for patients with mild to moderate
mental health diagnoses.MEDICAL 2020 WAIVER: California's Medi-Cal 2020 Waiver
creates opportunities for counties to implement locally based
initiatives to improve population health outcomes and leverage
Federal f inancial par ticipation, Federal revenues , for
implementation of pilot projects.
Through its Whole Person Care (WPC), the Medical 2020 Waiver
aims to expand care coordination, improve data collection and
sharing, and expand housing supportive services. The WPC is a
five year program to test locally based initiatives that will
coordinate physical health, behavioral health, and social services
for vulnerable Medi-Cal beneficiaries who are high users of the
multiple systems and continue to have or are at risk of poor health
outcomes. The Health Department will serve as the lead applicant
entity and will bring together public and private entities to identify
common patients who are high users across systems, discuss
methods for sharing data across systems, develop plans for
coordinating care in real time, and developing evaluation plans for
individual and population improvements in health outcomes.
The California Children's Services (CCS) demonstration project
aims to test two models of health care delivery for the CCS
population that results in achieving the desired outcomes related to
timely access to care, improved coordination of care, promotion of
community based services, and improved health outcomes and
great cost effectiveness. Components of CCS will be under the
responsibility of Monterey's Managed Care Plan with
implementation expected sometime in 2017.
The Drug Medi-cal Organized Delivery System is a pilot program
to test a new paradigm for the organized delivery of health care
services for Medi-cal eligible individuals with substance use
disorder (SUD) to increase access, improve care coordination,
assure implementation of evidence based practices in SUD
treatment, and assure greater administrative oversight in an effort
for individuals achieving sustainable recovery.
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH: The Health Department is attempting to
address the dramatic shortage of behavioral health providers in the
County, particularly in the South County region, through
expansion of County staff and increased funding levels for
contracted providers. As a result, the FY 2016-17 Recommended
Budget for Behavioral Health Fund 023 includes utilization of $12.2
million of fund balance which is not sustainable in future years.
The Department strives to appropriately train staff and contracted
providers to maximize the level of Federal Financial Participation,
Federal revenues.BEHAVIORAL HEALTH/CLINIC SERVICES/PUBLIC HEALTH:
With the Affordable Care Act, counties will continue to be
responsible for providing behavioral health, public health and
health services to indigent adults without private or public health
care insurance coverage. Based on recent reports, Monterey
County has a high percentage of persons, 13.5% of the population,
who do not qualify for either Medicaid (Medi-Cal) or subsidized
health insurance due to documentation status. Under Obama's
Executive Action on Immigration, individuals that qualify to legally
work in the United States, will not be eligible for Medicaid or
health care coverage subsidies but they may be eligible for
employer sponsored health care coverage. Portions of California
Senator Lara Senate Bill 4 Health Care for All Act originally
introduced in Fiscal Year 2014-15, was signed by Governor Brown
expanding full scope Medi-Cal to undocumented individuals up to
age 19 starting in May 2016. Locally, an option to fund health care
coverage for individuals not otherwise eligible for Medi-Cal or
health care coverage subsidies was explored and piloted last fiscal
year. The Department requested an augmentation in the amount
of $500,000 to continue the pilot project for remaining uninsured
to provide medically necessary pharmacy, radiology, and laboratory
services.
CLINIC SERVICES: There are several pending issues related to
increasing access for both primary care and mental health services
in the outpatient primary care setting. Clinic Services has
approximately 45,000 Medi-Cal Managed Care members currently
assigned, an increase of over 10,000 since implementation of the
Affordable Care Act. This, coupled with the newly insured through
the Covered California, has created a huge demand for access to
primary care services in our County clinics.
The Monterey County Clinics are participating in Phase 1 of the
Capitation Pilot Preparedness Program (CP3), a three year pilot
program developed in partnership with the Department of Health
Care Services, the California Primary Care Association, the
California Association of Public Hospitals and the Safety Net
Institute to reform Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC)
payment and service delivery modules, tentatively scheduled to
become effective July 2017. In March 2015, Clinic Services entered
into a capitation (per member per month payment) arrangement
with Central California Alliance for Health in anticipation of
payment reform and to improve upfront cash flow. CP3 is currently
in the process of developing a new capitation payment model that
would involve all FQHC payment to go through the local Managed
Care Medi-Cal Plan. This would replace the traditional Fee for
Service, per visit payment model where payment is contingent on a
face-to-face visit with a medical provider. The development process
includes extending the definition of a patient visit, or touch, to
potentially include, for example, texting, wireless monitoring,
eConsults, group visits, and face-to-face visits with providers who
are currently not reimbursable (e.g. Nurses). This is critical as
clinics will have to document patient engagement in care delivery
and will also be held accountable for improving patient health
outcomes. The pilot would fail if health outcomes are not improved
or if clinics cannot document that they are still seeing and engaging
patients in care.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH: The continued threat of drought
remains a concern as it may impact availability of water not only for
household consumer use but also its impact on the agricultural,
food, pool, spa and hospitality industries, as well as water systems
and wells. This will continue to remain on the forefront for FY
2016-17.
Stricter State regulations per AB 885 for Onsite Wastewater
Treatment Systems (OWTS) have mandated significant changes to
our current OWTS program as a State mandated Local Area
Management Plan (LAMP) is being developed for submittal to the
Water Board, as well as to certain Drinking Water Protection
Services program procedures. The impact of implementing the
County General Plan (GPU) 2010 continues to involve significant
staff time in development of ordinances and implementation of
GPU policies.
The State Water Resources Control Board adopted standards for
hexavalent chromium which have affected several water systems as
they have not met the new standard. Efforts to assist water system
operators in addressing nitrate and arsenic contamination in water
systems serving communities , including disadvantaged
communities, within Monterey County are ongoing and may be
supplemented through Local Primacy Agency funding.
Disadvantaged community water systems have been impacted by
nitrate contamination and the Environmental Health Bureau is
working with Environmental Justice groups and County
departments to find solutions to long term safe drinking water.
New recycling regulations under Cal Recycle will require
implementation of Organics Recycling programs in the County
through outreach and education.
New California Electronic Reporting (CERS) standards to the State
as the Certified Unified Program Agency will require computer
software upgrades and contracts with the vendor to comply with
State standards.
A County and local municipality ordinances regulating the sale,
manufacturing and distribution of medical marijuana will have
significant impacts on workloads and require collaboration with
law enforcement for illegal operations throughout the entire
County.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS): Due to ongoing
discussions at State level to utilize the Maddy Fund as a source of
revenue for the State budget deficit, there may be a loss of revenue
to the EMS Agency in the amount of approximately $229,000 and a
loss to local hospitals and emergency department physician groups
of $933,750. In addition, the Emergency Medical Care Committee
may recommend changes to the EMS system that may impact EMS
expenditures.
Policy Considerations
HEALTH REALIGNMENT: Over the past couple of fiscal years,
the County has utilized a portion of Health Realignment resources
to fund inmate medical care. The Health Department proposes to
retain the use of Health Realignment resources for primary
prevention efforts and early intervention strategies rather than
using a portion for inmate medical care services.
PILOT PROJECT FOR REMAINING UNINSURED: The County
continues to have a high percentage of its population ineligible for
healthcare coverage due to their documentation status. The
County funded an augmentation in the amount of $500,000 to
begin a pilot project for the remaining uninsured to provide
medically necessary pharmacy, radiology, and laboratory services
to reduce preventable emergency department visits, inpatient
hospitalization, and other higher cost medical interventions in
Fiscal Year 2015-16. Community residents eligible for this pilot are able to more appropriately comply with their physicians orders and
have better health outcomes reducing avoidable high cost
emergency department visits and inpatient hospital stays. Funding
this Pilot Project in Fiscal Year 2016-17 would provide necessary
services to residents not eligible for healthcare coverage to improve
health outcomes for these individuals and reduce avoidable high
cost emergency department visits.
PUBLIC HEALTH: The Recommended Budget does not include
funding to implement a Nurse Family Partnership Program (NFP)
in the County due to fiscal constraints. NFP is a community
healthcare program that yields quantifiable social benefits and
return on the community's investment. NFP would have a
significant effect in creating positive social outcomes for
communities such as reducing youth violence and increasing
graduation rates.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH: County and local municipality
ordinances regulating the sale, manufacturing and distribution of
medical marijuana will have significant impacts on workloads and
require collaboration with law enforcement for enforcement of
illegal operations throughout the entire County.

Communicable Disease Prevention and Control will initiate disease
control measures within Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention and California Department of Public Health
recommended time frames for 80% of selected reportable disease
incidents of public health importance, thus limiting the spread of
communicable diseases within our communities.
Communicable Disease Prevention and Control will disseminate
health and epidemiologic information to healthcare providers,
medical facilities, community-based organizations, and the public
six times per quarter. This information will assist providers in their
clinical decision making process, promote appropriate public
health interventions, and empower the public to make important
health decisions.
Tobacco Control will provide technical support to a jurisdiction in
Monterey County that is willing to explore, adopt and implement a
policy that prohibits the use of electronic nicotine delivery devices
in places where smoking is otherwise prohibited.
Tobacco Cessation will complete education and training to mental
health and drug and alcohol treatment facilities and support
adoption and implementation of tobacco policies which will reduce
employee, resident and community exposure to second hand
smoke.
Youth Violence Prevention will support the implementation of
youth leadership and bullying prevention programs to prevent
youth violence in Salinas.
Youth Violence Prevention will continue to participate in a
National Institutes of Health funded cohort study that identifies
factors that protect teens from adverse reproductive health
outcomes and prevents teens from participating in violence.
Vital Records will register births in Monterey County hospitals
within ten days at least 85% of the time.
Women, Infants and Children will maintain or increase
breastfeeding rates among infants enrolled in Women Infants and
Children (WIC) supplemental nutrition program. Among six
month old infants, 21% will be exclusively breastfed and 45% will
receive some breastfeeding. Among 12 month old infants, 18% will
be exclusively breastfed and 41% will receive some breastfeeding.

Public Health Preparedness will increase Department capability to
respond to emerging disease threats by completing health alerting
drills using the new California Health Alert Network System with
internal and external stakeholders and achieve a response rate of
75%.
Employee Wellness will increase employee participation in annual
biometric screening events through increased outreach and
communication efforts among staff.
Mental Health Services Act Prevention and Early Intervention
(PEI) program will implement new PEI regulations by developing
and implementing an effective evaluation system for PEI projects.
The evaluation system will assess how well PEI projects achieve
outcomes of interest and will demonstrate how PEI funded
programs benefit the community.
Alcohol and Other Drug program will work with AOD providers to
begin coordination of AOD efforts with the Prescribe Safe
Monterey County Initiative.
Teen Pregnancy Prevention will train 50 peer educators at Everett
Alvarez and Alisal High Schools who will then provide Postpone
Teen Pregnancy education to 500 students.
Teen Pregnancy Prevention will enroll local youth into the
California Personal Responsibility Education Program and 456 of
the participants will complete either the Cuidate or Be Proud Be
Responsible evidence based curriculum.

Complete 80% of routine maintenance requests within five days
utilizing the online work order system that captures comprehensive
reporting.
Participate in the customization of a new online work order system
for facility, information technology and human resources requests
in partnership with County Information Technology Department.
Support Behavioral Health and Clinic Services efforts to establish
additional/replacement facilities to assure continued provision of
critical services.
Maintain 99.99% uptime on Department technology systems.
Continue efforts to expand data exchange and sharing through
medical records systems with community based Health
Information Exchanges, and orders/results interfaces with
laboratory and radiology systems.
Reduce the vacancy rate to an average of 10%.
Prepare 90% of annual performance evaluations in a timely manner.
Temporarily accommodate 100% of employees with industrial
injuries, either in the employee's current position or with other
work.
Develop opportunities for aligning Health Department programs
with Strategic Plan Initiatives.
Participate in Public Health Accreditation Board (PHAB) site visit.
Maintain and improve PHAB Standards. Become a public health
accredited Department.
Continue development and delivery of short quality improvement
and accreditation-related training videos for Health Department
staff. At least four will be produced.
Increase staff and community knowledge of health equity and
health empowerment through trainings, seminars, and other
forums. At least 500 individuals will be trained.

Continue to conduct quality improvement (QI) trainings for staff
and support establishment of QI teams. Train QI team members on
how to conduct performance improvement projects using the Plan,
Do, Check, Act method. At least 50 staff will be trained and 15 QI
projects will be completed.
Issue RFP for enterprise electronic health record system for County
health service provider departments.
Incorporate Health IT staff provided training to better support
Health Department subscribers.
Streamline IT support and incorporate standard processes/
procedures to enable accountability, transparency, and accessibility.
Enable reliable, automated, and documented data exchange
activities for Behavioral Health, Public Health, Clinic Services,
Environmental Health, and Emergency Medical Services.
Implement data Security Mitigation Plan to assist department in
advancing data sharing in a way that ensures patient privacy and
security rights.
Finalize integration of Health Department website with countywide
website to ensure immediate access to current multi-lingual
information by the public.
100% of new staff will attend annual privacy training at the time of
new employee orientation. Department will continue to provide
privacy trainings in a variety of formats (in-person, online, etc.) to
increase compliance.
Finalize development of Facility/Equipment Preventative
Maintenance Plan and schedule. Develop implementation plan in
collaboration with bureau chiefs and finance managers.

The Recommended Budget for DSS totals $257,686,965 in
appropriations, financed by $245,436,475 in program revenue, and
$12,250,490 in General Fund Contributions (GFC). This represents
an increased appropriation of $16,915,427, increased estimated
revenues of $12,519,962, and an increase of General Fund
Contribution of $4,395,465 from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget.
The recommended budget includes 887 full time employees (FTE),
which is an increase of 19 positions from the FY 2015-16 Adopted
Budget. The FY 2016-17 recommendations include an increase in
the program and administration costs with supporting revenue to
offset the increase. The estimated costs of each division are as
follows:
SOCIAL SERVICES OPERATIONS & ADMINISTRATION: This
component, budgeted in Units 8262, 8425, and 8464 includes
Community Benefits, Family & Children Services, Aging & Adult
Services, CalWORKs Employment Services, Human Resources,
and Administrative Services. The recommendation includes
appropriations of $130,934,273, revenues of $128,359,493, and
General Fund Contributions of $2,574,780 which is an increase of
$16,222,677 in appropriations, an increase of $13,203,036 in
revenues, and an increase in General Fund Contributions of
$3,019,641 from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget.
Significant changes to this unit are due to the additional 19 FTEs
added in FY 2015-16 for Family & Children Services and In-Home
Supportive Services. Additional cost drivers include increased
costs for employees' health insurance, Enterprise Resource
Planning, Information Technology Department infrastructure,
negotiated rent increases, and contracted services. There is an
increased County share of cost due to the phase-out of the CalFresh
Match Waiver. In addition, there was an accounting change for the
Countywide Cost Allocation Plan which resulted in an increase in
both appropriations and General Fund Contributions.
ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS: Entitlement Programs, budgeted
in Units 8252, 8253, 8254, 8255, 8425, and 8464 include
CalWORKs, General Assistance, In-Home Supportive Services,
and Out-of-Home Care. The recommended budget includes
appropriations of $120,875,551, revenues of $112,665,610, and
General Fund Contributions of $8,209,941. This is a decrease of
$338,734 in appropriations, a decrease of $1,100,204 in revenues,

and an increase of $761,470 in General Fund Contributions from
the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget.
The significant change in appropriations, revenues, and General
Fund Contributions is due to a 3.5% statutory increase for In-Home
Supportive Services Maintenance of Effort (MOE), County share of
the negotiated increased wages, and a 2.96% Cost of Living
Adjustment (COLA) on all Foster Care and Adoption Assistance
payments.
OTHER COMMUNITY PROGRAMS: This division includes
Community Action Partnership (8257), IHSS Public Authority
(8259), Area Agency on Aging (8268), and Other Community
Programs (8258). The Recommended Budget includes
appropriations of $4,104,845, revenues of $3,342,015, and General
Fund Contributions of $762,830 which is an increase of $618,230 in
appropriations, $323,739 in revenues, and an increase of $294,491
in the General Fund Contributions from the FY 2015-16 Adopted
Budget.
There are two significant changes in appropriations and revenues:
1) Added three additional FTEs to the IHSS Public Authority Unit
8259 in FY 2015-16 due to the new State mandate for growing the
current capacity of the Public Authority's Registry to meet the
increased demands of consumers; and 2) Increased appropriations
and General Fund Contributions in the Community Programs Unit
8258 for the implementation of a Coordinated Assessment and
Referral System (CARS) which will be funded through a release of
the Social Services Assigned Fund Balance; and an approved
augmentation of $294,587 for Homeless Services to provide
services beyond the winter months.
MILITARY AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS OFFICE: The
Recommended Budget includes appropriations of $1,141,515,
revenues of $711,483, and General Fund Contributions of $430,032,
an increase of $106,116 in appropriations, an increase to revenue of
$59,256, and an increase of $46,860 in General Fund Contributions
from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget.
The significant change to Military and Veterans' Affairs is
attributed to an accounting change for the Countywide Cost
Allocation Plan which resulted in an increase in appropriations and
General Fund Contributions to offset the expense.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget includes a reduction of $265,681 to the
General Assistance Program. The program is an entitlement
program that has seen ongoing caseload decline over the past three
years. The Department built its requested budget based upon the
estimated caseload decline. If the estimated caseload decline and
reduced levels of payment for this mandated entitlement program
are not experienced, additional County General Fund
Contributions will be required.
The Recommended Budget includes a reduction of $321,407 for the
Workers' Compensation Program and $55,726 for the General
Liability Insurance Program. The Department built its requested
budget based on the charges published earlier in the year by Risk
Management, which assumed a change in County policy to fund
these programs at an 80% confidence level rather than the current
policy at 70% confidence level. Increasing the confidence level
would have increased the funding requirements for these
programs. The Recommended Budget adjusts budgeted amounts
for these programs to match current County policy.

DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES (DSS): Collaborate with
public safety and health partners to reduce youth violence and to
implement the Community Corrections Partnership plan. Work
with the Health Department's Behavioral Health Bureau to increase
therapeutic resources for foster children, youth at risk for out of
home placement and their families. Additionally, the Department
will continue active participation in the County Welfare Directors
Association of California (CWDA) and the American Public
Human Services Association (APHSA) to advocate for increased
regulatory flexibility and funding to meet the needs locally of lowincome
families, individuals, vulnerable children, frail seniors and
individuals living with a disability.
AGING AND ADULT SERVICES: Continue to work internally and
with community stakeholders to build an Aging and Disability
Resource Connection which is a service delivery model that can
support frail seniors and individuals with disabilities in navigating
the health and social supports necessary to sustain healthy
independence.
CALWORKS EMPLOYMENT SERVICES: Continue efforts to
meet the Federal WPR through intensive case management
activities and supportive services for CalWORKs participants that
include: child care, job search and job retention, skill building,
subsidized and unsubsidized employment opportunities, and
mental health and alcohol and drug treatment services. Continue to
move toward a holistic family focused approach that takes into
account the diverse needs of the family, reduces child poverty, and
supports parents in reaching self-sufficiency. This includes
continued development of the Family Stabilization program to
address barriers related to housing, mental health, substance abuse,
education, employment, and child safety. It also includes piloting
the establishment of therapeutic play groups at the CalWORKs
Career Centers in partnership with First 5.
COMMUNITY BENEFITS: Continue focused efforts on
recruiting, hiring and training eligibility staff to manage the high
volume of services delivered to the community. Continue support
for high levels of customer access to Medi-Cal health insurance and
CalFresh nutrition assistance through support of the MC-CHOICE
program and enhancements to the current task-based eligibility
management processes. Full roll-out of SB 75 expansion of full
scope Medi-Cal coverage for all children. Partnership with the CIV
Consortium to implement the telephonic signature system
currently under development. Continued efforts to analyze and
implement the many legislatively driven changes and protocols in
CalFresh, CalWORKs, and Medi-Cal that occur annually.
FAMILY AND CHILDREN'S SERVICES (FCS): Implement
recommendations offered by the California Department of Social
Services to include: policy and process changes in screening, intake
and emergency response to ensure that best practices for child
safety are met; provision of training to ensure staff adhere to
updated screening, intake and emergency response protocols; and
implementation of a warrant process with the Superior Court for
child welfare investigations and protective custody.

Continue the five year Systems Improvement Plan to strengthen
the Department's continuous quality improvement and
development of data tools to support decision-making with
enhanced monitoring of permanency within 12 months for
children entering foster care and placement stability.
Implement Continuum of Care Reform (CCR). CCR's goal is to
transition children from group homes to a family based placement
while strengthening services to these families. It is anticipated that
this process will require multi-year implementation efforts.
Implement the Therapeutic Visitation Center for parents, children
and foster caregivers. This center will offer an environment and
services to help parents to develop the skills necessary to care for
their children and provides a safe environment for children when
they are reunified with their parents.
Pending Issues
FAMILY AND CHILDREN SERVICES CORRECTIVE ACTION
PLAN: The Department of Social Services entered into a corrective
action plan with the California Department of Social Services to
implement systems improvement and best practices to more
effectively work towards preventing child abuse and neglect
fatalities. This corrective action plan addresses six strategic areas
for system strengthening: 1) Conduct refresher training and
ongoing reviews to support critical decision points and improved
practice for screening, intake and emergency response; 2) Create,
implement and train on a warrant process for child welfare
investigations and protective custody; 3) Transition existing safety
planning documentation to a State approved template; 4) Improve
intake and child abuse hotline operations by expanding supervisory
reviews and coaching, ensuring independent assessment when
referrals are cross reported to law enforcement, and update policies
and procedures; 5) Improve emergency response procedures for
documentation, and for interviews of children and collaterals; and,
6) Recruit and fill additional positions as budgeted by the Board of
Supervisors. As this corrective action plan progresses there is a
possibility that additional pressures in the Out of Home Care
budget could be experienced.
CONTINUUM OF CARE REFORM IN CHILD WELFARE:
Chapter 773, Statutes of 2015 (AB403) implements Continuum of
Care Reform in child welfare. This reform package emphasizes
home-based family care and improved access to services without
having to change placements to get those services. In order to
achieve these goals, the bill changes out of home care policies and
practices to limit the use of institutional care by transforming
Group Homes into Short Term Residential Treatment Programs
limited to serving children with a case plan that identifies a need
for short term, specialized, and intensive treatment. It is the
expectation that these placements will not exceed 120 days, unless
measurable progress is being made to transition the child to a
family setting. After the first 120-days of care, continued
placement needs to be reauthorized by the Director of Social
Services, the Chief Probation Officer or their Assistant/Deputy
Director every 60 days. In order to better assist family caregivers in
raising children who have experienced trauma, a new rate structure
that expands support, therapeutic services and crisis response
development. New out of home care rate structures have not yet
been established and will likely impact the Out of Home Care
budget. Funding included in the Governor's January 2016 budget
proposal do not adequately fund anticipated costs.
EXTENDED FOSTER CARE ENTITLEMENT PROGRAM:
California Department of Finance determined Extended Foster
Care is not an Entitlement Program. Extended Foster Care (AB 12)
improves outcomes for youth in foster care by extending Title IV-E
assistance to eligible youth remaining in foster care for ages 18 to
21. The California Department of Finance has determined that this
program is not an entitlement program, therefore counties do not
have cost neutrality and any overage becomes a local decision as to
whether or not assume responsibility. The dollar impact is
unknown at this time.
Policy Considerations
HOMELESS AUGMENTATIONS: A shortage of affordable
housing and insufficient access to living wages continues to hinder
efforts to address homelessness in our community. The
Department has proposed budget augmentations to expand
services within the community for individuals and families. These
proposed augmentations provide for: a) expanded inclement
weather season services that include warming shelters on the
Monterey Peninsula (in addition to the currently funded winter
warming shelter in Salinas), and daytime services in Salinas
Chinatown for warming, case management, and access to
restrooms, showers, laundry and mail facilities; and b) expanded
services for the balance of the year that includes the same daytime
services in Salinas Chinatown and expanded shelter services for
homeless youth located on the Monterey Peninsula.
MILITARY & VETERANS' AFFAIRS OFFICE: Requesting a budget
augmentation for one Office Assistant II to meet the shortfall of
support to claimants due to increased automation and front office
activities.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE (GA): Proposed budget augmentations
provide for a grant increase to address increased living expenses for
indigent adults and to match adjustments that were made to the
maximum grant levels in CalWORKs. Welfare and Institutions
Code Section 17000.5 sets the GA grant at 62% of the 1991 Federal
poverty line ($342 per month) and specifies that counties may
annually adjust that amount consistent with any adjustment
provided in the maximum grant levels for CalWORKs. The
current General Assistance grant of $302 per month was
established consistent with reductions to the CalWORKs grant that
occurred between 1992 and 1997 and there have not been increases
to the maximum General Assistance grant since that time.The Recommended Budget for the Library totals $10,119,266 in
appropriations, financed by $9,954,562 in revenues and $164,704 in
use of fund balance. The Recommended Budget includes increases
in appropriations totaling $1,398,649 to cover higher cost for
employee benefits and information technology replacement needed
for the redesign of the Library's internet network. The Library
anticipates $1,424,138 in additional revenue for FY 2016-17 to help
support the cost increases. Most of the revenue growth can be
attributed to increased property tax receipts.
Several building and repair projects were initiated in FY 2015-16,
with at least two of them carrying over into the FY 2016-17 Budget.
The Seaside library renovation project cost $675,000 for internal
repairs and refurbishing, and the City of Seaside contributed to
repairing the exterior of the building. The construction of the new
San Lucas Library is primarily funded by private donations, grants,
and library budget appropriations. The Big Sur Library is
undergoing an intensive repair project to mitigate serious
deterioration of the building. The estimated cost of this project is
$175,000. In addition the Greenfield Library is anticipated to need
major additional repairs in FY 2016-17, including wiring upgrades
to support high speed bandwidth.
Though the increase in expenses exceeds the increase in revenue,
the Library anticipates a continued positive balance for FY 2016-17.
However, the gap between library resources and community needs
continues to grow, and MCFL continues to actively seek alternative
and diversified sources of funding in order to supplement its
budget and fill the ongoing gap.
The majority of the County Library's budget pays for staff salaries,
and maintaining multiple locations. The funds available for books
and library materials, computers/technology, and library supplies
are very limited. The County Library collaborates with various
Friends of the Library groups and the Foundation for Monterey
County Free Libraries on fundraising events, grant applications,
book sales and various outreach efforts to obtain funding for library
programs, services, and staff support. The County Library is also
continuing to seek other funding opportunities like partnerships
with cities to share operational costs.The Recommended Budget provides for maintaining Library
services at basic levels for FY 2016-17.
Staffing will remain at FY 2015-16 levels, but costs have risen
significantly because of a major increase in benefits costs, and also
partly due to step increases.
Intermittent staff vacancies have helped the Library meet its
balanced budget goals. The temporary closure of three branches
(Big Sur, San Lucas and Parkfield), though having a negative effect
on MCFL's ability to provide service, has contributed to savings on
the staffing side. Conversely, the effort to reopen two of the
libraries to serve the communities and to get the projects moving
forward in FY 2015-16 has increased the budget gap because of
large unplanned emergency capital expenses. Deferred
maintenance of library facilities was the major contributing factor
in the closure of all three library facilities and continues to cause
serious concern regarding the structural conditions of several
additional library facilities.
Basic maintenance of library facilities, rents, and utilities remain
another significant area of budget appropriations.
MCFL continually assesses and tries to respond to the technology
needs of the community and a sizable portion of MCFL's budget is
devoted to technology related expenses. Administrative efforts
continue to focus on securing federal and state discounts like e-
Rate, and grants to support technological innovation.
Library materials, including books and non-print materials are
another significant line among the appropriations, but are
inadequate to meet community needs. The Library requested and
received a one time augmentation for FY 2016-17 of $190,000 to
purchase library materials. A large part of this will go to stocking
the shelves of the newly rebuilt San Lucas Library.During FY 2016-17, MCFL will address the Board of Supervisors
Strategic Initiatives and fulfill its mission through the following:
Formulate a new strategic or business plan which balances
individual community needs with efficiency and sustainability.
Complete the San Lucas Library building and open it for public use.
Continue to explore options for building a new Parkfield Library
and replacing the aging bookmobiles.
Continue repairs on the Greenfield Library.
Start investigating options for permanent County-owned library
facilities in Big Sur and Bradley.
Explore leasing and replacement options for library computers and
fleet vehicles.
Continue to grow programs for youth and adults including
cultural/arts programs, afterschool homework programs,
conversational English programs, etc.
Pending Issues
The Parkfield branch library is currently closed and a new facility is
needed to adequately serve this remote community. MCFL will be
exploring options for replacing this building serving this
community, which has very limited alternatives for library or other
services. Service is currently provided by bookmobile, Library-by-
Mail, and through the online services.The Recommended Budget for the Department totals $585,576 in
appropriations, financed by $124,219 in program revenue and
$461,357 in General Fund Contributions (GFC). Expenditures
increased $34,525 primarily due to the newly allocated countywide
indirect cost implemented for FY 2016-17 by the Auditor-
Controller, as well as increases in retirement contributions and
healthcare costs. Revenues reflect a decrease of $9,179 from the FY
2015-16 Adopted Budget. The decrease is a result of increased
regulation on the use of grant funds to reimburse County costs.
The Recommended Budget includes $19,608 in recommended
augmentations to restore an Accounting Technician to a 1.0 Full-
Time Equivalent (FTE).
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget maintains current service levels but
does not include additional operational supply needs which are
reflected as augmentation requests submitted by the department.

Promote the economic sustainability of the County's economic
base from the agricultural industry by conducting research to solve
current pest problems. Provide free diagnostic services that lead to
the discovery of new diseases and pests that can be stopped before
they spread. Provide anti-bioterrorism diagnostic services for the
agricultural industry. Maintain and enhance the resources of the
region by conducting food safety (E. coli) research for local growing
conditions. Increase assistance to growers to improve irrigation
and nitrogen use efficiency.
ENOTOMOLOGY RESEARCH PROGRAM: Research on biology
and management of cabbage maggot, thrips, garden symphylan,
springtails and bagrada bug will continue. Continue research on
organic controls of bagrada bug in Brassica crops.
PLANT PATHOLOGY RESEARCH PROGRAM: Continue to
investigate and study the two soilborne strawberry diseases that are
now in Monterey County. Continue surveying, detecting, and
identifying the races of spinach downy mildew. Continue to provide
diagnostic services to all components of the agricultural industry.
Continue to expand the capabilities of our diagnostic lab by adding
additional molecular testing methods that can detect the DNA of
target plant pathogen.
IRRIGATION AND WATER QUALITY RESEARCH PROGRAM:
Increase assistance to growers to improve irrigation and nitrogen

use efficiency and continue evaluating new practices and
technologies for improving water and nutrient use efficiency of
agriculture in Monterey County. Cooperative Extension will also
continue efforts to establish a new CIMIS weather station near
Soledad to help growers improve irrigation scheduling and water
conservation, and expand the online water and fertilization
decision support tool, CropManage, to additional commodities
produced in Monterey County; continue to assist the agricultural
industry in implementing practices to improve water quality, such
as vegetated ditches, denitrification bioreactors, and low residue
cover crops; begin a large study on the food safety risks of reusing
tail water for irrigating leafy green vegetables; and conduct trials in
commercial fields to demonstrate to growers that backgrounds
levels of nitrate in their irrigation water has fertilizer value for their
crops.
VEGETABLE AND WEED SCIENCE RESEARCH PROGRAM:
Develop information on how vegetables extract nitrate from the
soil profile and use this information in designing fertilization
programs. Evaluate efficient nitrogen fertilization of cool season
vegetables to assist growers in complying with the new restrictions
on the use of fertilizer by the Regional Water Quality Control
Board. Research computer assisted technologies that mechanically
thin and weed lettuce and make crop production more efficient and
economical. Develop an effective late season weed control system
for cool and warm season vegetables to reduce weeding costs and
safeguard yield.
VITICULTURE RESEARCH PROGRAM: Continue long-term
studies evaluating cultivar clonal selections and rootstocks for their
performance under local conditions . Continue disease
management studies in vineyards. Continue studies to measure the
effects of plant material and cultural practices to promote the early
development and productivity of newly established vineyards.
Establish additional sites to evaluate the use of tall vines at planting
to accelerate vine development and increase the production
potential of newly established vineyards.
Improve the quality of life for the County's youth, seniors and
families by training adult volunteers to work directly with youth.
Provide opportunities for youth to become engaged in positive,
research-based activities and develop responsibility and leadership
through community service. Train Master Gardener volunteers
who conduct community enhancement service projects.
Maintain and enhance the natural resources of the County by:
Providing information through classes, workshops, newsletters,
personal consultations and website that leads to the use of softer or
less chemicals for pest control or effective alternatives to chemical
controls. Provide farmers and policy makers unbiased, researchbased
information. Develop alternatives to pesticides that might
degrade water quality or air quality.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the Parks
Department is $9,901,820; a net increase of $1,060,486 from the FY
2015-16 Adopted Budget. Cost increases in services and supplies
reflect realistic costs associated with the management agreement at
the Parks Resorts. The Recommended Budget is financed by
$7,825,238 in program revenues and $2,076,582 in General Fund
Contributions (GFC). Projected revenue for the Parks Resorts
continues to decrease due to the low water levels at Lake
Nacimiento and Lake San Antonio. Reduced visitation is
anticipated for the 2016 season as a result of the current extreme
drought. The drought has increased the costs of utilities
throughout the park system as more water is needed to maintain
park fields at optimal condition. The Recommended Budget
includes 33 Full Time Equivalents (FTE), a nine FTE decrease from
the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget.
Budget Impacts
The Recommended Budget reduces the General Fund staff by two
FTE due to various cost pressures, such as the increased cost of
employee health care insurance and the Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) upgrade. Both positions (County Parks Ranger II
and Parks Building and Grounds Worker II) are currently vacant.
As a result of the ongoing drought at Lake Nacimiento and Lake
San Antonio, park operations have been impacted with reduced
revenues and other fiscal challenges. The Recommended Budget
reduces staffing for resort operations by eight FTE. The reduction
in positions will limit patrol by County Park Rangers and
maintenance by Building and Grounds workers at the Parks
Resorts.
In FY 2015-16, reduced revenue generated by the Parks Resorts
required the Department to close down Lake San Antonio (LSA) on
July 1, 2015. Although unbudgeted last fiscal year, the Department
provided a baseline level of maintenance to keep LSA from
deteriorating further. In FY 2016-17, the Parks Department

proposes boarding up buildings, turning off the water and sewer
systems and selling assets that are no longer in use (vehicles, boats,
office furniture, etc.) at Lake San Antonio. It is anticipated that the
bulk of operation responsibilities at Lake Nacimiento will be
handled by our partner, the Cal Parks Company operating under a
management agreement.
Most of the Department's facilities and park assets have outlived
their usefulness and are serving years beyond their expected life.
The cost to repair or upgrades continue to rise as maintenance
continues to be deferred due to funding shortages. Completed in
2015, the County's Capital Improvement Program (CIP) Five Year
Plan illustrates the Department's need of $25 million over the next
10 years to make infrastructure repairs.


The Recommended Budget sustains the operation of Lake
Nacimiento, mainly through a management agreement with our
partner, the California Parks Company. The current company
under contract is not required to maintain the water and sewer
systems at Lake Nacimiento; this is a Department responsibility.
The County is legally responsible to ensure that any sewage spills
are handled immediately and that sewer does not run into the lake.
The Recommended Budget increases the possibility that the
County might not be able to respond to sewage spills in a timely
fashion. This will not be an issue at Lake San Antonio if water and
sewer systems are shut off, as recommended.
The Recommended Budget eliminates the peak season temporary
labor, the baseline level of maintenance and improvements, and the
costs of the Invasive Species Protection Program (quagga mussel
inspection). Infrastructure repairs and improvements to buildings
and water and septic systems are also not budgeted to annual
needs.
The reduction of the five public safety peace officers will require
the California Parks Company to handle campground security. The
enforcement of laws on Lake Nacimientowill continue to rest with
the Sheriff 's Department of San Luis Obispo County. Monterey
County has been extended privileges to enforce the ordinances of
San Luis Obispo County over the years; however, revenues from
citations written by Monterey County Park Rangers stay in San Luis
Obispo County.
Last fiscal year, Lake San Antonio (LSA) was closed to the public.
This year, the Department will close down all water and sewer
operations at LSA. The Department will stop inspecting the
location on a daily basis for vandalism, poaching of animals or theft
of county assets. If in the future the County reopens LSA, there will
be start-up costs to restore operations and infrastructure. The
equipment and supplies at LSA will be reallocated throughout the
park system or put up for auction.
There are still unfunded costs for Lake San Antonio, even with the
closure of the operations last year. These unfunded costs include
funding to permanently board up buildings, remove copper fixtures
before they are stolen, a permanent fence around the entrance and
other necessary projects to remove Department liabilities.
Additionally, the company that partners with the Department in
providing the Wildflower Triathlon has been informed that the
event will not be permitted next year.

Require contractor holding management agreement to be
responsible for more of the resort operations including gate
entrance, campground maintenance, and quagga mussel
inspections.
Collaborate with San Luis Obispo County Sheriff's Department on
law enforcement issues relating to Parks Resort operations.
Create a volunteer group that could help provide services that the
County will no longer be providing directly
Pending Issues
There are no pending issues.
Policy Considerations
Weighing the options of authorizing a long term management
agreement to an operator and whether the lake resort operations
should be a lease rather than a management agreement need to be
discussed.
Analyze ways in which the Department delivers recreational
opportunities at the resorts today and how they can adapt to deal
with ongoing drought conditions.

Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 expenses are budgeted based on FY 2015-
16 activities through December 2015, annualized for the twelve
month fiscal year. To appropriately reflect expected future
expenditures, annualized amounts are normalized by excluding
one-time events and adjusting for anticipated expenses.
Expenditures for FY 2016-17 are budgeted at $251,667,562, a
$32,325,050 increase over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget, which
is approximately a 14.7% increase.
Salaries and Employee Benefits are budgeted at $145,154,390, an
increase of $17,330,407 over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget,
which represents an approximately 13.6% increase. The main
reasons for the increases are: Annual employee step rate increases,
insurance costs, new positions to accommodate for volume
increases, an expanding Family Practice Residency Program,
increasing quality assurance resources, additional components of
electronic health records implementation, and other support
positions.
Services and Supplies increased by $8,131,749 from the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget, which represents an approximately 11.0%
increase. The main drivers for the increases in expenses are:
healthcare information technology (IT) systems maintenance and
licensing, pharmaceutical drug costs, general surgical costs
including prosthetic costs, completion of trauma program,
increases in utilities cost, and depreciation costs.
Capital Assets will increase by $9,995,380 over the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget, an approximately 114.5% increase. The
$18,727,413 recommended budget is comprised of Building and
Improvement ($9,607,140), IT equipment ($5,474,788), medical
equipment ($2,589,230) and other equipment ($1,056,255).
FY 2016-17 total available revenue is budgeted at $262,167,926, a
$42,857,315 increase (16.3%) over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget.
Intergovernmental Revenues are budgeted at $38,364,800, an
$804,073 increase (2.1%) over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. The
majority of the increase is due to the 2010 Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (PPACA), commonly called the Affordable


Care Act (ACA) or colloquially, Obamacare, mandated payments
for Medi-Cal Managed Care adult expansion.
Charges for Services are budgeted at $206,752,612, a $25,002,728
increase (13.8%) over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. The
increase is due to Medicaid expansion through Covered California,
new enrollees in MediCal Managed Care, and revenue from trauma
services.
Other Financing Sources are budgeted at $17,050,514. This
financing source was implemented in FY 2016-17 as a budgetary
control feature for capital projects greater than $100,000 in cost.
Capital project funds are held in Fund 404-Facilities Master Plan
Implementation, a County capital project fund, and as capital
project expenditures are incurred by NMC, the capital project
funds are transferred to NMC. This budgetary control prevents
comingling of operational and capital funds.
The use of Other Financing Sources renders an actual overall
expenditure of $234,617,048 in operations. With a Total Revenue
of $262,167,926, NMC will add an additional $10,532,265 during
FY 2016-17 to its Net Position (Cash).
Budget Impacts
Impact on labor and benefit costs due to negotiated labor
contracts.
Impact of the California 1115 Waiver Renewal, called Medi-Cal
2020, was approved by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services on December 30, 2015 and became effective as of January
1, 2016 through December 31, 2020. Key programmatic elements
are Public Hospital Redesign and Incentives in Medi-Cal (PRIME);
Global Payment Program; Dental Transformation Initiative; and
Whole Person Care. PRIME incentive payments are earned based
on the achievement of specified benchmarks across various
metrics. PRIME also requires the achievement of set targets for
moving toward alternative payment methodologies for Designated
Public Hospitals over the course of the Waiver.

Successful first year implementation of Medi-Cal 2020 in order to
receive Federal funding for plan implementation.
Expand primary care clinic space.
Improve access to Emergency Department services.
Achieve 100% compliance on nationally reported clinical quality of
care measures.
Clinical quality measures are tools that help measure and track the
quality of health care services provided within the Medicare and
Medicaid Services. The measures use data associated with
provider ability to deliver high-quality care or relate to long term
goals and are measured in several areas of patient care: health
outcomes; clinical processes; patient safety; efficient use of health
care resources; care coordination; patient engagements; population
and public health; and adherence to clinical guidelines.
Develop capital expansion plans for clinical service growth.
Apply for consultative site visit with American College of Surgeons
(ACS) to become a Level II verified Trauma Center.
Trauma Center Verification is an evaluation process done by the
ACS to evaluate and improve trauma care. The ACS does not
designate trauma centers; instead, it verifies the presence of the
resources listed in Resources for Optimal Care of the Injured
Patient. These include commitment, readiness, resources, policies,
patient care, and performance improvement. This is a voluntary
process and verification lasts for a three-year period.
Meet FY 2016-17 budget performance.
Implement BETA Healthcare Group Emergency Department Quest
for Zero Assessment Recommendations.
BETA focused on improving reliability and reducing risk exposure
in emergency departments. BETA provides the opportunity for
significant reduction in ED premiums annually for this Patient
Safety Initiative. There are two tiers: (1) focuses on education,
where upon completion of the first tier the hospital can progress to
the second tier; (2) provides additional opportunities to enhance
patient safety while reducing ED premiums.
Develop patient analytics, specific data measures, for a new care
delivery model that focuses on the patient as the center of care with
delivery based on a coordinated team focused on a comprehensive,
safe, accessible, and quality of care emphasis to ensure the needs of
the patient are met efficiently and effectively. The overall goal is to
meet the recently signed California Section 1115(a) demonstration,
entitled "California Medi-Cal 2020 Demonstration (Waiver)" to
create models to slow the growth of healthcare costs, while
improving the quality and experience of care.
Implement action plan from employee satisfaction and culture of
safety survey results.
Implement the Vocera Experience Innovation Network Assessment
Plan (Network) recommendations to improve the patient
experience.
The Network seeks innovations that restore connections to
healthcare, improving clinical outcomes, increasing patient and
staff satisfaction, motivating physician loyalty and creating market
differentiation.
Complete NMC branding process and implement findings.
Enhance compliance audit activity.
Launch mandatory leadership training for current and new
managers through Monterey County management training
program.
Expand hospital-based wellness program.
Complete the second phase of the Sam Karas Acute Rehabilitation
Unit and Medical Surgical II Unit refresh (renovation). The phase
consists of seeking a license for existing 24-rehabilitation beds, thus
expanding the unit to a total of 44-rehabilitation beds and adding
20-medical/surgical beds. The first phase consisted of
construction and scheduled for completion prior to June 30, 2016.
Install nurse call system with communication features to improve
patient satisfaction and timeliness of care.
Complete the Emergency Department Rapid Medical Evaluation
(RME) remodel project.
Begin construction on Radiology Modernization Project.
Complete Central Plant Upgrade Project.
Implement direct messaging to send secure discharge information
to ambulatory partners.
Evaluate and establish a standardized master patient index (MPI)
with Monterey County Health Department.
Complete with Monterey County Health Department the
ambulatory electronic health record integration evaluation.
Complete business continuity of operations plan as part of disaster
recovery plan.