Provide the Board with an updated Major
Facilities Capital Financing Plan that will identify
financing alternatives for future capital needs
including a new Jail.
? Working with the Director of Library Services and
Community Outreach review, and if necessary,
update and implement the County’s External
Communications Plan to enhance public
awareness and communication about what the
County does.
? Successfully negotiate new Memoranda of
Understanding with the County’s bargaining
groups.
Complete the next round of funding grant
agreements from the Special Projects Fund.
? Complete first round of Arts and Culture grants
from the Special Projects Fund.
? Continued staff evaluation of the Napa Pipe
proposal.
? Renewal of Tourism Improvement District.
? Establish permanent financing strategy for
Farmworker Housing Centers.
? Implement recommendations of the Affordable
Housing Task Force.
Implement provisions of the Affordable
Healthcare Act (ACA).
? Revise Personnel Rules to comply with Local
Agency Personnel Standards (LAPS), with the
goal of becoming an Approved Local Merit
System (ALMS) Agency.
? Implement recommendations from the
PeopleSoft HR assessment including electronic
interfaces with benefit vendors for enrollment,
automatic step increases, and interface with
NeoGov for new hires.
? Revise New Hire Enrollment and OnBoarding
process.
? Develop procedures and checklist for
terminations.
? Implement New Hire Benefits and Employee
Handbook.
? Conduct marketing with several employee
benefit lines to ensure the most competitive and
highest quality vendors to provide employee
benefits (flexible spending account, life
insurance, long-term disability, and vision).
? Assume responsibility for benefits billing
reconciliations, which will be transferred from
the Auditor-Controller’s office.
? Continue to expand labor relations training in
order to improve employee relations.
? Revise leave management policies and
procedures to enhance employee and
department understanding of available benefits
and procedures, while ensuring legal
compliance.
Develop a Napa County Leadership Book Club
to increase the development of staff by reading
and sharing best practices and information on
appropriate leadership topics.
? Partner with Organizational Development
Committee and selected vendor to develop a
successful implementation plan for the Senior
Leadership Academy training program.
? Maintain the Organizational Development
Committee meetings on a quarterly basis.
? Remain developing and implementing the Napa
County Leadership Journal on a quarterly basis.
? Continue to support and respond to county-wide
requests for training and organizational
development assistance on an as needed basis.
Complete the Countywide Disaster Recovery
Plan project which began in FY 2011-2012.
? Donations Management Plan: Review of the
draft plan by stakeholder groups, followed by
approval of the plan in its final format.
? Continue to coordinate a Countywide
Emergency Operations Plan update with the
Cities of American Canyon, Calistoga, Napa, St.
Helena and the Town of Yountville and the
County which will avoid duplication of effort by
various jurisdictions.
? Continue the development and implementation
of a multi-year training plan for County
emergency response staff and other local
jurisdictions. Three Logistics section classes will
be offered in the fall of 2013.
? Continue delivering a quality Community
Emergency Response Team (CERT) program to
the residents, governmental agencies and
community-based organizations of Napa
County.
Continue to work on the Records Retention
schedule to eventually have a schedule for all
County departments that is approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
? Continue to work with Information Technology
Services to set up Electronic Records
Management Center.
Finalize Phase I of the Public Safety simulcast
Radio System project, with the installation of
equipment at the Oat Hill radio site providing
another transmit location.
? Start implementing Phase II of the Public Safety
simulcast Radio System by adding Berryessa
Peak as another transmitter for coverage in
Berryessa/Knoxville area.
? Improve management of County’s telecom
spending, by importing County telephony asset
information into the Telecom Asset
Management/Tracking System.
Upgrade Accela system to version 7.2 and start
implementing Accela Citizen Access Module for
PBES and Public Works; Upgrade GIS to version
10.1.
? Upgrade the SAS Budget application to the latest
version and develop a “user-friendly” application
for the publication of the Recommended Budget.
? Complete the development of the Jail
(Corrections) module, start the development of
the Juvenile Hall module and develop a mobile
interface for in-court use of CJNET.
Continue to qualify for certificates of excellence
from State Controller’s Office and the Government
Finance Officers Association for the County’s
financial reporting and Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR) for FY 2012-2013. This
includes the implementation of all new GASB
pronouncements issued during the year.
? With Information Technology Services, implement
the PeopleSoft Travel & Expense Module.
? With Purchasing Manager, implement a
purchasing card (P-Card) program for a secure
and efficient way to process specific County
disbursements.
? Enhance the use of PeopleSoft Project Costing
module for accurate and consistent reporting of
revenue sources and project tracking.
? Streamline the Accounts Payable process,
utilizing electronic payments and other enhanced
technology creating efficiencies in the data entry,
processing and reporting of invoices paid.
? With Information Technology Services, implement
automated approval workflow and document
imaging across all ERP modules, eliminating
duplicate entry and multiple paper copies of
documents
? Provide support and assist with development of
new reporting tool for the County’s new budgeting
software (SAS).
? Audit collection, disbursement and reporting of the
Tourism Improvement District activity.
? Develop and implement procedures for
streamlining County-wide financial processes.
? Create ongoing audit procedures for monitoring
grants and the various assessments created by
special districts.
Continue the installation and implementation of
comprehensive plan enabling County
departments to accept credit cards and debit
cards as payment for fees and services, as they
are needed and/or requested.
? Investigate possible cost savings in banking
services by analyzing detailed charges, activity
and alternative payment options. Analyze
County’s current and future banking services
requirements; possible issuance of
RFP/RFQ/RFI for identified services.
? Continue expanding the public’s ability to review
tax and treasury data online.
Continue to expand the public’s ability to review
data online and reduce the need to call or visit
this office in person.
? Continue to provide assessment value notices
on the County’s website for the January 1st 2013
lien date.
? Continue to review properties for possible
decline in value and increases in Prop 8 values.
? Communicate restoration of Prop 8 values to the
public through news releases and local media.
? Create online filing capability for vine reports
Continue to survey all polling places and Voter
Assistance Centers for feedback on operational
improvements for future elections.
? Improve vote by mail and polling place
experience for voters by implementing
suggestions from survey respondents.
? Successfully conduct the June 2014 Primary
Election. Continue to implement voting
procedures that provide accurate election results.
? Continue to provide all election materials to
voters in both Spanish and English, including
voter information access through the division’s
website.
? Offer 15,000+ polling place voters the opportunity
to receive their ballot by mail.
Complete implementation of the fictitious
business names (FBN) index online.
? Make available to the public the new online
marriage license application system which will
improve customer service and reduce staff time
needed to prepare marriage licenses.
? Complete scanning and indexing Vital Records
project (Birth and Death Certificates) from 1931-
1972.
Provide legal services to assist with acquisition
and expansion of the Health and Human
Services Agency campus.
? Provide legal services to assist with
implementation of a countywide transportation
sales tax measure that will bring $270 million to
local agencies for road rehabilitation and
maintenance.
? Complete a countywide record retention policy.
? Work with staff in the Regional Housing Needs
Assessment (RHNA) allocation and Housing
Element adoption process to ensure that the
County’s interests are adequately addressed.
? Continue to aggressively defend the County’s
interests relating to the Mishewal Wappo Indians
matter.
? Continue to defend the County’s interests in the
appeal brought by Latinos Unidos Del Valle De
Napa y Solano regarding the County’s housing
element.
? Complete Design and/or Planning:
o Improvements for the relocation of HHSA to
the Mylan Inc. property
o Improvements for the Staff Secure Facility
o Library Signage Master Plan
o New Jail Facilities
o Admin. Bldg. Chillers and Boilers
o Rutherford Restoration Project Reaches 5,
6, 7 and 9
o Jail Security System Replacement (Phase
II)
o Oak Knoll/Oakville Crossroad Restoration
Project
? Complete Construction (facilities):
o Administration Building Envelope
Improvements
o Calistoga Library Remodel
o 650 Imperial Way Paint and Windows
o Jail Security System Replacement (Phase I)
o Jail HVAC Fire Damper Retrofit
o Juvenile Justice Center Carpet and Sealing
of Exterior
o Library Acoustics and Lighting
o Hall of Justice Repair Air Handler
o Various County Facilities Solar
? Complete Construction (transportation):
o Devlin Road Segment C
o Various Traffic Safety Enhancements
o White Sulphur Springs Flood Repair
? Complete Construction (other):
o Rutherford Restoration Reaches 8B and 8C
and Re-vegetation
? Award of construction contract and begin
construction on the Oakville Crossroad Bridge
Replacement Project
? Continue implementation of the initiated Bridge
Replacement Program and the project
development process for the first bridge.
Complete RFP’s and implement new contracts
for all our vendors and services under the
CUPPCA rules.
? Develop comprehensive custodial cleaning
program to provide increased efficiency and
improved cleaning practices.
? Identify and implement energy conservation
measure for the Administration Building, 650
Imperial Way and the Hall of Justice.
Safety
? Improve safety for all users of County road
system
? Develop a traffic safety spot improvement
program
? Completion of grant funded Deer Park,
North Kelly and Wooden Valley safety
enhancements
? Complete construction of utility facilities for
channelization on St. Helena Highway
? Skid-resistant surface treatment on Butts
Canyon Road
Reliability
? Operate and maintain County road system
so that it is available at all times
? Implement chip seal and vegetation
management programs
? Completion of flood repairs on White
Sulphur Springs Road
? Develop traffic count and speed survey
programs
? Develop procedures for making traffic data
available to public
Accessibility
? Plan, design and maintain County road
system in collaboration with regional
partners so that it is accessible to all modes
and users
? Completion of Devlin extension design
? Construction of Devlin extension Segment C
Fiscal Viability
? Continue to participate within NCTPA, MTC
and other appropriate local and regional
frameworks to justify and seek sustainable
revenue sources to provide for maintenance
of roads infrastructure requirements
? Investigate possibility of establishing a
countywide Traffic Mitigation Fee program
Examine options for improved fueling and related
record keeping.
? Review and recommend changes to the take
home vehicle policy.
? Review and make recommendations regarding
fleet depreciation and maintenance charges.
? Research feasibility of on-board vehicle tracking
and monitoring systems for County vehicles and
equipment.
? Administration:
o Procure tenant for the JAL facility.
o Procure tenant for the restaurant.
? Planning:
o Preparation of an Environmental
Assessment to support runway and taxiway
rehabilitation projects identified in the ACIP.
? Capital Improvement/Maintenance:
o Airfield Electrical Vault Inventory and
Regulator.
o Solar project system to provide power
needed for the terminal and the airfield.
o Removal of Hwy 29 sign.
Evaluate the possibility of a cost-saving
agreement to procure a veterinarian specializing
in Animal Shelter Medicine.
? Continue to maximize partnerships with local
animal welfare organizations and utilize
cooperative arrangements to improve animal
welfare in Napa County.
? Continue efforts to reach out to the community
for volunteer recruitment with the goal of
growing the animal foster program to increase
adoptions.
? Install acoustical mitigation in kennel areas to
reduce sound impact to shelter staff, visiting
public and the surrounding properties.
Work with Napa Humane in development and
promotion of a “Shelter Support Services
Program” with the goal of raising funds to
purchase new and improved cat cages.
? Work with Animal Services (Sheriff’s
Department) for provision of special
circumstance animal housing (e.g. large
numbers of fowl taken as evidence in humane
cases).
? Continue to work with volunteer promotion team
on marketing campaigns and advertising to
increase adoptions to record high numbers.
The Agricultural Commissioner, in cooperation
with the federal and state governments, wine
industry and community, will continue to make
progress in eradicating EGVM from Napa
County, and incremently remove areas from
quarantine.
? Work closely with the Napa County Local Food
Advisory Council to hold the third annual
National Food Day event, and in doing so
promote local food production and consumption;
utilize time during Council meetings to connect
with key players in the local food community for
the purpose of collaboratively finding solutions
to the problems and obstacles faced in local
food initiatives; and establish the Council’s
website so it will serve as a resource hub and
the communities’ ‘go-to’ site for local food
information.
? Use comprehensive regulatory inspection
program to ensure that pesticides are stored,
handled, and used properly and ensure the
protection and health and safety of the
agricultural work force, environment and public.
? Ensure fair competition and equity in the
marketplace through education and
performance of all mandated weights and
measures inspections and complaint
investigations, including implementation of a
price verification or scanner inspection program.
? Work collaboratively with the Napa County
Winegrape Pest and Disease Control District,
Board of Supervisors and winegrape industry, to
ensure that the County’s efforts to prevent the
introduction of GWSS, despite reductions in
state program funding.
? Continue to participate in the Great Wine
Capitals Global Network and attend the annual
general meeting which will be held in the Napa
Valley.
Realize the full potential of the reorganization
that created the Department of Planning,
Building & Environmental Services by offering
excellent public services at the permit services
center, by meeting performance standards for
processing times and inspections, and by
streamlining department operations where
feasible.
? Continue implementation of priority action items
identified in the 2008 General Plan Update and
begin the 2014 Housing Element Update.
? Complete the processing of major projects,
including Napa Pipe, the Syar Quarry
expansion, and the jail project EIR.
? Review and incorporate the State Water
Resources Control Board’s new MS4 storm
water program for small municipalities into Napa
County’s existing storm water program.
? Continue to work with ITS to develop Accela
reports required to monitor all performance
metrics.
? Complete scanning of property records and
improve “one-stop” public access to information
via the County website.
Realize the full potential of the reorganization
that created the Department of Planning,
Building & Environmental Services by offering
excellent public services at the permit services
center, by meeting performance standards for
processing times and inspections, and by
streamlining department operations where
feasible.
? Develop an outreach plan for Environmental
Health to build public awareness and increase
collaboration with regulated communities.
? Begin to develop a Local Agency Management
Plan (LAMP) as required by AB 885.
? Complete scanning of property records and
improve “one-stop” public access to information
via the County website.
Complete State inspection requirements for all
types of solid waste facilities.
? Receive and complete review of a revised
permit application from Clover Flat Landfill for
major change of operations.
? Review and process rate reviews for
agreements with Berryessa Garbage Service
and Napa County Recycling & Waste
Services.
? Apply for, receive and implement Waste Tire
Enforcement Grant from State of California,
Department of Resources Recycling and
Recovery.
? Complete performance audit for Napa County
Recycling and Waste Services.
Provide grant funding opportunities for the
community that will address specialized or
seasonal needs and support the WCC mission.
? Provide support for local fish and wildlife
projects affected by State funding reductions
through targeted grant funding.
? Improve the effectiveness of project grants
through on-going Commission review of current
and past grant projects, and status reports at
regular meetings of the Commission.
? Improve community awareness through
outreach and participation in local and regional
environmental events, such as Napa Earth Day,
Watershed Awareness Month Activities, and
others.
Realize the full potential of the reorganization
that created the Department of Planning,
Building & Environmental Services by offering
excellent public services at the permit services
center, by meeting performance standards for
processing times and inspections, and by
streamlining department operations where
feasible.
? Bring the updated building codes to the Board of
Supervisors for adoption before January 1, 2014,
including local amendments developed in
collaboration with the Fire Marshal and other
Napa County jurisdictions.
? Complete scanning of property records and
improve “one stop” public access to information
via the County website.
? Develop an electronic permitting and inspection
program for permit types that do not require
approval from other divisions or require the
submittal of plans.
Improve case management to incorporate a
paperless system for code enforcement.
? Work with ITS to improve code enforcement
mobile technology.
? Complete an audit of farm labor dwellings to
ensure they are being used appropriately, and
continue outreach and enforcement related to
short term vacation rentals.
Deliver research-based information from the
University of California and other institutions to
the residents and agricultural professionals of
Napa County
? Conduct numerous, effective outreach efforts in
viticulture, weed science, pest management,
natural resources, youth development and home
gardening.
? Collaborate in on-farm research projects to
address local needs in viticulture, pest
management, weed science, water quality, and
rangeland management.
Complete remodel of the Calistoga
neighborhood library with improvements to the
HVAC and lighting and create a more
functional space with room for improved
technology.
? The Library plans to have 6,500 children attend
a Library-sponsored or co-sponsored program
designed to stimulate their imaginations
annually (unrelated to school activities).
? The Library plans to have 25 learners pass the
General Equivalency Test (GET) to earn their
General Equivalency Diploma (GED) by June
30, 2014.
? Working with ITS and other library partners,
release a Request for Proposal for a new
Integrated Library System to replace the
existing SNAP (Solano and Napa Partners
Library Consortium) system.
Continue implementation of evidenced based
practices, such as Deferred Entry of Judgment
programs, and continue to collaborate with other
criminal justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and assist in
managing the correctional system changes due
to the 2011 Public Safety Realignment Act.
? Develop increased capacity of the Victim-
Witness Services Division to accommodate an
increase in post-Realignment responsibilities to
assist crime victims in all respects from
enforcing their state constitutional rights;
advising victims of progress in their cases; and
assisting victims in preparing claims for
reimbursement for expenses related to their
victimization including restitution.
? Maintain an active leadership role in the
reduction of elder abuse, gang violence, and
domestic violence by educating law enforcement
and the community to recognize, report, and
investigate such crimes, as well as to protect
victims and to then successfully prosecute those
offenders.
? Conduct targeted outreach and education
activities in the community for prevention of
DUI’s.
Continue to collect money to restore victims and
protect our environment.
? Engage in consumer outreach activities to
educate the public about scams initiated through
the internet and scams targeting the elderly.
Meet State Bar of California and American Bar
Association caseload guidelines for the provision
of indigent criminal defense services.
? Continue our collaboration with fellow criminal
justice agencies in the full implementation of the
2011 Public Safety Realignment Act and assist
in the management of the resulting changes to
the County’s correctional system.
? Comply with Court mandated time guidelines in
Parole Revocation Hearings filed on or after the
start of the Fiscal Year.
? Implement utilization of CJNet and Westlaw
mobile courtroom applications.
Continue to develop a tracking and reporting
system.
? Review the current contracts and administrative
structure of the Conflict Public Defender panel to
determine if any changes are necessary.
Complete the CJNET application for Probation
with ITS.
? Implement a Rewards/Sanctions grid for
implementation in Juvenile Probation.
? Develop and implement a quality assurance plan
to ensure fidelity to evidence based practices
programs.
? Continue to increase programming for Post
Release Community Supervision and Mandatory
Supervision populations including starting
programs in custody.

Select and implement gender specific treatment
programs for female wards. To date the
Department has reviewed several possible
programs, but has not yet found a program that
meets the desired scope.
Continue to reduce numbers of youth sent to
camp and DJJ.
Review the program for possible expansion in
light of the changes to the criminal justice system
due to Realignment.
Increase distributed child support collections by
3%.
? Increase the Percentage of Current Support
Collected and Percentage of Cases with an
Arrears Payment (Federal Performance
Measures).
? Increase community awareness of services
offered by Child Support Services by partnering
with other governmental and community
organizations.
? Conduct outreach to Napa employers to
increase the number of employers paying
electronically to improve timeliness of support to
families.
Continue working on ways to improve radio
reception in remote areas of the county.
? Investigations unit to make contact with crime
victims within two working days of report taken.
? Continue monitoring the presence of sex offense
registrants in the county and ensure compliance
with Jessica’s Law for 100% of offenders in city
and county jurisdictions.
Train care homes regarding coroner procedures
and death protocol.
? Insure mass fatality protocols are up to current
legal and professional standards.
Implement a public awareness campaign to curb
the number of dogs at large.
? Establish a structured training program for new
Animal Service Officers.
Educate the public on the danger of drug abuse
including “Spice” (synthetic marijuana) and
“Bath Salts” (synthetic hallucinogens).
Continue to collaborate with other criminal
justice agencies to implement the
recommendations of the Community Corrections
Partnership Realignment Plan and lead the
effort in managing the correctional system
changes due to the 2011 Public Safety
Realignment Act by offering a variety of
alternatives to incarceration to reduce the
inmate population and programming options to
reduce recidivism.
? Complete the transition from written log books to
digital log books, improving the oversight and
safety and security within the jail.
? Working with various departments including the
County Executive Office and Public Works,
identify future building needs in a five year
facility plan.
? Implement video visitation throughout the facility
requiring less intensive use of staff to facilitate
inmate visitation and improving customer service
and safety and security.
? Complete an RFP for kitchen meal services to
replace cooking the daily hot meal internally
which will improve the efficiency of this service.
? Implement the Community Corrections Work
Program (CCWP) and complete the agreement
with CALTRANS to clean trash and debris
throughout the State right-of-ways in Napa
County
? Working with the County Executive Office create
a jail needs assessment to be used for future
planning and possible funding opportunities
? Implement new programs throughout the jail to
assist with the continued effort to utilize
Evidence Based Programs to reduce recidivism.
Continue to provide qualified inmates access to
the Jail Education and Employment Program
(JEEP).
? Continue to improve inmate services related to
Canteen and inmate phone usage to improve
commission revenue to the Fund.
? Complete an analysis on the impact of video
visitation as it relates to Inmate Welfare Fund
revenue.
Continue working with local cooperators to
develop and improve existing agreements and
response plans which will ensure efficiency and
increase the level of service provided to Napa
County residents and visitors.
? Relocate the Napa County Fire Marshal’s Office
to the Hall of Justice. This will incorporate
contracted Cal-Fire staff into the day to day
operations of County’s consolidated permitting
center.
? Continue to support and work closely with Napa
Firewise and local community based groups to
improve preparedness for wildland fires.
? Develop a five-year strategic plan.
Continue to expand outreach and education
efforts for healthy living strategies to support the
community in achieving optimal health and
wellness.
? Implement and evaluate strategies and
interventions to improve exclusive breastfeeding
rates among public health clients.
? Use the Live Healthy Napa County Community
Health Assessment to inform and engage policy
and decision makers in the Community Health
Improvement Plan and Action Plan processes.
Expand the electronic medical record (Anasazi)
to external contract providers starting as a pilot
project with one agency and expanding to a total
of three agencies.
? Implement the Katie A. Settlement which
requires counties to improve the provision of
mental health and supportive services for
children and youth in, or at imminent risk of
placement in, foster care.
? Increase integration with Alcohol and Drug
Services (ADS) to improve coordination of
services to individuals with both substance
abuse and mental health disorders.
? Implement an outcome measurement/level of
care (LOC) tool within the Adult Mental Health
Services programs.
? Successfully implement an integration project
with Public Health.
Support Napa County Tobacco Advisory Board
to implement the Environmental Retail Tobacco
Merchant Campaign involving youth and
community leaders.
? Increase access to Drug Medi-Cal population by
co-locating staff at Queen of the Valley Medical
Center (QVMC) and American Canyon HHSA.
? Implement Vivitrol Pilot Project, an evidencebased
medically assisted treatment, to increase
program compliance and reduce occurrence of
relapse.
? Fully implement “Members in Good Standing”
Criteria in Calistoga High School and Napa
County Friday Night Live Partnership Youth
Council.
? Implement SBIRT (Screening, Brief Intervention
Referral to Treatment), an evidence-based
practice, as part of the primary care project and
universal screening processes.
? Implement evidence-based practices in
adolescent contracted treatment services, by
utilizing the Adolescent Matrix Model and Teen
Addiction Severity Index, Teen ASI.
Develop a domestic violence collaborative
with partner agencies in the community.
? Formalize a system of facilitated family
meetings at key decision points in case
planning within the framework of Safety
Organized Practice, to support successful
reunification and relative placements.
? Strengthen partnerships with service
providers outside the city of Napa.
? Continue to develop formal infrastructure
for the Adoption Services Program,
including methods to measure program
effectiveness.
Ensure Comprehensive Services for Older
Adults’ (CSOA’s) infrastructure meets the
expanding needs of the aging community.
? Further develop CSOA’s workforce by
supporting staff to obtain an online certificate in
gerontology.
? Address short and long term workspace issues
to accommodate staff and serve the
community.
Prepare for the expansion of Medi-Cal services
for Napa County residents by improving our
service delivery infrastructure, working with
community partners and developing targeted
outreach to individuals who may eligible.
? Continue to increase the incidence of healthy
food choices and improve wellness of low
income residents through the SNAP-Ed grant.
? Strengthen the capacity and skills of staff
focusing on customer service, quality
improvement and workforce development.
? Continue to enhance the American Canyon
Service Center in order to better serve and
improve awareness of residents in south
county.
? Continue the final phases of transitioning
approximately 4,000 children from Healthy
Families to Medi-Cal.
? Publish and implement a strategic workforce
development plan for the Napa-Lake Workforce
Investment Area.
? Achieve designation from the Governor as a
high performance Workforce Investment Board.
? Implement SB 1041 which allows more
flexibility for people to participate in activities
leading to self-sufficiency.
? Implement changes in reporting for most Cal
Fresh and CalWorks cases from quarterly
reporting to semi-annual reporting.
Continue to implement HHSA’s strategic plan, of
which the four overarching goals are:
? To improve the community’s health and wellbeing
by defining and promoting desired
outcomes.
? To increase the integration of health and
social services.
? To focus on continuous quality improvement
by building both the systems and the
communication to make data-informed
decisions.
? To promote public service by continuously
developing our high quality workforce.
Continue elevated budget management
activities to respond to constant changes in
revenue due to the unpredictable State and
Federal fiscal situation.
? Further expand uses of the new County budget
module/financial management application to
include reporting functionality.
? Work with the Auditor-Controller’s Office and
ITS to strengthen County and Agency fiscal
systems, including “project costing,” which
integrates the Agency’s program-based budget
and fiscal reporting processes into the Countywide
system.
? Implement upgrade of “CMIPS” In-Home
Supportive Services Case Management and
Payroll System.
? Create a new contract database to track and
monitor compliance and insurance
requirements for all agency contracts.
Continue to participate with the County
Executive Office, the Department of Public
Works and other County agencies in the
development of new space for the Agency.
? Continue the project to extend use of the
Agency’s electronic clinical record and billing
system to non-profit organizations contracting to
provide mental health and alcohol and drug
services to HHSA clients.
? Work with contractors to expand new work
experience and supportive employment training
programs operating in the Agency kitchen.
? Continue to work with the Continuum of Care to
develop and implement structural and
programmatic changes in response to the new
Federal HEARTH Act regulations
Collaborate with HHSA Divisions and
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs) to
increase the development and implementation
of coordinated program evaluation.
? Update the HHSA Incident Reporting system to
improve efficiency and quality of the process
and outcomes.
? Collaborate with HHSA Divisions and CBOs to
support implementation of evidence-based
practices, with an emphasis upon prevention
programs and integrating services.
? Publish program evaluation dashboards for the
Mental Health Division’s children’s services and
the Alcohol and Drug Services’ Matrix
program.
? Expand the children’s mental health services
program evaluation and clinician support
project to include the Independent Provider
Network (IPN).
Working with QM and ITS to develop an
automated program to efficiently screen
contractors through the OIG/GSA and Medi-Cal
Suspended/Ineligible list, monthly.
? Revise and update the Credentialing process.
? Incorporate our mission, vision, and core values
into key human resources processes (e.g.
recruiting, onboarding, performance appraisals,
etc.)
? Develop a communication tool to inform
employees of the array of services the agency
provides and how to access those services.
? Develop a desk guide for managers and
supervisors on how to develop and support
employee professional growth goals as part of
the agency commitment to invest in ourselves as
a workforce.
