The FY 2016-17 base budget represents continued operation
at the FY 2015-16 level of staffing. To meet the FY 2016-17
NCC limit, the OCDA submitted one augmentation request
of $9.1 million to reduce 67 positions including Deputy District
Attorneys and Investigators responsible for prosecuting
murderers, rapists, child molesters, child abusers, spouse
abusers, and other felons to meet basic prosecution. The
operations of the OCDA are integrated and interdependent.
A restore augmentation of $9.1M is requested to fund 67
existing positions vital to upholding public safety and to
effectively represent the People of the State of California and
provide Orange County residents and visitors with a safe
community.
Each year prosecutors review approximately 70,000
crime reports and file cases involving over 60,000
defendants. To avoid significant increases to the base
budget, the OCDA continues cost cutting measures by
deferring and reducing expenses in services, supplies,
and equipment, and eliminating non-essential travel
and training.
¦ The advance of DNA technology is bringing an unprecedented
number of cold hit DNA cases into the criminal
justice system. These cold hits often identify violent
offenders and may implicate statute of limitations so
that immediate attention is paramount for public safety.
As DNA technology expands, the number of perpetrators
identified by DNA cold hits will continue to
increase. The DNA Unit is currently exploring the DNA
paperless database project to scan all metadata, prints,
photographs and currently stored documents to
increase efficiency.
¦ Continue to evaluate staffing levels to ensure sufficient
resources are available to address both the volume and
complexity of caseloads. Caseload demands are managed
through staff rotations and in some instances use
of volunteer staff.
¦ Continue to exercise fiscal prudence and closely monitor
revenues and expenses. The FY 2016-17 budget
includes a transfer out of the District Attorney's entire
estimated Obligated Fund Balance for Fund 14J, Excess
Public Safety Sales Tax to fund existing operations.
¦ Continue to work collaboratively with CEO/Budget
Office and highlight variances and issues, which may
impact budget requirements.
The base budget includes $580,806 NCC reduction compared
to the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget.
The FY 2016-17 Budget, with augmentation request, represents
continued operation at the FY 2015-16 level of staffing.
To meet the FY 2016-17 NCC limit, the DA-PA submitted
one augmentation request of $573,425 to reduce four existing
positions, of which the DA-PA has requested full restoration.
Cases are trending towards higher value estates in general,
with more varied and diverse asset bases for disposition.
Deputies are applying innovative ways to shorten
the time it takes to marshal financial assets, making
case processing less burdensome, while continuing to
maintain the high level of fiduciary focus needed to
assure highest and best value attainment for distributees.
FY 2016-17 Requested Budget for Grand Jury services
include $583,898 Appropriations and Net County Cost,
which is $55,286 (10%) more than FY 2015-16 final budget
of $528,612.
FY 2016-17 $583,898 Budget include:
1. $323,371 for reimbursement of mileage claims and stipend
(per diem) for Grand Jury members
2. $145,000 for reimbursement of Grand Jury administrative
support cost to OC Superior Court
3. $113,305 for County Information Technology cost for
Grand Jury members
4. $2,222 for workers' comp cost allocation for Grand Jury
members
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Juvenile Justice Commission
services include $178,367 Appropriations and Net
County Cost, which is $1,766 (1%) more than FY 2015-16
final budget of $176,601.
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Detention Release
services includes $1,632,490 Appropriations and $1,622,490
Net County Cost, which is $33,441 (2%) less than FY 2015-
16 final budget of $1,655,931. The OC Superior Court provides
administrative support to Detention Release and
receives reimbursement from the County.
Probation's base budget includes the adjusted vacancy rate
of approximately 10% to meet the Net County Cost limit,
which takes into account the deletion of 100 vacant positions
in Fiscal Year 2015-16. Carrying a vacancy rate of this level is
only possible due to the low population levels in Probation's
juvenile institutions. In the event these populations rise,
Probation will not be able to hold at a 10% vacancy.
Probation continues to focus on the efficient and effective
use of staff resources by reviewing the deployment
of existing resources. Performance Metrics and Evidence-
Based Practices initiatives are being used in this
effort.
¦ Probation continues to manage with limited resources
to protect public safety, as well as the health and security
of youthful offenders in custody.
¦ Probation will continue its joint efforts with the Courts,
other County departments, and community law
enforcement and stakeholders, especially as it relates to
Criminal Justice Realignment activities.
¦ Probation continues to make priority improvements to
its infrastructure to increase efficiency, while striving
for data sharing compatibility with state, county, and
local agencies.
Probation continues to look for grant opportunities to
help fund needed department-wide services consistent
with its use of best practices.
¦ Probation and other criminal justice partners are
addressing the impacts of Proposition 47 by monitoring
caseloads and shifting staff resources as appropriate.
The Offices of the Public Defender continue to provide
quality services on approximately 79,000 cases annually
and is proactive in addressing workload impacts resulting
from the complexity of casework, Proposition 47,
realignment, revocation hearings, parole violation hearings,
the three strikes law, changes in Proposition 36,
changes in how some juvenile offenders are prosecuted,
expansion of attorney responsibilities in delinquency
matters, expanded filing of "cold cases" arising from
advances in DNA evidence and other impacts of the
evolving legal environment.
¦ The Offices of the Public Defender, in partnership with
the Community Corrections Partnership and other
County Departments, continue to evaluate and employ
best practices to ensure the continued successful implementation
of services required as a result of AB109.
The base budget includes a $17.6 Million Net County Cost
(NCC) decrease compared to the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget
which includes the reduction of $11.9 Million in NCC for
one-time, current year augmentations.
Prop 172 Public Safety Sales Tax Revenue (Prop 172)
remains a significant funding source for the Sheriff ’s
Department, but fluctuated with the economy and
declined significantly in the past years. Although Prop
172 revenue has experienced growth, it is not significant
enough to offset the ongoing operational costs
increase in the areas of Salaries & Employee Benefits,
Workers’ Compensation Insurance, Property & Liability
Insurance, fuel, food and other Services & Supplies.
¦ In response to overall operational cost increases and the
decline in State and Federal grants as well as other revenues,
the department is focused on reducing the budgethas been to delay in filling vacant positions in order to
save costs. In addition, the department reduced/
deferred facility maintenance and equipment purchases.
¦ The Department faces a fluctuating jail population
which may impact revenues. The passage of Proposition
47 has reduced the inmate population, however, those
same convicts may be re-incarcerated as they miss
court dates and fail to pay citations. The AB109 population
has also decreased with the passage of Prop 47 due
to the reclassification of inmates and ICE beds fluctuate
which impacts revenue.
without impacting public safety. One of the measures 
Emergency Management is increasingly reliant on
information systems to produce detailed information
during disaster response, such as automated detection
for hazardous chemical plumes, rapid damage assessment
tools and the ability to produce a common operational
picture for all levels of government. Technical
support is now required to manage the informational
systems used in everyday emergencies. Moving forward,
high tech solutions will be required to address
catastrophic emergencies.
¦ Emergency Management leads the County effort to produce
the Orange County Hazard Mitigation Plan. This
involves emerging science related to climate change and
the adaptability of communities to become disaster
resilient.
¦ Emergency Management is leading the effort to improve
emergency planning for people with disabilities, and
those with access and/or functional needs through a
collaborative effort, which includes the building of partnerships
with private, non-profit and advocacy groups.
¦ Emergency Management continues to work on planning,
preparing and training for yearly emergency exercises,
including those related to terrorism response,
earthquakes, flooding, and the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
Station spent fuel pools.
¦ Emergency Management continues to improve current
Emergency Plans (County and Operational Area Emergency
Operations Plan, Hazard Mitigation Plan, San
Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS)) and
Annexes (Weapons of Mass Destruction, Aviation
Disaster, Mass Evacuation, Recovery) and develop new
Annexes (Volunteer and Donations Management).
¦ Emergency Management continues to lead the County/
Operational Area effort on terrorism emergency planning.
¦ Emergency Management is responsible for maintaining
the County/Operational Area Emergency Operations
Center in a constant state of readiness (per County
Board Ordinance) for activation and exercises.
¦ Emergency Management continues to receive a high
number of requests for public education and preparedness
expos, which fall into an unfunded area. There is
no staff dedicated to working with the unincorporated
County area residents and community groups. This is
an area in which requests will continue to increase as
incidents and emergency situations increase.
Assembly Bill 118, effective July 1, 2011 made certain
changes to the manner in which Court Security services
are funded. Funds for Court Security come directly to
the County from the State and have been deposited in a
unique Trial Court Security Account. This account will
be "billed" each month for reimbursement of all allowable
security costs as detailed by the Sheriff ’s Department.
State funding for Court Security should be stable
through FY 2016-17 Superior Court and the Sheriff will
continue to negotiate a staffing and security plan.
¦ The Sheriff 's Court Operations Division continues to
maintain a working partnership with the Superior
Court and will seek to maximize security services while
working within available funding levels.
Interoperable communications for first responders.
¦ Digital audio and video recording systems and services.
¦ Video conferencing/visitation systems.
¦ Jail electronics/control systems and services.
¦ Extending 800 MHz CCCS network and subscriber fleet,
as a migration path towards the next generation system.
¦ FCC required Rebanding planning and implementation.
FY 16-17 consists of PROACT’s Department of Justice Asset
Forfeiture remaining balances.
Orange County and Southern California continue to be
the pipeline for major drug trafficking organizations
(MDTO’s) bringing their methamphetamine into the
United States. Once in the Southern California area, the
methamphetamine is often cleaned with a process
called "Icing" which involves the washing of drugs with
solvent, allowing it to be sold at a higher price. The presence
of methamphetamine manufacturing labs in
Southern California has dropped significantly; however,
the team continues to encounter these "Icing" labs in
and around Orange County. The drug cartels have
moved some of their production into Mexico where they
have more access to the precursor chemicals needed for
production and less of a presence from law enforcement.
¦ During 2015, PROACT continued to focus on disrupting
drug trafficking organizations in the facilitation, manufacturing
and distribution of methamphetamine. Since
the aggressive movement of production to Mexico, the
PROACT has experienced a shift in trend from production
to smuggling. PROACT continues to identify laboratories
throughout the region as well as the
identification of leads related to the transportation of
methamphetamine in liquid form.
¦ In addition to Methamphetamine, Orange County is
also experiencing an increase in the use of Hash/honey
oil, as well as an increase in butane honey oil extraction
labs. This new designer drug is a new focus of law
enforcement agencies within the boundaries of Orange
County. As a result, law enforcement incidents include
buy/bust operations, enforcement investigations, clandestine
methamphetamine and butane honey oil laboratories
and search warrants. Furthermore, the
PROACT is experiencing a more critical threat to the
exposure of the growing trend of Fentanyl, due to the
laboratory environments they more often are exposed
to.
The County Automated Fingerprint Identification Fund is a
self-balancing budget with restrictive revenue from Court
Fines. The base budget for Fiscal Year 2016-17 includes
$1,064,288 transfer in from Fund 14D to fund operational
costs in Fund 109 when revenue is insufficient to offset the
expenditures for that year.
The trend continues to expand from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric
identification systems, capable of storing and matching
several types of physical features for identification. Fingerprint
and palmprint identification are widely used
by local law enforcement. Mobile fingerprint identification
and facial recognition are the next most commonly
used biometric modalities. Iris pattern recognition,
voice pattern recognition and DNA profile matching are
among the emerging biometric modalities being considered
by local law enforcement to maximize the ability
to identify criminals. Attention continues to focus on
the standardization of automated biometric identification
systems and the interoperability among disparate
local, state, national and international databases.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation and will
result in more technically skilled staff with more diverse
skill sets. The national trend is toward standardization
of all aspects of forensic science, to include mandatory
examiner certification and laboratory accreditation.
The RNSP-DOJ fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue from the U.S. Department of Justice. This budget, in conjunction
with the budgets established for Funds 125 - RNSP Dept. of Treasury and Fund 126 - RNSP Other, is intended to support
the RNSP’s operational expenses, and to reimburse overtime costs worked by participating agencies.
The Regional Narcotics Suppression Program (RNSP)
continues to maintain a key role in targeting Major
Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering Organizations
throughout the region. As these Organizations continue
to use Orange County as a major thoroughfare for their
transportation and trafficking activities, RNSP's continued
status as an active initiative of the Los Angeles High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA), provides the
Program access to the critical intelligence necessary to
maintain the innovative and far reaching approach carried
throughout many of its active investigations.
¦ Mexican Drug Trafficking Organizations continue to be
the primary large-scale drug traffickers in the Southern
California Region. As a result, there has been no change
to the violence experienced along the southwest border
area of Mexico, while the different cartels compete to
control the drug trafficking routes into the United
States. This violence has a direct impact on the domestic
market. Drug trafficking organizations continue to
use not only land routes to smuggle their drugs into the
United States, but cross border tunnels and air routes to
include ultra-light aircrafts. As the violence in Mexico
lingers, a shift in the method of transportation has
changed. RNSP is experiencing a multiple vehicle transport
approach for couriers. Traffickers are dispersing
the currency and product throughout multiple vehicles,
making it more difficult for surveillance teams to target
a specific vehicle, spreading surveillance efforts thin.
¦ In addition, RNSP experienced a significant increase in
the seizure of Heroin. For one on-going investigation,
RNSP seized a total of 146 Kg of Heroin; of that 113 Kg
was discovered while serving just one search warrant.
More concerning, Heroin laced with Fentanyl is also a
rising trend amongst addicts. The US Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) issued a nationwide alert
in early 2015, about the dangers of Fentanyl and Fentanyl
analogues/compounds. Furthermore, DEA also
issued warnings to law enforcement as Fentanyl can be
absorbed through the skin and accidental inhalation of
airborne powder can occur, which can be lethal
depending on the level of exposure.
The RNSP-Treasury fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue from the U.S. Department of Treasury. This budget,
in conjunction with the budgets established for Funds 118 - RNSP Dept. of Justice and Fund 126 - RNSP Other, is intended to
support the RNSP’s operational expenses, and to reimburse overtime costs worked by participating agencies.
The Regional Narcotics Suppression Program (RNSP)
continues to maintain a key role in targeting Major
Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering Organizations
throughout the region. As these Organizations continue
to use Orange County as a major thoroughfare for their
transportation and trafficking activities, RNSP's continued
status as an active initiative of the Los Angeles High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA), provides the
Program access to the critical intelligence necessary to
maintain the innovative and far reaching approach carried
throughout many of its active investigations.
¦ Mexican Drug Trafficking Organizations continue to be
the primary large-scale drug traffickers in the Southern
California Region. As a result, there has been no change
to the violence experienced along the southwest border
area of Mexico, while the different cartels compete to
control the drug trafficking routes into the United
States. This violence has a direct impact on the domestic
market. Drug trafficking organizations continue to
use not only land routes to smuggle their drugs into the
United States, but cross border tunnels and air routes to
include ultra-light aircrafts. As the violence in Mexico
lingers, a shift in the method of transportation has
changed. RNSP is experiencing a multiple vehicle transport
approach for couriers. Traffickers are dispersing
the currency and product throughout multiple vehicles,
making it more difficult for surveillance teams to target
a specific vehicle, spreading surveillance efforts thin.
¦ In addition, RNSP experienced a significant increase in
the seizure of Heroin. For one on-going investigation,
RNSP seized a total of 146 Kg of Heroin; of that 113 Kg
was discovered while serving just one search warrant.
More concerning, Heroin laced with Fentanyl is also a
rising trend amongst addicts. The US Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) issued a nationwide alert
in early 2015, about the dangers of Fentanyl and Fentanyl
analogues/compounds. Furthermore, DEA also
issued warnings to law enforcement as Fentanyl can be
absorbed through the skin and accidental inhalation of
airborne powder can occur, which can be lethal
depending on the level of exposure.
The RNSP-Other fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue guidelines from State Asset Forfeiture and grant funding.
This budget, in conjunction with the budgets established for Funds 125 - RNSP Dept. of Treasury and Fund 118 - RNSP
Dept. of Justice, is intended to support the RNSP’s operational expenses, and to reimburse overtime costs worked by participating
agencies.
The Regional Narcotics Suppression Program (RNSP)
continues to maintain a key role in targeting Major
Drug Trafficking and Money Laundering Organizations
throughout the region. As these Organizations continue
to use Orange County as a major thoroughfare for their
transportation and trafficking activities, RNSP's continued
status as an active initiative of the Los Angeles High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA), provides the
Program access to the critical intelligence necessary to
maintain the innovative and far reaching approach carried
throughout many of its active investigations.
¦ Mexican Drug Trafficking Organizations continue to be
the primary large-scale drug traffickers in the Southern
California Region. As a result, there has been no change
to the violence experienced along the southwest border
area of Mexico, while the different cartels compete to
control the drug trafficking routes into the United
States. This violence has a direct impact on the domestic
market. Drug trafficking organizations continue to
use not only land routes to smuggle their drugs into the
United States, but cross border tunnels and air routes to
include ultra-light aircrafts. As the violence in Mexico
lingers, a shift in the method of transportation has
changed. RNSP is experiencing a multiple vehicle transport
approach for couriers. Traffickers are dispersing
the currency and product throughout multiple vehicles,
making it more difficult for surveillance teams to target
a specific vehicle, spreading surveillance efforts thin.
¦ In addition, RNSP experienced a significant increase in
the seizure of Heroin. For one on-going investigation,
RNSP seized a total of 146 Kg of Heroin; of that 113 Kg
was discovered while serving just one search warrant.
More concerning, Heroin laced with Fentanyl is also a
rising trend amongst addicts. The US Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) issued a nationwide alert
in early 2015, about the dangers of Fentanyl and Fentanyl
analogues/compounds. Furthermore, DEA also
issued warnings to law enforcement as Fentanyl can be
absorbed through the skin and accidental inhalation of
airborne powder can occur, which can be lethal
depending on the level of exposure.
The SNP-DOJ fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue from the U.S. Department of Justice. This budget is
intended to fund services and supplies, overtime, equipment and lease costs for part of the Brad Gates Forensic Science Building.
The FY 2016-17 Budget is higher than the FY 2015-16 year-end projections, as a result of fund balance available carry forward
that will be used in future years for costs to fight the war on drugs.
The Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program (SNP) seized a record
amount of methamphetamine in 2015. The price of
methamphetamine remains low and has dropped
slightly from 2014 prices. The low price indicates there
is an ample supply and the cost of methamphetamine
has dropped below the cost of some low-grades marijuana.
¦ Synthetic drugs are an emerging trend with several
overdoses occurring in the Sheriff ’s jurisdiction. In the
past, synthetic drugs such as "spice" (synthetic marijuana)
and "bath salts" were the hot topic. Recently,
MDMA replaced Ecstasy (MDMA is ecstasy without the
binder and sold in powder or rock form instead of pill
form). And the Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program has seen
juveniles and young adults using synthetic LSD, commonly
referred to as "25b". The 25b is purchased over
the internet, through countries such as London and
Canada. When the United States government declares
such drugs illegal, and places them on the banned list,
the drug manufacturers just alters the drug’s compound
or molecular structure, making a slightly altered and
legal version of the newly banned substance.
¦ With the passage of Proposition 47, making most drug
possession cases a misdemeanor; the SNP has seen a
sharp decrease in calls for assistance from patrol deputies
regarding arrestees who will cooperate with law
enforcement in exchange for consideration in their new
drug cases. The arrestees know they will be cited and
released, instead of being booked in the county jail.
Therefore, the SNP has been unable to complete as
many controlled buys and informant-initiated cases as
in the past. Consequently, paid informants now play a
larger role than defendant informants in new narcotics
cases.
¦ Heroin use among young adults remains high, and large
amounts of heroin continue to be seized. Through calls
intercepted during court authorized wiretap investigations,
the SNP has learned that Mexico is increasing its
heroin production. According to intelligence gathered
during these intercepted calls, marijuana fields in Mexico
are being converted to poppy fields.
The SNP continues to encounter mid-level drug dealers
using vehicles to stash their narcotics as opposed to
their residences, storage facilities and/or stash pads.
The dealers move their stash vehicles frequently, making
finding the vehicles difficult.
¦ The SNP continues to see that narcotics traffickers are
more aware that law enforcement officers are using GPS
trackers to monitor their vehicle’s movements. It is common
for members of the SNP to observe narcotics traffickers
check the undercarriage of their vehicles for GPS
trackers that may have been installed by members of
law enforcement. Additionally, the SNP have discovered
GPS trackers placed on load vehicles have the ability to
not only track the vehicle’s movement, but can also
monitor audio of the interior of a load vehicle.
¦ The amount of firearms possessed by drug dealers and
narcotics traffickers remains high, and is a serious concern
to the safety of law enforcement personnel. The
number of firearms seized in 2013 was 55, nearly double
the number seized in 2012. In 2014, the Sheriff ’s
Narcotics Program seized 69 firearms, a 25% increase.
In 2015, the SNP seized 52 firearms. The steady seizure
of firearms is not known, but the SNP believes that the
investigation into and the targeting of more mid-level
narcotics traffickers may be the reason.
¦ In the airport interdiction realm, smugglers of narcotics
proceeds are carrying smaller amounts of cash in order
to avoid detection. Drug trafficking organizations are
using more than one person on the same flight to smuggle
narcotics proceeds, by either splitting the cash into
multiple bags or by using a lay-off person to distract law
enforcement from the actual smuggler. Also, drug trafficking
organizations are using commercial airlines and
parcel carriers, such as USPS, UPS, FedEx and independent
freight carriers to transport large amounts of currency
and narcotics.
¦ In the parcel interdiction arena, drug trafficking organizations
continue to utilize parcels to send narcotics to
states east of California and narcotics proceeds are sent
from states in the east to California. Many parcels are
gift wrapped and currency is often concealed with other
items, such as electronics, clothing, magazines and carbon
paper. The trafficking organizations are using vacuum
sealed bags, distracting odors and gluing the
seams of the parcels to avoid detection.
¦ The continued partnerships with the United States
Postal Service, the United Parcel Service, the Department
of Homeland Security, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the Drug Enforcement Agency, and the
Santa Ana Police Department, has been successful in
the interdiction of narcotics and narcotics proceeds
through parcel, freight and mass transit carriers. The
Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program has significantly increased
narcotic and narcotic currency seizures at the John
Wayne Airport and United States Postal Service though
increased enforcement efforts.
The SNP-Other fund is a self-balancing budget with restricted revenue from the State of California, other grant programs and
miscellaneous revenues. This budget is intended to fund services and supplies and equipment related to narcotics law enforcement
activities.
The Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program seized a record amount
of methamphetamine in 2015. The price of methamphetamine
remains low and has dropped slightly from
2014 prices. The low price indicates there is an ample
supply and the cost of methamphetamine has dropped
below the cost of some low-grades marijuana.
¦ Synthetic drugs are an emerging trend with several
overdoses occurring in the Sheriff ’s jurisdiction. In the
past, synthetic drugs such as "spice" (synthetic marijuana)
and "bath salts" were the hot topic. Recently,
MDMA replaced Ecstasy (MDMA is ecstasy without the
binder and sold in powder or rock form instead of pill
form). And the Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program has seen
juveniles and young adults using synthetic LSD, commonly
referred to as "25b". The 25b is purchased over
the internet, through countries such as London and
Canada. When the United States government declares
such drugs illegal, and places them on the banned list,
the drug manufacturers just alters the drug’s compound,
or molecular structure, making a slightly altered
and legal version of the newly banned substance.
¦ With the passage of Proposition 47, making most drug
possession cases a misdemeanor; the SNP has seen a
sharp decrease in calls for assistance from patrol deputies
regarding arrestees who will cooperate with law
enforcement in exchange for consideration in their new
drug cases. The arrestees know they will be cited and
released, instead of being booked in the county jail.
Therefore, the SNP has been unable to complete as
many controlled buys and informant-initiated cases as
in the past. Consequently, paid informants now play a
larger role than defendant informants in new narcotics
cases.
¦ Heroin use among young adults remains high, and large
amounts of heroin continue to be seized. Through calls
intercepted during court authorized wiretap investigations,
the SNP has learned that Mexico is increasing its
heroin production. According to intelligence gathered
during these intercepted calls, marijuana fields in Mexico
are being converted to poppy fields.
¦ The SNP continues to encounter mid-level drug dealers
using vehicles to stash their narcotics as opposed to
their residences, storage facilities and/or stash pads.
The dealers move their stash vehicles frequently, making
finding the vehicles difficult.
The SNP continues to see that narcotics traffickers are
more aware that law enforcement officers are using GPS
trackers to monitor their vehicle’s movements. It is common
for members of the SNP to observe narcotics traffickers
check the undercarriage of their vehicles for GPS
trackers that may have been installed by members of
law enforcement. Additionally, the SNP have discovered
GPS trackers placed on load vehicles have the ability to
not only track the vehicle’s movement, but can also
monitor audio of the interior of a load vehicle.
¦ The amount of firearms possessed by drug dealers and
narcotics traffickers remains high, and is serious concern
to the safety of law enforcement personnel. The
number of firearms seized in 2013 was 55, nearly double
the number seized in 2012. In 2014, the Sheriff ’s
Narcotics Program seized 69 firearms, a 25% increase.
In 2015, the SNP seized 52 firearms. The steady seizure
of firearms is not known, but the SNP believes that the
investigation into and the targeting of more mid-level
narcotics traffickers may be the reason.
¦ In the airport interdiction realm, smugglers of narcotics
proceeds are carrying smaller amounts of cash in order
to avoid detection. Drug trafficking organizations are
using more than one person on the same flight to smuggle
narcotics proceeds, by either splitting the cash into
multiple bags or by using a lay-off person to distract law
enforcement from the actual smuggler. Also, drug trafficking
organizations are using commercial airlines and
parcel carriers, such as USPS, UPS, FedEx and independent
freight carriers to transport large amounts of currency
and narcotics.
¦ In the parcel interdiction arena, drug trafficking organizations
continue to utilize parcels to send narcotics to
states east of California and narcotics proceeds are sent
from states in the east to California. Many parcels are
gift wrapped and currency is often concealed with other
items, such as electronics, clothing, magazines and carbon
paper. The trafficking organizations are using vacuum
sealed bags, distracting odors and gluing the
seams of the parcels to avoid detection.
¦ The continued partnerships with the United States
Postal Service, the United Parcel Service, the Department
of Homeland Security, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the Drug Enforcement Agency, and the
Santa Ana Police Department, has been successful in
the interdiction of narcotics and narcotics proceeds
through parcel, freight and mass transit carriers. The
Sheriff ’s Narcotics Program has significantly increased
narcotic and narcotic currency seizures at the John
Wayne Airport and United States Postal Service though
increased enforcement efforts.
The Orange County Jail Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to assist in jail
operational costs. Annually, it reimburses Sheriff-Coroner to
partially offset positions added in 1989 for expansion of the
Theo Lacy Branch Jail and, when additional funds are available,
it reimburses one-time jail expenditures. FY 2016-17
Base Budget includes a transfer out of $500,000 to Sheriff-
Coroner.
The SNP-CALMMET Treasury fund is a self-balancing budget
with restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund
services and supplies and equipment related to Dept. of
Treasury activities.
The HIT continues to see a rise on drug trafficking
organizations equipping their narcotics load vehicles
with hard-wired and "slap-on" global positioning satellite
tracking systems. The seized trackers were operational
when discovered by the HIT and some of the
tracing devices were equipped with microphones,
which enable the drug trafficking organizations to listen
to the load vehicle driver’s cell phone conversations and/
or any other conversation between the load driver and
other individuals within close proximity to the load
vehicle. The utilization of these tracking devices has had
a significant negative impact on the HIT’s ability to
attempt controlled deliveries if the load driver agrees to
cooperate with law enforcement.
¦ The HIT has seen an increase in the number of load
vehicles utilizing the gasoline tank as a hidden compartment
for the transportation of narcotics from Mexico
into the United Sates. In addition, the Highway
Interdiction Team has seen an increase in the number of
load vehicles occupied by more than a single driver. And
as of 2014, the amount of narcotics in a load vehicle
remains higher than in years past, averaging 40-plus
pounds of narcotics per load vehicle.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue, intended to fund costs for correctional purposes. All unassigned
fund balance is being allocated to partially offset anticipated reductions in other revenues.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue. The base budget includes planned replacement and major maintenance
requirements of key Department equipment scheduled to occur following FY 2015-16.
The key trends in mobile computing are the enhancements
to connection speed, reliability, coverage and
security. The Mobile Data Computer (MDC) Project will
continue to remain in the forefront of these advancements.
¦ With the increase in cyber-threats, we are in the process
of improving our security with a combination of new
equipment, better applications and the eventual implementation
of multi-factor authentication.
¦ The Department will continue to plan strategically and
to identify other major equipment replacement and
maintenance items to be included in this Fund in order
to maintain future operational needs of the Department.
The Sheriff 's Substation Fee Program is a self-balancing
fund with restricted revenue. The developer deposit fees
received will be used for the future construction or purchase
of a Sheriff 's Substation in South Orange County. The construction
project has been deferred for many years.
A new Sheriff ’s Station (Saddleback Station) in southeast
Orange County became operational effective April 2015. The
Sheriff ’s ability to use this fund has ceased since the department
is leasing this Saddleback Station rather than purchasing
it. The language in the Rancho Mission Viejo
Development Agreement restricts the funding to be used for
construction and land acquisition. County Counsel, Rancho
Mission Viejo and Sheriff ’s personnel are collaborating on
finding alternative ways to use this funding. The optimal use
of these funds would be to bring the Aliso Viejo Station
(Southwest Station) up to basic functional standards.
The existing Southwest Aliso Viejo Station is severely
overcrowded. Future population growth in South
Orange County will exacerbate the need for the additional
space.
¦ The station serves several law enforcement cities and is
occupied 24/7. The parking lot and many areas in the
building are in need of repair and/or replacement to
keep it running at optimum level.
¦ Safety, confidentiality and overall effectiveness could be
compromised if the building remains in its current condition.
The Jail Commissary Fund is a self-balancing fund that does
not rely on support from the County General Fund. Operational
and product costs are projected to increase in FY
2016-17.
The number of County inmates decreased due to the passage
of Proposition 47 in 2014. Consequently, Jail Commissary
profits have decreased and staffing vacancies were not filled
which increased overtime costs.
The Inmate Welfare Fund is a self-balancing fund with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund inmate
programs and operational costs. There will be an increase in
FY 2016-17 for inmate services programs and operational
costs.
Inmate population has declined which has affected
Commissary sales. In addition, the largest source of revenue
is the inmate telephone commissions and current
considerations by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) to regulate calling rates leaves an uncertain
future for telephone revenues.
The Cal-ID Operational Cost Fund (14D) is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue. The revenue includes fees collected
from Cal-ID Users (cities). The budget is intended to fund operational costs in Fund 109. The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Budget
includes a $1,064,288 transfer out to Fund 109.
The trend continues to expand from traditional fingerprint
identification databases to multi-modal biometric
identification systems, capable of storing and matching
several types of physical features for identification. Fingerprint
and palmprint identification are widely used
by local law enforcement. Mobile fingerprint identification
and facial recognition are the next most commonly
used biometric modalities. Iris pattern recognition,
voice pattern recognition and DNA profile matching are
among the emerging biometric modalities being considered
by local law enforcement to maximize the ability
to identify criminals. Attention continues to focus on
the standardization of automated biometric identification
systems and the interoperability among disparate
local, state, national and international databases.
¦ These trends will impact the Cal-ID operation and will
result in more technically skilled staff with more diverse
skill sets. The national trend is toward standardization
of all aspects of forensic science, to include mandatory
examiner certification and laboratory accreditation.
This fund is a self-balancing fund with restricted revenue, which supplements jail operations and construction costs, as well as
supports front-line law enforcement in the unincorporated areas of Orange County. There are no significant, planned changes
in FY 2016-17 compared to FY 2015-16.
This funding source is subject to State budget approval
each year. It is anticipated that the State will continue to
approve funding in the future; however, funding levels
cannot be projected.
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Alternate Defense
services includes $5,757,674 Appropriations and $5,671,674
Net County Cost, which is $56,155 (1%) more than FY 2015-
16 final budget of $5,615,519. The OC Superior Court provides
administrative support to Alternate Defense and
receives reimbursement from the County.
FY 2016-17 Net County Cost (NCC) for Trial Court 081 is
$40,547,374, which the same as the approved budget for FY
2015-16.
FY 2016-17 Budgeted revenue estimated to be less than
required Revenue MOE payment to the State, which means
there will be negative excess MOE payment to the State.
AB233 Revenue MOE payment was set in 1997 based on
actual revenue receipts in FY 1994-95, which means FY
2015-16 Trial Court revenue will be lower than FY 1994-95
level.
FY 2015-16 3rd Available Financing projections include
$1,609,915 NCC overrun due to lower court revenue. FY
2016-17 $64,800,246 Appropriations include:
1. $54,449,487 AB233 MOE payment to the State,
2. $4,701,336 SB1732 County Facility Payment (CFP) to
the State,
3. Excess AB233 MOE payment to State $0,
4. Supplemental Judicial Benefits $1,763,835, and
5. Other $3,885,588 consist of Victim Witness Services
$3,626,237, insurance and earthquake insurance
cost $189,351 for court facilities, Court transcript
costs for Grand Jury Hearings $45,000 and accounting
and telephone services $25,000.
While OC Community Resources' baseline Net County Cost
limit will grow 1% in FY 2016-17, OC Community Services
and OC Animal Care programs will continue to be challenged
by increases in salaries and benefits, services, and
other costs with either level or minimal growth in revenues.
As the result, OC Community Resources' must continue to
closely monitor and reduce costs while maximizing the use
of existing revenues, including but not limited to: Federal
Innovation and Opportunity, Measure M2, State Department
of Aging, and other funding sources as well as complying
with city revenue billings for OC Animal Care programs.
OC Community Resources continues to face economic
challenges of rising costs of maintaining services with
flat or minimal increases in funding. As the result of
increasing salaries and employee benefits and services
and supplies costs, OCCR reduced expenditures where
possible and will continue to subsist on a lean budget.
The Fund 106 Budget for FY 2016-17 includes an increase of
$700,000 to the capital project reserves. This money will be
used in the future to pay for required capital projects to protect
and maintain Newport Tidelands facilities.
Fund 106 has budgeted for three substantial capital
projects for FY 2016-17 including $500,000 to repair the
Upper Newport Bay East Bluff Drainage System,
$400,000 to extend the Newport Harbor Bulkhead adjacent
to Bay Beach in Lower Newport Harbor, and
$114,900 to install interpretive kiosks in Upper Newport
Bay.
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is approximately $2.49
million higher than the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget with
the inclusion of all available fund balance for possible housing
projects.
Library capital improvement projects are contingent upon
available funding. Capital projects budgeted in FY 2016-17
include Dana Point HVAC Replacement, La Habra Air Handler
and Ventilation Replacement, Laguna Beach Exterior
Siding Replacement, Rancho Santa Margarita Air Handler
and Ventilation Replacement and OCPL Headquarters HVAC
projects.
The baseline budget is approximately $2.3 million lower
than the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget. The decrease is primarily
due to less available funding for capital projects.
Each library branch facility will continue to be maintained
and upgrades and enhancements will be provided
contingent upon available funding. In FY 2016-
17, building improvements and energy efficiency
upgrades will be carried out to increase energy conservation
and productivity.
The total FY 2016-17 recommended base budget for Fund
120 is $53.9 million which is $4.3 million lower than the FY
2015-16 Modified Budget due primarily to a decrease in the
budget for operating transfers-out to Fund 119 as there will
be less capital projects in the next fiscal year.
Fund 120 reflects a 4% increase in overall property tax revenue
due to an improving housing market within Orange
County.
OC Public Libraries’ Operating Budget assumes maintaining
current service levels by continuing the five-year plan to
upgrade the library computer systems, increasing library
book materials and subscription of library collections as
well as appropriations allocated for maintenance projects on
OC Public Libraries’ aging infrastructure.
The FY 2016-17 baseline budget includes a $2.1 million contribution
to Fund Balance Restricted for the Irvine Set-Aside
based on the MOU between the City of Irvine and OC Public
Libraries to finance a future Library in the City of Irvine as
well as to make a contribution of $310,000 to operating
reserves to maintain the 10% goal of the operating cost set
forth by the Library Advisory Board.
OC Public Libraries will continue evaluating the interior
space of all branches and redesigning them to conform
to the one desk service model. For expediency, confidentiality
and efficiency, library users will be able to
complete their business transactions at one service
location rather than at separate desks for each interaction.
Customer needs have changed over the years. The
single service desk model will provide a better customer
experience while freeing up librarians to have more
time for complex questions and to interact more with
the public.
¦ In redesigning the floor configuration, we are hoping to
achieve the following goals:
? Provide a one stop transaction environment for
library users.
? Extend basic reference by freeing staff to have on the
floor interaction with library users.
? Provide efficient and flexible staffing solution.
? Use limited space more efficiently in libraries.
? Change will inevitably be uncomfortable, but with
communication and training, staff can adopt the new
single service desk model with little difficulty. Some
branches have already converted the multiple service
desks model into a single service desk and have
found it to be successful.
Appropriations of $30,000 was approved as a FY 2015-16
Third Quarter Budget Adjustment. The FY 2016-17 Base
Budget includes $100,000 in appropriations for anticipated
donation revenue.
FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is $232,182 lower than the FY
2015-16 Modified Budget due to anticipated decrease in professional
services expenditures in response to lower revenues.
FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is $344,830 lower than the FY
2015-16 Modified Budget due to anticipated decrease in professional
services expenditures in response to lower revenues.
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is approximately $500,000
less than the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget to reconcile
appropriations to forecasted revenues and actual fund balance
available.
FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is $429,104 lower that the FY
2015-16 Modified Budget due to an anticipated slight reduction
in professional services expenditures resulting from
funding grants expiration.
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is approximately $2.34
million higher than the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget due an
increase in professional services contracts and other financing
uses.
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is approximately $429,557
higher than the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget due to anticipated
increase professional services expenditures.
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is $305,273 higher than
the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget in anticipation of higher
professional services expenditures.
Total appropriations of $5.0 million for Fund 16D have been
requested as a FY 2015-16 Third quarter budget adjustment.
Total appropriations of $25.0 million are included in the
2016-17 Base Budget.
Besides the baseline of $67.0 million in property taxes,
which is $4.4 million higher than the FY 2015-16 budget, OC
Parks expects to receive an additional $11.9 million in recurring
property tax revenue due to end of bankruptcy payments.
Total property tax revenue estimated for Fund 405 in
FY 2016-17 is $78.9 million.
OC Parks expects to receive sufficient funding in Fund
405 in FY 2016-17 to pay for park staff, maintenance
and improvement contracts, and other expenses
required to operate all OC Parks facilities for public use
and enjoyment.
¦ OC Parks' Operating Fund 405 continues to provide
funding for Fund 406 for budgeted capital project
requirements in FY 2016-17 and to increase the capital
project reserve for future use.
¦ OC Parks budgets a contribution of $2.5 million to the
Operating Reserve in FY 2016-17 to maintain its established
goal of 20% of its actual salaries & benefits and
services & supplies.
The total FY 2016-17 Budget for Fund 406 is $31.2 million
which is approximately $1.5 million lower than the modified
Fund 406 Budget for FY 2015-16. The decrease is due primarily
to the award of several capital projects in FY 2015-16,
including the dredge of Sunset Harbor for $8.0 million.
In addition, Fund 406 has budgeted $11.7 million in operating
transfer-in revenues from Fund 405 in FY 2016-17. This
transfer will provide sufficient funding to pay for engineering
and capital project construction costs budgeted for FY
2016-17 and an increase of $4.0 million to capital project
reserves. The capital project reserves will provide funding
for future required park capital improvements.
OC Parks staff have budgeted for 30 capital projects in
Fund 406 in FY 2016-17 to further maintain and protect
park facilities and infrastructure. Of the 30 projects, 11
are for the initial engineering and design of a project
while the remaining 19 are to construct required projects.
Included for project construction is $2,600,000 for
the OC Bike Loop, Segments O,P,& Q, $2,500,000 for the
Countywide Trails & Bikeways Active Transportation
Program, $2,325,000 for a Multi-Purpose Recreation
Facility at Mile Square Park, $2,188,575 for a new visitor
center at Aliso & Wood Canyons Wilderness Park,
$1,500,000 to replace the Bay View Bridge at Upper
Newport Bay, $1,350,000 for drainage improvements
within Irvine Park, $1,470,000 to restore and protect the
creek bed running through Riley Wilderness Park,
$1,150,000 for a restroom and entry plaza at the OC
Zoo, and several other park capital projects.
CSS expects the federal and state allocations to remain flat
for FY 2016-17. CSS' FY 2016-17 base budget includes $59.1
million in appropriations offset by $55.6 million from Federal
(66%) and State (34%) revenue sources. To balance its
budget, CSS also included a Transfer In of $3.5 million from
Fund 12C, Child Support Program Development to offset the
expenditures. CSS has no net county cost included in FY
2016-17 Budget.
CSS continues to exceed federal performance measures
in percent of collections on current support and percent
of cases with arrears collection. The success of CSS plays
a key role in assisting families in achieving and maintaining
self-sufficiency.
¦ Through strategic planning, CSS continues to evaluate
existing program and processes and when possible
implement new technologies to achieve efficiencies,
improve performance, and increase effectiveness of
programs.
The base budget includes a transfer out of $3.5 million to
Child Support Services, Budget Control 027, to balance the
budget. Included in the $3.5 million is a $266K transfer out
of the Building Reserve account to reimburse the excess of
non-claimable principal over the claimable building depreciation
expenses. Interest earnings is the Fund's primary revenue
source, which is estimated at $130K.
The base gross budget increases $39.6 million, primarily
related to increases in the Mental Health Services Act program
and a one-time Public Health Services intergovernmental
transfer. These increases are offset by increased
categorical revenues. Reductions and cost containment measures
implemented in prior years are carried forward into
the FY 2016-17 requested budget in order to align Department
expenditures with available funding levels.
HCA continues to face the challenge of providing
needed and often mandated health services with limited
resources. At State and federal levels, legislative
measures aimed at budget reduction could have a significant
impact on local funding for health care services.
¦ There will be continued emphasis within HCA on
implementing new Mental Health Services Act (MHSA)
programs in FY 2016-17, funded through available Prop
63 revenues. In addition, the Agency is working with the
Board and the community on planning and funding for
expansion of Psychiatric Emergency Services.
SSA's budget request was developed based on maximizing
projected Federal and State mandated social services program
funding allocations for Orange County. It includes
increases to the Medi-Cal and CalFresh allocations, a
decrease to CalWORKs allocation, a 1% increase in Net
County Cost (NCC) limit, and uses reserve funds in the
Wraparound Program, Fund 12W, to fund eligible program
expenses. SSA's base budget consists of increases in salary
and benefits, contracts for services, information technology,
facility improvements and other services required to ensure
continued operations.
SSA continues with its reorganized budget structure that was
prepared in FY 2015-16. The agency administrative costs
will be identified under the three primary programmatic
Divisions (Family Self-Sufficiency, Adult Services and Assistance
Programs and Children and Family Services).
In 2015, the Child Abuse Registry received 40,953 calls
which generated 7,110 Immediate Responses referrals
and 21,212 Ten Day referrals. Although total initial call
volumes have decreased from 2014 by 4%, there is an
increase of 17.35% for Immediate Response referrals
and 13.78% for Ten Day referrals for the Children and
Family Services Emergency Response Program.
¦ Calls to the Adult Protective Services Registry 2015
showed significant increases in both call volume and
reports taken. In 2015, there were 18,846 calls to the
Hotline versus 15,321 calls to the Hotline in 2014, an
18.70% increase. In addition, there were 11,488 reports
taken in 2015 as compared to 9,671 reports taken in
2014, an increase of 15.81%.
¦ California is moving to a Resource Family Approval
(RFA) process which will be implemented statewide in
2017. RFA is a mandated child-centered unified
approval process that offers ongoing support for
resource homes. This will require annual certification
and recertification of all relative caregivers, foster
homes and adoptive homes (resource families). Starting
in February 2016, Orange County began transitioning to
the RFA system of approving all out-of-home caregivers
and phasing out the traditional system of different
approval tracks for relatives, NREFMs, licensed foster
parents and adoption home studies.
¦ California’s Continuum of Care Reform eliminates lower
level group homes, limits stays in shelter care and sets
standards for short term treatment facilities. It is
designed to better serve California’s foster children and
improve and expand home-based family care through
additional training and support. The current financial
impact is unknown at this time; however, the need for
specialized homes and enhanced recruitment efforts are
expected to increase.
¦ Medi-Cal provides health care coverage for California
residents who have limited resources and income.
Medi-Cal has been expanded significantly and new
standards regarding income, assets, and family composition
have been added as alternatives to the traditional
Medi-Cal eligibility rules. The number of new Medi-Cal
applications has increased by over 70% in FY 2013-14.
The number of active Medi-Cal cases grew 30% in FY
2013-14 and an additional 54% in FY 2014-15.
¦ The CalFresh caseload increased 9.8% in FY 2013-14
and an additional 7.3% in FY 2014-15. This is significantly
lower than growth during the recession, which
peaked at 42% in FY 2009-10. This growth is projected
to slow to 5.8% in FY 2015-16.
¦ General Relief caseloads increased 49.6% in FY 2013-14
as a result of changes to the eligibility requirements and
aid level approved by the Board of Supervisors. Caseload
growth continues to increase for this program. In
FY 2014-15 caseloads increased by 18.1% and are projected
to increase by 9.4% in FY 2015-16.
OC Public Works Fund 080 FY 2016-17 Base Budget changes:
Appropriations Request of $49,116,244 is $424,913 (0.9%)
lower than the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget. This is primarily
due to an increase in Salaries & Benefits totaling $1.4 million
(4.9%), an increase in Services and Supplies totaling
$2.2 million (6.8%) primarily for increase Facility costs for Maintenance and Professional Services, an increase in
Equipment totaling $0.4 million, partially offset by
increased inner department Intrafund Transfers by $4.3 million,
resulting in the $0.4 million decrease in Appropriation
costs.
Revenue Request of $35,682,961 is $557,916 lower (-1.5%)
primarily due to lower Charges for Services revenue for
expenditure offsets resulting from lower fuel costs.
Net County Cost (NCC) of $13,433,283 is higher by $133,003.
One percent which represents the increase allocated by CEO
for growth given to all County General Fund budget controls.
An additional $970,248 represents costs above offsets/revenue.
An augmentation request is pending to request restoring
the funding to keep the department needs whole.
OC Facilities Maintenance & CUF will continue an effective
Preventive Maintenance (PM) Program to allow for
scheduled preventive maintenance of County facilities,
reduce emergency repair costs, avoid costly building/
system shutdowns and be proactive regarding the stewardship
of public buildings and use of public funds;
working on the continued development of a maintenance
management database directing Preventive
Maintenance work and providing cost accounting support;
and working to produce an energy demand model
for each County facility to support strategic project
developments targeted at reducing demand on utilities.
¦ OC Development Services will continue its programs of
training staff, improving morale, increasing efficiency,
educating the public, and providing the best and most
efficient customer service. Additionally, OC Development Services will continue to increase the collaborative
effort of public outreach and community meetings
involvement.
¦ Will also continue providing excellent and efficient customer
service through the execution of Planning and
Engineering Service contracts to support the availability
of adequate resources for various planning application,
plan check review, environmental review and
additional Development Services related activities.
¦ The Agricultural Commissioner's portion of the OC
Environmental Resources Service Area will continue its
programs of training staff, educating the public, seeking
State funding and cooperatively partnering with the
State to achieve its goals.
¦ OC Infrastructure Programs: Will evaluate alternative
delivery methods to ensure most efficient procurement
of design support and construction services for capital
improvement projects; also, the Service Area will be
developing the capital improvement program for successful
project delivery.
OC Public Works Budget Control 034 OC Watersheds FY
2016-17 Base Budget request of $15,612,585 is $78,608 (-
0.50%) lower than the FY 2015-16 year-end projection. Salaries
and Employee Benefits increases are offset by the transfer
of two positions into Budget Control 071 Building &
Safety and 080 OC Public Works. Services and Supplies
decrease primarily due to the removal of one-time projects
and shifting of $250,000 from Special Departmental
Expenses to Contributions to Non-County Governmental
Agencies for water quality program support per the cooperative
agreement.
Regulatory mandates continue to increase in number,
scope, and complexity. The Santa Ana and San Diego
Regional Water Quality Control Boards reissue municipal
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permits for the County, cities, and OC Flood
Control District every five years. In each renewal cycle,
mandates are added and expanded to increase the protection
of the drinking water supply, fishing, swimming,
and other uses of Orange County's streams, bays,
harbors, and beaches.
¦ In addition to NPDES requirements, state and federal
regulators periodically assess the health of waterways.
When data show pollution levels are impairing the uses
of those waters, they are added to a list of water quality
impairments under the Federal Clean Water Act. In the
most recent update, the list of impairments in Orange
County increased from 122 to 130. A new regulation
called Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) is then
developed to correct each impairment. To date, 33
TMDLs have been adopted that impose corrective measures
on the County, OC Flood Control District, cities,
and other public and private entities. Both the currently
adopted mandates and the growth trend in this regulatory
arena are expected to outpace our resources to
address the problems, as well as outpace our ability to
sustain compliance.
¦ The County has taken a leadership role in crafting regulatory
approaches as well as investing in science and
regulatory development to bring forward TMDL and
other regulations for adoption by the Regional Boards.
In collaboration with Riverside and San Bernardino
Counties, regulators, and other stakeholders, a major
revision to the Santa Ana Regional Board's basin plan
was developed to rationalize recreational water quality
standards for streams and channels. Once approved, the
plan will contain strict standards for those streams
where people actually recreate and adjust standards in
flood control channels to reflect the actual risk to
human health based on usage; will modernize the water
quality objectives used to measure bacterial contamination;
and will suspend the requirement to meet recreational
standards during dangerous storm conditions in
engineered channels. As a result, cities and counties
could invest their limited resources in protecting those
streams where recreation occurs and human health may
be at risk. Initiatives are underway for improvements to
existing TMDLs for bacteria, sediment, nutrients, and
toxics.
Integrated Regional Water Management Plans have
been completed for all three Watershed Management
Areas to develop collaborative water management strategies
and integrate the management of water supply,
water quality, flood management, and natural resource
protection. The plans identify solutions to meet regulatory
mandates and other water needs, and establish a
context for multiple agencies to collaborate on implementation.
The plans also position Orange County
agencies for grant funding opportunities and prioritize
implementation projects for each Watershed Management
Area.
OC Public Works Budget Control 040 Utilities FY 2016-17
Base Budget request of $14,466,182 is $4,223,435 (-23%)
lower than the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget. Salaries and
Employee Benefits increases are offset by an increase in
Intrafund transfers. Revenue decrease of $862,266 offset by
an increase in Services & Supplies Reimbursements and
Intrafund transfers.
Energy surveys and modeling efforts have provided the
OC Facilities Maintenance & CUF team with critical
data in supporting our constant focus to develop a more
sustainable future. By supporting the development of
capital planning targeted to reduce agencies operational
demands, the County’s overall environmental footprint
can be reduced.
OC Public Works Budget Control 071 Building and Safety
General Fund FY 2016-17 Base Budget request of
$14,446,757 is $3,279,557 (29%) higher than the FY 2015-16
Modified Budget. The Salaries and Employee Benefits costs
reflect increases and the addition of nine employees which
were moved during the First Quarter of FY 2015-16. Services
and Supplies also increased in FY 2016-17 resulting from
increased costs for Professional Services related to Developer Planned Consultant expenses and direct charges for services
provided within the department. Equipment also increased
for costs relating to the Land Management System (LMS)
and the Customer Relationship Management (CRM) software
system.
The overall increase is offset by an increase of $3,279,557 in
revenues due to an anticipated increase in Building and
Safety permit activity and the Board Approved OC Development
Fees which will be fully phased in by May 2016.
When comparing 2015 to date with the same period
during 2014, the data represents a 20% increase in the
number of building permits issued. Based on recent
data and current market and recent activity, the permit
volume increase is expected to continue.
¦ OC Public Works/OC Development Services continues
to work with the building industry on further improvements
in its provision services, principally through the
Developmental Processing Review Committee
appointed by the Board of Supervisors and through the
Local Government Affairs Committee of the Building
Industry Association of Orange County.
The revenue base budget is $89.1M, a decrease of $16.2M
compared to FY 2015-16 modified budget. The expense base
budget is $115.7M, a decrease of $22.0M compared to the FY
2015-16 modified budget. The changes are primarily due to
a reduction in capital improvement projects. The Salaries
and Employee Benefits increased resulting from negotiated
increases per the Memorandum of Understanding. Also
included in the recommended base budget are contributions
to non-county government agencies for non-county lead
projects including: City of Irvine - Marine Way, City of La
Habra - County Islands Annexation, City of Anaheim -
Brookhurst Street, City of Fountain Valley - Harbor Boulevard
and Caltrans - Laguna Canyon Road Segment 4.
Industry trends consist of a transition to alternate project
delivery methods for vertical and some horizontal
projects such as bridges. OC Public Works, through the
Traffic Engineering Division is currently participating
in the OCTA-led effort to create interconnected regional
data collection systems that can be combined to deliver
comprehensive transportation information and support
regional management and operational coordination.
¦ Dodge Data & Analytics 2016 Construction Outlook
report predicts that public works construction growth
will remain generally the same as in 2015, with a modest
reduction for highways and bridges and an increase
in environmental public works projects.
¦ An editorial in California Asphalt Pavement Association
Magazine’s January 2016 issue opined that when dealing
with limited budgets, public agencies will focus
more on quality and efficiency to ensure they get the
highest performance possible from limited highway
improvement projects.
¦ A January 4, 2016, article titled "10 Construction Industry
Trends to Watch in 2016" on ConstructionDrive.com
identified a continued reduction in available skilled
construction labor that started in 2015. As identified in
last year’s CEO Budget Report, this is expected result in
increased construction costs for public works projects.
The shortage of labor is expected to result in fewer bids
received for public works construction contracts.
The proposed budget continues the practice of billing all
County Departments that utilize parking facilities for
County employees in the Civic Center area. The change in
billing practices allows Parking Facilities to established
reserve accounts for future capital improvements and will no
longer have to rely on the General Fund for structural
improvements.
Reserves available for FY 2016-17 decreased from FY 2015-
16. Reserves were used during FY 2015-16 for purchase of
electric vehicles and EV charging stations.
Use of AB2766 Subvention Funds will continue to promote
quantifiable strategies that specifically reduce
motor vehicle emissions. Subvention Funds will be considered
as a source of funding to encourage the development
of motor vehicle emission reduction measures or
projects that result in the reduction of motor vehicle
emissions in conjunction with the County's Green Fleet
Plan.
Included in the recommended base budget is a technical
Adjustment to move two positions from Budget Control 115
OC Road to Budget Control 400 OC Flood as a result of shifting
Mitigation Program from OC Infrastructure Programs to
OC Environmental Resources Service Area.
Total appropriation request for FY 2016-17 is $169,789,513
which is $425,252 (.25%) lower than the FY 2015-16 Modified
Budget.
Dodge Data & Analytics 2016 Construction Outlook
report predicts that public works construction growth
will remain generally the same as in 2015, with a modest
reduction for highways and bridges and increase in
environmental public works projects.
¦ An editorial in California Asphalt Pavement Association
Magazine's January 2016 issue opined that when dealing
with limited budgets, public agencies will focus
more on quality and efficiency to ensure they get the
highest performance possible from limited highway
improvement projects.
¦ A January 4, 2016, article titled "10 Construction Industry
Trends to Watch in 2016" on ConstructionDrive.com
identified a continued reduction in available skilled
construction labor that started in 2015. As identified in
last year’s CEO Budget Report, this is expected result in
increased construction costs for public works projects.
The shortage of labor is expected to result in fewer bids
received for public works construction contracts.
¦ Municipal stormwater permits issued to OCFCD, the
County, and the cities are requiring the development of
Water Quality Improvement Plans (also termed an
Enhanced Watershed Management Plan) that will prioritize
water quality conditions; establish improvement
goals, strategies and schedules; establish an improvement
monitoring and assessment program; and create
an adaptive management re-evaluation of the developed
plans. Based on work in one of the County's five watershed
areas, the priority water quality conditions identified
include pathogen health risk, unnatural water balance and flows, and impacts resulting from channel
erosion and changes in channel form. The Improvement
Plans will place an emphasis on source controls and
best management practices that restore natural water
course function and flows. The plans will impact future
flood channel design and improvement projects.
¦ Proposition 1 funds will start to be released for competitive
proposal in 2016-17 with eligibility requirements
that require the development of a Storm Water Resource
Plan and its incorporation into the appropriate Integrated
Regional Water Management Plan. OCFCD will
be participating in preparing a Storm Water Resource
Plan (similar to a Water Quality Improvement Plan) to
be eligible for grant funding.
¦ Ramping up of the mitigation program for habitat
impacts from OCFCD capital improvement projects will
begin in 2016-17 with a review of the existing inventory
and monitoring of existing mitigation sites and work on
new potential mitigation areas.
The Fiscal Year 2016-17 expense budget includes appropriations
for engineering and construction costs related to the
Harbor Revitalization project as well as other facility maintenance
projects required in the Harbor. This includes $12.1
million budgeted for construction of landside improvements
planned as part of the Revitalization Project and $1.2 million
budgeted to repair aging docks, pilings, and ramps in the
harbor.
OC Dana Point Harbor continues to pursue key steps
required to implement the Harbor Revitalization project.
This includes developing a final design for the Commercial
Core project, finalizing a financial strategy, and
acquiring required construction permits. Additional
Coastal Development Permits will be required for the
Dry Boat Storage Building Project as well as the Marina
Improvement Project.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Base Budget is higher than
the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget, due to the inclusion of a
one-time transfer-out of $1.3M to Budget Control 036 - Capital
Projects for Phase II of the El Toro project, partially offset
by the removal of FY 2015-16 one-time projects.
Supplemental Assessment filed by the developer reduced the
assessment value for the real properties in the El Toro Redevelopment
areas.
In FY 2009-10, the Irvine Redevelopment Agency filed an
appeal to reduce prior year assessed values for the El Toro
parcels. This resulted in a reduction of assessed values and
negative supplemental property taxes for the El Toro parcels.
The Agency has requested no refund but will offset future
incremental property taxes. As a result of the withholdings,
Fund 15T received no incremental property tax revenue in
FY 2010-11 and received lower $667,147 revenue in FY 2011-
12. FY 2012-13 revenue was budgeted at $518,075, which is
less than the $673,863 amount in the initial schedules and
Recognized Obligation Payment Schedule (ROPS) received
from the Irvine Redevelopment Agency. The revised ROPS
from the Oversight Board to Successor Agency to the Irvine
Redevelopment Agency showed a reduced amount of
$110,000 is anticipated for FY 2012-13. As per County
Implementation Agreement No. 1, Fund 15T receives revenue
within 30 days after the close of the fiscal year.
FY 2016-17 Appropriations request of $1,136,244 is
$801,244 higher than FY 2015-16 Modified Budget and composed
primarily of rent from ground leases, incremental
property tax, and a draw from reserves to balance financing
In December 2011, the California Supreme Court
upheld Assembly Bill X1 26 dissolving redevelopment
agencies effective February 1, 2012. The City of Irvine
elected to become Successor Agency to the Irvine Redevelopment
Agency.
¦ The Successor Agency to the Irvine Redevelopment
Agency met and approved the ROPS on February 7,
2013, which included $256,754,898 for County Implementation
Agreement No. 1 to Fund 15T for FY 2013-14
(Year 7) through FY 2051-52 (Year 46). The approved
ROPS showed $110,000 FY 2013-14 estimated revenue
for the County Implementation Agreement to El Toro
Improvement Fund 15T. As per the County Implementation
Agreement, Fund 15T receives a certain percentage
of incremental property taxes, which changes with
changes in assessed value each year.
Fund 280 operating revenue budget increased from FY 2015-
16 by $10.3M or 8.1%. Increased revenues are projected for
airline reimbursement of CUPPS upgrade, Space and Gate
Hold Rent, Parking, Landing, Airline Operations and RON
fees.
Fund 280 operating expense increased from FY 2015-16
Modified Budget by $9.0M or 5.5%. Salaries and Benefits
budget increased from FY 2015-16 Modified Budget by
$0.5M or 2.6% due to the vacancy factor of 4.49% for FY
2016-17 and salary and benefit increases. Services and Supplies
budget increased by $5.6M or 8.0% due primarily to
Maintenance - Buildings & Improvements for the Operations
& Maintenance portion of the Terminal Improvements Project
and Central Plant scheduled maintenance.
Fund 281 Capital Improvements budget increased $25.9M or
45.6% and includes Terminal Improvements, Taxiway "B"
Rehabilitation, Paularino Street Gate Improvements and Station
18 Improvements.
The FY 2016-17 priorities are to operate a financially
efficient and self-supporting aviation facility with conservative
fiscal policies to continually provide safe and
superior services to the traveling public and the Airport’s
tenants
¦ Budget Priorities:
? Exercise prudence in managing and prioritizing operating
expenses and other expenditures and maintain
a viable diversification of revenue sources.
? Appropriate cash reserves and other financing
sources for continuing capital improvements at the
Airport
¦ Finance and Operating Priorities:
? Control operating expenses and cash outlay to maintain
the Airport competitiveness via costs reimbursed
(compensatory) through airline rents and
fees given the Airport’s growth constraints (Settlement
Agreement)
? Maintain long-term sustainable and diversified revenue
streams and remain vigilant to revenue trends
and opportunities
? Utilize cost-effective available financing sources and
provide adequate wherewithal to maintain the Airport
facilities and infrastructure in good condition
? Maintain strong debt coverage exceeding the Bond
Indenture Rate Covenant requirement
Expenditures in this fund are financed by transfers from the
Airport's Operating Fund (Fund-Department 280-280) and
Debt Service Fund (Fund-Department 283-280), Federal
and State grants and by interest earnings on the cash balance
in the Fund.
JWA will utilize PFC revenue and transfers in from the JWA
Operating Fund (Fund-Department 280-280) to make debt
service payments.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Base Budget of $170.1M is
$18.4M (12%) higher than the FY 2015-16 Modified Budget.
This is largely due to transfers-out needed for the funding of
capital projects in OCWR's Capital Project Fund 273. The
$170.1M Revenue request includes $102.4M in anticipated
revenue, $8.2M from transfers-in, $13.7M from Reserves,
and $45.8M from FY 2015-16 Fund Balance Unassigned.
OC Waste & Recycling will continue to support the
County General Fund in FY 2016-17 with an estimated
transfer of $11.2 million for bankruptcy debt obligations.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling continues to integrate disposal
capacity and strategic financial and operational planning,
maintains a competitive disposal rate, and continues
to manage risk/liability through diligent
administrative practices.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling continues with its ongoing habitat
mitigation efforts.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling operates and maintains state of
the art environmental control systems and continues to
work towards increasing the beneficial reuse of landfill
gas at the landfills.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling will continue development of the
County's landfills in FY 2016-17 with large capital
expansion projects.
¦ OC Waste & Recycling continues with its Renewable
Technologies Implementation Plan to evaluate existing
agreements and to explore new arrangements to help
diversify its waste management and landfill gas management
portfolios.
Operating expenditures increased by $25.8M due to large
capital projects scheduled for FY 2016-17. These projects
include Olinda Alpha Landfill's Front Slope Improvement
Project ($16.6M), Frank R. Bowerman Landfill's Phase
VIIIB-2 Buttress and Liner Project ($13.5M), and Prima
Deshecha Landfill's Zone 1 Phase D Mass Excavation and
Liner Project ($11M). Expenditures in this fund will be
financed by a combination of transfers from OC Waste &
Recycling Bankruptcy Recovery Plan Fund (Fund-Department
285-299) and by OC Waste & Recycling Operating
Fund (Fund-Department 299-299).
The recommended base budget includes one technical augmentation
of $15M to allow for the transfer of OCWR funds
in support of the County's IT projects, expansion of the
Musick facility, and OC Community Resources' Animal Shelter
project.
The recommended base budget includes four technical augmentations
totaling $36.6M to allow for the transfer of
OCWR funds in support of the County's IT projects, expansion
of the Musick facility, and OC Community Resources'
Animal Shelter project.
Base Budget includes one reduce level of service augmentation
rolled into base budget to meet the Net County Cost
Limit. Assessor is requesting ongoing restoration of $1.06M
in services and supplies to meet the current and projected
level of service required to produce the 2017 Rolls.
Starting in FY 2016-17 the Assessor will record property
characteristics revenue in Fund 12P and transfer for eligible
expenses and reimbursement to Budget Control 002.
The Auditor-Controller defunded five positions in the Central
Operations Division and one position in the Administrative
Services unit in order to meet the Net County Cost
Limits.
The Base Budget includes the transfer of three Employee
Benefits Accounting Unit positions from the Employee Benefits
056 to the Auditor-Controller 003 effective August 5,
2016. The positions include: one Administrative Manager II,
one Administrative Manager I, and one Accountant/Auditor
II.
The Auditor-Controller Department has been able to
continually meet established Net County Cost limits
through careful analysis, planning, and limiting
requests to those that are essential to the mission and
goals of the department.
The base budget includes one reduce level of service for professional
services and hardware for $265K. The CAPS Program
requires adequate professional services in order to
maintain the CAPS System and to provide support to users
and leverage the system to its fullest capability.
County business needs are driving an increasing
demand for more information system capabilities.
Examples are the need to automate transactions to
increase productivity and lower costs to keep up with an
increasing workload and mandated requirements.
The base budget includes one technical augmentation rolled
into the base budget of $4.3M to finance the Property Tax
System Re-Platforming by OC Waste and Recycling. The
Property Tax System Re-Platforming project total cost is
$6.5M. In FY 2016-17, the first year of the project, $4.3M will
be financed with borrowing from Orange County Waste and
Recycling (OCWR) with repayment by the County General
Fund. In FY 2017-18, the second year of the project, $2.2M
will be financed by the County with the method of financing
and repayment to be determined. The transfer out is funded
by a $4.3M decrease to OCWR reserves.
The Property Tax System (PTS) processes approximately $6
billion annually in property taxes and special assessments
for the County, cities, school districts, redevelopment trust
funds, and special districts within the County. The PTS currently
runs on the County's mainframe platform and was
developed in the late 1980's using a programming language
that is now obsolete and it does not allow for Disaster Recovery
backup for the PTS system. The re-platform will increase
the life expectancy of the current Property Tax System application
for up to 10 years, and allow additional time for a
replacement solution to be developed.
The PTS Steering Committee will continue to look for
innovative solutions to effectively administer the property
tax system processes by working collaboratively
with all stakeholders and other California counties.
The FY 2016-17 Clerk of the Board's budget was increased by
$44,600 to include the BOS members' car allowance.
The base budget includes one reduce level of service augmentation
of $207K for one defunded Board Services Specialist
position ($68K) and services and supplies ($139K)
within the Clerk of the Board to meet the Net County Cost
Limits.
FY 2016-17 Recommended Base Budget meets the Net
County Cost (NCC) Limit of $16,941,051. The decrease in
expenditure budget from FY 2015-16 to FY 2016-17 is due to
the increase in vacancy factor from 2% to 4%, reduction in
Professional/Specialized Services and the removal of onetime
purchases. The decrease in revenue budget from FY
2015-16 to FY 2016-17 is due to lower billable costs. The
increase in NCC from FY 2015-16 to FY 2016-17 is due to the
annualization of positions that were included in FY 2015-16
Quarterly Budget Reporting Processes and the FY 2016-17
1% NCC growth.
CEO/Real Estate issued a Request for Qualifications for
the lease and development of a 95-acre land assemblage
in Chino to create a long-term revenue stream for the
County of Orange and the Orange County Flood Control
District. CEO/Real Estate continues to manage the
development efforts for approximately 1,900 acres of
County owned land with private developers as partners,
which includes 140 developable acres at the former
Marine Corps Air Station El Toro. Estimated revenue of
$4,000,000,000 could potentially be generated from real
estate lease payments over the next 85 years.
¦ CEO/Real Estate is collaborating with County Counsel
to develop a cell tower policy that will match current
technologies, which will financially benefit the County
of Orange.
¦ The Budget Office collaborated with OCIT to develop a
new web-based resource, Open $ Data Tool that
replaced the OpenGov product and is critical to OpenOC,
the County's data transparency initiative. The
public can instantly access past and current budget data
anywhere and at anytime at http://data.egovoc.com/#/
Main.
FY 2016-17 Recommended Base Budget meets the Net
County Cost (NCC) Limit of $4,634,966. The increase in
expenditure budget from FY 2015-16 to FY 2016-17 is due to
the increase in Salaries and Employee Benefits, Services &
Supplies for Learning & Organizational Development training
materials and Professional/Specialized Services offset
with Cost Apply to other County departments for Human
Resource services provided. The increase in revenue budget
from FY 2015-16 to FY 2016-17 is due to the increase in
Charges for Services to departments for Human Resource
services provided. The decrease in NCC from FY 2015-16 to
FY 2016-17 is due to the removal of the Equal Employment
Opportunity (EEO) training approved in FY 2015-16 for an
every other year occurrence offset with FY 2016-17 1% NCC
growth.
Identifying and making policy decisions in regards to
Affordable Care Act requirements.
¦ Use of Extra Help employees.
¦ Labor negotiations: OCAA, OCEA, AOCW, ACLEM,
OCMA and salary reopener with AOCDS.
¦ Examining current County Mission Statement, Vision
and Goals.
¦ Implementation of employee development programs on
a County-wide basis.
We are experiencing an escalation in demand for legal
services in the areas of mental health (due to Laura's
Law and the availability of Assisted Outpatient Treatment),
information technology, real estate, subpoenas
for jail records, and Public Records Act requests. In
other areas of our practice, including juvenile dependency,
juvenile dependency appeals, probate, and general
civil litigation, our workload is steady.
The Base Budget includes a technical augmentation to reconcile
to the FY 2015-16 Third Quarter Budget Report, and
increases appropriations ($57,000) and revenue ($2,280) for
the increase stipend pay for Poll Inspectors and Poll Clerks,
offset by an increase in Net County Cost ($54,720).
The Registrar of Voters FY 2016-17 budget includes costs
anticipated in the November 2016 Presidential General Election.
Orange County has seen growth in vote-by-mail voting
without all vote-by-mail elections. The percentage of
Orange County voters choosing to vote-by-mail is
increasing, while the percentage of votes completed at
polling places is slowly declining.
¦ Overall survey results from voters and poll workers
reflect extremely well on the operations and services
provided. Several customer service surveys will be
taken during the November 2016 General Election.
The Base Budget includes a reduce level of service augmentation
for salaries and benefits to meet the Net County Cost
Limit. A restoration will not be requested.
Government auditors are increasingly expanding their
roles from traditional compliance and financial audits
to include complex performance audits and operational
reviews. Conducting these comprehensive audits
requires auditors to possess a broad range of skillsets,
including strong analytical skills, strategic acumen,
communication skills, and operational experience
across diversified functions such as information technology,
accounting, and finance. OPAD has followed
this trend by recruiting auditors with advanced graduate
degrees in public administration, public policy, and
business administration as well as work experience in
consulting, management, and finance.
The FY 2016-17 Base Budget request is submitted $370,070
above the NCC limit. A Reduce Level of Service Augmentation
has been submitted to meet NCC limit.
The Revenue budget is $11,804,850, an increase of approximately
$206,000 over FY 2015-16, and includes estimated
revenue from an online tax auction of timeshare parcels. The
FY 2015-16 current year secured property tax collection rate
of 99.04% as of March 31, 2016, is expected to exceed the
prior year's collection rate record of 99.24% by June 30,
2016.
The Expense budget is $13,889,904, an increase of approximately
$387,000 over FY 2015-16, and includes increased
Salaries & Employee Benefits (S&EB) of $54,000, and
increased Services and Supplies (S&S) of $333,000. The
S&EB increase of $54,000 is primarily due to salary
increases from County wide union negotiations. The S&S
increase includes $155,000 of one-time estimated timeshare
auction costs which will be offset by anticipated revenue of
$247,000 from the auction, and increased activity and
charges from Merchant Card Services of $152,000 billed to
County agencies.
Maintaining the public trust by meeting the investment
objectives of safety, liquidity, and yield.
¦ Reducing costs and increasing assets under management
that increase net yields to pool participants.
¦ Increasing current year secured and unsecured property
tax collection rates.
¦ Increasing usage of eCheck, which is the most costeffective
payment method.
¦ Providing additional payment options for taxpayers.
¦ Increasing public information on web, for 24/7 taxpayer
accessibility.
¦ Reducing investment compliance findings.
¦ Providing cost-effective options to school and community
college districts in the form of Temporary Transfers.
Capital Projects Budget Control 036 include $50,395,187
Appropriations, $37,560,901 Revenue, and $12,834,286 Net
County Cost (NCC) for new and carryover capital and critical
maintenance/repair projects for various County facilities.
The requested 036 budgeted Net County Cost for FY 2016-17
is $12,834,286, which includes:
1. $8,008,518 for carryover capital projects from FY
2015-16
2. $3,613,635 for new capital and critical maintenance/
repair projects
3. $1,212,133 for mid-year contingencies and change
Orders
The $12,834,286 requested by Capital Project Budget Control
for FY 2016-17 excludes:
1. $1,352,000 expand level of service augmentation for
Sheriff 's air handler replacement at Central Men/
Women's Jails and Headquarters funded by NCC
2. $1,550,000 expand level of service augmentation for
deferred maintenance projects at various County
owned facilities funded by NCC
Capital Projects Fund 15D FY 2016-17 Base Budget of
$94,203,042 includes:
1. $53,785,000 Appropriations for the Central Utility
Facility (CUF) Infrastructure Upgrades funded
from Bond Proceeds
2. $2,765,716 Appropriations for Phase II of El Toro
Development project funded from Miscellaneous
Budget Control 004
3. $3,607,527 Appropriations for Year Round Emergency
Shelter/Service Center funded from Miscellaneous
Budget Control 004
4. $8,838,719 Appropriations for Civic Center Master
Plan funded from Miscellaneous Budget Control 004
5. $25,206,080 Appropriations for carryover capital
projects from FY 2015-16
Budgeting CUF Bonds proceed revenue and capital project in
Fund 15D will avoid Net County Cost impacts on Budget
Control 036.
FY 2015-16 3rd QBAR includes a transfer of $19,390,737
from Budget Controls 004, 036 & 042 to Fund 15D Reserves,
which include the following carryover projects:
? $25,000 Warranty Work - Completed Projects
? $2,549 Gates Bldg- Repl Elevator Controls & Controllers
? $373 MOB - Rebuild fans
? $6,515,054 Year-Round Emergency Shelter/Service
Center
? $25,600 COC-Bldg A-Replace Air Handlers 1- 3
? $150,124 HOA - Replace Video Surveillance System
? $35,621 Bldg 12 - Elevator Modernization Cars 5, 6 &
7
? $251,896 HCA - Health Clinic - Replace Air Ducts In
Units 11,12&15
? $1,000,000 Various HCA - Projects
? $210,336 909 N. Main - Rehab Roof
? $882,084 Gates - Replace VAV Boxes Phase II of III
? $60,407 HOA - Replace Modify 3rd Floor Ducts
? $110,000 MOB - Replace Emergency Generator
? $236,000 Sheriff - Coroner Bldg- Biological Evidence
Freezer Unit
? $124,950 Fruit St. - Two New ADA Compliant
Restrooms
? $82,000 HOA - Metal Gates and Fences
? $25,870 Bldg.11 TTC - Metal Gates and Fences
? $1,082,359 HCA Lab - Replace 8 Air Handlers
? $1,504,763 DA’s 401 Civic Center Drive
? $2,065,751 Sheriff Equipment
? $5,000,000 Sheriff Automated Jail System
Base budget includes key Information Technology (IT) initiatives
that are recommended for FY 2016-17 by the IT
Investment Review Board. FY 2016-17 Budget includes a
$4,570,846 Appropriations and Net County Cost for various
IT projects listed below:
1. $1,656,300 Real Estate Portfolio Tool (CMMS)
2. $793,698 HR Data Warehouse Upgrade
3. $198,438 Enterprise Data Management Solution
4. $1,351,564 Contingency for IT Projects
5. $570,846 IT Project Loan Repayment to OC Waste &
Recycling
FY 2016-17 Base Budget also includes revenue and appropriations
for:
1. $1,026,000 OC PA/PG Conservatorship System
funded from Fund 289 (FY 2015-16 3rd QBAR carryover)
2. $240,000 for Public Defender's Case Management
System funded from Fund 289 (FY 2015-16 3rd
QBAR carryover)
3. $939,200 e-Agenda Upgrade (CAMS) funded from
Fund 289 (FY 2015-16 3rd QBAR carryover)
4. $510,000 Integrated Talent Management System
funded from Fund 289 (FY 2015-16 3rd QBAR carryover)
5. $950,000 Board Crestron Communication Panel
funded from Fund 289 (FY 2015-16 3rd QBAR carryover)
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is $12,081,059, which
includes $9,468,140 for capital and maintenance projects for
Probation facilities and $2,612,919 for debt service on Sheriff-
Coroner's facility.
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is funded from
$2,237,655 operating revenue, $2,000,000 operating transfer
in from Budget Control 036, and $7,843,404 projected carryover
fund balance from FY 2015-16, which includes a
$5,839,000 transfer from Probation, Budget Control 057 to
Fund 104 for Probation facilities capital projects.
The primary use of these court penalties, fines, and fees is to
make $3.9 million Debt Service payments on Juvenile Justice
Center Bonds and Civic Center Expansion COP, which will be
paid off in June 2019. FY 2016-17 Proposed Expense Budget is $3,634,856, which
is $308,535 lower than FY 2015-16 Modified Budget due to
the cessation of the allocation of the 1991 Civic Center
Expansion reimbursement expense to Fund 105. FY 2011-12
State Controller's Court revenue audit findings resulted in a
substantial decline ($1.9M or 42%) in ongoing revenue to
Fund 105. FY 2013-14 revenue was not sufficient to fund the
bond payments in Fund 105. In order to avoid the projected
negative fund balance at the year-end (6/30/14), a resolution
for a General Fund Temporary Transfer "Resolution" to loan
up to $1.3 million from the County General Fund to Fund
105 was submitted for Board consideration. This resolution
avoids the projected negative cash balance in Fund 105 and
allows the Fund to meet the required debt service obligation.
The County Board of Supervisors approved a similar resolution
for $2.5 million on June 26, 2012. The $2.5 million loan
was not recorded as an Operating Transfer-In to Fund 105,
which resulted in a positive cash balance but the negative
fund balance at the year-end. Fund 105 will repay $2.5 million
to the General Fund whenever excess funds are available
in Fund 105 after meeting its Debt Service obligations. After
the payment of final Juvenile Justice Center Bonds in June
2019 or earlier, all available funds (including bond reserves)
in Fund 105 will be used to repay all loans from the County
General Fund before transferring the remaining balance to
the State.
The 800 MHz CCCS fund is a self-balancing budget with
restricted revenue. This budget is intended to fund 800 MHz
CCCS equipment and infrastructure costs that will be used
in future years for 800 MHz CCCS equipment purchases and
radio site development.
Interoperable communications for first responders.
¦ Extending the useful life of the 800 MHz CCCS network
and subscriber fleet, as a migration path continues
towards the next generation system that includes P25
compliance.
¦ FCC required Rebanding planning and implementation.
The final Bankruptcy Lease Revenue Bonds will be paid off
in July 2017.
FY 2016-17 Budget includes waste importation revenue and
final debt service payment.
The base budget increased by $4.1M, compared to FY 2015-
16 modified budget, to include a full 12 months of appropriations.
During FY 15-16, through the integration of IT
resources from Child Support Services, County Executive
Office, OC Community Resources, OC Public
Works, and OC Waste & Recycling and the implementation
of an IT Shared Services model, the County has
taken key steps toward improving its ability to uplift
technology and keep pace with industry advancements
in areas such as cloud-computing.
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes $2,778,311
Appropriations and Net County Cost for IBM Mainframe
and $392,239 Appropriations and Net County Cost for Open
System costs.
The budget includes the transfer of three positions and
accounting functions from Employee Benefits to Auditor-
Controller, Budget Control 003.
The known projected costs associated with implementation
of the provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (PPACA) have also been included in the FY 16-17
budget request
Expense budget is $96.8M, a $8.9M increase over the current
budget due to an increase in customer demand for Vendor
Scope 1 services ($2.2M), increase in Vendor Scope 2 Transformation
activities delayed in FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16
($5.9M), and an increase in depreciation for Scope 2 and
IBM Mainframe hardware ($1.3M). Revenue budget is
$78.4M, an increase of $2.4M due to IT billing to departments
for increase in demand of services.
During FY 2015-16, OC Information Technology augmented
its Countywide Information Security program
in an effort to address the upward trend in cyber security
threats faced by both public and private sector organizations.
The program included Countywide IT
Security Awareness Training, with approximately 500
users completing training to-date.
Medical inflation (trend) nationwide continues to rise causing
an increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs. These rising costs are reflected in an increase in health
plan premiums.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise causing an
increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs for the County and other employers nationwide.
¦ In 2015, the County implemented its Wellness Program,
OC Healthy Steps. Due to the high employee participation
in biometric screening and the Health Risk Assessment,
the County's 2016 Cigna health plan premiums
were decreased by 1.1%. The actual Kaiser health plan
premiums increase was lower than budget.
¦ The Fiscal Year 2016-17 budget reflects the positive
impact of the Wellness Program on the 2016 health plan
rates and assumes that the 2017 health plan premiums
will increase due medical inflation trend.
Unemployment claims experience has continued to trend at
the same level as last fiscal year. This has allowed the rate
holiday for County departments to be continued from FY
2013-14 through FY 2016-17. The fund has sufficient
reserves to fund potential economic downturns or internal
labor market issues.
Due to the economic downturn, layoffs and the Federal
extension program, the number of claims and amount
of benefit paid significantly increased to its highest level
in FY 2009-10. The Federal legislation had increased the
benefit from 26 to 46 weeks and weekly maximum benefit
from $450 to $475.
¦ To assist the Departments with their NCC budget targets
no premiums were charged from July 2009 through
February 2010. In FY 2010-11, the claims experience
improved slightly from FY 09-10 which enabled the
Unemployment rate charged to Departments to be
reduced in FY 2011-12 from .0028 to .0027 of payroll.
The claims experience in FY 2011-12 improved slightly
from FY 2010-11 and allowed the Unemployment rate
charged to Departments to remain at .0027 of payroll in
FY 2012-13. Unemployment claims experience has continued
to decline to levels commensurate with FY 2007-
08. The drop in claims has allowed for rate holiday for
County departments from FY 2013-14 through FY
2016-17.
Medical inflation (trend) nationwide continues to rise causing
an increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs. These rising costs are reflected in an increase in health
plan premiums.
Medical inflation (trend) continues to rise causing an
increase in medical, hospital, and prescription drug
costs for the County and other employers nationwide.
¦ In 2015, the County implemented its Wellness Program,
OC Healthy Steps. Due to the high employee participation
in biometric screening and the Health Risk Assessment,
and favorable claims experience health plan
premiums were decreased by 3.0%.
¦ Fiscal Year 2016-17 budget reflects the positive impact
of the Wellness Program on the 2016 health plan rates
and assumes that the 2017 health plan premiums will
increase due medical inflation trend.
Workers' Compensation charges to program participants
will increase in FY 2016-17 as a result of a strategic funding
decision to increase program funding as outlined in the
Board approved funding policy.
Workers' Compensation claim costs are increasing due
to rising medical costs, however, the County's loss rate
and claim frequency are significantly below the benchmark
average for other California counties.
Property & Casualty Risk charges to program participants
have been reduced in FY 2016-17.
Commercial insurance premiums are leveling and
insurance market conditions are currently stable.
OC Fleet Services Fund 296 FY 2016-17 Base Budget Request
of $31.0M is $5.2M million (17%) lower than the FY 2015-16
Modified Budget through 2nd Quarter Adjustments. This is
primarily due to a decrease in the equipment appropriation
requests.
One of the biggest challenges facing the County’s fleet is
the overall age of county vehicles. The average age of the
county’s fleet exceeds 11 years, well over the industry
benchmark. Older fleets result in higher operational
costs (maintenance repairs and fuel). As the economy
continues to improve, county departments are replacing
their older fleet assets at an accelerated rate. The county
could benefit from removing and selling its low-use
vehicles and investing in a fleet modernization plan that
includes analysis of optimal vehicle replacement cycles
and alternative capital equipment funding options. OC
Fleet is currently analyzing best practice options in a
Modernization Study to be completed in FY 2016-17.
As a result of a planned Publishing Services Modernization
Project, FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes a
$145,280 increase over the FY 2015-16 budget due to anticipated
software and hardware purchases. The project will
provide better customer experience through a new customer
interaction portal, faster response time through automated
workflow, integrated billing, guaranteed service levels, and
enhanced quality of service.
In the past five fiscal years the gross number of requisitions
received has increased by 59.5%.
¦ Evaluate and update equipment for efficient and
improved printing operations.
¦ During FY 2016-17, the department plans to expand
printing services provided to users.
Budget includes annualized cost for Wellness Management
Program vendor and implementation of Wellness initiatives
such as on-line coaching, quarterly Wellness newsletters and
biometric screenings.
Budget also includes additional claims cost associated with
the negotiated short-term disability benefit changes for the
Orange County Attorneys Association.
The FY 2016-17 budget includes the annualized
expenses associated with the County Wellness program
and the annualized decrease in Long Term disability
plan premiums.
