FY 2016-17 Highlights: The Administration program will focus its efforts on enhanced fiscal analysis of the
Department’s six diverse divisions through the use of next generation technology tools in accordance with the
County’s Priority-Based Budgeting initiatives.
The Procurement Services program will expand its vendor community outreach efforts to improve participation in
county solicitations through the use of community forums and targeted vendor training campaigns.
The Revenue Services program will continue to identify and implement new business practices to improve
collection initiatives through the use of innovative tools including collection analysis software, call recording
capabilities and specialized employee training.
FY 2016-17 Highlights: The Telecommunications Division maintains and supports the county’s data, media,
telephone, and two-way radio networks. The division will focus its efforts on the continued replacement of core
infrastructure for improved network management capabilities and increased reliability of transport services. In
addition, implementation of the Countywide Interoperable Radio Network Project’s Eastern Slope initiatives will
continue to include the construction of new state of the art communications tower facilities, deployment of digital
radio infrastructure and the migration of public safety agencies onto the new digital radio network.
FY 2016-17 Highlights: The Information Technology (IT) Division is the central information technology service
provider for Placer County Departments with an emphasis on shared technology services and reducing the overall
cost of information technologies countywide while maximizing value and high quality service. The division will focus
its efforts on strengthening the county’s cyber security program to further protect county data assets, enhance
citizen engagement initiatives to interact with county agencies in a secure and transparent manner, and evaluate
emerging technologies to identify opportunities for increased efficiencies and cost reductions.
FY 2016-17 Highlights: The Central Services Division provides comprehensive business services to all county
departments, as well as other government agencies, and non-profit organizations. To improve efficiencies in all
print shop functions, the division will focus on streamlining internal processes for print job receipt, production, and
billing services. In addition, the division will continue with its efforts to further promote the use of on-line job
requests to save county staff time and improve job turnaround times.
In addition to the responsibilities listed above, the department is prepared to react to Board
of Supervisor direction related to implementing and enforcing medical marijuana permitting and regulation should
that direction occur.
The Fish and Game Commission seeks to expand its appropriation to support up to ten
meetings per year. The Commission also intends to renew its grant program which was suspended in FY 2015-16
due to reduced revenues from Fish and Game code violations and fine payments.
The Assessor’s Office administers the property tax assessment program for 176,960
assessor’s parcels, resulting in an annual assessment roll of over $63.4 billion. Office workload is still affected by
over 31,000 properties that require annual market review and adjustment as the real estate market recovers. Given
the complexity of the property tax system, responding to public service inquires is an important role. The Assessor’s
website continues to provide more information every year with 166,772 visitors in 2015, up 13% from the previous
year.
Starting the groundwork for a multi-year project to replace our countywide financial
accounting system, along with supporting CEO initiatives, which include Priority Based Budgeting, Open Gov, a
government transparency software, and Neubrain, a countywide budgeting and business intelligence tool. Along
these same lines, we are developing training programs for new and existing staff to support our succession
planning efforts. We are also cross-training across divisions in anticipation of the formation of a project team for the
financial accounting system replacement.
In Federal Fiscal Year 2015, the Placer County Department of Child Support Services
ranked 18th out of all Local Child Support Agencies (LCSA) statewide for federal performance measures, which is
the highest ranking for this department. To accomplish this feat, the department worked diligently to hire the best
people for the job, provide the best training and tools to do their job, and maintain a work environment that
employees appreciate, and enjoy.
The Agency Administrative Services team continues to further the Board’s vision to have
all land development activities led by the Agency team. In the coming year, annexation agreements with Amoruso
Ranch (in the City of Roseville) will be processed, as well as annexation agreements with the City of Lincoln
(Village 1). In addition, Development Agreement and tax-sharing agreements for the Martis Valley West
development project and the Village at Squaw Valley Specific Plan will require commitment of staff time.
Building Services continues its public outreach and transparency initiatives, seeking to
facilitate and encourage compliance with applicable life safety and quality of life standards. The Building Services
team will also continue to make improvements to streamline and expedite the permit review process.
As development continues to gradually increase, particularly in the Western Placer
County, the Engineering and Surveying team will continue to strive to process applications efficiently to help keep
developments moving through the permitting process in a timely manner. The team will continue to analyze process
improvements, and implement further efficiencies when possible. Lastly, the team will continue the gradual
transition to create “single contact” project leads that oversee permit processing from initial submittal through
improvement plans and mapping, and ultimately construction inspection. Staff consistency, as a single contact
project lead, will provide applicants with staff familiarity, thereby allowing applicants to better navigate the permitting
process.
Continued facilitation of current land use projects, with a focus on improved streamlining of
those projects through the environmental and development review processes. The Planning Services Division will
also continue efforts to effectively coordinate with other departments, divisions, and agencies to provide support on
CEQA and NEPA project and program review, and will continue to provide on-going legislative support to the
County Executive Office. Key focus areas include completion of the Placer County Conservation Plan, the Tahoe
Basin Area Plan and the Sunset Area Plan, as well as initiation of an update to the County’s General Plan and
preparation of a Climate Action Plan.
FY 2016-17 will see the completion of the new sidewalk construction in Kings Beach and
part of the Commercial Core Improvement project. Homeownership programs will continue to be a priority to
increase and preserve the supply of affordable housing.
Quartz Ridge Family Housing is on track for a September 2016 construction completion,
making 63 affordable housing and one manager’s unit available in the Auburn/Bowman area. Kings Beach
Housing continues to have full occupancy with a substantial waiting list.
Clerk-Recorder - The office continues to look forward to expanding electronic recording of
land related documents and to serve the public through their Clerk and Recorder programs. Elections - The
Presidential General Election to be held in November 2016 is expected to have the greatest impact on the Elections
department for the next fiscal year. In addition, the office will be implementing some new procedures related to the
creation of a state-wide voter registration database and new regulations that affect vote by mail ballot processing.
The continuing recovery of the local and regional economies has resulted in increased
activity in land development and related transactional legal services. The economic recovery has stimulated new
county initiatives in the areas of infrastructure planning and financing, such as the evaluation of the potential West
Placer area, and Tahoe area economic incentive and financing mechanisms. In addition, in the area of
sustainability, the County has expanded its mPower PACE program and is exploring the development of community
choice aggregation. New State legislative initiatives such as the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act and
the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act, as well as the continuing implementation of public employee
pension reform, have added to this increased demand for legal services for both the General Government, Finance
and Taxation and the Land Development and Public Services programs. The new implementation issues involved
in quality of life issues, and the continuing implementation of criminal justice realignment, has increased the
demand for legal services in the Public Protection program. The general growth in the county, as well as
homelessness issues, has increased demands for services from our Health Services and Dependency program.
The increased activity by local government resulting from implementation of new state or local initiatives often leads
to new demands for Litigation and Claims program services.
The County Executive Office’s administration budget maintains the staffing and
operational costs associated with overseeing the overall department in support of the mission of the Board of
Supervisors. Administration delivers the county budget and financial activities, participates in the analysis of Board
agenda items countywide, coordinates legislative priorities, functions as the liaison between county departments
and the Board of Supervisors on policy, fiscal, and operational matters, and is the link between Placer County and
its community.
FY 2016-17 is a milestone year for ongoing Priority Based Budgeting, Economic Development, and Employee
Engagement initiatives. This year marks the first year all county departments are budgeting their program costs to
complement their departmental proposed budgets. Economic development activities are underway as expanded
activities occur in the Sunset and Tahoe areas with supporting land development functions provided by the County
Executive Office. Employee engagement continues to take center stage as wellness challenges and opportunities
for employees and the community to work together to bring greater meaning to county services.
The Board of Supervisors budget remains consistent with prior year operational activities
and adjusts for unavoidable cost-drivers.
The Clerk of the Board budget remains consistent with prior year operational activities,
adjusts for unavoidable cost-drivers, and allows for continued flexibility in the re-organization of staff as the division
adapts to Board of Supervisor and County Executive Office needs for support.
The Office of Economic Development is focused on three priorities for FY 2016-17 that
include Promotion and Marketing, Business Assistance, and Special Projects.
Promotion and marketing includes working closely with Communications and Public Affairs to increase awareness
of Placer County’s business development opportunities, outstanding quality of life, unique film production locations,
film/TV tax credit, and skilled labor force. This will be accomplished through branding implementation using the
new logo as a platform, partnering with the Greater Sacramento Area Economic Council on recruitment, and
concentrated effort on strategies for the ultimate promotion of the Sunset Area Plan once finalized.
Business assistance yields job creation and includes attracting new business, helping existing ones to expand, and
offering site location services, permit assistance, and hiring incentives. This will be accomplished through assisting
clients to find suitable sites/buildings; project proponents to gain needed entitlements, production companies to
discover the best possible locations; and employers to benefit from recruiting events and job fairs.
Special projects incorporate working with County departments, outside agencies, and project applicants to generate
enhance returns on investment for Placer County. These include potential incentive programs and financing
mechanisms, staging and sponsoring events such as Bridge Day California, Annual Economic Development
Summit Breakfast, Meet the Consultants, Manufacturers’ Forums, and Film Safety Officer Training. Other projects
include the Economic Development Board Action Plan, Get “Film Ready” Program, and the USDA Livestock
Processing Facility.
The Office of Emergency Services is focused on two priorities for FY 2016-17 that include
Emergency Preparedness and Response and Fire Service Administration.
Emergency Preparedness and Response continues to be a high priority. The Office of Emergency Services (OES),
Emergency Operations Center (EOC), and non-Emergency Operations Center teams collaborate to respond to and
prepare for major incidents. This requires intensive initial training and continuous training and preparedness
actions on an ongoing basis. Training is especially important as we bring on a new Emergency Services Specialist
and as we go into Continuity Training for County staff with EOC exercises and table tops, and with County focused
fire drill/active shooter/resiliency training for our County Employees. Two Emergency Operation Center (EOC)
exercises with County Emergency Management Organization (EMO) staff are planned to take place in the EOC,
one of which will include an ‘Oil by Rail’ train derailment explosion/hazmat/incident.
The pending Fire Services Regional Assessment and Improvement Plan is reviewing the adequacy of the current
fire services system for service delivery and fiscal solvency. The goal is to develop a long term Fire Service plan
for the western slope that is sustainable and efficient well into the future.
The General Liability / Risk Management budget is currently under review to satisfy A87 /
Cost Plan audit requirements for FY 2016-17. Additionally, the re-organization of the Human Resources
department enables the County Executive Office to strategize an approach to staffing and operations for this
division within existing position allocations. The upcoming budget year will include operational and financial
improvements envisioned and discovered as this program continues to adjust. Areas of focus will continue in
claims management, ADA coordination, and any nexuses to safety.
The County is conducting a feasibility study to determine the scale and scope of a
potential new Placer County Crime Lab.
Training a new generation of farmers will be accomplished through a two-day Beginning
Farmer Academy and six-week Farm Business Planning short course. Planning assistance for development of a
business plan for a USDA inspected meat processing plant for Placer County will be provided. Nutrition education,
produce tastings, garden education, and physical activity sessions will be provided by our UC CalFresh program to
Placer County schools and families. The Master Gardener program will provide over 7,000 hours of volunteer time
to assist home gardeners with questions and provide support for school gardens. The 4-H Youth Development
program will provide training, incubators, and eggs for an embryology program that will reach over 4,000 youth in
Placer County. A countywide Robotics project will spend six weeks building a robot and compete at a statewide
competition in Davis.
The Animal Services Division intends to expand their webpage and Facebook page to
attract additional visitors and increase licensing and animal adoptions, as well as implement online licensing
software programs and bring licensing back in house to increase efficiency and enhance public service. Online
licensing will also promote efficiency and increase licensing compliance. The division also intends to develop and
implement structured animal behavioral assessments; work more closely with partner rescue groups in order to
increase the live release rate; bring back in-house spay/neuter surgeries of all county animals to provide better
service and to eliminate spay/neuter contract costs; develop and implement K–8 animal humane education
programs; and expand low-cost vaccination clinics and community outreach programs to include weekend animal
adoption events. Work with the Public Works and Facilities Department will also continue to complete the
construction of the new Animal Services Center in Auburn, which will maximize services to our community and
provide the best possible care for our shelter animals.
Administration staff will generate claims, billings and fee collections totaling over $130
million from external sources such as federal and state partnering agencies and manage approximately 312
contract agreements and amendments for HHS to facilitate numerous service delivery models that implement
necessary programs for the Placer County community. Administration will process approximately 45,000
transactions totaling over $100 million to ensure timely payment to local businesses and community-based
organizations. Staff members will continue to work closely with the County Auditor-Controller on fiscal policies and
monitoring to align HHS activities with current funding law and regulations and will continue to work with the County
Executive Office on refining the new priority based budgeting model, which the department participated in as a pilot
department in FY 2014-15 and FY2015-16.
The Public Health Division’s FY 2016-17 budget reflects an increasing emphasis on
chronic disease prevention, data-analytics/evaluation, policy involvement, and connections to the communities we
serve. The Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) program will be transferred to the Public Health Division from the
Human Services Division. The Public Health Division has secured grant funding to re-establish a preventionfocused
Oral Health program targeting WIC families and will also be receiving Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program funding to provide Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention Services and grant funding to better
engage schools and the community around the issue of childhood immunizations. The Division will complete Placer
County’s first comprehensive Community Health Assessment and Community Health Improvement Plan, and will
expand the Be Well Placer campaign, including the Be Well Placer Community Dashboard.
Environmental Health will continue the efficiency and accountability of the Division by
improving health permit revenue collection to 96 percent within the permit year. New program development will
include the implementation of a retail food placarding program to advise the public of the health standards of that
facility at a glance. The division submitted the Local Agency Management Plan (LAMP) to the Regional Water
Quality Control Board (RWQCB) for approval and implementation of the most progressive onsite waste water
management program in Northern California and gain compliance and approval of all programs related to hazardous material and hazardous waste management as approved by the California Environmental Protection
Agency.
In the last year the demand for Older Adult Services continued to grow, and it is expected
that this trend will continue in FY 2016-17. One additional Adult Protective Services worker has been added to
assure that older and disabled persons stay safe in our community. The Adult System of Care received a federal
grant to partner with community agencies to provide integrated health and mental health care. This Health 360
Program is expected to help those with serious mental illness improve both their health and mental health with
planned interventions and coordination. The collaborative courts outcomes are showing promising results keeping
people from returning to the criminal justice system through treatment and supervision.
The Placer County Medical Clinics in Auburn and Tahoe continues to provide 19,000 high
quality services to 5,600 individuals to address their specific health care needs. In the last year the Medical Clinic
services have continued the redesign of services towards “whole health” incorporating most services into a primary
care visit.
This year has brought a number of significant changes in provision of foster care including
Continuum of Care Reform (CCR) which will fundamentally alter the way children and youth are placed when out of
their natural homes, with the goal of them staying with foster families and only being placed in institutions as a last
resort. CCR will also change how foster families are recruited, trained and paid, leading to possible retention
issues, and will change how foster family agencies are certified and monitored by county personnel. Another
highlight is that Medi-Cal Benefits are being extended to undocumented minors which will likely impact mental
health and physical health service provision.
It is projected that caseloads will continue to see modest growth in FY 2016-17, with all
applicable cost of living adjustments required by the state becoming effective throughout the year.
The past fiscal year continued to show significant growth in both CalFresh and the Medi-
Cal program (fueled by the Affordable Care Act) despite an overall improvement in the economy. However, there
were modest decreases in the CalWORKs and General Relief cases due to focused efforts to help move those
clients into employment and self-sufficiency. In FY 2016-17, Human Services requests no additional positions and
plans to use technology to achieve efficiencies wherever possible (especially in areas with significant caseload
growth) to provide service in a timely manner.
In FY 2016-17, the Placer County Housing Authority will enter its sixth year as a High
Performing Housing Authority. Notable changes to the program in the coming year include the addition of a
preference for Placer County Veterans, and the ability to open the wait list on an annual basis in an effort to target
applications from the county’s most vulnerable populations such as the homeless.
With the formation of the Human Resources Department, this appropriation includes the
additional functions formerly in Risk Management and Organizational Development, and will also include a new
wellness program. The primary initiative will be the development and implementation of the Human Resources
Strategic Plan with a focus on process improvements through technological enhancements.
Fiscal sustainability and stable operations including appropriate staffing levels is the focus
for FY 2016-17. Fiscal challenges and an on-going structural budgetary deficit in the Library Fund have left the
Library unable to adjust to the community’s needs in all eleven of the Placer County Libraries and the Bookmobile.
The demand by citizens for longer open hours, plentiful and relevant library materials, up-to-date technology, and
attractive facilities is not currently being met. Library Administration continues to work with the County Executive’s
Office and the Board of Supervisors to develop strategies that will move the Library toward modern library practices
and sustainable funding and services in the future.
“The Placer County Library cannot maintain quality by resting on its laurels or by ignoring the changing context in
which services are offered. While it is impossible to predict the exact future, it is important to develop a strategy that
aligns well with the trends in technology, publishing, and consumer expectations that are most likely to exert a
strong influence on the Placer County Library in the years to come.” From the Board of Supervisors approved
Placer County Library Strategic Plan
This budget reflects the Probation Department’s commitment to the citizenry of Placer
County to fulfill our mission using the available resources, while adapting to shifting responsibilities occurring
through criminal justice realignment, voter approved changes and the constantly evolving needs of each of our local
communities. Probation strives to provide the most efficient and effective services, while contributing to the overall
effectiveness of the criminal justice system through cost efficient business practices and collaborative partnerships
with the Board of Supervisors, the County Executive Office, the Superior Court, District Attorney’s Office, Public
Defender’s Office, Sheriff’s Office, local police departments, Health and Human Services, Placer County Office of
Education, Sacramento County Office of Education and local treatment providers.
Probation’s increased collaboration with local law enforcement throughout the County will allow the Department to
maximize Community Supervision services delivered with the resources provided. Strengthening these ties within
the communities that comprise Placer County allow Probation to adjust its programs and services to best meet local
needs. We have recently increased staffing in Tahoe and have created specialized caseloads to address significant
emerging issues within localized portions of our community.
The Placer Re-Entry Program (PREP) also exemplifies Probation’s commitment to the community and public
safety. A coordinated, collaborative effort brings a wide array of services and treatment to offenders in order to
reduce the likelihood of their re-offense to the greatest extent possible. Within this budget period, Probation will
determine if expansion of this program to serve other areas within Placer County is both feasible within the given
resources, and the best way to address community needs.
The provision of appropriate staffing, equipment and technology is part of our on-going strategy to continuously
evaluate our organization for effectiveness and efficiency of services. This evaluation, in combination with an
emphasis on best practices and evidence based programming demonstrates our dedication to public safety. As the
Department transitions to Placer County’s priority based budgeting initiative, we will make data available to allow
the public to assist us in refining our services.
An evaluation of the cost effectiveness of this internal service fund versus privatizing these
services will be completed.
Administration continues to implement Priority Based Budgeting and co-locate Facility
Services and Public Works administrations into one location at the Community Development Resource Center.
The NPDES program will renew the Lake Tahoe NPDES Municipal Water Quality Permit,
implement statewide stormwater trash reduction standards, and adopt updated and new Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) floodplain mapping.
The Real Estate Acquisitions program will support the county’s economic development
activities through its acquisition of Tourist Accommodation Units (TAUs) in the Tahoe basin to incentivize
development, and perform property management duties until the Kings Beach Center is sold or leased. The
program will also support the implementation of the Placer County Conservation Program (PCCP) through
acquisition of mitigation lands that need to be conserved by the time the PCCP is initiated. The Real Estate
Management program will manage the disposition of the three Successor Agency properties and the Kings Beach
Center. This program will also work with the Fairgrounds Revitalization Committee and stakeholders to develop
short and long term plans for the Fairgrounds. The program intends to work with the City of Lincoln, developers and
stakeholders to position the former Titan Missile Site for future development and perform environmental
remediation activities.
Administration continues to implement Priority Based Budgeting and co-locate Facility
Services and Public Works administrations into one location at the Community Development Resource Center.
The Parks Development and Grounds Maintenance program will sustain the county
response to drought conditions by continuing to meet and exceed water conservation goals, and expand the
irrigation retrofit and drought-tolerant planting program. The Trails Development and Maintenance program will
work with neighborhoods and partners to develop the County Park and Trail Master Plan through community
outreach, inventory of existing amenities, evaluate future needs, collaborate with residents and stakeholders on the
vision for a Hidden Falls Regional Park Connectivity project, and complete an environmental review process that
documents potential project details. The Public Landscape Development and Maintenance program will develop a
long-term funding and improvement strategy for the roadway corridor landscape and recreational amenities in
Granite Bay.
The Historical Heritage Education program will expand the Oral History Program through
interviews of individuals connected with the Dewitt Center, and the Fruit Packing industry. Second, the program will
also complete finishing touches on the new DeWitt History Museum in anticipation for the 75th Anniversary of the
U.S. entry into World War II. Third, the program will open several new temporary exhibits including “Post-Mortem,”
and “Placer County Civil Defense,” both of which will be housed in the Placer County Museum at the Historic
Courthouse. Lastly, the program will expand the school-age Gold Rush Program, using facilities at the new Gold
Rush Museum, and continue successes of the Living History Program for Placer County Third Graders. The
Historic Preservation program will continue to preserve hundreds of County artifacts, documents, and photographs
and assist the public with research.
Perform annual maintenance and repairs of emergency landing strip for small aircraft and
emergency use by U.S. Forest Service during fire season.
Engineering projects such as bridges, roads, pedestrian facilities, and Tahoe
enhancement will include completing the Kings Beach Commercial Core Project, and begin construction of up to
four bridge replacements and construction of the SR 89/Fanny Bridge Project, including the Dollar Creek Shared-
Use Trail, and two bus transit shelters. Transportation planning programs will complete design of Phase 1 of Placer
Parkway, and seek agreement on a regional traffic fee program between Sacramento, Sutter and Placer Counties.
Major Budget Adjustment(s):
• Decrease of $20,218,291 in project expenditures based on estimated project completions during FY 2015-
16, mostly for the Kings Beach Commercial Core Improvement project and bridges such as the Alpine
Meadows replacement.
• Decrease of $15,278,002 in revenues associated with completed projects, and including a gas tax revenue
loss of $3,400,000 that is reflected in the road maintenance budget.
• Decrease of $2,000,000 in one-time general fund augmentation for deferred road maintenance overlay
projects approved in FY 2015-16.
Engineering projects such as bridges, roads, pedestrian facilities, and Tahoe
enhancement will include completing the Kings Beach Commercial Core Project, and begin construction of up to
four bridge replacements and construction of the SR 89/Fanny Bridge Project, including the Dollar Creek Shared-
Use Trail, and two bus transit shelters. Transportation planning programs will complete design of Phase 1 of Placer
Parkway, and seek agreement on a regional traffic fee program between Sacramento, Sutter and Placer Counties.
The Road Maintenance program will complete the curb ramp ADA transition plan update,
administer and construct three major surface treatment projects covering nearly 80 miles of County maintained
roadway (including a federally funded hot mix asphalt overlay), and continue Highway Safety Improvement
Program (HSIP) striping project on approximately 200 miles of County maintained roadways. The Snow Removal
program will continue the operation of one of the largest snow removal programs in the State.
The Facility Development program will complete the construction, acceptance and
occupancy of the new Animal Services Center and the development of the Placer County Government Center
Master Plan. The program will also complete the programming for a Health & Human Services office building and a
county-wide ADA assessment and transition plan. The program will continue analysis and implementation of
security measures at facilities and continue negotiations and acquisition of a countywide warehouse facility on
Locksley Lane on behalf of the Clerk-Recorder. The program will support efforts for a design-build delivery of an SB 863 Acute Mental Health Housing Unit addition at the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility, and provide other
capital project support as prioritized by the Board of Supervisors.
The Placer County Transit program will complete the replacement of aging fleet and
pursue a grant to implement the first battery electric bus into the fleet.
The Tahoe Truckee Area Regional Transit program will complete the roll-out of the new
TART brand in coordination with the Town of Truckee and continue to expand services that began in FY 2015-16.
The Garbage Collection, Disposal and Recycling program will construct a second inbound
scale to more accurately measure waste volumes and improve traffic flow and site safety. The program will also
develop a master plan for the on-site soil reclamation area to extend the useful life of the facility.
The Kings Beach Center program will manage the former Successor Agency properties
pending disposition for development consistent with redevelopment and community plans.
The Garbage Collection, Disposal, and Recycling program will implement organics
recycling programs to comply with state mandates.
The Fleet Operations program will implement actions for compliance with air quality and
safety regulations, upgrade fuel management system, and implement parts management outsourcing.
The Land Development program will negotiate capacity expansions at City of Lincoln
Wastewater Treatment and Reclamation Facility and the City of Roseville’s Pleasant Grove Wastewater Treatment
Plant to accommodate growth in North Auburn and western Placer County. The Sewer and Water Utility District
Management program will develop a reclaimed water master plan for the Sunset Industrial Area using reclaimed
water available to the county from the City of Lincoln through the Sewer Maintenance District 1 regionalization
project, and define roles and responsibilities for reclaimed water in the Riolo Vineyards / Placer Vineyards areas.
The Groundwater Management program will define the County’s roles and responsibilities for groundwater
management per state law and regulations.
Building Maintenance programs will continue repair and renovation of parking lot and
street paving, comprehensive painting plan at county facilities, roofing repair and replacement at highest priority
facilities, analysis and implementation of appropriate security measures at identified facilities, expand
implementation of automated HVAC and lighting systems, and continue implementation of energy saving
measures.
The Placer County Government Center program will provide efficient delivery of utilities,
maintenance and services for the campus, and is funded by direct charges to county departments who occupy
space at the campus.
Automated technology initiatives will increase the functionality of Sheriff’s Office
operations. Replacing the existing automated Corrections Management System (CMS) will enable more effective
and integrated supervision of inmates; while the replacement Records Management System (RMS) will provide
more critical data to officers in the field, in real time.
Continued transition to South Placer Jail with opening of 180 previously constructed jail
beds.
Workload associated with capital facilities financing and infrastructure and development
financing is expected to increase. The level of increased workload could be significant and will depend on actual
demand for financing. Additionally there will be increased activity associated with the development of the
Community Choice Aggregation project.
Workload is expected to increase with program expansion and growth.
Continue to explore service delivery to veterans in our community. Continue to advocate
for maintaining and improving veteran benefits at the State and Federal Level. Improve service delivery model to
ensure more technically savvy veterans can locate information and access their benefits.
