In prior years, the Assessor was able to mitigate the impact of the
reduction in general fund support by restructuring business processes and with support from the Clerk-Recorder
division. For FY 14/15, the department has submitted an initial budget that maintains prior year spending levels
although labor costs have increased. This spending level will impact the departments ability to provide services at
prior year levels.

The project continues to progress with anticipation of Thomson Reuters’ first planned release of a new Government
Revenue Management system in the county’s test environment early in the fiscal year. Work continues in earnest
on other project tasks in the areas of system design, data conversion, infrastructure build-out, testing, and report
writing.

In FY 13/14, the Economic Development Agency consolidated related functions into the Economic Development
Program division. The Office of Film and TV and the Office of Military and Defense Services are newly created
functions that fulfill the economic development goal of raising the profile and attracting industry to the county, as
well as retaining military facilities throughout the county.

Given the current economy, there are few new general fund projects. Due to the transfer of capital funds for budget
purposes, the CIP has significantly reduced its ability to fund major department projects. These transfers boosted
critical reserves at a time of great economic turmoil. A $24 million loan from Waste Management during the FY 13-
14 fiscal year provided cash support for the Eastern County Detention Center (ECDC) and related projects in
advance of the planned bond financing that will take place in FY 14/15.
The CIP will continue to focus on the financing of new jail construction. Several projects will still be under way in
FY 14/15, representing about $8 million in outstanding CIP budget commitments and Board obligations. The
Executive Office is monitoring all project activity on commitments to determine when a project commitment may be
closed. Remaining commitments from inactive or completed projects will be transferred to the General Fund for
budget stabilization.

These contributions total about $46 million in the recommended
budget and support ongoing and one-time needs. The largest
contribution is for debt service to Capital Finance Administration for various county facilities ($20.1 million). Also
included is a $10 million subsidy for the county medical center, paid from tobacco settlement revenue.
Contributions for the County of Riverside Enterprise Solutions for Property Taxation project ($1.8 million), the
homeless program ($2.5 million), and deferred maintenance ($0.6 million) have also been included.

Although there are no significant budget changes with operational impacts for this fiscal year, the administration is
actively looking at refunding possibilities to reduce tax liability for the property owners within the community facilities
and assessment districts.

Due to the economically reduced revenue streams from all project areas, going forward the focus of this budget unit
over the near term will center on maintaining sufficient reserves to make debt service payments on existing county
and finance authority debt obligations, and fully funding the county’s commitment to the medical school.

In FY 13/14, $400,000 of the balance forward, received from the Desert Sunlight solar power plant located in
Desert Center, was earmarked for capital improvements to the Lake Tamarisk Clubhouse in Desert Center,
although no appropriations from that amount have been made as of this writing. The FY 14/15 revenue estimated
includes only the annual franchise payment owed by the Desert Sunlight project. Although it is anticipated
NextEra’s McCoy project will commence in FY 14/15, the timing of that is not certain, and consequently the amount
of their initially payments cannot be calculated at this time. The budget for this unit includes no recommendations
regarding appropriation of these revenues at this time.

Purchasing is absorbing salary increases by reducing expenses in areas that will not affect service levels (e.g.
training, carpool, office supplies, communication services, professional services). The department has also
increased revenues by entering into MOUs with county departments to pay for dedicated purchasing staff. The
department will remain focused on maintaining adequate levels of service and providing continued cost savings for
countywide purchasing activities.

In FY 14/15 the department will conduct one major countywide election and one smaller municipal election. The
major election is the November 2014 General Election, followed by the smaller City of Riverside City Council 

Election in June 2015. The operating budget was reduced due to the reduced number of elections to be
conducted during the fiscal year. Additional special elections may be called throughout the year.
With the incorporations of Eastvale and Jurupa Valley in FY 10/11, the unincorporated population of the county
dropped 28 percent. As a result, AB2766 revenues fell about 16 percent. Although revenue is expected to remain
flat, expenses continue to rise. Currently funded programs include Rideshare, Western Riverside Council of
Governments Clean Cities, and a contribution to Coachella Valley Association of Governments for street sweeping.
Expenses are expected to exhaust fund balances in FY 14/15. Air Quality staff will work with the Executive Office
and Human Resources to identify program efficiencies and new revenues in the Rideshare program.

Ordinance 857 will be updated in July 2014 with a revised fee structure. After the Ordinance revision, outreach
efforts will be established to bring into compliance all unregistered businesses in the County’s unincorporated area
as well to ensure the renewals of the existing active businesses. The Storm Water Inspection program is closely
tied to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, the latter of which has been
consolidated into the Transportation Department’s NPDES program. This integration has resulted in four staff
transferring to Transportation.

The department is making efforts to generate revenue by entering into service agreements with cities. Currently,
the department has an on-going service contract with the City of Perris. Efforts to secure the use of grants funds
remain a focus. There has been a reduction in position from last fiscal year due to the integration of accounting
staff into a single reporting structure in TLMA Administrative Services.

Potential budget, and resulting staff, reductions in EPD and the Planning department may lead to a complete
merger of all staff into the Planning department by FY15/16. TLMA is evaluating options as FY 14/15 gets
underway and general fund impacts are more fully assessed in September.

The cost for services provided by the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection are estimated to
increase $6.7 million, from $60.9 million, for FY 14/15. The department also increased its budget to include the
lease of additional fire engines. To assist with the increase in operating costs, additional general fund support
totaling $306,000 and revenue related to Prop 172 totaling $7.4 million was added to the department’s budget.

The alternate public defender/capital defender office will be dissolved in FY 14/15. The budget for the dissolved
division was divided proportionately between the Public Defender and the Executive Office to accommodate the
conflict capital defense contracts.

As part of the FY 14/15 budget, the Department will continue the implementation of realignment efforts with either
community based supervision or mandatory probation, pre-trial services, court-ordered probation, and Require
Every Convict Occupant Reimburse County Expenses (RECORCE); through the recruitment and hiring of vacant
positions and continued implementation of evidence based programs. Probation continues to ensure that service

levels comply with all applicable code sections and regulations. Field personal are also beginning to utilize the
Public Safety Enterprise Communication system (PSEC).

Beginning FY 14/15, the Public Defender will dissolve the Alternate
Public Defender/Capital Defender Office to achieve better transparency in capital cases. In the past, the office
accepted capital cases in which the Public Defender had an ethical conflict of interest and was prohibited by law
from representing an indigent individual facing the death penalty. Private attorneys will now be hired when the
Public Defender has a conflict of interest or if numerous defendants in the same case require representation.

At the end of FY 13/14 patrol in the unincorporated area of Riverside County has returned to the pre-recession level
of 1/1000, or one sworn officer for every one thousand residents. Additional funds were added to the Sheriff’s
budget in order for additional officers to be trained and hired during FY 14/15 with the ultimate goal of reaching a
patrol staffing level of 1.2/1000 by the end of FY 17/18.

In order for the department to hire the first 207 positions needed to staff the East County Detention Center $10
million was added to the budget. The majority of the positions to be filled during FY 14/15 are Correctional
Deputies and Deputy Sheriffs. At the completion of academy training these officers will immediately begin working
in one of the five jails, allowing the Sheriff to provide needed field training for the new hires and concurrently
reducing overtime.

Administration: TLMA Administrative Services has now integrated all accounting staff into a single reporting
structure, and is adding a small Records Management function within its consolidated staffing to complement
efforts at automation with the new Land Management System (LMS) replacement project.
Consolidated Counter Services: The remodel the department’s facilities with a counter design and space layout
that is more functional and business friendly have been initiated. To further enhance customer service, the
department has included two (2) Ombudsman positions in its budget. In an effort to maintain the department’s
presence in the desert area, the department offset increasing operating costs by moving into a smaller facility.

Health Realignment revenue for FY 13/14 was budgeted at slightly
more than $3 million for indigent services provided in the health
clinics. This funding is expected to decrease to just over $1 million in FY14/15. However, many of those previously
uninsured will now be eligible for MediCal. The department expects that by increasing capacity with additional
appointments, sufficient MediCal reimbursements will be generated to offset the reduction in state 1991 Health
Realignment revenue.

In FY 13/14, AB 85 significantly modified 1991 Realignment distribution to capture and redirect savings counties will
experience from the implementation of federal health care reform effective January 1, 2014. It is estimated that
funds into this budget unit may be reduced by as much as $32 million. FY 14/15 appropriations have initially been
reduced by $10 million. The fund will be monitored and budget adjustments requested as necessary.The department budget for FY 14/15 includes additional general fund
support of $5 million. The increase is primarily attributable to additional positions expected to be filled during the
year to meet the MOU service levels and increased costs for salaries and benefits. Although the recruitment
process is lengthy, the department continues to fill vacant positions with permanent full-time employees rather than
per diem, temporary, or overtime staff.
Detention Health Services, Sheriff, and Executive Office staff continue to monitor service levels established in the
MOU, explore operational efficiencies, and pursue other sources of revenue, including AB 109, to offset the cost of
providing service. Beginning January 1, 2014, the MediCal expansion replaced the low
income health program. Consequently, no budget is proposed for FY 14/15. Service providers may submit claims
through December 31, 2014 and once all low income health program service claims have been processed, the
account will no longer be necessary and will be closed out.Beginning January 1, 2014, the MediCal expansion replaced the low
income health program. Consequently, no budget is proposed for FY 14/15. Service providers may submit claims
through December 31, 2014 and once all low income health program service claims have been processed, the
account will no longer be necessary and will be closed out.The department anticipates that MISP expenditures related to services performed by contracted medical service
providers will decrease as those eligible and previously uninsured enroll in MediCal. Federal MediCal
reimbursements will increase however; total revenue is not expected to increase as state 1991 Health Realignment
will be reduced.

The department’s budgeted spending for salaries and benefits will increase by more than $38.9 million for FY
14/15. This increased spending is in response to continued caseload growth in CalFresh and the MediCal
expansion related to healthcare reform. Additionally, staff has been hired in children services to fill recent
vacancies and to utilize available funding from the 2011 Realignment.
Additional changes are related to the implementation of: state policy changes related to the CalWORKs redesign;
state policy changes in child welfare related to the core practice model and expansion of mental health services
related to the Katie A. settlement; and, the Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) in the In Home Supportive Services
program. During FY 14/15, the number of community centers the Economic
Development Agency is responsible will be greatly reduced. The
department will continue to be responsible for the four community
centers in the desert area. The Kay Ceniceros senior center will be transferred to the City of Menifee effective July
1st and responsibility for the remaining county community centers will be transferred to the Regional Parks & Open
Space District.In FY 14/15, Fleet Services will use surplus net assets to offset
operating costs and maintain rates. Fleet Services is working with
the Executive Office and county departments to reduce the overall
size of the fleet and better utilize existing vehicles.

The budget unit formerly included the Wellness Program. The
Wellness Program has established a separate budget unit to track
revenues and expenditures more accurately amongst the two
programs.Rather than continuing with its own fund, the Property Insurance
budget unit is being included in the Liability Insurance Fund to
combine the insurance coverage funds for the county under one
fund.

In order to maintain services at an acceptable level while minimizing charges to department, Human Resources
Temporary Assistance Pool operated with a budgeted structural deficit during Fiscal Years 12/13 and 13/14.
Consequently, any surplus value in net assets has been depleted. The division’s budget will be review and may be
adjusted with final budget adoption by the Board of Supervisor’s if the operating budget is not consistent with
service demand.In FY 14/15, Printing Services will use surplus net assets to offset
operating costs and maintain rates. There are no other significant
budget changes with operational impacts for this fiscal year. In order to maintain services at an acceptable level while minimizing
charges to department, Custodial Services operated with a budgeted
structural deficit during Fiscal Years 12/13 and 13/14.In order to maintain services at an acceptable level while minimizing
charges to department, Maintenance Services operated with a
budgeted structural deficit during Fiscal Years 12/13 and 13/14.
Consequently, any surplus value in net assets has been depleted. To
return the net assets to a level that is consistent with full cost recovery
as required by the State Controller’s uniform accounting procedures for counties and balance the division’s FY
14/15 budget, Maintenance services will reduce its operation budget by $3.7 million. The division’s budget will be
review and may be adjusted with final budget adoption by the Board of Supervisor’s if the operating budget is not
consistent with service demand.
To consolidate maintenance services provided to the Riverside County Regional Medical Center, Maintenance
Services is providing an assessment of the facility. Efforts to transition maintenance responsibilities to this division
will include the absorption of approximately 39 personnel. Budgetary assessments are underway and will be
completed by the summer of FY 14/15.In order to maintain services at an acceptable level while minimizing charges to department, RCIT operated with a
budgeted structural deficit during Fiscal Years 12/13 and 13/14. Consequently, any surplus value in net assets has
been depleted. To return the net assets to a level that is consistent with full cost recovery as required by the State
Controller’s uniform accounting procedures for counties and balance the division’s FY 14/15 budget, RCIT services
will reduce its operation budget by $3.9 million. The division’s budget will be review and may be adjusted with final
budget adoption by the Board of Supervisor’s if the operating budget is not consistent with service demand.

RCRMC will begin FY 14/15 with a budget that includes county support of $5 million in redevelopment tax
increment pass-through revenue from the city of Moreno Valley, obligated toward debt service on the facility. In
addition, $10 million in tobacco tax revenue has been designated for hospital use. The current budget reflects
hospital spending that does not exceed revenue that is generated. The hospital will likely require additional
spending authorization to maintain acceptable service levels.
Notable events that may affect the FY14/15 budget include:
? The Affordable Care Act was implemented on January 1, 2014 and expanded the number of patients
eligible for the MediCal program. It comprises approximately $78.4 million of patient revenues. Although
federal payments are set at 100 percent, reductions in other funding sources (particularly realignment
revenue) will offset a significant portion of the increased revenue.
? Based on the latest information, it is estimated that 1991 Health Realignment is approximately $39 million
? The RCRMC-Huron improvement plan projects additional patient care revenue of $10 million and savings
of $42.9 million due to operational improvements
? It is anticipated that MediCal expansion may generate approximately $9 million in additional MediCal
payments for in-patient services provided to eligible jail inmates.
The FY14/15 budget is predicated on successful implementation of the Affordable Care Act MediCal expansion,
maintaining the current patient base, achieving the targeted RCRMC-Huron revenue and expense improvements,
qualifying all MediCal eligible jail inmates receiving in-patient services, and limiting the effects of the 1991 Health
Realignment reduction to no more than $24.5 million with a distribution to RCRMC of no less than $9 million.
Future capital projects not already funded by the CORAL 2012 Lease Revenue Bonds will likely need financing to
conserve cash for hospital operations. Cash flow timing issues are expected to continue to affect RCRMC due to
the process for obtaining federal matching dollars for the Affordable Care Act MediCal expansion program and
other supplemental federal waiver hospital programs. RCRMC is required to transfer significant funds, several
times per year, to the state through Inter-Governmental Transfers in order to receive federal matching dollars. This
process can take several weeks and sometimes months, leaving the hospital with insufficient cash to offset ongoing
expense claims.During FY 14/15, salary and benefit costs are expected to increase due to increases in staffing levels and
renegotiated labor union contracts. After the major expenditures for the landfill expansion projects at the Badlands
and Lamb Canyon landfills, the FY 14/15 budget for fixed asset purchases will decrease significantly. Most of the
FY14/15 asset costs will be related to land improvements and the replacement and acquisition of new equipment
needed to comply with In-Use Off-Road Diesel regulations and increase productivity at landfill sites.First Five is primarily funded through Prop 10 revenues which
continue to decline due to a decline in taxable of tobacco product
purchases. The reduction has been mitigated to some degree by an
increase in the county’s birth rate, a basis for the allocation of Prop 10 funds. First Five utilized fund balance to
cover expenses for services that exceed revenue. The five-year spending plan continues the uses of fund balance
to cover the programs increase in expenditures.
The agency’s current strategic plan provides multi-year funding for providers through several state and local
Initiatives. These initiatives allocate over $83.4 million to 73 health and early Care and education providers through
FY 15/16.
The FY 14/15 budget is anticipated to allocate approximately $24.5 million for contract services, which represent
the most significant component of the agency’s budget. In addition, the First Five commission approved the use of
previously designated funds for the purchase of a facility, effectively capping occupancy costs and maximizing long
term funding for services for children.In FY 13-14, the Board of Supervisors designated the Regional
Parks & Open Space district as the agency to manage the
operations of all parks located in the various County Service Areas.
For FY 14/15, the Economic Development Agency will continue to
manage the CSAs, with the exception of park related activities. There are no significant budget changes with
operational impacts for this fiscal year.

All Programs have an average two percent increase in expenditure budget over prior year due to higher personnel
costs. Also, the Parks and Recreation Programs’ expenditure budgets increased an additional 34 percent and 27
percent, respectively, over prior year due to the District’s new contract with EDA to manage several Community
Park sites and the opening of the new Perris-Menifee Valley Aquatic Center.
The District looks forward to continued growth in the Volunteer Management program in FY 14/15, as well improved
customer service and revenue reporting capabilities resulting from the recently approved Districtwide web-based
point of sale software system. With these changes, training will be needed to educate staff in proper volunteer
supervisory techniques and to instill a level of comfort with the new technology required for today’s business
environment.
While some strides have been made in the Capital Improvement Program, significant energy will be required to
build capacity and sustainability so projects are completed as planned and within budget targets. Moreover, with
grants beginning to mirror desired societal changes, including healthy lifestyle habits, it is anticipated that trail-type
projects will consume much of the time and energy required for most, if not all, future grant applications. Therefore,
District staff will be required to collect and track data which demonstrates the positive outcomes of trails should the
District wish to remain competitive.
Looking toward the end of FY14-15, the District will be celebrating its 25 year anniversary. This milestone will
coincide with the completion of the 5-year strategic plan, which will require additional efforts to amend the plan with
new goals and objectives. It is assumed that the new strategy will incorporate many of the new community
recreation facilities and programs that have consumed resources in the last several months. In order to remain
competitive, the District must develop adequate maintenance and programming plans for these facilities which are
consistent with current District plans and industry best management practices.