The department’s net county cost allocation is insufficient to support critical general fund positions and
will impact the Assessor’s ability to fulfill its legal mandate. In prior years, the Assessor was able to
mitigate the impact of reduced general fund support and increasing operating costs by restructuring
business processes and with the support of the Clerk-Recorder. In FY 15/16, the Clerk-Recorder will no
longer be able to backfill general fund support. The recommended budget adds a net of two authorized
positions for a total of 224, of which 183 positions are currently filled.

There are no significant budget changes with operational impacts for this fiscal year. The FY 15/16
recommended budget maintains general fund support at the FY 14/15 level of $3,802,064. The FY
15/16 recommended budget funds 77 positions, of which 71 positions are currently filled.

With the payroll service fee remaining unchanged from FY14/15, there are no significant budget changes
with operational impacts for this fiscal year. The payroll division is a general support service funded by
the departments, agencies, and districts it serves. The FY 15/16 recommended budget funds 22
positions, of which 19 positions are currently filled.

The COWCAP budget unit is used to collect reimbursements determined by the countywide cost
allocation plan. For the FY15/16 recommended budget, the COWCAP calls for a reimbursement of
$22,673,294 as compared to $19,221,274 in FY 14/15. Support for this function is provided by the
Auditor-Controller’s specialized accounting unit, and no positions are authorized in this budget unit.

The department’s general fund support for FY 15/16 will remain at the FY 14/15 level of $3.3 million.
Revenue of $4.2 million will partially offset expenditures of $7.6 million. The department will use
$100,000 in restricted fund balance to cover special projects associated with the Youth Advisory
Committee. The recommended FY 15/16 budget funds 58 positions.
The department anticipates financial impacts for FY 15/16 resulting from projected decreases in
revenues totaling $620,000, including $193,000 in cable franchise fees, $401,000 in Board ancillary fees,
and $26,000 in miscellaneous service fees. The department therefore requests additional general fund
support to maintain the same level of service to both the Board of Supervisors and the public. The
department also requests $271,000 to fund recent new staff hires and unfilled positions. The vaca
positions are a result of attrition and funding issues. An additional $218,000 is also requested to cover
anticipated internal service fee increases in FY 15/16.

The Office of County Counsel is continuing the strategy of offsetting its labor cost increases by focusing
on full cost recovery through billable rates to chargeable client departments and leaving some previously
vacated positions unfilled. The office also continues to attempte to keep most litigation in-house to
minimize and avoid outside counsel costs and increase its ability to service agencies and departments
with revenue sources outside of the general fund.



The CIP will continue to focus on financing new jail bed construction and operations, which continues to
be the highest capital priority. Several projects will still be under way in FY 15/16, representing about
$370 million in outstanding CIP budget commitments and Board obligations. The East County Detention
Center and related projects will be funded by bond proceeds and the state grant. The construction of the
Riverside Public Defender/Probation building will be funded by bond proceeds. The Probation Crogan
Youth Facility is being funded by the state grant, DIF funds and limited general fund support. The
Executive Office is monitoring all project activity on commitments to determine when a project
commitment may be closed. It is likely that many worthy projects will be delayed until new revenue
sources are available or departments are able to fund projects without affecting the general fund.

Previously accumulated excess fund balance attributable to the Palm Desert project areas has been fully
depleted through funding of construction of capital projects such as the Coachella Valley Rescue
Mission, Indio Volunteer Clinic, Blythe Animal Shelter, Desert Hot Springs Family Care Clinic, and North
Shore Yacht Club. Due to the economically reduced revenue streams from all project areas, going
forward the focus of this budget unit over the near term will center on maintaining sufficient reserves to
make debt service payments on existing county and finance authority debt obligations, and fully funding
much-needed capital improvements at the county medical center.

In FY 13/14, $400,000 of the balance forward, received from the Desert Sunlight solar power plant
located in Desert Center, was earmarked for capital improvements to the Lake Tamarisk Clubhouse in
Desert Center, and a portion of that has been appropriated by the Board. The FY 15/16 solar payment
revenue estimate of $1 million includes the annual franchise payment owed by the Desert Sunlight
project and the developer agreement payment owed on NextEra’s McCoy project that commenced in FY
14/15.
The recommended budget appropriates $600,000 from the commitment for community benefit for County
Service Area 51 at Lake Tamarisk, including $100,000 to purchase a new backhoe/tractor and riding
lawn mowers; $100,000 for repairs to the water system; $250,000 to upgrade the clubhouse kitchen and
restrooms; and $50,000 to purchase irrigation parts for the golf course. Based on current revenue
estimates this is projected to leave an ending balance in the commitment for community benefit of
$82,534. The actual ending balance may vary depending on exact revenue payments received and
invoices paid to County Service Area 51. The recommended budget appropriates the full $757,404 of
the general-purpose portion of the anticipated revenue for transfer to the general fund to help offset in
part the Board’s commitment to funding public safety.

Project activity among the remaining project commitments continues to slow. The Executive Office is
monitoring all project activity on commitments to determine when a project commitment may be closed.
Remaining commitments from inactive or completed projects will be transferred to the general fund for
budget stabilization.


The nature of the units in EDD makes it difficult to draw direct correlations between sponsorships or
special events and actual economic development. For instance, a collateral consequence of the
ordinance governing film projects in the County is that, as more film crews are attracted to Riverside
County, Office of Film & Television costs increase without supporting revenue. EDD divisions will be
bringing lessons learned in the Office of Foreign Trade, such as seeking sponsorships and donations (to
the extent allowed by County policy), to support activities that foster economic development. While
evaluating options, the EDD requests a general fund contribution of $4,725,801 to continue to fund
Board of Supervisors’ supported programs and activities, sponsorships, and special events for economic
development, marketing, business intelligence, Office of Foreign Trade, Office of Flim & Television, and
Salton Sea.

While the Riverside County Fair and National Date Festival itself typically generates profits of more than
$1 million dollars annually, the division regularly runs a deficit. A review of the last several years
highlights that, while costs have remained relatively constant at roughly $2 million dollars per year,
revenues have increased. Consequently, the Fair requests a one-time general fund contribution of
$617,488 for FY 15/16. The division will continue to look at ways to reduce costs and increase revenues
through an increase in interim events such as partnerships with high profile music festivals in the area,
attraction of large “special interest” conventions and expos, increase in the duration of the fair, and/or
implementing an admittance fee for headliner entertainment.

The goal of Parking Services is to meet the Board of Supervisors expectations for parking services and
rate charges. The Indio parking structure and the Indio Law Building parking lot will be operational by FY
15/16. While revenues for these new parking lots have been included in the budget, the Parking services
division requests general fund assistance of $190,443. Another option for consideration by the Board of
Supervisors is a parking rate increase.

The Youth Treatment and Education Center (YTEC), and the East County Detention Center (ECDC) are
significant projects approved by the Board of Supervisors, with a combined total budget of approximately
$400 million. The construction contract for the YTEC was awarded in March 2015, and the anticipated
award date for the ECDC construction contract is June 2015.

Human Resources re-instated the classification and compensation team to address the changing
structure of positions countywide. In FY 14/15, the team was fully funded by direct departmental
contributions. However, in FY 15/16, the entire cost of the team is a significant portion of the rate
increase. The demand for classification and compensation analysis across the county warrant having a
team of professionals focused on providing studies that will benefit both departments and employees.
Additional funding was also added for costs related to impending labor negotiations.

Purchasing is absorbing salary increases by reducing expenses in areas that will not affect service levels
(e.g. training, carpool, office supplies, communication services, professional services). The department
is seeking more revenues to offset general fund support by entering into arrangements with county
departments to pay for dedicated purchasing staff. The department will remain focused on maintaining
adequate levels of service and providing continued cost savings for countywide purchasing activities.

In FY 15/16, the department will conduct two major elections. The first major election is the November
2015 Uniform District Election, followed by the June 2016 Presidential Primary Election. In addition, a
mail ballot election for water districts and fire districts, and a city election are scheduled for FY 15/16.
The department is actively exploring its options for expanding facilities to meet the spacing needs for
future elections. The FY 15/16 recommended budget includes a one-time increase of $3.6 million due to
the increased number of scheduled elections to be conducted during the fiscal year. Additional special
elections may also be called throughout the year.

The FY 15/16 recommended budget maintains general fund support at the FY 14/15 level. However,
with increases in personnel costs and internal service rates, as well as operating the San Jacinto Animal
Campus, the department requested an additional $4.1 million to maintain current operations. If the
department is instructed to absorb the identified cost increases, it will be required to close the San
Jacinto and Blythe Animal Campuses, as well as reducing costs through attrition and potential layoffs.

The FY15/16 recommended budget shows the department is benefiting from a strong upswing in rooftop
solar installations. With the new state mandate of AB2188 effective in July 2015, these solar related
activities are anticipated to expand into the desert areas, and building permits for them are expected to
stay strong for an additional two years.

Operations are always impacted by any reductions in federal and state support coupled with changes in
costs that the department cannot control, including increases based upon bargaining agreements and
internal service fund rates. To ensure a balanced budget for FY 15/16, the department reduced office
space in Riverside, moved San Jacinto staff to Riverside, and will limit hiring for currently unfilled
positions.

The FY 15/16 recommended budget for Code Enforcement provides general fund support at $9.3 million.
However, this amount does not fully cover staff labor increases scheduled for FY 15/16. The department
indicates it is able to cover the increase in FY 15/16 using one-time monies, but a long-term structural
shortfall of $1.1 million will continue into FY 16/17. Interim efforts are being made to enhance revenues
through grant programs such as community development block grants or abandoned vehicle abatement;
however, the department will lose its $150,000 tire cleanup grant in FY 15/16, as the Riverside County
Department of Waste Resources will be administering the grant on the county’s behalf instead of Code
Enforcement.

Court Facilities: The FY 15/16 recommended budget funds court facilities at $4,895,120, the same each
year since FY 11/12. Costs have dramatically increased, as indicated by the need in FY 14/15 to request
$1.5 million in additional support. It is very likely that additional funds will also be needed in FY 15/16.
Contribution to the Trial Court: Beginning in FY 07/08, fee collections decreased, however in FY 14/15
they began to increase slightly. Penal Code §1203.1d stipulates the priority distribution of fines and fees
collected from a convicted person. Court-ordered fines and fees are the third priority for payments. The
first priority is victim restitution and the second a 20 percent state surcharge. The Superior Court
continues to improve its collection efforts in order to maximize revenue. Court and county staff meet
regularly to review collections.

The District Attorney reduced the FY 14/15 projected budget deficit more than a million dollars during his
first quarter in office. He submitted a balanced budget. There are potential financial impacts including
review of every filed petition following the passage of Prop. 47, and handling all parole violations that
used to be a state responsibility. The greatest budget impacts are increases to salaries and benefits,
internal service rate charges, and the need to make lease payments in both Indio and Banning. Prior to
the fourth quarter of FY 14/15, the DA was in county-owned space in both locations.

For FY 15/16, the impacts of the long-term reduction in overall staff in Planning and EPD will result in
merging the two departments together into a single budget unit. All staff members will be consolidated
into the Planning Department, and all RCHCA dedicated and funded staff will be moved from TLMA
departments into the vacated budget unit. The detachment of RCHCA staff from all other TLMA units will
facilitate more consolidated fiscal reporting of these RCHCA staffing costs.

The Fire Department remains in the fiscal situation where expenditures exceed revenues. The
department has employee benefit rate increases from the state along with other operating expense
increases. There is an operating deficit of $6.7 million for FY 15/16. The state contract is increasing
$9.1 million over the FY 14/15 budget. The operating budget has the same unfunded deficit from FY
14/15 of $1.5 million. The department has been able to partially fund the increases with additional
general fund support, a small increase of Prop. 172 revenue, and an increase in structural fire taxes.
On May 12, 2015, (Agenda Item 3-49), the Board authorized the County Executive Officer to take the
appropriate steps to establish the Emergency Management Department (EMD). The Office of
Emergency Services (OES) division from Fire will be combined with Public Health Emergency
Preparedness and Response (PHEPR) and Riverside County Emergency Medical Services Agency
(REMSA) to form the new department. The consolidation is effective July 1, 2015; however, the budget
for OES will remain in the fire department until the new department is formalized.

The FY 15/16 recommended budget reduces general fund support from FY 14/15 levels by $62,000.
This was necessary to accommodate the transfer of one full-time equivalent position from the NPDES
budget unit into the Executive Office budget unit. Minimal impact is anticipated for the program.

The Planning Department has experienced significant staff reduction over the past few years. Overall
staff reductions in Planning and Environmental Programs Division will result in merging both departments
together in FY15/16. Increased general fund support is being used to prepare the new housing element
and recirculate general plan amendment no. 960. Planning general fund support increased $1.8 million
to provide additional support for major projects such as the general plan and housing element update,
consistent with the five-year plan developed with the Executive Office.

Field Services: As part of the FY 15/16 budget, the department will continue implementing realignment
efforts through community-based supervision or mandatory probation, pre-trial services, court-ordered
probation, and day reporting centers. Although the department is absorbing all negotiated labor and
internal service fund increases within the budget submitted, Probation continues to ensure that service
levels comply with all applicable code sections and regulations.
Juvenile Institutions: Replacement of Riverside Juvenile Hall, constructed in 1947, remains the highest
capital priority. The juvenile master plan authorized by the Board of Supervisors is expected to provide
possible options for its replacement. The master plan contractor, Carter Gobel Associates LLC, worked
with the department to secure SB81 second round funding to remodel the Indio Juvenile Hall intake,
treatment, and visiting areas.

The FY 15/16 recommended budget maintains general fund support at the FY 14/15 level of $33.4
million. However with the passing of Prop. 47, additional staff was hired to address the inundation of
client requests, but only partial funding was provided in FY14/15. In addition, in FY15/16 the department
will be expanding, as new courts are opening in Banning that require staffing.
Consequently, the department requests $552,882 to fully fund the staffing to handle the potential 10,000
or more cases projected over the next three years. The department also requests $1,208,168 to fund
increased salary and benefits costs, and $100,000 to fund vehicle replacements. In addition, in March
2015, the department staff in Indio moved into the new Indio Law Building. Previously, the department 

did not pay rent for the space it occupied in the Indio county administrative center, and now requests
additional funding to cover rent charges of approximately $260,000 per year. The department indicates it
will not be able to absorb these staffing and labor increases and the new rent. If it is required to absorb
these costs, the department will first try to manage the budget through attrition, and then initiate layoffs
as needed. The car purchases can be evaluated on an as needed basis. The FY 15/16 recommended
budget funds 250 positions, of which 221 positions are currently filled. The vacancies are due to attrition
and funding issues.


Nearly every budget organization in the Sheriff’s department is facing a structural deficit during FY 15/16.
The current operational total is $65 million. The deficit is primarily based upon increased salaries and
benefits from negotiated bargaining agreements, increased internal service rates, and unfunded
expenditures in prior fiscal years. Although the state of California, under provisions of the 2011
realignment of public safety, distributes court security funding to counties, counties are required to
maintain the level of service provided when courts were transferred from counties to the state in 1995. In
twenty years, costs have increased dramatically; however, funding has been flat since 2011, causing a
budget gap that grows larger each year. The estimated FY 15/16 court services deficit is $4.9 million.

For FY 15/16, significantly increased costs from internal service providers caused the Agency to cut back
on these services in order to maintain a balanced budget. Due to cost increases, TLMA has had to slow
down some automation efforts in order to focus available resources on timely delivery of TLMA’s land
management system replacement project, the Public Land Use System or PLUS, which is well
underway. TLMA’s Riverside Counter Operation has moved to the ninth floor of the Riverside county
administrative center. Efforts to remodel the obsolete and outdated second floor, with special emphasis
on a more functional and business friendly counter design and space layout, met with budget problems
do the extreme age of the floor. The Executive Office will work with TLMA, Fire, and the Economic
Development Agency on how to overcome these cost hurdles. TLMA has also successfully completed a
downsizing move of its desert office from approximately 22,000 square feet into a smaller 10,000 square
foot facility. TLMA has initiated the ombudsmen program to enhance customer services at both counters
by creating two ombudsman positions in Riverside and one in the desert, for a total of three to assist
customers through the public permitting process.

The budget for the ten family care clinics increased significantly compared to FY 14/15. Expenditures of
nearly $42 million will be offset primarily by MediCal capitation funds and reimbursements. The
department receives no general fund support.
The department requests 71 additional positions, including 12 providers and the associated support staff
to maximize capacity at each clinic. Support staff positions will only be recruited when the medical
provider positions are filled. Recruitment of medical providers has been difficult, but the department is
working with Human Resources to improve retention and recruitment. The increased cost for staff is
expected to be fully offset by the additional revenue generated.

In FY 13/14, AB85 significantly modified 1991 Realignment distribution to capture and redirect savings
counties will experience from the implementation of federal health care reform effective January 1, 2014.
Revenue was previously estimated to be approximately $10 million less than FY 12/13. However, it
appears reimbursements will continue at the same level in FY 14/15, as the state continues to work with
counties to determine the allocation. Any under or over payment will likely be reconciled through future
cost allocation reports.

Correctional Health Services projects expenditures of nearly $27 million with no source of revenue other
than general fund support. The FY 14/15 budget authorized 185 permanent positions to provided
services at both adult and juvenile locations. The department continues to make progress in filling
permanent positions. In March of 2015, 144 positions were filled and another 24 are going through the
background process necessary to work in a correctional facility. The FY 15/16 recommended
budget funds 220 positions, including 21 temporary positions.

Environmental Health is in the second phase of a benefit assessment balloting process for vector control
funding support. There will be no operational impact for FY 15/16 contingent on the benefit assessment
passing. If the measure does not pass, a reduction in staff and services within the vector control
program may be necessary.

Detention Program
Mental Health receives additional detention support funding for inmates who, at adjudication, are
considered non-violent, guilty of a non-serious crime or one that does not require the inmate to register
as a sex offender. In FY 15/16, detention staff will work with corrections personnel on a step-down
model that will assist mentally ill inmates as they transition from specialized housing into the general jail
population. Also, in FY 15/16 the department is requesting support to return detention staffing to the
2006 level as well as to begin hiring for the Indio detention facility. Hiring experienced clinicians who
pass an extensive background is challenging across the county.
Substance Abuse
The Department continues to receive federal block grant funding for treatment and prevention services,
and is closely monitoring funding uncertainties surrounding these funds. Substance abuse staff is
working with the California Department of Health Care Services on proposed revisions to the Medi-Cal
drug treatment entitlement program waiver. This may increase the budget for services over the next
several years.
Treatment Program
The Department continues to expand clinics and services throughout the county with funding received
from the Mental Health Services Act (MHSA). Of particular note are the joint locations where health care
and treatment are offered. Providers of either medical care or mental health treatment are finding that
consumers accessing one service also are willing to access the other service, since it is delivered at the
same location. The net result is that more people are provided health care and mental health treatment.
The proposed budget also includes a request for $2.9 million to support state hospital treatment for those
whose felony convictions were reduced to misdemeanors. Prop. 47 allows individuals to petition for
sentence reduction and upon approval from the court treatment responsibility transfers from the state to
the county where the individual was adjudicated. The department also requests an additional $1.8
million to support essential staffing increases at juvenile halls and at the new treatment and education
center.

CAP joined the Department of Public Health as a new Division in February 2015. There are no
significant budget changes for this fiscal year. CAP is preparing for an audit for its Low Income Home
Energy Assistance Program and its Department of Energy Weatherization Assistance Program contracts.
In its preparation, CAP has been working to improve processes and documentation since the last audit.
CAP will report on the results of the audits and any findings as they become available during FY 15/16.

The Department continues to hire eligibility staff and plans are in place for additional hiring within current
funding levels in response to continued caseload growth in CalFresh and Medi-Cal, as expanded under
the Affordable Care Act.
For FY 15/16, the state reinstituted the match requirement for the CalFresh program. To sustain existing
staff levels, matching funds identified in an addback request will be required. This is the first of a 4-year
phase-in, so each year the county match requirement will increase by 25 percent. This requirement will
be critical for continued program compliance and to enable DPSS to meet regulatory requirements
pertaining to timeliness and accuracy of benefits issued. DPSS is also implementing several changes in
the CalWORKs program, consistent with State policy changes related to redesign, which are discussed
in more detail below.

Categorical Aid: In September 2010, Assembly Bill 12 (AB12) was signed into law, and provided the
California Fostering Connections to Success Act. Beginning January 1, 2012, foster youth could remain
in foster care up to the age of 20 years and 21 years starting January 1, 2013. The extended Foster
Care cases average approximately 450 per month, an increase of 13 percent over the standard Foster
Care caseload. Together, the Foster Care caseload is projected to increase by 13.6 percent in FY 15/16,
over projected FY 14/15.
Mandated Client Services: The state received federal approval to proceed with implementation of the
Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI), with a few modifications to the scope of the pilot, no sooner than
October 1, 2013. The CCI includes a dual demonstration project focusing on persons eligible for both
Medicare and Medi-Cal. The department’s IHSS program is coordinating the effort with local managed
health care plans. The county will continue to participate in CCI to coordinate Medicare and Medi-Cal
services and to promote integrated delivery of medical, behavioral and long-term care Medi-Cal services.
This program has increased the demand on the IHSS social workers’ workload, as they conduct
expedited IHSS assessments, participate in inter-disciplinary care team meetings and provide ongoing
consultation with managed care health plans.

Office on Aging has exercised sound fiscal management and has been able to mitigate the direct impact
on core services through a number of cost-saving measures. However, the department is at a point
where the continuance of absorbing increase labor and indirect costs, along with a reduction of funding
for the Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP), as part of the health care reform, will result in a
great impact to the core services and programs we provide to the frail isolated older adults in need in
Riverside County. The department has estimated the financial impact of these costs for FY 15/16 to be
approximately $250,000.

General fund support for FY 15/16 remains at the FY 14/15 level of $902,950. Revenue of $317,000 will
partially offset expenditures of nearly $1.4 million. In addition, the department will use restricted fund
balance in the amount of $253,808 to cover increased operating, salary and benefit costs associated
with enhanced services. The recommended FY 15/16 budget funds 15 positions.

The FY 15/16 recommended budget maintains general fund support at the FY 14/15 level of $614,604.
However, increases in ISF rates, insurance policy costs, lease costs, and labor costs will require
additional support of approximately $60,000 for FY 15/16. Out of this $60,000, approximately $48,000 is
required to cover the projected shortfall in salary and benefit costs, and $12,000 is required to cover
projected ISF rate, insurance policy, and lease increases. The department indicates it will not be able to
absorb these cost increases. If it is required to absorb these cost increases, the department will first try
to manage the budget through attrition, and then initiate layoff procedures as necessary.

The EDM received a general fund allocation of $73,381 for the last several years. For FY 15/16, the
EDM requests a one-time, additional allocation of $453,144 to continue operations, and increase
revenues. The EDM is exploring opportunities to increase non-general fund revenue, such as improving
the grounds with the addition of a “Golden Pavilion” that will allow concurrent events, and the
implementation of a partnership with the County Library System to create a “special collection” at the
EDM.

Central mail services is subject to any change in postage fees imposed by the U.S. Post Office. Any
changes to postage fees will be reported quarterly, as needed. Other than the potential for postage
increases there are no other significant changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year.

Appropriations totaling $13.4 million and 164 regular positions and 23 temporary assistance pool (TAP)
positions are budgeted for FY 15/16. Revenue projections anticipate that approximately $88,000 will be
available at year-end to begin repayment of the general fund loan. Revenue generation occurs through
billing county departments and some outside agencies for custodial services provided.

During FY 15/16, the department’s focus will be key initiatives and enterprise solutions as directed and
approved by the Board of Supervisors. These initiatives will reflect collaboration in strategic planning
and promote proactive leadership for cost effective long-term growth. These interdepartmental
collaborations and partnerships will remain essential elements for continued success in selecting and
implementing technology that will contribute to the ability to provide services to county residents.

The Riverside University Health System – Medical Center (RUHS-MC), projects revenue of $461.8
million will offset operating expenditures of $504.4 million, an operating deficit of $42.6 million. Profits
earned during FY 14/15 will be retained and used to cover the operating deficit. The hospital continues
to face challenges related to unfunded and undercompensated care provided to correctional inmates and
mental health patients.
Expenditures do not reflect the cost of capital projects to upgrade and/or modernize the current facility
and replace existing outdated systems and equipment expected to require additional annual on-going
funding of $20 to $25. In addition, one-time expenditures to implement an effective Electronic Medical
Record (EMR) essential for the hospital and the community clinics to compete in the new health care
environment will be required. The purchasing process has begun, yet many of the costs associated with
the EMR system are unclear.
Negotiated labor increases significantly affect the hospital’s budget with salary and benefits increasing by
$31 million. In addition, the costs paid to other county departments for the services provided to the
hospital increased by nearly $10 million. Higher patient revenues, from potential insurance contracts and
other sources should offset some of the increases.
California’s current Section 1115 Medicaid Demonstration Waiver, which funds hospitals and indigent
care and is due to expire on September 30, 2015. The State Department of Health Care Services is
working with counties and the legislature to develop a new waiver that accomplishes the goal of
continuing support, maximizing federal funds and improve the system of care. Until the completion of the
negotiations with the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare (CMS), impacts on the hospital’s budget are
unknown. The hospital will continue to monitor the negotiations and update the Board.
RUHS-MC relies on a significant amount of governmental Medicaid waiver revenue, Disproportionate
Share Hospitals (DSH) funding, Delivery System Reform Incentive Payments (DISRIP) and Realignment.
While changes are expected from the new Medicaid Waiver with the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare
(CMS), it is unknown at this time how the funding changes will affect the hospital’s revenue; therefore,
the hospital budgeted its FY 15/16 Waiver revenue to equal the amount projected for FY 14/15. RCHSMC
continues to streamline processes and look for efficiencies to improve the cash position.

During FY 15/16, costs are expected to increase from the previous year as follows:
• Salaries and Benefits: As the Department continues to develop environmental and community
outreach programs, staffing levels are projected to increase. Increase is also the result of
renegotiated labor union contracts, which include pay increases ranging from 2 percent to 8.025
percent throughout the fiscal year.
• Services and Supplies: Increase is primarily a result of increased revenue distribution related to
revenues derived from the importation of out of county waste.
• Fixed Assets: In FY 13/14 a large portion of the Department’s fixed asset costs were due to
landfill expansion projects at the Badlands and Lamb Canyon landfills. The majority of these
costs were incurred in FY 13/14, thereby allowing for a substantial decrease in the fixed asset
budget for FY 14/15. FY15/16 asset costs are related drainage improvements required by
changes to NPDES rules/permits and replacement and acquisition of new equipment needed in
order to comply with In-Use Off-Road Diesel regulations before 2021. The acquisition of new

equipment will not only allow the Department to meet regulatory requirements but will also
increase productivity at landfill sites. The Department plans to phase the required replacement of
equipment fleet over the next several years.

First Five is primarily funded through Prop. 10 revenues, which continue to decline due to a decline in
taxable of tobacco product purchases. The reduction has been mitigated to some degree by an increase
in the county’s birth rate, a basis for the allocation of Prop. 10 funds. First Five utilized fund balance to
cover expenses for services that exceed revenue. The five-year spending plan continues the uses of
fund balance to cover the programs increase in expenditures. The agency’s current strategic plan
provides multi-year funding for providers through several state and local Initiatives. These initiatives
allocate over $83.4 million to 73 health and early care and education providers through FY 15/16.

The District’s recommended appropriations for FY 15/16 are 11 percent higher than projected FY 14/15
results. Expenditures for the District’s core programs will increase by an average of 14 percent, with
even larger increases in community parks and centers, and planning and construction. Community parks
and centers will increase by 40 percent as the District continues to determine the maintenance,
operations, and programming needs at all sites, and spending in Planning and Construction will be up by
more than 225 percent as the District pushes forward with much-needed repairs and improvements to
major elements of its aging infrastructure.
Costs for payroll will increase by an average of 13 percent district-wide due to negotiated pay increases
and additional staffing to handle the District’s exponentially increasing workload. Appropriations for
supplies and services are 32 percent higher in FY 15/16, particularly as the cost of utilities and grounds
maintenance continues to rise sharply. Purchases of capital assets will increase by 55 percent as the
District begins to replace aged and broken vehicles and equipment.
The cost of doing business for the District continues to climb faster than its revenues. In the coming
years, the District will work to maximize the revenue potential of all existing programs, continue to cut
expenses through efficiencies and explore new sources of income to support ongoing operations. It is
imperative the District identify effective ways to close the gap between the estimated 11 percent
expenditure increase and disproportional 4 percent revenue increase while maintaining adequate fund
balance reserves.
The District will continue to expand its Volunteer Management program in FY 15/16 in order to provide
additional operational and programming support to all areas. The District will also be creating its own
nonprofit foundation, which will support our volunteer efforts and provide a means of interfacing with
private organizations to solicit and accept donations, forge new partnerships, and provide additional
support to the District.
In order to improve the timeliness and efficiency of planning and construction activities, the District will be
adding a temporary Park Planner to assist in moving projects forward smartly. In addition, the District
recently entered into an agreement with the Riverside County Transportation Commission (RCTC) to
manage construction of the eagerly anticipated Santa Ana River Trail; this partnership will provide the
District much needed capacity to focus on other time-sensitive projects requiring attention. In addition,
the Parks Finance Team added a second Buyer II to ensure bids and proposals move forward in a timely
manner, contracts remain current, and product pricing and delivery meet the District’s growing needs.
During FY 15/16, the District will be celebrating its 25-year anniversary. This milestone will coincide with
the completion of the 5-year strategic plan, which will require additional efforts to amend the plan with
new goals and objectives. It is assumed that the new strategy will incorporate many of the community
recreation facilities and programs that have consumed resources in the last year. In order to remain
competitive, the District must develop adequate maintenance and programming plans for these facilities
that are consistent with current District plans and industry best management practices.

The FY 15/16 budget reflects special district funds established for the purpose of accounting for assets
held in trustee or agency capacity to cover the remaining enforceable obligations of the Agency. The
Successor Agency Private Purpose Trust Fund (PPTF) is used to report resources held at the trustee
and in reserves and the Redevelopment Obligation Retirement Fund (RORF) is used to report the
Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund (RPTTF) received from the County Auditor-Controller.