Currently, the Assessor has an ongoing $2 million dollar structural deficit. Without a sustainable funding
solution, the Assessor will need to drastically reduce its workforce, which will affect the department’s
ability to close the assessment role accurately and on time. This would potentially compromise property
tax apportionments to the county, schools, cities and other benefiting jurisdictions. General fund budgets
may also be reduced due to diminished discretionary revenue.

The FY 16/17 operational budget for the Controller division is $6.5 million, an 8 percent decrease from
the previous fiscal year’s budget. The FY 16/17 budget funds operations with revenue from accounting
reimbursements and fees along with general fund support. Currently, 61 full-time positions are
authorized with this budget with 55 positions currently filled and 12 vacant. The department plans to fill
60 positions total and delete 6 vacant positions.
The Auditor-Controller’s Office continues to provide high quality services with a budget that does not
reflect any growth in general fund support. The proposed budget for the controller function of the
department reflects an overall decrease in personnel costs and an increase in service costs. This is
primarily due to the consolidation of the information technology function with the Riverside County
Information Technology department. In addition, the department’s efforts to improve activity tracking
methods has resulted in an increase in cost reimbursements overall.
The FY 16/17 operational budget for Internal Audits is $1.8 million, an 8 percent increase from the
previous fiscal year’s budget. The FY 16/17 budget funds operations with revenue from accounting
reimbursements along with general fund support. Currently, 13 full-time positions are authorized with
this budget, with 10 positions currently filled and 3 vacant. It is planned to fill 11 positions total. The
budget for the auditor function of the department reflects an overall increase in personnel costs and an
increase in service costs. This is primarily due to reallocation of these costs to more accurately
associate the cost with Specialized Accounting division.

With the payroll service fee remaining unchanged from FY 15/16, there are no significant budget
changes with operational impacts for this fiscal year. The Payroll division is a general support service
funded by the departments, agencies, and districts it serves. The FY 16/17 budget authorizes 22
positions, 17 of which are filled and 5 are vacant. The department plans to fill 22 positions total.

The COWCAP budget unit is used to collect reimbursements determined by the countywide cost
allocation plan. For the FY 16/17 budget, the COWCAP calls for collection of net reimbursements
totaling $25.9 million as compared to $22.7 million in FY 15/16, and increase of $3.2 million to be
collected to offset the cost of indirect services within the general fund. Support for this function is
provided by the Auditor-Controller’s specialized accounting unit, and no positions are authorized in this
budget unit.

Major changes for the Board of Supervisors include increased labor costs primarily from merit increases
and higher internal service costs. A freeze was placed on filling vacant positions for the upcoming fiscal
year to offset rising operating costs. Staffing expenses of $6.5 million comprise the majority of the Board
of Supervisor’s expenditures. This authorizes 58 positions, of which 54 are currently filled and 4 are
vacant. Other operating expenses of $1.9 million include direct and indirect internal services, phone
services, office expenses, printing charges, and travel related expenses. For FY 16/17, the Board of
Supervisors will receive $3.65 million in general fund support and use $100,000 in fund balance reserved
for the youth council, totaling $3.75 million. In addition, the department estimates receiving
approximately $3.3 million in cable fees and $1.1 million in ancillary fees consistent with receipts in
previous fiscal years.

Major changes for the Assessment Appeals Board include a decrease of staffing expenses of $34,704.
A freeze was placed on all vacant positions for the upcoming fiscal year, which resulted in a savings of
$55,633. The decrease in staffing expenses is offset by an increase in operating expenses of $34,704,
which will be used to cover upgrades to the Assessment Appeals Board online appeal system. Legal
Fees and Assessment Appeals Board Members stipends make up approximately 53 percent of the
overall operating expense budget unit. Staffing expenses of $373,639 make up about 35 percent of the
Assessment Appeals Board expenditures within this budget. This authorizes 6 positions, of which 5 are
currently filled and one is vacant. Operating expenses of $633,222 include COWCAP, ISF, Assessment
Appeals Board Member stipends, phone services, office expenses, printing charges, information
technology charges, and legal service fees. For FY 16/17 the Assessment Appeals Board will receive
$621,861 in net county cost funds. In addition to this amount, it is estimated that the department will
receive approximately $200,000 in property tax collection fees and $185,000 in assessment appeals
fees.

The Office of County Counsel is continuing the strategy of offsetting its labor cost increases by focusing
on full cost recovery through billable rates to chargeable client departments. The office’s overriding goal
is to be the county’s counsel of choice and to continue to reduce reliance on outside counsel. In this
way, general fund costs are reduced and service levels are increased to agencies and departments with
revenue sources outside of the general fund.
The department primarily receives funding through direct billing of client departments. This source
makes up nearly 85 percent of the department’s revenue. The remaining 15 percent represents the net
county cost. The office has recently implemented a new integrated case management and billing system
to improve efficiencies and enhance performance. The new system will allow the department to track
every assignment, the work-product, the time and cost necessary to complete the assignment, and the
final result for the client dpeartment. This information will be used to develop organizational performance
measures starting with this next fiscal year. This information will allow the department to measure
productivity and better manage resources. Performance and productivity measures will be developed for
each of the department’s five divisions and will be reported to the Board and Executive Office as part of
the annual budget process. The office is working closely with client departments to streamline processes
and procedures to proactively reduce civil liability and to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and
regulations.
The department’s budget authorizes 74 positions, of which 72 are currently filled and 2 are vacant. The
department is in the process of filling the vacancies. These positions are funded by department revenue
as well as general fund support directly allocated to the department.

Salaries and benefits have a slight increase of approximately $20,000 due to merit increases. Major
changes for the Executive Office include an increase to services and supplies of approximately $8.7
million, primarily due to an agreement with KPMG, which will begin the implementation phase of the
recent audit and recommendations of the public safety and internal service charges that will occur in FY
16/17. Staffing expenses of $4.7 million make up a majority portion of the Executive Office’s normal

operating expenditures within this budget. The budget authorizes 32 positions, of which 24 are currently
filled and 9 are vacant. Services and supplies of $10.1 million include internal service charges,
professional and consulting services, phone services, office expenses, printing charges, and information
technology charges. The department estimates it will receive approximately $3.2 million in revenue from
other departments and programs to reimburse for administrative expenses. This includes a lease
payment from the community facilities district administration and rent payments from office space, which
covers various maintenance costs within the Riverside County Administrative Center. The Executive
Office receives reimbursement from the Successor Agency as well as Riverside University Health
System for staff time and overhead costs. The department also receives an administrative fee for
management of various debt service obligations. The remainder will be covered by $10.6 million in net
county cost.
In FY 16/17, this budget unit funds an estimated $1.5 million in tax sharing obligations and minor
ancillary operating expenses, and includes a small increase over FY 15/16 to cover the rising costs of
these obligations as the factory outlet expansion increases receipts and development of the March Joint
Powers Authority expands its revenue base.

The CIP will continue to focus on financing new jail bed construction, which continues to be the highest
capital priority. Several projects will be under way in FY 16/17, representing about $500 million in
outstanding CIP budget commitments and Board obligations. The East County Detention Center and
related projects will be funded by bond proceeds and a state grant. Construction of the Riverside Public
Defender/Probation, the Ben Clark Training Center, and the Riverside University Health System Medical
Center Nursing and Allied Health Education Building building will be funded by bond proceeds. The
Probation Crogan Youth Facility is being funded by the state grant, developer impact fees, and limited
general fund support. The Executive Office is monitoring all project activity to determine when a project
commitment may be closed. It is likely many worthy projects will be delayed until new revenue sources
are available, or departments are able to fund projects without support from the general fund.

These contributions total $53.8 million in the budget and support ongoing and one-time needs. The
largest contribution of $29.3 million is for debt service to Capital Finance Administration for various
county facilities. Also included is a $10 million subsidy for the county medical center paid from tobacco
settlement revenue.

With the reduction of CFD and AD activity, appropriations have decreased accordingly to meet the needs
of the coming fiscal year. The resources are held in a special revenue fund which requires no general
fund support. The budget reduces atuhorized positions by 1 vacant position for a total of 4, which are all
filled. The administration is actively looking at refunding possibilities to reduce tax liability for the
property owners within the community facilities and assessment districts.

The Executive Office anticipates that obligation pertaining to the Vail Ranch Historic site will come to
fruition in FY 16/17, resulting in an expense of $3.4 million, which has been held in an escrow account for
several years. The Radio Replacement Fund, which funded a portion of the Public Safety Enterprise
Commission project, was previously budgeted in this sub-fund, however these funds were exhausted,
and the fund was closed in FY 15/16.

Previously accumulated excess fund balance attributable to the Palm Desert project areas has been fully
depleted through funding of construction of capital projects such as the Coachella Valley Rescue
Mission, Indio Volunteer Clinic, Blythe Animal Shelter, Desert Hot Springs Family Care Clinic, and North
Shore Yacht Club. Due to the economically reduced revenue streams from all project areas, going
forward the focus of this budget unit over the near term will center on maintaining sufficient reserves to
make debt service payments on existing county and finance authority debt obligations, and fully funding
much-needed capital improvements at the county medical center. In FY 16/17, of the $30 million total
appropriated, this budget unit will fund $27.7 million in operating transfers to fund those obligations, as
well as $2.3 million for capital improvements for security at the County Administrative Center in Riverside
and other operating expenses of the fund.

Proceeds received from the Desert Sunlight solar power plant located in Desert Center were previously
appropriated by the Board for capital improvements to the Lake Tamarisk Clubhouse in Desert Center.
Those projects are being completed, and it is anticipated will exhaust the remaining amount committed
for community benefit. The whole portion identified for general-purpose use is slated to be transferred to
the county general fund in FY 15/16. The FY 16/17 solar payment revenue estimate of $1.02 million
includes the annual franchise payment owed by the Desert Sunlight project and the developer
agreement payment owed on NextEra’s McCoy project that commenced in FY 14/15.
The FY 16/17 budget appropriates $97,000 toward a staff position for the Fourth Supervisorial District
from the portion of this revenue earmarked for community benefit, leaving a projected ending balance in
the commitment for community benefit of $158,890. The budget appropriates the full $767,669 generalpurpose
portion of the anticipated revenue for transfer to the general fund to help offset in part the
Board’s commitment to funding public safety.

Project activity among the remaining project commitments continues to slow. The Executive Office is
monitoring all project activity on commitments to determine when a project commitment may be closed.
A portion of uncommitted funds was transferred to the Capital Improvement Fund in FY 15/16 to use
toward deferred maintenance in various county facilities. In addition, $2.5 million is budgeted toward
capital projects, as needed. The Tobacco Securitization Fund currently has $2.5 million in fund balance;
therefore, no additional general fund contribution is needed at this time. Remaining commitments from
inactive or completed projects will be transferred to the general fund for budget stabilization.

There are no significant budget changes with operational impacts for this fiscal year. Property tax
administration revenue (SB2557) is the primary source of funding. This revenue serves as cost
reimbursement from agencies that will benefit from the new property tax system, as prescribed by
Revenue and Taxation Code §95.2. In addition to Property Tax Administration reimbursements, the
department received seed money from contributing departments, as well as annual general fund
contributions. In cooperation with the Executive Office, CREST began drawing down its fund balance
during FY 14/15 and will continue to do so in FY 16/17. The budget adds 5 new positons for a total of
twenty-six full-time authorized positions, of which 17 are currently filled and 4 are vacant. The four
vacancies will be filled in preparation for implementation and training during the upcoming fiscal year.

The Economic Development Agency (EDA) Administration fund provides administrative and management
support to the multiple and unique divisions of the agency. The division budget of $5.2 million consists of
54 authorized positions for executive management, administration, accounting and finance, and human
resources, an increase of 10 positions. Currently, 29 of the existing positions are filled and 15 are
vacant.

The Economic Development Division requests general fund support of $4.4million for FY 16/17 in order
to compete effectively in the fostering an economically diverse and thriving regional economy.
The Executive Office recommends funding Economic Development programs in the amount of
approximately $1.9 million for FY 16/17. The department will prioritize the delivery of public sector
economic development strategies such as investments that spur local innovation and entrepreneurship,
growing local small businesses, and branding Riverside County as a premier destination for business
and living. Activities that maximize economic impacts within the unincorporated areas of the county will
become the focus of the division, including this geographical focus for the business attraction, EB-5
program, and the film and television permitting functions.

The fair’s revenue is attributable to attendance, parking, sponsorships, and concessions, as well as year
round rental of the grounds and buildings. The expected operational revenue during FY 16/17 is $3.8
million. This revenue will leave an expected shortfall of $250,000, which for FY 16/17 will be funded from
contributions from other funds.
The recommended budget for the Fair deletes two vacant positions, leaving 10 funded authorized
positions, of which 7 will be filled and 3 vacant. Of the funded vacancies, two positions are currently
being recruited and the remaining one will be assessed during FY 16/17 for ultimate staffing needs. The
two positions being deleted worked with the Shalimar Satellite Wagering Center, which was closed
during FY 15/16. Those positions were vacated through retirement, and are no longer necessary for the
Fair operations.

Funding for projects managed by PMO are subject to the same economic expansion and contraction
cycles as the county and national economy at large. PMO’s major revenue sources include bond
proceeds used to build Sheriff’s department and Probation department facilities and Riverside University
Health System (RUHS) enterprise funds. Revenue received from projects funded by bond proceeds are
projected to continue through the next three years.
PMO uses the Construction Management - Agency and Multi-Prime project delivery vehicles as a way to
manage quality and augment resources on large more complex projects. PMO’s major expenses include
staff salaries, benefits, and the cost of services provided by supporting departments and divisions.
Expenses are anticipated to be maintained at their current rates.
The budget for the PMO authorizes 42 positions, of which 27 positions are filled and 12 are vacant.
Vacant positions are slated to be filled should there be an increase in demand for services that cannot be
addressed through alternative delivery vehicles. Staffing is not increased until an increase in revenue
has been identified.

The budget funds 57 positions, with 14 positions vacant. This includes addition of 7 positions and 2
deletions. The most significant costs for this budget are staffing resources and they make up which at
$5.5 million comprise 67.5 percent of the unit’s overall budget. This budget unit also works as a passthrough
process for the inventory stores in the amount of $110,214. EDA manages a warehouse for
Custodial and Maintenance and this budget offers a pass-through process for the warehouse. Layoffs
are not anticipated for FY 16/17. The rates and preliminary budgets that impact this fund have already
been established through the rate development process that was approved by the Board of Supervisor
on February 2, 2016.

The budget unit’s major revenue sources include the general fund, grants, and project funding through
savings. The county general fund currently covers the $4.9 million in utility costs that are currently not
chargeable. The budget for this unit deletes one vacant position for an authorized level of 5 positions, of
which 4 are filled and one is vacant. Staffing remains consistent and provides countywide support.
The primary capital asset that is requested periodically is electric vehicle charging stations, most of which
are funded through grants. Rather than requesting any additional budget allocation from the county
general fund, this request will improve fiscal integrity and encourage more careful stewardship of each
department’s energy and water use. Furthermore, this single cost recovery method would allow the
county to comply with recommendations of audits conducted at the local and state agencies.

Salaries and benefits have increased due to the addition of six new positions, merit increases, and
increased retirement costs. Staffing expenses of $20.1 million make up the majority of the Human
Resources expenditures within this budget. Operating expenses of $5.7 million include internal service
charges, professional and arbitration services, training materials, phone services, office expenses, and
rent. Operating expenses are expected to increase due to increases costs for internal services,
professional services, labor negotiations, and arbitration costs. The department estimates that it will
receive approximately $10 million in revenue, mostly from other departments and programs to reimburse
for administrative expenses. The remainder will be covered by $463,500 in general fund support.

Operating expenses of $4.1 million make up the majority of the department’s expenditures within this
budget unit. These expenses include $3.7 million for salaries and benefits and $346,864 in ongoing
services and supplies. Revenues are derived from reimbursements from departments within the general
fund and outside the general fund. Requirements are increasing by $290,532 primarily due to the
addition of two new budgeted positions that will be reimbursed by departments. A decrease of $315,269
in operating expenses primarily represents the completion of the Huron Consulting effort to improve the
PeopleSoft workflow and the improvement of purchasing processes.
Staffing expenses of $3.8 million fund 30 authorized regular positions. This includes the addition of 2
new positions to the 26 currently filled and 2 vacant positions. Budget for staffing expenses has
increased by $290,532 due to increased retirement costs and the addition of a Contract Procurement
Specialist and a Senior Contract Procurement Specialist that will be funded by Departments.

In FY 16/17, the ROV is required to conduct the presidential general election in November 2016 and the
City of Riverside Municipal election in June 2017. The ROV also expects increased costs with the
anticipated surge of voter turnout for the November 2016 presidential general election. Given the

county’s budget challenges, the department implemented a process for increased permanent vote-bymail
voters to take pressure off the polling places on Election Day. The department also purchased
additional ballot scanners to expedite processing and counting of votes. The FY 16/17 budget includes a
one-time increase of $1.1 million to fund the November 2016 presidential general election. The budget
authorizes 34 regular positions, of which 31 are currently filled and 3 are vacant.

There are no significant budget changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year. The Survey Division
currently has 28 positions filled and 4 vacant. In addition, Survey relies on several on-call consultant
contracts to help it manage workflow peaks and valleys. Survey does not receive funding from the
general fund, but is reliant on a mixture of State, Federal, and Local Transportation improvement dollars
made available to it through Transportation’s annual TIP program. Survey’s major expenses are salary
costs associated with staffing to provide the required technical and specialty services.
Capital Assets requested are: Two GPS field “kits” to upgrade and replace older, less effective
equipment as part of the Division’s long standing technology replacement cycle; a wide format color
printer and laserjet printer.

Although staff salaries, benefits, and other operating expenditures have continued to rise and the service
volume has steadily grown, the staffing level remains the same, and the general fund support remains at
the same level. Through innovative approaches and cost cutting measures, the Treasurer-Tax
Collector’s office has met budget targets and does not anticipate significant budget changes with
operational impacts for this fiscal year. The budget deletes 4 of the 7 currently vacant positions, for an
authorized level of 104 positions, of which 101 are currently filled.

The FY 16/17 recommended budget for the department is almost $6 million with approximately $842,000
provided by the general fund. The department is funded by Statewide Agricultural Pesticide Mill
Assessments, Statewide Unclaimed Off-Highway Use Gasoline Tax, state and federal contracts for

services, business licenses and registrations, fees for services performed for private businesses, and,
lastly, county general fund support. Agricultural revenues are projected by federal and state agricultural
forecasting services and the University of California Cooperative Extension Service. Weights and
measures revenues follow local economic trends as defined by the County Executive Office, County
Assessor, the State Board of Equalization, and a number of academic institutions that offer economic
forecasts. With the exception of county general fund support, each revenue source is expected to
increase modestly at 1 percent to 5 percent over each of the next three to five years.
The major costs for the department are payroll and internal services fees. The key drivers of payroll
expenditures are negotiated and cost-of-living salary increases for employees. To a large degree, this is
also true of internal services fees, as these also rise with salary increases in various other departments.
Over the next three to five years, the department anticipates increased costs in the range of 2 percent to
5 percent per year.
The office is currently authorized for 50 positions, with 49 positions filled and one temporarily vacant
position due to a recent retirement. As the county population continues to grow, requests for service will
increase as well, which will necessitate the need for additional staffing.

For FY 16/17, the Executive Office recommends general fund support in the amount of $12.8 million to
sustain operation of the four animal shelters and field services. Based on this recommended level of
support, the department is cutting 26 vacant positions, leaving 205 authorized positions, of which 202 are
currently filled. The three remaining vacancies are currently under recruitment. This staffing level has
been determined the minimum for maintaining service levels.

The department is gradually expanding its use of electronic plan check for internal and external
customers. The department has also implemented the “BI Call-Ahead” Program, in which each Building
Inspector calls the customer with a two hour window for arrival to the jobsite, which has been well
received by customers. Over the next year, the department will further implement new appointment
service software and virtual inspections on some permit types. These additions will streamline
processes and combine to improve the customer’s overall experience.

Sixty-six percent DCSS's support comes from the federal government and 34 percent from the state.
Allocations have been flat for more than ten years. The California Department of Child Support’s early
research to reformulate the county allocations indicated that Riverside is severely underfunded.
However, there is no firm date for a new formula. The county has not included a general fund
commitment for five years; at that time, the county purchased an office building in Indio where the east
county services are delivered.
DCSS’s staffing level in FY 15/16 included 301 authorized positons. Of these, 278 are filled and 39
remained vacant. The budget includes a reduction of 37 vacant positions, leaving 280 authorized and
funded. Since 2006, DCSS has seen a 48 percent reduction in staffing, which will continue indefinitely
unless funding increases. Positions vacated through attrition have been held open to prevent layoffs and
prepare for forecasted salary, benefit, and internal service fee increases.
Despite budgetary challenges, the department continues to find strategies to maximize efficiencies and
improve performance. Last year, DCSS collected and distributed over $149 million dollars to the families
of Riverside County, a 4.9 percent increase over the prior year. Riverside County DCSS is the third most
cost effective child support program in California.
Annually, an average of $1.6 million dollars in welfare recoupment is returned to the general fund through
efforts by DCSS staff. The department requests that the Board of Supervisors allow it to retain all or a portion this money as an ongoing investment in the program. County funds can be matched two to one
through the federal financial participation (FFP) claiming process bringing an additional $3.2 million
dollars to the child support program.

Code Enforcement works towards finding solutions that allow the Department to operate within the
budget allocated and provide a high level of service to the public. Efforts are being made to
appropriately enhance cost recovery programs, while continuing to scrutinize and reduce non-essential
costs. However, the department continues to face long-term structural budget challenges primarily from
current and future projected salary increases, and from other support cost increases. Code Enforcement
currently has 71 budgeted positions, and that number is projected to remain flat in FY 16/17, or decrease
through attrition. In order to maintain current staffing levels, the department will need to continue to draw
down significantly from the abatement fund that is funded through prior year’s cost recovery efforts
recovered through the tax roll.
The department does not have any major asset acquisitions planned for the budget year. There has
been a significant increase in the cost of the PSEC radio systems (from $32,325 in FY 15/16 to $135,617
projected in FY 16/17, due to a change in how PSEC allocates costs to departments). 

The District Attorney has worked closely with the County Executive Office to reduce their FY 15/16
budget shortfall; however, an inherited structural deficit remains. Accordingly, the County Executive
Office recommends increasing the District Attorney’s net county cost allocation by $6 million dollars.
Increasing the funding allocation will move the department closer to structural balance and allow the
District Attorney time to continue the process of aligning operational cost with realistic funding for current
service levels.

During the development of EMD’s organizational structure, and in partnership with the County Executive
Office, it was determined the need for key operational staff. The key staff include an EMD deputy
director to oversee administrative business and act in the director’s absence; a Buyer II to facilitate the
procurement of good and services and to ensure the adherence of county purchasing guidelines; and a
senior public information specialist who can act as a liaison between the department and the media, and
be the spokesperson for the department. These positions will be filled in FY 15/16 and are included in
the FY 16/17 personnel budget. In addition, EMD is relocating the Office of Emergency Services (OES)
staff from the basement of the County Administrative Center (CAC) in downtown Riverside to office
space adjoining the EMD Riverwalk facility. This will increase the rent/lease cost for EMD in the FY
16/17. It should be noted, however, that funds transferred from Cal/Fire/OES for building maintenance
and janitorial costs and space at the CAC will offset some of the cost for the additional office space at
Riverwalk.
In order to assist EMD in becoming a new department, an additional $275,000 in general fund support for
FY 16/17 is requested to cover the cost of the EMD deputy director and 1 – 2 Business Systems Analyst.
As stated above, these positions provide EMD with infrastructure to complete its strategic objectives.
EMD has worked closely with the Executive Office to create a sustainable program and organizational
structure that will provide exceptional emergency response capabilities and overall safety for the
residents of Riverside County.
EMD is purchasing 38 PSEC radios that are required as specified within the county’s all hazards
emergency operations plan (EOP) and as part of the county’s continuity of operations plan (COOP),
which is still being developed. PSEC operational costs are currently being negotiated for FY 16/17.
Ongoing operational costs are covered through Federal grants and EMS service fees. When it becomes
necessary, outdated PSEC Radios will be used as a trade-in toward the upgrade of next generation’s
radios.

Indigent Defense has been administered by the Executive Office since April 2013. The contracts for
Indigent Defense services were renewed on March 1, 2014. Indigent Defense administration also
includes conflict capital case assignment and contract administration. The alternate public
defender/capital defender office was dissolved as of FY 14/15 at the Law Office of the Public Defender’s
request.
The budget for FY 16/17 is being reduced to reflect the current level of support needed for indigent
defense. The budget will be monitored through out the year to determine if the needs have increased.
The number of cases that require indigent defense or capital conflict counsel will determine this.

The FY 16/17 recommended budget for this budget unit is $1 million. This budget unit is 100 percent
funded by the general fund and expenditures include salary and benefits for one full time employee,
payment of implementation plan fees for each watershed MS4 permit, payment of fees for the legally
impaired Santa Ana River, Lake Elsinore, and Canyon Lake. This budget unit also pays for other state
mandated storm water obligations for the county. As the state and the three regional water quality
control boards continually adopt policies reflective of increases in regulatory requirements tied to urban
runoff and storm water quality, this budget unit will likely see increased, manageable budgetary
pressures in the next three to five years.

The Probation Department anticipates a significant reduction in Title IV-E funding due to changes in
Federal and State regulations. Funding reductions, coupled with increased internal costs, have placed a
significant strain on the Department's ability to perform its core functions. In response, the County
Executive Office recommends allocating an additional $3.5 million dollars in county funding to partially
mitigate revenue shortfalls thus avoiding personnel reductions and maintaining juvenile supervision
services; and to provide youth treatment and education programming in the eastern region. The
Department requests an additional $4.8 million to maintain operational capacity to its institutional
operations and fund resources to meet ongoing initiatives.

The department has been actively minimizing the impact of budget impacts. They have not replaced
high-ranking management positions. They have replaced departing lawyers with entry-level positions.
They have initiated a volunteer attorney program and an inter-office training program. They are also
actively improving efficiencies in the office and the courtrooms.
For FY 16/17, the department requested an additional $2.1 million to fund increased salary and benefits
costs, and $1.2 million to cover increased internal service costs. These are both a carryover of cost
increases from FY 15/16 into FY 16/17. In addition, in March 2015, department staff relocated into
offices in the new Indio Law Building. While the department does not pay rent for the space, it does pay
operation and maintenance expenses, and it requested an additional $60,000 per year to cover
increases in these charges in FY 16/17. The department will not be able to absorb these cumulative cost
increases without necessitating layoffs that would diminish the department’s ability to carry out its core
mission.

Consequently, the Executive Office recommended increasing the department’s ongoing general fund
support by $1.5 million in FY 15/16 to offset a portion of these cost increases and maintain existing staff,
with the intent that this increase carry over into FY 16/17. The resulting recommended budget for the
department contains 251 regular authorized positions, of which 235 positions are funded, 233 positions
are currently filled, and 18 are currently vacant.

The FY 16/17 budget for Public Guardian is $5.0 million, with 41 permanent authorized positions, of
which 40 are filled and 1 is vacant. County general fund support is maintained at the FY 15/16 level of
$1.3 million. There are no significant budgetary considerations requested for FY 16/17. Superior Court
judges have requested that the Public Guardian increase staffing in order to provide more timely services
to conservatorship clients. However, the court does not provide funding for this function. The
department will closely monitor costs and service levels required by the Superior Court.

As a result of unfunded labor increases and rising operating cost, the Sheriff’s Department began FY
2015-16 operating under a chronic structural deficit. It has been recent policy to defer related budget
adjustments to the end of the fiscal year, allowing for a more accurate assessment of the Department’s
additional budgetary requirement. However, the lack of funding certainty makes it difficult for the
Sheriff’s Department to manage its strategic objectives and achieve budgetary balance.
As contained in the FY 2015-16 Third Quarter Report, $25 million dollars in on-going funding was added
to the Sheriff’s budget to correct the Department’s current year deficit and bring the Sheriff closer to
structural balance. In order to preserve county reserves, the County Executive Office recommends a $1
million dollar reduction in funding as part of the FY 2016-17 Recommend Budget, resulting in a net
increase of $24 million dollars relative to the Sheriff’s FY 2015-16 beginning budget. Furthermore, the

Sheriff’s Department is actively engaged with KPMG in an effort to identify and capture additional
efficiencies. The resulting budgetary saving should help mitigate any residual budget shortfall and
establish the basis for a sustainable budget in the out years.

Revenues for the Aviation division are received from on-site activities and aviation grants. On site
activity revenue is received from airport tenant lease agreements, sales of aviation fuel, and some air
show sponsorships. The expected operational revenue during FY 16/17 is $3,022,206. This revenue will
leave an expected shortfall of $199,950, which for FY 16/17 will be funded from available fund balance
from restricted program money.
Aviation grant revenues are primarily received from the FAA and the State for capital improvement
grants. FAA approved grants are specific to projects and are received on a reimbursement basis.
Matching funds are used from reserves received from the sale of the Desert Center Airport. The
combined expected operational revenue during FY 16/17 is $3.1 million. This revenue will fully cover all
expenses.
The Aviation division currently has 15 authorized positions with 6 vacancies, and is requesting to delete 1
vacant position and add 3 new positions at the time of budget submission. Of the funded vacancies, 4
positions are currently being recruited, leaving 1 vacancy to be assessed during FY 16/17 for ultimate
staffing needs. Positions being requested include an Airport Ops & Maintenance Supervisor that will
handle the desert area airports, an Administrative Analyst to assist Aviation with detailed lease increases
and negotiation issues being handled by County Counsel, and a Development Specialist to assist with air
show and special event contracts that were previously outsourced.

Changes in the new Gas Tax (Section 2103) program reduced revenue projections in FY 15/16 and the
negative trend has continued in FY16/17. The department will continue to monitor these changes in
FY16/17, but a continued reduction in this funding source will mean fewer dollars available for the
Transportation Improvement Program (TIP), and will limit the amount of road paving and maintenance
work that can be done.

Increases in Fleet internal service fund rates for FY 16/17 and the change in the COWCAP charge will
have a significant impact on the rideshare program budget. The county vehicle program is designed to
recover the usage cost of the vehicles. As such, the participant rates are being reviewed and will be
brought to the Board in early summer to increase the participant fees due to rising fleet costs. Carpool
expenses of $330,000 make up the majority of the services and supplies budget, responsible for more
than half of the department’s expenses within this budget unit. Revenues are derived mostly from user
fees from county employees and interfund transfers.

The budget for the ten family care clinics decreased modestly compared to FY 15/16. Expenditures of
$33.3 million will be offset primarily by Medi-Cal capitation funds and reimbursements. The department
receives no general fund support.
The budget authorizes 443 positions, a reduction of 57, of which 291 are filled positions and 152 will be
vacant, just four fewer than the previous year. As a general approach, support staff positions will only be
recruited when the medical provider positions are filled. Recruitment of medical providers can be
difficult, but the department is working with Human Resources to improve retention and recruitment.
Any increased cost for staff is expected to be fully offset by the additional patient revenue generated.

CCS projects that expenditures of $22.8 million will be partly offset by nearly $16.4 million in revenue.
General fund support remains the same as FY15/16 at just over $6 million. The budget authorizes 154
permanent positions, of which 141 are currently filled and 13 will be vacant after the addition of 5 new
positions.

Each annual operating budget is developed to meet the county’s strategic objectives and meet the
department’s mission. The FY 16/17 recommended budget is approximately $27.4 million, which does
not include general fund support.


Funding and Service Growth
Public Health, on behalf of the state and federal governments, administers various programs funded
through realignment money, county general fund support, and state and federal funding, and foundation
grants. State and federal funds often are allocated based on population or burden of disease/condition,
realignment funding is tied to taxes and vehicle license fees, which are impacted by the economy, and
foundation funding supports innovative projects. Generally, funding has remained flat, and it is
challenging to absorb staffing and operational expense increases with flat funding. Further, the state and
federal dollars are often proscribed and categorical, which makes efficient use of funds challenging given
the dynamic nature of public health and emerging health priorities. The need for service continues to
grow, based on population growth and the resulting health needs of the population. Funding for core
services have remained flat or decreased slightly over time, whereas new money is for innovative or
emerging health issues.
Capital Needs
Five computer servers supporting the department have reached end of life and must be replaced.
Additional capital purchases planned for FY 16/17 are tape drive and battery replacements. The costs of
these items will be shared with the Care Clinics. PH’s share of cost for the capital purchases totals
$171,249. The Public Health Laboratory expansion will be constructed using bond proceeds and the
debt service will be paid by department revenue. No additional funds will be requested.

Staffing and Budget Information
Public Health projects that the use of $43.3 million in revenue and $6.6 million of general fund support
will offset expenditures of $49.9 million. The budget adds 4 positions for an authorized level of 598
permanent positions, of which 456 are currently filled and 138 are vacant.

Staffing levels remain consistent to administer Community Action’s programs and services, yet the entire
county need for services is far greater than the staffing levels. Community Action projects expenditures
of $8.4 million are covered primarily by federal grants. The budget includes 111 permanent and
temporary positions with 24 vacant positions. There are no significant budget changes with operational
impacts for this fiscal year.

With the continuation of flat state and federal funding, the Office on Aging faces a number of budgetary
challenges entering FY 16/17. The department’s balanced budget for FY 16/17 is insufficient to sustain
the critical core services and programs provided to meet the growing needs of the county’s elderly
population. Support will be impacted as a result of the department’s increased labor costs at $398,250
for FY 16/17, staffing expense at $6.5 million, operating expenses in ongoing services and supplies at
$1.8 million and service provider contract agreements at $4.4 million. The budget authorizes 68
positions, of which 55 positions are filled and 13 are vacant. The department’s sources of revenue are
from reimbursements derived from federal (Older Americans Act), state (Older Californians Act), county
contributions and donations and local funding. Primary funding for the department comes from federal
funding, totaling $8.2 million, which is approximately 64 percent of the total budget for FY 16/17. The
department requests the continuance of assistance of county contributions at FY 15/16 levels in the
amount of $300,000 for FY 16/17. The department is strategically working to mitigate service level
impacts by enhancing efficient operations and will provide the Executive Office with an update during the
first quarter of the fiscal year, including any adverse impacts to the budget or service levels.

For FY 16/17, general fund support was increased slightly by $47,000 to $949,950 from the FY 15/16
level to cover the cost of making two temporary positions permanent. Revenue of $470,000 will partially
offset expenditures of nearly $1.5 million. The department plans to draw its remaining $108,028 in 

departmental reserves to help cover increased operating, salary and benefit costs associated with
enhanced services. However, these reserves will be exhausted in FY 16/17, and in FY 17/18, the
department will request $108,028 in additional general fund support to cover the gap.
The FY 16/17 recommended budget funds 17 regular positions, of which 15 are currently filled (and two
more are currently temporary employees). The department also requests additional ongoing general
fund support of $342,367 to hire four new employees to handle the more than doubled caseloads in the
surrounding Riverside County offices. By increasing staff, the demand for services and state reporting
requirements will be met, allowing for increased state funding. The Executive Office recommends
analysis of the department be done before any positions are added.

Cooperative Extension’s revenue sources include the University of California Division of Agriculture and
Natural Resources which provides salaries and benefits for academic researchers and staff educators,
federal funds for nutrition educators, and county funds for support staff and operations, including
housing, utilities, supplies, communication, and mileage reimbursement. The FY 16/17 recommended
general fund support level remains flat at $674,064. It should be noted that uncontrollable increases and


are not expected to plateau in the immediate future. The main drivers of this increase are from MOU
negotiated increases to support staff salaries and benefits. In addition, building lease contracts, utilities,
telecommunications, and information technology charges are anticipated to increase annually per lease
contracts. Maintaining programs and reimbursing vehicle mileage will continue to be challenging. Staff
levels have already been reduced and only one staff member is available for fifteen hours per week staff
in one of the satellite offices.
The FY 16/17 budget authorizes staffing at five full-time positions, all of which are currently filled. This
includes the positions of receptionist and clerical support that allows office availability to the public in two
offices and only one fourth in one of the satellite offices as previously mentioned. An executive assistant
and an accounting clerk provide services to all three Cooperative Extension offices. One employee is a
countywide volunteer coordinator position for the Master Gardener program. The department did lose
one full-time employee during the recession of 2007. This position was responsible for data entry of
multiple programs, especially the 4H program and the Master Gardener programs. Due to lingering
budgetary issues at the county, the position remains unfunded. With the University recently approving
the 4H advisor position, which is filled, funding the data entry position is becoming critical for maintaining
the data-heavy nature of these programs. If and when revenue and expense conditions improve for the
county, the department would like to request funding for an office assistant position so that data entry
and accounting clerk support for the 4H and the Master Gardener. 

RCLS is operated through a contract of $13.7 million between Library Systems and Services (LSSI) and
the County of Riverside. Branch library staff, with the exception of custodial and maintenance staff, are
employed by LSSI.
County staff positions are paid out of the library fund for administration, project managers and finance
staff to oversee the day-to-day facility improvements, administration of contract services and financial
operations per county standards. The budget authorizes 8 positions, of which 4 are filled and 4 are
currently vacant.

EDM has received $73,381 in general fund for the past two years, and the museum collects revenue
from admissions, weddings, events, parking during special events, and contributions from other county
funds. The museum currently has a museum manager, curator, museum assistant, and one TAP
museum assistant. Additional funding for school tours and educational programming is provided by the
“Friends of the Museum.” The major expenditures of the museum include staffing, maintenance, utilities,
building, and property improvements.
EDM is comprised of 16 acres of land, and is rented for weddings, receptions, banquets, retirements,
concerts and other special events. Typical rentals occur on the weekends with very few meeting rentals
during the week. There is a small gift shop inside the museum with consigned merchandise that
contributes a small amount of revenue. A major objective of EDM is to increase the number of weddings
per year, and develop a different pricing structure in order to increase revenue.

Requirements of $49.4 million include $44.2 million in operating expenses. Major operating expenses
are service and supplies of $17 million and transfers totaling $22 million. Revenues are received from
departments using the vehicles. Requirements are increasing by $1.4 million primarily due to needs of
departments. All vehicle purchases of departments are to be made through Fleet Services, and the
purchases vary as funds are available and vehicles need replacement. Service and supplies are slightly
lower and salaries and benefits are slightly higher to account for merit increases. Depreciation and
amortization expense account for $11.2 million, offsetting the $13.7 million use of net assets, and at the
end of April 2016 the department had $6.6 million in unrestricted net assets.
Staffing expenses of $5.1 million fund 61 authorized positions, of which 51 are currently filled and 10 are
vacant. Staffing changes for 2016-17 include the addition of an Office Assistant II and an Accounting
Assistant II.

Requirements of $2.9 million include $1.7 million in operating expenses. Major operating expenses are
paper products and copier products. Revenues are received from departments use printing services.
Over the past few years, requirement for printing services within the county and other governmental
agencies has decreased. In FY 15/16, the department restructured its operations to be more efficient as
a result, salaries and benefits have been reduced and the overall personnel have been reduced by 50
percent. The department is requesting $290,000 for capital equipment to buy equipment more in line
with the needs of the departments. Staffing expenses of $5.1 million fund 9 budgeted positions. Staffing
changes for FY 16/17 include the reduction of 9 positions that were a result of the reorganization, leaving
a total of 9 authorized positions, 11 of which are currently filled.

Requirements of $15.9 million are primarily operating expenses. Major operating expenses are service
and supplies of $14.8 million and salaries and benefits of $949k. Direct and indirect materials purchased
for the county are the major expenditure of this fund at $14.0 million. Revenues are received from
departments using the vehicles. The budget for this division has a slight increase to cover salaries and
benefits increases and small increase in operating costs. This division is expected to break even at the
end of the year.
Staffing expenses are approximately $949,000 that funds 14 budgeted positions. Staffing changes for
2016-17 include the addition of a Support Services Supervisor and an Administrative Services Manager.

There are no significant budget changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year. The fund has a
healthy unrestricted net assets balance, which will be used to cover claims costs. Other expenses of
$5.6 million for disability claims make up the majority of the department’s expenses within this budget
unit. Revenues are derived from charges to County departments.

There are no significant budget changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year. Salaries and
employee benefit expenses of $1.4 million make up the majority of the department’s expenses within this
budget unit. Revenues are derived mostly from reimbursements from county departments. The budget
authorizes 12 positions, of which 11 positions are filled and 1 is currently vacant.

Participation in the program continues to increase. Unrestricted net assets will be used to offset rising
costs. Other expenses of $62.7 million for health care claims make up the majority of the department’s
expenses within this budget unit. Revenues are derived mostly from fees charged to county employees
and retirees. The budget authroizes 45 positions, of which 40 are currently filled and 5 are vacant.
229

There are no significant budget changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year. Other expenses of
$32.5 million for liability claims make up the majority of the department’s expenses within this budget
unit. Revenues are derived mostly from the rate charged to county departments. The budget authorizes
26 postions, of which 24 positions are currently filled and 2 are vacant.



There are no significant budget changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year. The fund has a
healthy unrestricted net assets balance, which will be used to maintain the same rate and to cover claims
costs. Other expenses of $800,000 for dental claims make up the majority of the department’s expenses
within this budget unit. Revenues are derived from fees charged to county employees and retirees.

There are no significant budget changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year. Salaries and
employee benefits expenses of $2 million make up the majority of the department’s expenses within this
budget unit. Revenues are derived mostly from contributions from county departments. The budget
authorizes 16 positions, of which 14 are currently filled and 2 are vacant.

There are no significant budget changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year. Salaries and
employee benefit expenses of $3.5 million and services and supply expenses of $2.2 million make up the
majority of the department’s expenses within this budget unit. Revenues are derived mostly from
charges to county departments.

Per the actuarial projections a reduction in the costs of unemployment claims are anticipated. The fund
has a healthy unrestricted net assets balance, which is being used to provide a discounted reduced rate
to departments and will also be used to cover the deficit. Other expenses of $3.9 million for
unemployment claims make up the majority of the department’s expenses within this budget unit.
Revenues are derived from charges to county departments.

Charges to departments were increased in FY 16/17 in accordance with the 60 percent confidence level
from the county’s actuary. Other expenses of $24.8 million for workers’ compensation claims make up
the majority of the department’s expenses within this budget unit. Revenues are derived mostly from
rate charged to county departments. The budget authorizes 45 positions, of which 42 positions are
currently filled and 2 are vacant.

There are no significant budget changes or operational impacts for this fiscal year. Salaries and
employee benefit expenses of $2.5 million make up the majority of the department’s expenses within this
budget unit. Revenues are derived mostly from reimbursements from county departments. The budget
authorizes 23 positions, of which 17 are currently filled and 6 are vacant.

CSD’s revenue comes from custodial service agreements with county departments and non-county
tenants through hourly rates per full time equivalent (FTE) CSD employees. Revenues are forecast from
projected annual service hours per customer based on prior year’s levels, and adjustments are made
based upon the customer’s needs and budgetary circumstances. The square footage serviced by CSD
has increased by 9 percent over the past six years. To date CSD has yet to recover staffing levels,
which are established by the RRAC and CEO despite budget shortfalls, which require increased staffing
for deficit correction. CSD cannot generate revenue without custodians and housekeepers to perform
daily services.
Staffing continues to represent approximately 80 percent of CSD’s overall budget. Staffing is CSD’s
primary resource due to the physical nature of the job; the fact that CSD is under union wage
agreements; and without proper staffing levels CSD is unable to meet mission needs and generate
revenue requirements for expenses. CSD offsets this expense by maintaining a conservative 5 percent
overhead cost for CSD Administration. Staffing levels have been reduced by 28 percent over the past
four years, despite increases in demand for services. In addition to budgetary constraints, recruitment
efforts have proven challenging due to the need for high level security screening for all potential
employees, regardless of facility assignment.

CSD’s FY15/16 total staffing level is 202 employees. CSD will have 188 authorized positions, 144 of
which are currently filled and 44 are vacant. CSD utilizes 25 Temporary Assignment Program (TAP)
employees on a continual basis to offset staffing deficiencies.
For FY 16/17, CSD requests purchase of a new high use photocopier to replace a ten-year-old machine.
CSD will continue to utilize county vehicles as they become available through Fleet Services and other
EDA divisions.

With large unanticipated expenditures next year for inmate health, a carryover deficit from the FY 15/16
budget year, and increased public safety costs, a large structural deficit is projected for the county’s FY
16/17 budget. The county’s strategy includes managing discretionary spending and finding savings and
efficiencies countywide. The Real Estate division has supported this effort by negotiating acquisitions,
dispositions and leases to maximize revenue generation; pursuing consolidation of county departments
when acquiring and/or leasing space; and continuing efforts to minimize vacant county owned space by
marketing space to departments as necessary to maximize revenue potential. Primary revenue sources
for the division include reimbursement for rental of buildings, pre-leasing services, lease administration
management fees, and acquisition and right of way services.
Budget challenges to the Real Estate division include salaries and benefits, COWCAP charges, and
unfunded projects. Salaries and benefits represent one primary constraint in the appropriations budget.
As of March 2016, there were 34 budgeted positions in the Real Estate division. Due to the projected
negative variance for the budget FY 15/16, an analysis of staffing and projected FY 16/17 workloads for
the division was undertaken and a decision was made to reduce staffing without affecting the division’s
ability to complete requested work or degrade the division’s capacity to generate revenue. This resulted
in elimination of ten overall positions and the requested transfer of one position to another EDA division.
Of the ten positions eliminated, three are through attrition/retirements and seven from open position
eliminations. The effective overall cost savings to be realized through this division staffing reorganization
will be approximately $1 million for FY 16/17. The budget authorizes 34 positions, of which 29 positions
are currently filled and 7 are vacant.
County Wide Cost Allocation Plan (COWCAP) costs were introduced to the division budget in FY 12/13.
The annual cost of COWCAP charges to the Division Budget in FY 16/17 is forecasted at $1.8 million.
This added cost to the budget has minimized the division’s ability to generate enough revenue to meet
required reserves and working capital. In addition, the division is tasked to pursue projects that are
unfunded but nonetheless are obligations, requests, analysis, and needs of the county. These projects
require expenditures of staff time and miscellaneous project and overhead costs. Unfunded county
projects (as listed below) cost the division approximately $1million annually. Examples of county projects
funded through the division budget include:
• Federal District and Bankruptcy Court leases (Management/Lease Renewals);
• Law Library, Indio (Overhead);
• Roy Wilson Community Center, Blythe (Overhead);

District offices (Overhead);
• Hemet Service Center (Overhead);
• Grand Jury lease (Overhead);
• State Juvenile Court Project, Indio (Utility and Project Oversight);
• Vacant Space (Overhead); and,
• Miscellaneous leases, easements and transfers of county-owned property (Management).
The Real Estate division does not have any reserves or restricted balances available for which to fund
appropriations. With a projected FY 15/16 year-end division budget deficit of $2.3 million, which again is
due to growing overall county costs and flat to slightly declining revenue, the division will pursue the
following efforts in order to balance its FY 16/17 budget:
• Cut expenses without affecting ability to generate revenue
• Reorganize staffing to meet current demand for services
• Eliminate vacant and retiring positions
• Maximize revenue recovery potential
• Minimize “unfunded projects”
In addition and with EDA Management support, the division will also explore the possibility of:
• Seeking county funding for “unfunded” county obligations
• Reduction of COWCAP expenses
• Raising rates to address actual increasing costs
• Raising rates to address the lack of reserves
• Consider moving internal services back to a general fund division
As an Internal Service Fund (ISF) department, RCIT charges county departments and other agencies
through Board-approved rates for the information/communications services and technology previously
described. RCIT’s budgetary goals include maintaining ‘flat’ spending over the next five years, although
user departments can expect some cost increases due to labor negotiation increases and external
maintenance agreements. However, RCIT proposes to consolidate/optimize existing departmental
spending into RCIT’s budget for data/voice connections, multi-function printers (MFP) and cell phones.
The overarching goal is streamlining processes and gaining economies of scale.
In an effort to better serve county departments, RCIT’s FY 16/17 budget is the first to include a simple,
easily understood rate methodology, consolidating 64 rates into 20. RCIT developed two major rate
categories (device and server) to allocate primary lines of business/service. The device rate allocates all
available enterprise applications (PeopleSoft, GIS, and SharePoint), services (VoIP, and CorNet), and
support (Helpdesk, Desktop Support, and Phone Technicians) to participating departments, based on
numbers of users and devices. The server rate distributes enterprise server infrastructure costs using
numbers of physical and virtual server instances.
For FY 16/17, the department submitted a balanced $90.7 million budget that cuts 95 vacant positions to
an authorized level of 385 authorized, of which 368 are currently filled. . Through the budget process,
the department eliminated 95 positions from the FY 15/16 funded level. In an effort to reduce future
costs and maintain financial stability, the department plans to further reduce five positions per year in
subsequent years. Personnel costs for RCIT comprise approximately 62 percent of the total budget.
Other significant costs include financed infrastructure, of roughly 13 percent, and software
licenses/maintenance at 9.5 percent.


The PSEC system operating budget for FY 16/17 is $14.8 million. The budget includes 40 positions, 37
currently filled and 3 vacancies. Personnel costs for this budget unit represent 31 percent of the total
budget. The other area of significant cost is financed and cash-purchased equipment and infrastructure
at approximately 33 percent.
The Board established an oversight committee for PSEC, made up of the primary system users (Sheriff,
Fire, District Attorney and RCIT), as well as the Executive Office and city representation. The Steering
Committee is responsible for administrative, operational, and financial controls.
It is the Board’s vision to turn the county’s PSEC radio system into a regional system providing
interoperability between the county and all cities within the county. Through addition of these and other
users, eventually the cost of operating the system will decrease, as new users begin paying the
associated monthly rate. The Board recently approved an expansion of system channels to ensure
adequate capacity while accommodating additional users. Once this is complete, normal operations can
remain static and those costs can be spread across more users, thereby creating financial sustainability
through economies of scale.

GIS performs a highly important function for the county with a modest budget of $1.8 million. The
primary revenue source (91 percent) is fees for service. The FY 16/17 budget deletes 2 vacant positions
to an authorized level of 8 positions, of which 7 are currently filled. Through the budget process, the
department eliminated 2 positions from the FY 15/16 funded level. Personnel costs comprise 54 percent
of the budget unit’s total costs, and software licenses and maintenance account for 42 percent.

The HACR‘s long range fiscal plan is to continue to ensure sufficient grant funding for operational and
capital expenditures for housing programs. The sources of funding are allocated as follows: HUD (83
percent), Housing Successor funds (7 percent), HACR program revenues (4 percent), State of California
(3 percent), DPSS (1 percent), and city funding (2 percent). HACR’s nonprofit affiliate, Riverside
Community Housing Corporation (RCHC) provides access to private foundation and public agency
housing funds and supports the acquisition and development of affordable housing units. Factors that
may affect funding availability include: congressional appropriations for the federal expenditure budget,
availability of grant funding, availability of state funding for preservation and development of affordable
housing, availability of tax credits for the development of Housing, timing of contract renewals from the
City of Riverside and other federal funding that pass through other county departments like DPSS; and
funding for appropriate staffing levels needed for lease-up efforts.
Budget projections materialize from federal funding notices for the Section 8 and Public Housing
Programs (housing assistance and administrative revenues); HUD’s Notice of Funding Availability
(NOFA) for special grants; and tracking of available bond proceeds allowable by the Department of
Finance.
Federal revenues for Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) of the Section 8 Program continue to be
funded at 100 percent; however, administrative revenues have remained at a critical low pro ratio rate of
80 percent and future budget planning assumptions will be remain at a conservative 80 percent. Federal

funds for the Public Housing and Capital Programs have decreased through the years, forcing the HACR
to pursue more stable funding through RAD. Tax Increment and Bond Funds for the Housing Authority
Successor Agency are slowly being depleted as projects identified in the Recognized Obligation
Payment Schedule (ROPS) are completed. Program Income funds for the NSP Program are expected to
wind down in the next 3-5 years with the lack of foreclosed homes to rehabilitate and sell.
HACR’s achievements are measured by its specific progress toward expansion of the supply of assisted
housing; improvement of the quality of assisted housing; increase in number of assisted housing choices;
promotion of self-sufficiency within assisted housing programs; assurance of equal opportunity and
affirmatively further fair housing; implementation of the requirements of the Violence Against Women Act
(VAWA); completion of construction on units which have been awarded Tax Credits; provision of FTHB
loans to families within the funding allocation provided; issuance of MCC to absorb 100 percent of the
Bond Allocation; and, implementation of the Senior Home Repair Program.
The budget unit’s major costs are payroll, capital improvements including utilities and trash, operations
and maintenance, insurance, housing assistance payments, debt service payments, and asset
purchases. Salaries and benefits continue to rise with union negotiated cost of living and step increases.
Funding challenges for these personnel costs are expected to grow as administrative revenues continue
to be cut from the federal level. Due to these factors, the HACR is not able to employ additional staff to
support the rising need for supportive services. The division currently has 129 filled positions and 8
vacant positions as a result of staff attrition, and vacant and promotional opportunities have been
eliminated in the FY 16/17 budget due to a reduction of federal administrative funding. The budget unit
is deleting 10 vacant positions in the FY 16/17 budget.
No capital assets are being requested for the next budget year; the HACR has opted to lease vehicles in
order to avoid increased one-time costs for vehicle purchase.

The Riverside University Health System – Medical Center (RUHS - MC), projects that revenue of $545.9
million will offset operating expenditures of $546.1 million, essentially a balanced budget. In addition to
the operating revenue and expense, the hospital has plans to invest $32.7 million in fixed assets. Net
income earned during FY 15/16 will be retained and used to fund the cost of these fixed assets. The
hospital continues to face challenges related to unfunded and undercompensated care provided to
correctional inmates and mental health patients.
Negotiated labor increases significantly affect the hospital’s budget, with salary and benefits increasing by
about $22 million. In addition, the costs paid to other county departments for the services provided
to the hospital also increased, as they do each year. Higher patient revenue from potential insurance
contracts and other sources, as well as increased state compensation for care of patients with Medi-Cal
insurance will offset these increases.
California’s current Section 1115 Medicaid Demonstration Waiver, which funds hospitals and indigent
care, will remain in effect for four more years. The State Department of Health Care Services continues
working with counties and the legislature to refine the existing waiver, and to plan for a new waiver that
accomplishes the goal of continuing support, maximizing federal funds and improving the system of care.
RUHS-MC relies on a significant amount of governmental Medicaid waiver revenue, Disproportionate
Share Hospitals (DSH) funding, Incentive Payments and Realignment.

Ninety four percent of the department’s $65.6 million in projected revenue for FY 16/17 is from the
disposal fees it charges to users of the county’s landfill system. Of this, 89 percent is received from the
three major regional waste haulers in Riverside County: Burrtec, CR&R Incorporated, and Waste
Management, Inc., the majority of which is charged at the transfer station rate, which for FY 16/17 is
proposed at $28.52 per ton. Other primary contributing revenue sources include grants and sales of
landfill gas to energy utilities.
The department’s recommended FY 16/17 appropriations total $86.2 million. Major departmental costs
are in services and supplies, salaries and benefits, and fixed assets. Of the department’s appropriations
for services and supplies, 31 percent is for revenue distribution paid to various agencies to fund services
including habitat protection efforts, local enforcement, and clean-up programs. Another 29 percent is incounty
tonnage expense paid to the private operator of the El Sobrante Landfill, Waste Management,
Inc., 7 percent is reimbursement of salary and benefit costs for legacy Waste District employees (refer to
Waste Resources District budget unit 40250-943001). The remaining 43 percent is for routine services
and supplies necessary for landfill operations and associated support and outreach activities.
Fixed asset costs proposed for FY 16/17 include infrastructure improvements necessary to maintain
regulatory compliance, equipment replacements required in compliance with California Air Resource
Board’s In-Use Off-Road Diesel Vehicle Regulations, non-vehicle related assets such as tarps, and
construction of new facilities to support the expansion of the Household Hazardous Waste Program.
All expenses will be funded by Waste Resources’ operational revenue stream and available unrestricted
net assets. There are no foreseeable future significant costs associated with any of the requested items.
Currently and in the upcoming budget year, the department does not anticipate any major constraints
that would require mitigation, and no general fund support is requested.
The department’s staffing levels are carefully managed to ensure its ability to meet regulatory
requirements and operational demands. Since the FY 15/16 budget submittal, one position was added
to the roster, increasing the number of authorized permanent positions from 240 to 241. In addition to
the 241 authorized permanent positions, the department coordinates with the county’s Temporary
Assistance Program as needed temporary help. At the time the FY 16/17 budget was submitted, 191 of
the department’s permanent positions were filled, and 20 permanent positions were in a recruitment
status. Of the remaining 28 vacant permanent positions, 25 will be eliminated in the FY 16/17 budget.
While 25 currently vacant permanent positions will be eliminated, the department also proposes to add
23 new permanent positions. The vast majority of proposed new positions are operational support
positions including the corresponding supervisory roles, and positions needed to support expanding
recycling programs and outreach efforts. The net result is 239 permanent positions proposed for the FY
16/17 budget. No currently filled positions are proposed for deletion.


Although Riverside County birthrates are on the rise, making First 5 Riverside eligible for 6 percent of
Prop. 10 Tobacco Tax revenue, declining sales of tobacco products statewide are expected to erode
Prop. 10 receipts from the current level of $20 million to $18.8 million by FY 20/21.
In response to reductions already experienced, First 5 Riverside is striving to meet growing demand
through innovative programs and greater efficiency. To achieve outcomes that are both cooperative and
sustainable, from FY 16/17 through FY 20/21 the agency will focus on investments that strengthen
support systems for children prenatal through age 5, families, and communities.
The Commission’s $35.4 million FY 16/17 budget draws $14.5 million from fund balance to supplement
$20.8 million in estimated revenue. Approximately 91 percent of expenditures will finance programs and
initiatives designed to meet the needs of the county’s youngest population and their families, and 9
percent will support the program’s operating costs. The department currently has 26 positions, of which
4 are vacant. The FY 16/17 budget requests 5 additional positions at the Program Specialist and
Program Coordinator level to support programs and initiatives.

The CSA’s key revenue source is the collection of special assessments. These special assessments are
based on the size of each community and the services delivered to the community. The revenue is not
based on fluctuating indicators such as property values or contract negotiations. Revenue growth is
based on population growth, annexations, and inflation determined by CPI. CSA budgets trend upward
consistently, and forecasted residential development shows significant growth in the next 3 to 5 years.
CSA’s that provide water treatment and distribution have an additional revenue source through delivery
charges and fees. These charges and fees are driven by customer usage and are increased
incrementally as the cost of delivering services increases.
The major costs CSA is responsible for include staffing, insurance, and energy costs for streetlights.
Other major costs include contracts for street sweeping, landscape maintenance, and recreation
services. The key drivers for those costs are increases in energy, wages, insurance, and NPDES
regulations. Maintenance contracts are forecasted to increase as the minimum wage increases over the
next 5 years.
CSA budget constraints are related to the delivery of water services. Those constraints are addressed
through Board approved increases to delivery charges and service fees and are entirely usage based.
Responsible increases will ensure the sustainable delivery of services.
Each individual CSA has restricted fund balances. Laws governing the collection and expending of
special assessments require all revenue received in each CSA budget unit to be spent only on the
services approved for that budget unit. Fund balances carried between fiscal years can only be used to
improve the quality of the services being provided to each community.
The CSA currently has 57 positions in its budget, 24 are vacant. Vacant positions are slated to be filled
in order to address growth in the residential housing market. The upcoming fiscal years forecast
significant growth in the areas served by the CSA, and in response, CSA staff sizes will have to grow at a
rate that allows for the successful delivery of services. Because the completion of housing development
does not follow the schedule of the county fiscal year, CSA must carry certain vacancies in order to
quickly fill positions as needed and determined by growth. Staffing is not increased until the CSA is
collecting special assessments from new communities. Added staffing costs will be covered by
increased revenue collected through the new special assessments. Included with increased staffing,
CSA budget units will have to increase capital assets, specifically vehicles. These vehicles will be used
by staff located in the specific areas where growth is occurring.

The district’s major costs are associated with the design and construction of flood control infrastructure
and its operations and maintenance. Staffing is a relatively small proportion of the district’s budget. The
key drivers of those expenditures are costs associated with the design and construction of flood control
infrastructure and its subsequent operations and maintenance. The trend of expenditures over the past
five years is an increase of approximately 4 percent over each prior fiscal year. The economic boom in
the early 2000’s significantly increased the district’s ad valorum property tax revenues. As a result, the
district was able to initiate programs to accelerate the development and construction of flood control
infrastructure to the benefit of the community. These efforts are now paying off and the district is
spending down reserves that had been built. The enhancement of the district’s CIP program can be
seen in the 5-year expenditure trend. The district is now forecasting more moderate growth in
expenditures, with an increase in expenditures of approximately 5 percent each fiscal year over the next
3 years.
Related to constraints for FY 16/17, the district is not experiencing any excessive constraints now and is
not expected to in the near term. The most significant constraints the district is facing relate to the need
to construct very large regional flood control infrastructure projects that are currently outside of the
district’s fiscal capacity. The district is working with the county and local agencies to search for state and
federal funds as well as other sources of revenue to build the resources necessary to move these large
projects forward. All available funds within the district’s seven zones are budgeted annually in the
district’s 5-year CIP. These funds are allocated to the current budget year and future budget years 2-5
for flood control infrastructure project costs, operations and maintenance costs, and administration
support costs. The projects budgeted for in the CIP are evaluated annually and may be re-prioritized
based on unexpected flooding events and community input supporting the need of new infrastructure in
their areas.
Additionally, all available benefit assessment funds collected in the NPDES watershed areas – Santa
Margarita, Santa Ana, and Whitewater – are budgeted annually for public education, water quality
monitoring and planning, permit compliance, and hydrologic data collection. Foreseeable future
constraints include regulations, cost of implementing those regulations, permitting requirements, and the
cost related to these requirements. Currently, the district has entered into cost sharing agreements with
the cities within Riverside County to offset the costs associated with the programs listed above. These
agreements are negotiated annually to adjust for any changes made to the programs.
The major portions of the district’s funds are in zone-specific special revenue funds and NPDES
Watershed Funds i.e. Santa Margarita, Santa Ana, and Whitewater. The use of the fund balance in
these funds is constrained to a specific purpose by a government’s enabling legislation, using its highest
level of decision-making authority; amounts cannot be used for any other purpose therefore cannot be
used to deal with other potential constraints outside their specific purpose. The funds in each special
revenue fund are secured for use within the geographical boundaries of the Fund. Due to the district’s
efforts to enhance the district’s capital project throughput, the balances in these funds are dedicated to
future projects identified in the district’s five-year CIP. Some funds are allocated in the CIP to begin
saving for larger regional projects that are of significant cost. The projects budgeted for in the CIP are
284
County of Riverside
Recommended Budget
Fiscal Year 2016/17
285
evaluated annually and may be re-prioritized based on unexpected flooding events and community input
supporting the need of new infrastructure in their areas. All available benefit assessment funds collected
in the NPDES Santa Margarita, Santa Ana, and Whitewater watershed areas are expended for public
education, water quality monitoring and planning, permit compliance, and hydrologic data collection.
The district currently has 299 positions authorized, of which 229 positions are filled, and 68 are vacant.
All vacant positions at the district are funded with the expectation that they will be filled during the budget
year. Many vacant positions are included to address expected recruitments and to accommodate natural
progressions within some job classifications. Further, the excess can be attributed to difficulty in
recruiting and hiring engineering classification positions due to lack of qualified candidates that meet
both the educational and job experience requirements desired.
The district will be proposing to acquire the following capital assets in FY 16/17:
Funding source: District’s General Fund - 15100/Administration:
• Moisture Density Gauge: The gauge is used for construction inspection. An additional gauge is
being added into the inventory rotation to increase the life of existing gauges over time and to ensure
availability of a gauge for field at all times in the event one is non-operational. The approximate cost
to purchase the gauge is $8,400 and the annual cost of running and maintaining the gauge is
estimated around $3,000.
• Trimble Robotic Total Station (2): Used for surveying, these stations will replace obsolete equipment
that is no longer repairable as parts are not available. The approximate total cost to purchase the
total stations is $82,000 and the annual cost of running and maintaining the stations is estimated
around $5,000.
Funding source: District’s Hydrology Fund - 48000:
• Auto Sampling Equipment (2): Used in Hydrology, the equipment is an addition to inventory and is
required for increased water sampling in areas around the County. The approximate total cost to
purchase the equipment is $24,000 and the annual cost of running and maintaining the equipment is
estimated around $2,500.
Funding source: District’s Mapping Services Fund - 48060:
• Copiers (3): The new copiers are replacing outdated copiers for increased functionality and capacity.
Increased functionality includes producing high volume color print jobs, high speed and it can
process multistep tasks in one single step (scan, print, and fold). The approximate total cost to
purchase the copiers are $45,000 after trade-in and the annual cost of running and maintaining the
existing and new copiers is estimated around $6,000.
• HP Plotter: The new plotter is replacing an outdated and fully depreciated plotter for increased
functionality and capacity. Increased functionality includes more color graphics, professional shine,
accepts large files, and enables highly unattended printing. The approximate total cost to purchase
the plotter is $10,000 and the annual cost of running and maintaining the plotter is estimated around
$2,000.
Funding source: District’s Garage-Fleet Operations Fund – 48020:
• Vehicles – Various Heavy equipment: The total cost of purchasing the heavy equipment is approximately $1,425,000 and the new equipment will be replacing outdated and/or fully depreciated
equipment. New purchases include Fecon Mower heads (2), CNG Dump trucks (6), 4x4 water trucks
(1), and Tracked Skid Steer Loaders (2). The annual cost of running and maintaining the equipment
is estimated around $ 56,000.
Funding source: District’s Data Processing Fund – 48080:
• Multiple servers, printers, worm storage, and plotters: the printers, plotters, and servers are being
purchased to replace fully depreciated and/or outdated equipment. The worm storage is necessary
to meet and implement Trusted System requirements at the district. The approximate total cost of
these purchases is $184,000. The annual cost of running and maintaining the equipment is
estimated around $6,000.

As part of the state coordinated care initiative, a maintenance of effort (MOE) requirement was
established for IHSS administrative costs, provider services and IHSS-PA administrative costs. Effective
FY 14/15, the MOE requirement for IHSS was entirely covered using Department of Public Social
Services funding, eliminating the need for a county contribution. In FY 16/17, the $9.9 million IHSS
budget will fund 99 new positions, bringing the total to 106. The majority of new positions are clerical
and social service workers, consistent with program responsibilities. Currently, the program has two
filled and six vacant positions.

The Cemetery District is funded through the Pre-Need Fund and the Endowment Fund, and operations
are funded by the general fund. The Pre-Need Fund was established by state law to ensure that
cemeteries would have the ability to refund monies paid for burial rights should the cemetery cease to
operate. The Endowment Fund was established by state law in 1982 to ensure that cemeteries have the
ability to maintain the property after the cemetery has been filled to capacity and burial operations have
ceased. The principal of this fund cannot be withdrawn, only the interest may be used to maintain the
property. Payroll, benefits, county administrative charges, equipment and repairs, water, gas, electricity,
phone, gasoline, diesel and uniforms are all expensed through the general fund.

For the past 25 years, the Regional Park and Open-Space District has prided itself on operating free of
debt and with minimal support from the County of Riverside’s general fund. Even at the height of the
economy in FY 07/08, the District’s allocation of general fund support was only $712,000, which organizations across the country) and was used to support various services primarily related to historic
venues and trails. In 2012, the District was encouraged to provide active recreation services at the Cove
Waterpark and Jurupa Sports Park without general fund support, and as a result FY11/12 expenditures
exceeded revenue by $1.6 million. For the next three fiscal years, expenditures exceeded revenues by
an average of about $1 million each year, and by the end of FY14/15 (after the addition of DropZone
Waterpark), the District’s operating fund ending balance was less than $2 million. This represents a
cumulative use of $6.6 million, or 78 percent of the District’s initial $8.45 million reserve.
Other factors that have affected the organization include significant increases in internal service and
Workers Compensation charges, labor increases, utility increases, the drought, and difficult state and
federal mandates and bureaucracy that have had a significant impact on project and program costs.

