Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Protect residents from crime and abuse.
?? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement
strategies to protect San Diego youth against crime,
neglect and abuse.
?? Collaborate with law enforcement agencies and
community services organizations to combat human
trafficking and enhance the support to victims and
education to the community.
?? Enhance enforcement of required standards of care
in long-term care facilities.
?? Provide for a strong, collaborative criminal justice system
that holds offenders accountable and protects victims’
rights.
?? Continue participation in multi-agency operations
and multi-agency task forces.
?? Reduce recidivism and help offenders successfully
reenter society.
?? Fully implement a balanced-approach model that
reduces crime by holding offenders accountable
while providing them access to rehabilitation.
?? Improve offender reintegration into the community
through a continuum of care and case management
through reentry that begins at Sheriff facilities and
juvenile institutions with an assessment of offender
needs, which also occurs at the Community
Transition Center (CTC) for certain offenders.
Probation will continue to engage with offenders on
supervision to provide case management and
rehabilitative services.
?? Make neighborhoods safe to live, work and play.
?? Expand data-driven crime prevention and
information-led policing strategies, focus on prolific
offenders and utilize current technologies to reduce
crime at the local and regional level.
?? Improve the quality of life of all San Diego residents
by proactively working to make our streets, parks,
public spaces and buildings safer from crime and
injury.
?? Help communities prepare, respond, and recover from
natural disasters, public health threats, environmental
hazards and other emergencies.
?? Encourage and promote residents to take important
and meaningful steps to protect themselves and their
families for at least 72 hours during a disaster.
?? Complete a disaster preparedness curriculum, which
aligns and complies with the Common Core State
Standards, for San Diego County’s 4th grade
students.
?? Ensure professional, timely emergency response is
provided to the residents of County Service Area 135
through the supervision of the San Diego County Fire
Authority.
?? Continue the implementation process of replacing
the Regional Communications System (RCS) with a
state of the art, next-generation communications
system.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Assist families in achieving and maintaining self-sufficiency
and promote the future well-being and prospects
of residents.
?? Ensure the success of the child support program by
establishing and enforcing court orders to support
the long-term well-being of children by collaborating
with custodial and non-custodial parents, courts,
government agencies, and community resources.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Leverage technology innovations and best practices to
improve service delivery and operational efficiency.
?? Improve communications with volunteer firefighters
through the continued implementation of the
Advanced Situational Awareness for Public Safety
Network (ASAP NET).
?? Continue projects to improve data sharing and
operations while achieving optimal results for County
residents.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Protect residents from crime and abuse.
?? Develop and implement strategies to educate,
prevent, detect and prosecute human trafficking
crimes.
?? Provide for a strong, collaborative criminal justice system
that holds offenders accountable and protects victims’
rights.
?? Collaborate with local law enforcement and
community services organizations on issues related
to human trafficking crimes to enhance support to
victims, training of law enforcement, and education
to the community.
?? Make neighborhoods safe to live, work and play.
?? Establish a one-year pilot program to investigate and
prosecute crimes committed against residents of
long-term care facilities and to raise public
awareness about preventing and reporting abuse
and neglect of our most vulnerable citizens.
?? Develop and implement cyber-crime public
awareness campaigns to help the community avoid
becoming victims of online predators.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop protocols necessary to implement a trusted
electronic document management system that meets
the required professional guidelines.
?? Expand the use of technology to reduce the number of
paper files retained and stored.
?? Develop and implement online training courses for staff
to address improved business processes created
through the implementation of new technologies.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Protect residents from crime and abuse.
?? Reduce crime in San Diego County by 5%.
?? Increase the number of field interviews conducted by
5%.
?? Increase closure of cold case homicides from an
average of two per year to five per year.
?? Increase the number of Crime Free Multi-Housing
units in Sheriff's jurisdiction by 10%.
?? Improve the ability of deputies to work with mentally
ill subjects by ensuring that 100% of deputies and
sergeants complete a minimum eight-hour PERT
training by May 2015.
?? Provide for a strong, collaborative criminal justice system
that holds offenders accountable and protects victims'
rights.
?? Continue to implement information-led policing (ILP)
throughout the department as the primary
philosophy used to address crime trends in order to
establish San Diego as the safest urban county in the
country.
?? Reduce recidivism and help offenders successfully
reenter society.
?? Obtain beds in the community to be utilized as a
Residential Reentry Program for female offenders.
The program would provide services specific to
female offenders, including employment services
and family reunification.
?? Increase the number of community based providers
that provide evidence based programs to the
inmates within the jail facilities by 50%.
?? Reduce chargeable traffic accidents by 10%.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Increase hiring to meet department goal of opening
East Mesa Reentry Facility and the San Diego County
Women's Detention and Reentry Facility, with a goal to
hire 127 sworn positions by June 30, 2015 and 228
sworn positions by June 30, 2016.
?? Achieve a minimum of eight female recruits in each
academy class.
?? Achieve 99% staffing of Emergency Services Dispatcher
classification.
?? Continue to work with departments to improve health
and academy readiness of new recruits/cadets and
reduce injuries at Regional Academy.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Assist families in achieving and maintaining self-sufficiency
and promote the future well-being and prospect
of residents.
?? Increase the percentage of open cases with an
enforceable order at or above 89% (64,460 of
72,350), consistent with the statewide goal.
?? Ensure the percentage of cases with parentage
established is at 100%, consistent with the statewide
goal.
?? Increase the percentage of current support collected
to current support owed at or above 70% ($114
million of $163 million).
?? Increase the percentage of arrears cases with a
collection to 68% (38,500 of 56,500) or above.
?? Maintain collections for child support at or above
$178 million.
?? Establish at least 275 parenting time orders along
with a child support order to build healthy
relationships and consistent payment.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Collect at least $3.75 for every $1.00 spent on operations.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop and distribute at least one informational video
and two e-newsletters to educate employers on how
their contributions positively affect the families of our
region.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Continue to promote family self-sufficiency by partnering
with at least one community based or governmental
organization to ensure the needs of the family are met.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Provide for a strong, collaborative criminal justice system
that hold offenders accountable and protects victims’
rights.
?? Increase community awareness of the CLERB
through quarterly stakeholder outreach.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Maintain public accountability of Sheriff and Probation
peace officers, to the extent allowed by law, by conducting
timely investigation and review of citizens’
complaints of misconduct.
?? Issue and publicly distribute monthly workload reports
to the CLERB, and Sheriff and Probation departments.
Complete a comprehensive annual report with a thorough
accounting of new complaints and case closures,
including an analysis of citizen complaint trends and
recommendations for policy change.
?? Complete 95% of complaint investigations within one
year of receipt, unless delayed due to lengthy investigations
that may be required in complex cases.
?? Provide monthly “early warning” reports to the Sheriff
and Probation departments regarding the nature of
complaints filed and the identity and assignment of the
employees, when known, to enable corrective action
when necessary.
?? Maintain a transparent and independent citizen complaint
process, to the extent allowed by law, which provides
relevant feedback and recommendations to the
Sheriff and the Chief Probation Officer.
?? Provide redacted case synopses that include relevant
information for the public while respecting peace officer
confidentiality rights.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Continue to implement business process reengineering
measures, which define a standard, measurable process
and reduce the amount of effort and lead time
required to complete high-quality investigations.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Process new complaints in a timely manner. Maintain a
complaint turnaround of two working days or less,
measured from when the complaint was received to
when case documents were completed and returned to
the complainant for signature.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Help communities prepare, respond, and recover from
natural disasters, public health threats, environmental
hazards and other emergencies.
?? Foster a culture of independence, self-sufficiency
and disaster readiness by completing a disaster
preparedness curriculum for San Diego County’s
37,000+ 4th grade students. The curriculum will align
and comply with the Common Core State Standards
(CCSS).
?? Increase public awareness of the importance of
personal preparedness by providing presentations
and attending safety events for children and adults,
for a total of 20 events.
?? Reach out to five large San Diego Business Alliance
member companies and encourage them to foster a
mentee/mentor relationship with other member
companies that wish to improve their emergency
management capability and business continuity
planning.
?? Ensure readiness in the region by improving the
response capability of the Operational Area EOC.
?? Develop plans, procedures and responsibilities to
add an emergency response position focused on
Access and Functional Needs in the EOC during a
level III activation.
?? Enhance the EOC facility by intelligently modifying
existing space to ensure it can accommodate a
larger and more flexible response during
activations.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Promote Accessible AlertSanDiego, the County’s mass
notification system, which targets individuals who are
blind, deaf, or hard of hearing, throughout the county to
increase the number of registrants by conducting one
targeted, incentivized outreach campaign.
?? Research multiple translation technologies and available
translation services to expand the capability of
Accessible AlertSanDiego to provide Spanish translations
of emergency alerts and notifications.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Provide for the continued development of regional
emergency and mitigation plans.
?? Update and enhance the Operational Area
Emergency Operations Plan with a focus on
community planning. This plan assigns
responsibilities, establishes lines of authority,
identifies resources and describes how people and
property will be protected in an emergency. The new
version will incorporate input from regional partners
and individuals with disabilities.
?? Update and enhance the San Diego County Multi-
Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation plan with a focus on
the effect climate change has on regional natural and man made disasters. This plan enhances public
awareness of hazards, creates a decision tool for
emergency managers and assists in the
development of local policies for hazard mitigation.
?? Facilitate the development of a drought concept of
operations plan which contains prepared emergency
procedures and resource information to increase the
regional ability to respond to and recover from
regional drought conditions.
?? Align one County disaster response exercise with an
external agency exercise to improve overall coordination,
collaboration and response capability.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Provide for a strong, collaborative criminal justice system
that holds offenders accountable and protects victims’
rights.
?? Complete 90% of homicide examination reports in
60 days or less.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Make neighborhoods healthy places to live, work and
play.
?? Gather epidemiology information to address public
health issues and partner with agencies to alert the
community on patterns and trends. These trends will
be communicated through press releases and an
annual report published online.
?? Continue to train medical residents, students and
first responders on forensic investigations by fulfilling
100% of requests, at least 75, within 4 months of the
request.
?? Contribute to research efforts in childhood death by
providing statistics and case examples, and lending
expertise though active participation in groups
including the San Diego County Child Fatality
Committee, the Methamphetamine Strike Force,
PDATF, MECAP, NICHD, and the SIDS Advisory
Council.
?? Continue to contribute to research efforts in
Alzheimer’s, Epilepsy, Autism and Schizophrenic
studies by providing tissue to academic research
organizations, with family consent.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Continue to assist in the healing process of those who
have lost a loved one by providing timely and compassionate
service and accurate information about Medical
Examiner procedures.
?? Notify 90% of next-of-kin for identified Medical
Examiner cases in 12 hours or less.
?? Enable timely funeral service for families by making
97% of bodies ready for release in 7 days or less.
?? Enable timely sharing of detailed information with
customers (families, law enforcement agencies,
hospitals, insurance companies, media, etc)
regarding the cause and manner of death.
?? Complete 85% of investigative reports in 60 days
or less.
?? Complete 95% of toxicology reports in 60 days or
less.
?? Complete 80% of examination reports in 60 days
or less.
?? Provide 95% of report requests within 7 days or
less.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Use advanced forensic imaging to assist in the determination
of the cause and manner of death.
?? Gather imaging case information to locate objects,
identify John or Jane Does and document fractures,
deformities and post-surgical procedures.
?? Use bar coding technology to ensure transfer and
maintenance of specimens, evidence, and bodies is
accomplished quickly, efficiently, and accurately.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Reduce recidivism and help offenders successfully
reenter society.
?? Provide rehabilitative services to youth in custody to
prepare them for success in the community.
?? Continue to provide employment readiness
services to at least 99% of youth in custody
assessed as having an employment readiness
need.
?? Continue to provide services to reduce
delinquency for 100% of the youth in custody who
are at high risk to recidivate.
?? Continue to provide substance abuse services for
at least 99% of the youth assessed to have
substance abuse needs.
?? Provide rehabilitative opportunities in order to reduce
future criminal offenses by connecting adult and
juvenile offenders with appropriate community
resources.
?? Link high-risk juvenile probationers to communitybased
services associated with the juvenile’s
assessed need.
?? Increase the percentage of high-risk adult
offenders and Post Release Community
Supervision Offenders linked to appropriate
intervention services by 20% (55% to 66%) to
address factors that lead to criminal behavior.
?? Increase the percentage of adult offenders on highrisk
supervision engaged in work readiness and
employment services.
?? Protect residents from crime and abuse.
?? Increase public safety and reduce crime by providing
supervision and services using evidence-based and
best practices so that 70% of juvenile probationers
complete their probation without a new sustained
law violation.
?? Increase public safety and reduce crime by providing
supervision and services using evidence-based and
best practices to adults under supervision.
?? Ensure 65% of adult probationers complete their
probation without being convicted of a new crime.
?? Ensure 70% of Post Release Community Supervision
Offenders will complete their supervision without
being convicted of a new crime.
?? Increase the number of searches on probationers by
5% (7,587 to 7,966) to ensure that probationers are
in compliance with their terms of supervision and not
in possession of illegal contraband such as
weapons, drugs, and child pornography and/or gang
paraphernalia.
?? Provide for a strong, collaborative criminal justice system
that holds offenders accountable and protects victims’
rights.
?? Increase the percentage of participation in multiagency
operations including gang operations,
truancy sweeps, probation and parole sweeps and
sobriety checkpoints by 5% to at least 530
operations.
?? Increase the restitution collected from adult
probationers from $2.2 million to $2.5 million for the
benefit of crime victims.
?? Maximize the amount of restitution collected in
relation to juvenile cases.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop applications for mobile devices to improve the
efficiency of case management and supervision.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Protect residents from crime and abuse.
?? Encourage clients to take advantage of programs
that will allow them to thrive by successfully
completing probation and reduce the likelihood of reoffending.
?? File approximately 475 misdemeanor expungement
requests to help clients obtain meaningful
employment.
?? File approximately 475 felony expungement
requests to help clients obtain meaningful
employment.
?? Reduce recidivism and help offenders successfully
reenter society.
?? Promote collaborative justice by participating in
specialty courts aimed at linking services to clients
with specialized needs.
?? Participate in Offender Reentry Court, Adult and
Juvenile Drug Court, and Homeless Court to help
ensure clients obtain the services they need to
become self-sufficient and maintain a crime-free
lifestyle.
?? Maintain 90% of caseload capacity in the
Behavioral Health Court Calendar.
?? Maintain 90% caseload capacity in the Veterans
Treatment Review Calendar.
?? Improve opportunities for children and families by
assisting juvenile delinquency clients to be
successful in their rehabilitation programs and on
probation.
?? Use juvenile record sealing statutes to assist
juvenile clients in clearing their records to gain
employment or to participate in training and/or
education programs, for 90% of requests.
?? Maintain the number of elapsed days between
admission and sentencing in juvenile cases at an
average of 28 days to accelerate rehabilitation.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Promote collaborative justice by establishing a professional
rapport and bond of trust with clients, and work
with criminal justice partners to ensure a reasonable
and efficient criminal justice system and obtain the
best possible outcome for the client.
?? Resolve 90% of misdemeanor cases prior to trial
when doing so benefits the client more than
litigation.
?? Resolve 65% of felony cases within 60 days of
arraignment when doing so benefits the client more
than litigation.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of services
by storing case-related information electronically.
?? Receive discovery electronically via eDiscovery on
80% of incoming adult felony cases in Fiscal Year
2014–15, and 100% of incoming adult felony cases
in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable, and Diverse Workforce
?? Ensure a qualified, well-trained and diverse workforce
to effectively represent all cases appointed to the
department.
?? Achieve 15 hours of annual continuing legal
education for all attorneys.
?? Achieve eight hours of annual investigation-related
training for all investigators.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Develop and maintain partnerships with educational
and community organizations to leverage resources
and address common needs.
?? Maintain at least 100,000 hours provided by
volunteers.
?? Participate in four community outreach events
through the Public Defender’s Community Outreach
Program.
?? Train approximately 800 non-staff attorneys
concurrently with staff attorneys to build
relationships and strengthen the criminal justice
system.
?? Provide 50 streaming video trainings to the department’s
branch offices and other indigent defense agencies.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Help communities prepare, respond, and recover from
natural disasters, public health threats, environmental
hazards and other emergencies.
?? Develop the 2014 Consolidated Fire Code, which will
provide consistent and enforceable fire codes for all
individual fire protection districts. The Consolidated
Fire Code is planned for presentation to the Board of
Supervisors for adoption by December 31, 2014.
?? Manage and implement programs that will help
protect residents from wildfire and other
emergencies.
?? Establish and implement programs to enhance
volunteer firefighter emergency training and
readiness.
?? Continue implementation of the ASAP NET and
evaluation of the volunteer fire stations’
communication network.
?? Develop and implement a regional closest resource
concept, including the installation and
maintenance of automated vehicle locators for
SDCFA first responder vehicles, to improve
emergency response.
?? Provide outreach, education and enforcement of
the Defensible Space Program to property owners
within CSA 135, including the mailing of 10,000
notifications.
?? Continue to evaluate expanding the Defensible
Space Program to additional fire agencies in the
unincorporated area.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Provide regional leadership with the implementation of
the County’s Fire Master Plan and continue collaboration
with other fire agencies to improve overall efficiency
through consolidation and sharing of resources.
?? Finalize Step III of the County’s Fire and Life Safety
Reorganization Report, which will reorganize the Pine
Valley and San Diego Rural Fire Protection Districts
into CSA 135.
?? Continue to build a regional fire prevention program,
including collaboration with other agencies.
?? Continue to participate with the Greater San Diego Fire
Safe Council and provide regional leadership on the
development of Community Wildfire Protection Plans
for Fire Safe Councils in various unincorporated communities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Pursue grant funding opportunities to support the partnering
fire services agencies, including collaboration
with non-profit and other governmental agencies.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Conduct at least 11 site visits to SDCFA volunteer fire
stations to ensure program compliance.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Essential
Infrastructure
?? Complete construction of the new Boulevard Volunteer
Fire Station by spring 2015.
Advance the County’s Strategic Initiatives and Live Well
San Diego to provide the right services, to the right people,
at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Promote the safety of vulnerable adults in long-term
care residential facilities by restoring the staffing levels
for the Long Term Care Ombudsman Program. The
increase in staff will allow the program to address
issues such as training needs, facility inspections,
community education, and complaint resolution.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Support positive choices for health by enrolling 100%
of newly eligible Medi-Cal recipients as part of the ACA
to increase the number of Americans with insurance
and cut the overall costs of health care to families and
individuals. Medi-Cal is California’s Medicaid program
which provides needed health care services to eligible
children, families and individuals.
?? Support healthy and safe living by expanding the In-
Home Outreach Team (IHOT) program services from
three HHSA service regions to the remaining three service
regions, providing countywide coverage. IHOT
links treatment-resistant individuals and their families
to existing behavioral health services and community
resources. This outreach and engagement is essential
in assisting this population to willingly receive these
needed services.
?? Build a better service delivery system for children and
youth in foster care by connecting the children in child
welfare to needed mental health services.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Enhance services for children awaiting adoption, and
the potential permanent families approved to adopt, by
implementing strategies to streamline the Child Welfare
Services Adoption Program.
?? Assist veterans and their dependents to thrive by facilitating
their access to needed benefits by processing
2,520 compensation and pension claims.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Continue efforts to impact the 3 behaviors (no physical
activity, poor diet, and tobacco use) that result in 4 diseases
(cancer, heart disease and stroke, type 2 diabetes,
and lung disease) that contribute to over 50
percent of deaths in San Diego by creating new Live
Well San Diego partnerships.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Increase understanding among HHSA staff of how
trauma affects individuals, families, groups, and communities
by implementing a “trauma-informed” model
that recognizes how trauma impacts the overall wellness
of clients and staff.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Essential
Infrastructure
?? Address changes in program and customer needs by
implementing approved recommendations from a
multi-year facility plan which includes updating and
modernizing facilities.
Advance the County’s Strategic Initiatives and Live Well
San Diego to provide the right services, to the right people,
at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Building a better service delivery system by providing
protection, permanency and stability to children and
youth who are at-risk or have been, abused or
neglected.
?? Improve positive outcomes for children by increasing
to 50% (2,350 of 4,700) the number of families who
participate in joint case planning. Families who are
engaged in joint decision making are more likely to
follow through with plans and meeting safety goals,
resulting in positive results for children.
?? Support stability by placing 55% (825 of 1,500) of
foster care children with a relative or close non-family
member, minimizing trauma to children by
maintaining their connections to familiar
environments.
?? Support stability by increasing to 87% (1,479 of
1,700) the number of children who have been in
foster care for less than 12 months who have fewer
than 3 placements. Fewer placements minimize the
trauma that children experience and may help lessen
negative impact to their school performance.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Building a better service delivery system to maximize
the health and well-being of at-risk children and families
and vulnerable adults.
?? Ensure 50% (150 of 300) mothers in the Maternal
Child Health and NFP programs will continue to
breastfeed their infant at 6 months of age, promoting
healthier outcomes for their infants.
?? Immunize 99% (3,217 of 3,250) of children and
adolescents, 18 years of age or less, served at Public
Health Centers and clinics, protecting them from
diseases such as measles and whooping cough.
?? Partner with community agencies and regions to
conduct at least five informational events on
immunization targeting at-risk populations.
?? Support choices to become more healthy and self-sufficient
by helping eligible families and individuals
access health care, nutrition, and temporary financial
assistance programs.
?? Enroll 100% of newly eligible Medi-Cal recipients as
part of the ACA to increase the number of Americans
with health insurance and cut the overall costs of
health care to families and individuals. Medi-Cal is
California’s Medicaid program which provides
needed health care services to eligible children,
families and individuals.
?? Process 91% (11,933 of 13,114) of CalFresh
applications timely every month. CalFresh is a State
nutrition program to help eligible families and
individuals buy food to improve their nutrition.
?? Process 95% (3,442 of 3,624) of CalWORKs
applications timely every month. CalWORKs is a
State financial temporary assistance program that
helps eligible families become more self-sufficient.
?? To reduce homelessness in San Diego County, Central
Region which has an estimated 65% or 5,733 of the
homeless population, will coordinate with Behavioral
Health Services in countywide homeless services by
actively participating with coordinating bodies and
organizations addressing homelessness including the
Regional Continuum of Care Council, the 25 Communities
Effort, the Campaign to End Homelessness in
Downtown San Diego Leadership Team, the Emergency
Food and Shelter Program, and the Unaccompanied
Youth Task Force.
?? To address the high rate of domestic violence in South
Region, in which children are frequently present during
these domestic violence incidents, South Region will
partner with the Chula Vista Police Department on the
planning and implementation of the Smart Policing Initiative
Grant. This collaborative approach between law
enforcement and Child Welfare Services will provide
support to at-risk children and families.
?? Partner with the South Region communities on the
implementation of the Chula Vista Promise Neighborhood
Grant. As a region with a very large number of
non-English speakers, South Region faces challenges
in delivering culturally and linguistically appropriate services
to its residents. Chula Vista Promise Neighborhood
is poised to develop and implement customized
solutions that address the culturally and linguistically
unique needs of South Region. This is a multi-year
grant with interagency coordination to improve longterm
outcomes, and identify best practices that can be
replicated throughout the County and the nation.
?? Work with community partners in East Region to
develop effective resources and supports that allow
refugees to acculturate, gain independence, and
enhance long-term self-sufficiency. East Region is
home to the largest concentration of existing and
incoming refugees in the county.
?? In collaboration with community partners, North Central
Region will develop resources that promote safe
and healthy lifestyles for military personnel transitioning
to civilian life. The Marine Corps Air Station Miramar is
located in North Central Region and has over 15,000
service members.
?? Provide at least 640 service contacts, which include
home safety assessments, education, parenting and
health education to military families in North Coastal
Region, supporting the safety and protection of children
and military families. Camp Pendleton, which is
located in North Coastal Region, is home to over
45,000 military families.
?? Increase by 5% (from 1,260 to 1,323) the number of
video interviews for public assistance clients in North
County who are older adults or live in rural communities.
The population in rural San Diego numbers over
100,000 including many Native American Reservations
and rural communities. Transportation in these communities
is limited, making it difficult for residents to
apply for needed medical services and health/nutrition
resources.
Advance the County’s Strategic Initiatives and Live Well
San Diego to provide the right services, to the right people,
at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by safeguarding
and protecting vulnerable adults from neglect and
abuse, including financial, physical and emotional.
?? Conduct 96% (7,200 of 7,500) of face-to-face
contacts within 10 days of receiving an APS referral.
?? Ensure 92% (6,825 of 7,500) of APS cases are not rereferred
within six months of case closing.
?? Restore the staffing levels for the Long Term Care
Ombudsman Program. The increase in staff will allow
the program to address issues such as training
needs, facility inspections, community education,
and complaint resolution.
?? Ensure the safety of vulnerable seniors, dependent
adults and the community.
?? Ensure that 100% (1,230) of conservatorship
investigations for PG and PC begin within 2 business
days of assignment to an investigator as mandated
by the Omnibus Conservatorship and Guardianship
Reform Act.
?? Complete 98% (123 of 125) of follow-up face-to-face
visits with conservatees living in San Diego County
within 30 days of previous date of face-to-face visit.
?? Complete 98% (1,029 of 1,050) of assessment notes
on conservatorship investigations within 10 business
days of assignment of referral.
?? Minimize the risk and loss of assets and resources
belonging to conservatees and decedents.
?? Submit 100% (10) of Inventory and Appraisal reports
of all estate cases in the PG Program to the Court
within 90 days of receiving letters of conservatorship.
?? Ensure 100% (1,050) of PA investigations are begun
within 2 business days of a referral being assigned
for investigation.
?? Submit 100% (20) of Inventory and Appraisal reports
of all formal probate cases in the PA Program to the
Court within 120 days of receiving Letters of
Administration. A formal probate case is an estate
valued over $150,000 and is under court supervision.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system to improve quality
and efficient care for vulnerable adults ensuring
90% (1,800 of 2,000) of high-risk, fee-for-service Medicare
patients receive contact from staff within 72 hours
of discharge notification from a partner Acute Care
Hospital or Skilled Nursing Facility as part of CCTP.
?? Support positive choices that foster independence
among seniors and educational opportunities for veterans
and their families.
?? Connect 1,900 older adults with volunteer
opportunities, including the Retired and Senior
Volunteer Program (RSVP), promoting Live Well San
Diego through active living.
?? Provide 1,300 older adults with the Feeling Fit
exercise program, promoting Live Well San Diego by
increasing opportunities for physical activity.
?? Maintain 98% (539 of 550) participation in the MSSP
case management program helping to avoid, delay
or remedy inappropriate placement in nursing
facilities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Process 2,520 compensation and pension claims to
allow veterans and their dependents to thrive by
promptly facilitating their access to needed benefits.
?? Ensure 90% (14,850 of 16,500) of annual IHSS reassessments
are recertified timely so that clients receive
the appropriate level of care to remain safely in their
own home.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Maintain 100% (19) of mandated California State PA/
PG certification for applicable PA/PG staff in order to
improve services to conservatees and families of decedents.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system for children and
adults with behavioral and physical health needs by
maintaining timely integrated, specialized developmental
and mental health services for 250 young children
(ages 0–5 years) with complex developmental and/or
behavioral health issues through the KidSTART program.
?? Build a better service delivery system through the integration
of physical and behavioral health services with
SmartCare, a modified service delivery system program.
Care coordination between physical and behavioral
health services has enormous potential for enhancing the quality of care provided for clients as
well as increasing efficiencies in the delivery of health
care services overall.
?? Expand psychiatric consultation services to pediatric
providers who serve children with Medi-Cal to ensure
that behavioral health as well as physical health
needs are met.
?? Increase the use of the wellness blog in the online
newspaper Ramona Patch that serves the rural
community.
?? Maintain 97% (291 of 300) client satisfaction with the
integrated care model.
?? Support educational growth and overall well-being of
adolescents who complete alcohol and drug treatment
by ensuring 95% (879 of 925) either complete high
school (or the equivalent) or are enrolled in an educational
setting.
?? Support healthy and safe living by ensuring that 42%
(5.460 of 13,000) of participants complete alcohol and
drug treatment.
?? Support healthy and safe living by expanding In-Home
Outreach Team (IHOT) program services from three
HHSA service regions to the remaining three service
regions, providing countywide coverage. IHOT links
treatment-resistant individuals and their families to
existing behavioral health services and community
resources. This outreach and engagement is essential
in assisting this population to willingly receive these
needed services.
?? Build a better service delivery system for children and
youth in foster care by connecting them with needed
mental health services by:
?? Developing and implementing a joint screening tool
for children coming into the system with Child
Welfare Services.
?? Implementing the cross-training model developed for
Child Welfare Services and Behavioral Health
Services staff for screening to connect children to
assessment.
?? Implementing the plan for co-location of Child
Welfare and Behavioral Health staff to ensure referral
for assessment and treatment.
?? Support healthy and safe living by ensuring that a minimum
of 1,000 members of the community receive
training designed to help them recognize the warning
signs of suicide and help them assist someone who
may be considering suicide to seek help. Suicide is a
leading cause of non-natural death for all ages in San
Diego County, second only to motor vehicle crashes. In
2010, a total of 372 San Diegans died by suicide, for a
rate of 11.5 suicides per 100,000 population.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Advance operational excellence in customer service
through timely and improved access to services.
?? Ensure access to outpatient mental health
assessments for at-risk children and youth by
maintaining an average wait time of three days.
?? Ensure timely access to care and treatment in
nonresidential alcohol and drug treatment programs
for adolescents by admitting 90% (1,296 of 1,440)
within 14 days.
?? Improve access to prevention, early intervention, and
treatment services for older adults, an underserved
population, by serving an additional 5% (from 4,994
to 5,253).
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Advance operational excellence by demonstrating
accountability and commitment to outstanding patient
care by maintaining a readmission rate at SDCPH that
is lower than the readmission rate for fee-for-service
hospitals of 26.56% for Fiscal Year 2012–13.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Lead efforts to increase understanding among HHSA
staff of how trauma affects individuals, families,
groups, and communities by implementing a “traumainformed”
model that recognizes how trauma impacts
the overall wellness of clients and staff.
Advance the County’s Strategic Initiatives and Live Well
San Diego to provide the right services, to the right people,
at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Building a better service delivery system for vulnerable
children and youth by strengthening families and supporting
transitions to adulthood.
?? Place 78% (185 of 232) youth enrolled in intensive
home-based services (i.e. Wraparound) in a homelike
setting each month to improve their connection
to home and community and to reduce the use of
costly group home placements.
?? Promote housing stability by maintaining safe and
secure placements for 96% (348 of 363) of young
adults that are in Extended Foster Care each month
in order to promote self-sufficiency and prevent
homelessness. The remaining 4% would be either in
Guardianship placements or are pending Change of
Placement approval with their Supervised
Independent Living Plan.
?? 50% (230 of 460) of youth, ages 13 to 18, at PCC will
participate in a diversion program that teaches youth
to identify and manage behavior to decrease the risk
of crossing over to the juvenile justice system.
?? Offer 83% (90 of 110) of youth enrolled in the San
Pasqual Academy work readiness program
internships and part-time employment to obtain
work skills and experience that will help with their
transition to adulthood.
?? Conduct trainings regarding the Quality Parenting
Initiative for 80% (667 of 834) of Child Welfare
Services social workers. Quality parenting seeks to
improve the partnership between staff and foster
parents. Social Workers will learn about the
collaboration underway to enhance foster care by
strengthening relationships with foster parents and
community partners which will help minimize the
impact of trauma on children, help children develop
strong attachments, and facilitate information
sharing which supports quality caregivers.
?? Increase the number of completed home studies by
15% (300 to 345). Home Studies are a major
milestone in the adoptions process for prospective
adoptive families.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Building a better service delivery system to protect vulnerable
children and youth by improving child welfare
practices.
?? Train 100% (33) Child Abuse Hotline Screeners on
the framework of “Safely Organized Practice” to
increase competency in Child Welfare practice which
supports safety, well-being, and permanency of
families served by Child Welfare Services.
?? Continue to improve community engagement and
service integration by identifying new opportunities
for co-location of CWS staff.
?? Continue to build a trauma-informed Child Welfare
system through the implementation of the Pathways
to Well-Being practice model where children and
youth of the Child Welfare system will be screened
and assessed to determine the impact of trauma on
development and well-being.
?? Improve child well-being through the implementation
of a practice framework that includes continuous
quality improvement (CQI), trauma-informed
practice, and improved staff development/training.
Advance the County’s Strategic Initiatives and Live Well
San Diego to provide the right services, to the right people,
at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system through programs
to protect the health of the public.
?? Reduce the spread of disease by investigating 100%
(130) of reported selected communicable disease
cases within 24 hours.
?? Prevent transmission of TB by ensuring 100% (260)
of cases are reported within one working day from
start of treatment.
?? Increase access to healthcare by connecting 100%
(700) of new case management clients with an HIV
primary care provider within 90 days.
?? Ensure preparedness for response during a disaster
or public health threat by activating the public health
emergency response system a minimum of five
times.
?? Continue to support Health and Human Services
Agency (HHSA) service regions in the
implementation and monitoring of Live Well San
Diego Community Health Improvement Plans.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system for vulnerable
children and adults.
?? Ensure preventive health examinations are
performed to identify and correct health issues for
90% (2,700 of 3,000) of children in out-of-home
placement.
?? Expedite CCS referrals and improve accuracy by
receiving 65% (29,250 of 45,000) of referrals
electronically.
?? Work with the Border Health Consortium to assess
border health data, identify regional health priority
areas, and develop a plan to address them via a
Binational Border Health Improvement Strategic
Plan.
?? Promote positive nutrition choices throughout the
county by implementing the second year of the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program Education
(SNAP-Ed) activities, to provide nutrition education and
obesity prevention services to low-income families who
are potentially eligible for the federally funded CalFresh
food assistance program.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Advance operational excellence through continuous
improvement.
?? Conduct a minimum of six quality improvement
projects.
?? Submit 100% of required documentation (97
performance standards and measures) for national
voluntary public health accreditation, phase three
(Document Submission) of the Public Health
Accreditation Board’s seven phases for national
voluntary public health accreditation.
Advance the County’s Strategic Initiatives and Live Well
San Diego to provide the right services, to the right people,
at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Conduct a countywide community needs assessment
to inform the development of an updated Community
Action Plan for San Diego County's use of Community
Service Block Grant funds to help strengthen economically
disadvantaged individuals, families and communities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Advance operational excellence by ensuring public
funds are used in accordance with funding requirements.
?? Conduct 21 comprehensive financially focused
compliance reviews of contractors.
?? Conduct 14 quality assurance reviews of HHSA
Regions/Divisions to ensure adherence to
contracting policies and procedures, and funding
source established standards.
?? Conduct 15 internal reviews of offices with petty
cash to ensure appropriate controls are in place.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Increase financial competency across all levels of management
regarding their program’s increasingly complex
funding streams and other financial issues that
impact their program operations and service delivery.
?? Develop a multi-year financial spending plan for the
First 5 San Diego Commission to reflect declining revenues.
First 5 San Diego programs and services are
funded through San Diego County’s portion of the
State’s Proposition 10, State and County Early Childhood
Development Programs Additional Tobacco Surtax
(1998) tobacco tax revenues.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Continue to advance against the 3 behaviors (no physical
activity, poor diet and tobacco use) that result in 4
diseases (cancer, heart disease and stroke, type 2 diabetes and lung disease) that result in over 50 percent of
deaths in San Diego by creating new partnerships
through Live Well San Diego.
?? Increase the number of unique visitors to the public-facing
Live Well San Diego website (LiveWellSD.org) by
50% (from 3,600 to 5,400) by providing access to
timely, relevant news and materials that support the
communication, adoption and measurement of collective
efforts and local best practices across all sectors.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Collaborate with County business groups to expand
and enhance employee data security practices, ensuring
compliance with regulations and sharing of best
practices.
?? Implement recommendations from a review of existing
trainings, for new and continuing employees in public
assistance programs, to strengthen their knowledge,
improve customer relations, and promote cultural sensitivity.
?? Collaborate with the County Department of Human
Resources in promoting Live Well San Diego to all
County job applicants.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Coordinate with the County Technology Office to conduct
information technology countywide projects such
as the Data Loss Prevention Pilot.
?? With the Probation Department and Sheriff, enroll
newly eligible individuals to health care in order to maximize
the use of State and federal resources.
?? Reach out to community-based organizations to support
their efforts to enroll eligible families and individuals
to public assistance programs such as health,
nutrition, and temporary financial assistance.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Essential
Infrastructure
?? Implement the approved recommendations from a
multi-year facility plan to address changes in program
and customer needs, including updating and modernizing
facilities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Launch information and knowledge management practices
to support a person-centered service delivery
system, by establishing guidelines, policies, and tools
to ensure consistent, accurate, and quality use and
sharing of information and employee knowledge to
improve service delivery.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Protect county residents by conducting 320 safety
inspections on structural fumigations annually in San
Diego County.
?? Provide safe and accessible parks and preserves, foster
innovative programs and initiatives that promote
government agency partnerships and community
involvement, and enhance emergency communication
and preparedness.
?? Provide four workshops for the Local Agency Management
Program to educate stakeholders on the new
standards and regulations for onsite wastewater treatment
systems.
?? Provide two stakeholder workshops for the Environmental
Corrective Action Program (ECAP) which is a
program now delegated to DEH by the Department of
Toxic Substances Control to oversee the clean-up of
contaminated sites.
?? Create safer parks, preserves and recreation centers by
using more than 100,000 hours of volunteer service to
assist with park patrols, operations, and maintenance.
?? Work collaboratively with County Fire Authority, Planning
and Development Services, Office of Emergency
Services and other County departments, regional fire
authorities, government agencies, university staff and community groups to enhance wildfire-related
research. Disseminate information through a minimum
of four outreach activities.
?? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and
improvements are designed and constructed in accordance
with building safety codes.
?? Review proposed building plans to ensure structures
are properly and safely designed.
?? Help customers navigate the building permit and
inspection process by explaining code requirements
and exploring options to achieve compliance.
?? Conduct building inspections during construction to
ensure structures are built in accordance with
approved building plans.
?? Facilitate at least one training for federal agency staff
and local aviation community members on foreign flight
student vetting and screening requirements.
?? Flood Control staff will assist communities to prepare
and respond to flood events by inspecting 75% of
flood control facilities annually and maintaining County
flood control facilities to their design capacities by
removing debris from clogged or blocked facilities.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Promote the diversion of recyclable materials from
landfills through recycling events in conjunction with
the Department of Public Works by implementing two
collection events for recycling of used pesticide containers
from the agricultural community.
?? Prevent the spread of the insidious pest Glassy-
Winged Sharpshooter, a serious threat to California’s
$4.0 billion grape industry, by ensuring 100% of more
than 2,350 plant shipments arrive at destination with no
viable life stages of the pest.
?? Stop the spread of Red Imported Fire Ants (RIFA), a
devastating pest of agriculture and urban environments,
by planning and conducting a comprehensive
survey of high risk habitat throughout the entire county
for RIFA infestations. Conduct three RIFA training sessions
with key personnel from County of San Diego
Parks and Recreation and Public Works by June 30,
2015.
?? Maintain an inspection program to protect the public
from the harmful effects of air pollution by annually
conducting 7,400 inspections of equipment at regulated
facilities for compliance with air pollution laws.
?? Protect the health of the public by reducing exposure
to hazardous air pollutants by implementing the following
actions:
?? Test emissions from all natural gas fired reciprocating
internal combustion engines required to show
ongoing compliance with the National Emissions
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants.
?? Maintain the capability to deploy an emergency
network of two fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
monitors within 48 hours of any wildfire and link the
instruments via satellite for real-time data delivery to
the public.
?? In coordination with affected industries, develop
training videos on how to comply with air pollution
control requirements.
?? Identify problems and potential solutions for endemic
and invasive pests such as insects, diseases, weeds
(Asian Citrus Psyllid, Gold Spotted Oak Borer, Phytophthora,
invasive grasses, etc.) impacting San Diego
agriculture, nursery, ornamental horticultural and landscapes.
Provide a minimum of four outreach activities
to nursery and ornamental horticulture growers, residents
and agricultural community members.
?? Maintain and manage the volunteer Master Gardener
program to provide research-based information in the
areas of home gardening, community gardening, landscaping,
water conservation, and pest management to
San Diego County residents, Agriculture, Weights and
Measures and other Land Use and Environment Group
departments. Provide a minimum of 400 office consultations,
10 educational exhibits and 4,000 hours of volunteer
service.
?? Acquire, develop and maintain facilities that support
and promote park stewardship and environmental sustainability
and efficiency.
?? Conserve irrigation water by installing smart irrigation
controllers at one County park.
?? Enhance recreation opportunities by improving
sports fields by installing new turf at two County
parks.
?? Acquire 500 acres within the MSCP plan areas that
will count toward the County’s commitment to the
MSCP Implementing Agreement.
?? Use Board Policy I-138, Mitigation on County-
Owned Land Managed by the Department of Parks
and Recreation to generate $40,000 of revenue for
acquisitions, operations and maintenance of MSCP
lands.
?? Install additional photovoltaic panels at one County
park to offset energy consumption and provide a
clean source of renewable energy.
?? Incorporate cultural, historical or environmental
interpretive components at two park facilities.
?? Protect the environment and preserve community character
through the efficient application of planning, engineering,
and environmental regulations in the
management of land development permit applications
for discretionary projects.
?? Continue implementation of the Purchase
Agricultural Conservation Easement (PACE) program,
which supports the local agriculture industry and the
preservation of community character.
?? Extend easement contract offers to the 15 remaining
program properties.
?? Develop for Board of Supervisors’ consideration a
mechanism that would allow easement land acquired
under the PACE program to be utilized as off-site
mitigation for agricultural impacts resulting from
private development.
?? Improve the efficiency of land use programs that guide
the physical development of the County’s land through
a balance of growth and conservation while collaborating
with communities.
?? Present for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration a
Comprehensive Renewable Energy Plan (CREP) by
summer 2015. The CREP will explore opportunities
for a more comprehensive approach to increasing
renewable energy use, reducing costs for
consumers, and minimizing impacts to the
community and its resources.
?? Complete public review of the North County Multiple
Species Conservation Program (MSCP) text and
environmental document by April 2016.
?? Present for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration a
Form-Based Zoning Code for the Valley Center
South Village by summer 2015. Similar to the Zoning
Ordinance, the Form-Based Codes will include
provisions on allowed uses, setbacks, height and
information on development process. The new codes
will also provide detailed architectural and
landscaping requirements and information to
applicants on required street and trail improvements.
?? Conduct outreach to residents with information and
resources on stormwater pollution prevention at 15
community events throughout the unincorporated area
of the county.
?? Monitor 50% of major stormwater outfalls by June
2016 to assess the health of watersheds by conducting
a comprehensive monitoring program.
?? Assist 100 businesses and 60 multifamily complexes in
initiating recycling programs.
?? Provide residential composting education at nine workshops,
one community event and three schools in the
unincorporated area of the county. Install one new
composting demonstration site.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? In conjunction with LUEG’s Thriving Team in support of
HiAP, produce consumer-oriented certified farmer’s
market (CFM) brochure in English and Spanish with
information on availability of healthy, locally produced
fruit, vegetables, and other agricultural products.
?? Recruit and train a minimum of 350 adult and teen 4-H
volunteers to deliver positive youth development experiences
through a minimum of four experiential learning
outreach activities.
?? Conduct nutrition education for 500 low-income families
with children to reduce the risk of childhood obesity
and chronic diseases (such as diabetes, heart
disease, and high blood pressure) through lifestyle
change related to diet and physical activity.
?? Develop and enhance the experiences of park patrons
and promote healthy lifestyles by increasing recreational
opportunities and educational programs.
?? Create additional recreational opportunities by
constructing new exercise stations along two County
Park’s trails.
?? Promote healthy lifestyles for 2,000 adults and
seniors through participation in 60 recreation
programs and services that increase physical,
intellectual, social and/or emotional abilities.
?? Foster positive development of 6,500 youth through
180 recreation programs and services that increase
physical, intellectual, social and/or emotional
abilities.
?? Repaint and or use thermoplastic to re-mark crosswalks
and roadway legends adjacent to 121 public
school and 12 private school locations in the unincorporated
area of the county. Thermoplastic will be introduced
at some schools’ sites to minimize the need for
annual repainting.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Essential
Infrastructure
?? Manage the execution of parks-related capital projects
identified in the Capital Improvement Needs Assessment
as approved by the Board of Supervisors, in a
timely and cost effective manner.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Maintain the commitment to customer service by
promptly reviewing all Carl Moyer Program grant applications
upon receipt and notifying applicants within
five business days of any additional information that
may be required.
?? Maintain average plan review times for new retail food
and public swimming pool projects at levels that are
50% less than the State law requirement of 20 days.
?? Provide three California Environmental Reporting System
(CERS) kiosks for facility owners and operators
throughout the county that need CERS assistance or
may not have access to a computer.
?? Ensure ongoing customer and stakeholder engagement
through proactive outreach, regular stakeholder
and industry group meetings, and continuous communication
through a variety of formats.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Collaborate with the San Diego Foundation on its Climate
Initiative and help coordinate with government,
nonprofits, businesses, and consumers to advance
regional efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
?? Increase awareness of the Mobile Source Incentive
Program by participating in eight community outreach
events about APCD’s mobile source emission reduction
incentive programs and grant funding opportunities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? LUEG is committed to embodying the County's Strategic
Initiatives and practicing the Required Disciplines
for Excellence included in the County’s Strategic Plan.
As part of this, “Team LUEG” was created to leverage
interdepartmental efforts in the following areas: Workforce
Development, Communication and Outreach,
Customer and Stakeholder Focus, Team First and Continuous
Improvement. Comprised of all LUEG Departments,
“Team LUEG” is about striving to be a “best in
class” organization by working together and meeting
the varying needs of customers.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? To increase efficiency, consistency and accuracy,
implement auto-generated Notices of Proposed Action
(NOPA) for Weights and Measures’ retail fuel meter and
water dispensers, develop associated business practices
and conduct staff training.
?? Streamline the Temporary Event permit process to
leverage online information resources. Conduct a
workshop for event organizers and vendors with annual
permits to provide them with food safety education and
a sound understanding of the permitting process.
?? Conduct an analysis of the building permit pre-review
process to identify and implement improvements to
reduce customer wait and transaction times, while
ensuring continued quality review.
?? Reengineer and streamline the incentive grant application
process, moving from a largely paper-based system
to an electronic system using Accela Citizen
Access.
?? Provide assistance with air pollution rules and regulations
to the business community by creating two new
compliance assistance videos and posting them on the
APCD website.
?? Expand the development of project management tools
to improve case and project management within the
department of Planning and Development Services.
?? Conduct an analysis of the building permit pre-review
process to identify and implement improvements to
reduce customer wait and transaction times, while
ensuring continued quality review.
?? Implement a new Airport Lease Management System
(ALMS), using BCMS, to track County airport leases
and other contracts to replace the current lease management
system, which will no longer be supported.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure responsible stewardship of resources
expended to fulfill Public Records Act requests by
identifying the top three requested public records and
making them available on AWM webpage for 24/7 customer
access.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Reduce the delivery cost of repaving streets in the
unincorporated area by 10% within the next two years.
Delivery costs do not include the cost of materials,
since the Department of Public Works cannot control
the cost of the asphalt paving materials, but the
department can take actions to control costs for getting
those materials installed on County roads. Reducing
costs will benefit the region by enabling the
department to stretch existing dollars even further,
thereby enabling additional lane-miles to be paved.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Promote the diversion of recyclable materials from
landfills through recycling events in conjunction with
the Department of Public Works by implementing two
collection events for recycling of used pesticide containers
from the agricultural community.
?? Prevent the spread of the insidious pest Glassy-
Winged Sharpshooter, a serious threat to California’s
$4 billion grape industry, by ensuring 100% of more
than 2,350 plant shipments arrive at destination with no
viable life stages of the pest.
?? Stop the spread of Red Imported Fire Ants (RIFA), a
devastating pest of agriculture and urban environments,
by planning and conducting a comprehensive
survey of high risk habitat throughout the entire county
for RIFA infestations. Conduct three RIFA training sessions
with key personnel from County of San Diego
Parks and Recreation and Public Works by June 30,
2015.
?? Avert the establishment of invasive pest species and
provide excellent customer service in a timely manner
by identifying and diagnosing 100% of plant insect and
disease samples submitted by industry and AWM
inspection staff within two weeks of submission. Early
and accurate identification is crucial to ensure invasive
pest species do not become established in San Diego
County or other parts of California.
?? Ensure consumers’ confidence by completing 100% of
annual inspections for fuel meters, taxi meters, water
dispensers, computing scales, and counter scales.
?? Protect agriculture, the food supply, and urban and
natural environments by pursuing additional funding to
control invasive pests.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Establish a County of San Diego Interdepartmental Live
Well Food System Task Force to develop HiAP-compatible
strategies for improved access to fresh, nutritious,
and affordable foods in identified food deserts
(areas with low access).
?? In conjunction with LUEG’s Thriving Team in support of
HiAP, produce consumer-oriented certified farmer’s
market brochure in English and Spanish with information
on availability of healthy, locally produced fruit,
vegetables, and other agricultural products.
?? Convert the remainder (16,440 of 54,825) of the previously
developed trapping sites into the statewide mapping
grid system. This is year two of a two-year goal.
?? Increase consumer protection of organic produce by
increasing produce sampling inspections for illegal
pesticide residues by 100%, from 15 to 30, at certified
farmer’s markets and other venues.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Ensure timeliness in pesticide-related illness investigations
by completing 90% of investigations within 120
days.
?? Protect county residents by conducting 320 safety
inspections on structural fumigations annually in San
Diego County.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? To increase efficiency, consistency and accuracy,
implement auto-generated Notices of Proposed Action
(NOPA) for Weights and Measures’ retail fuel meters
and water dispensers, develop associated business
practices and conduct staff training.
?? To improve timeliness of payments and increase customer
satisfaction, implement Accela Citizen Access
online registration/fee payment system for the Point of
Sale System and Device Registration.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure responsible stewardship of resources
expended to fulfill Public Records Act requests by
identifying the top three requested public records and
making them available on AWM webpage for 24/7 customer
access.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Maximize technology and improve efficiency by implementing
a mobile application for the Pierce’s Disease
Control Program (PDCP). By June 30, 2015, 100% of
PDCP Insect Detection Specialists will be using the
PDCP Trap App to capture daily trapping data.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Implement the first “near-road” air quality monitoring
station in the County of San Diego to measure the
emission impact of on-road motor vehicles by September
30, 2014. Contingent on EPA site approval, implement
a second “near-road” air quality monitoring
station to measure the emission impact of on-road
motor vehicles at a second location by June 30, 2015.
?? Relocate the El Cajon ambient air quality monitoring
site, which is designated as a National Core monitoring
station, to a permanent location within 30 days after
the relocation site is ready.
?? Maintain an inspection program to protect the public
from the harmful effects of air pollution by annually
conducting 7,400 inspections of equipment at regulated
facilities for compliance with air pollution laws.
?? Collect valid ozone concentration data on at least 90%
of monitoring days in the year, thereby exceeding the
EPA standard of 75% valid samples.
?? Reduce mobile source air pollutant emissions by up to
350 tons by providing incentive grants to projects that
remove high polluting vehicles and engines from service.
?? Support the Juror Transit Pass program in cooperation
with SANDAG, MTS and the courts to reduce transportation-
related emissions resulting from jury duty by partially
funding the program.
?? Protect the health of the public by reducing exposure
to hazardous air pollutants by implementing the following
actions:
?? Test emissions from all natural gas fired reciprocating
internal combustion engines required to show
ongoing compliance with the National Emission
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants.
?? Maintain the capability to deploy an emergency
network of two fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
monitors within 48 hours of any wildfire and link the
instruments via satellite for real-time data delivery to
the public.
?? In coordination with affected industries, develop
training videos on how to comply with air pollution
control requirements.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Participate in LUEG’s Health in All Policies (HiAP) initiative
and help to develop metrics to evaluate baseline
and ongoing implementation of measures to build and
maintain healthy and safe communities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Provide excellent customer service by responding to
and investigating 100% of an estimated 540 annual air
pollution complaints from the public.
?? Provide excellent customer service by promptly reviewing
all Carl Moyer Program grant applications upon
receipt and notifying applicants within five business
days of any additional information that may be
required.
?? Develop customer service training program that
instructs staff on effective communication skills with
the regulated community by June 30, 2015.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Participate in meetings of the San Diego Regional
Clean Cities Coalition and related working groups to
promote the use of alternative fuels and alternative fuel
vehicles in the region.
?? Collaborate with the San Diego Foundation on its Climate
Initiative and help coordinate with government,
nonprofits, businesses, and consumers to advance
regional efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
?? Support public awareness and enhanced support of
reduction in emissions by recognizing local leaders in
reducing emissions.
?? Partner with San Diego EarthWorks on the VIP (Very
Important Planet) reception and the annual San Diego
APCD Clean Air Award hosted by the County of San
Diego, Third District.
?? Partner with the Industrial Environmental Association
(IEA) to provide the annual “IEA-APCD Blue Sky Leadership
Award” to three local businesses.
?? Create greater public awareness of the harmful impacts
of air pollution by participating in two public outreach
events and coordinating activities with events such as
the Earth Day fair.
?? Increase awareness of the Mobile Source Incentive
Program by participating in eight community outreach
events about APCD’s mobile source emission reduction
incentive programs and grant funding opportunities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Obtain inspection reports for 100% of the equipment
funded through the Carl Moyer Program and Goods
Movement Emission Reduction Program to ensure that
the new or upgraded equipment meets program specific
requirements to achieve emission reductions.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Reengineer and streamline the incentive grant application
process, moving from a largely paper-based system
to an electronic system using Accela Citizen
Access.
?? Provide assistance with air pollution rules and regulations
to the business community by creating two new
compliance assistance videos and posting them on the
APCD website.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Continue to work with the EPA and Baja California,
Mexico as the U.S. Co-Chair of the Border 2020 Emergency
Preparedness and Response Group for the San
Diego-Tijuana region to:
?? Coordinate and conduct binational emergency
training with the goal of ensuring that responders in
the region use the same equipment, procedures and
have the same training.
?? Integrate the Office of Emergency Services
Operational Area Emergency Operations Center and
the Tijuana Protection Civil’s Emergency Operations
Center into binational exercises.
?? Improve collaboration with federal, State, County and
city prosecutors, investigators and other regulatory
agencies to prosecute environmental crimes, both
locally and Statewide, by hosting hazardous waste task
force meetings, hosting joint hazardous waste operations
and emergency response training, and sending
two inspectors to the Advanced Environmental Crimes
Training Program (AECTP).
?? Develop a drought management plan for small drinking
water systems regulated by DEH to ensure procedures
are in place to maintain adequate supplies for water
system customers.
?? Provide three stakeholder workshops for the Voluntary
Assistance Program (VAP) to increase awareness on
the benefits of the program and how it will help expedite
future development of contaminated properties.
?? Provide two stakeholder workshops for the Environmental
Corrective Action Program (ECAP) which is a
program now delegated to DEH by the Department of
Toxic Substances Control to oversee the clean-up of
contaminated sites.
?? Provide two outreach events for the Beach Water Quality
Program to educate the public on the resources
available to determine the water quality at local
beaches prior to use.
?? Provide four workshops for the Local Agency Management
Program to educate our stakeholders on the new
standards and regulations for onsite wastewater treatment
systems.
?? DEH will continue to play an active role with the
County’s efforts to develop the Live Well San Diego
Thriving initiative.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Educate 8,000 children on awareness and protection
from mosquito-borne diseases and other vectorrelated
diseases, household hazardous waste/source
reduction, environmental health careers, and food and
pool safety by conducting outreach presentations to
primary and/or secondary school children at schools or
other outreach events throughout the year.
?? Trap rodents twice per year at port of entry sites where
freight from foreign origin is received by boat, airplane
or truck in order to conduct tests for plague and identify
flea species.
?? Trap at 60 locations and test captured mice (by taking
blood samples) for the presence of Hantavirus, a rare
pulmonary syndrome caused by the virus.
?? Inspect at least 75% of the 259 identified waste tire
sites in the Tire Enforcement Agency Inspection Work
Plan to ensure compliance and reduce illegal handling
and disposal of waste tires.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop a strategy for evaluating and controlling mosquito
breeding in storm drains.
?? Develop a graywater procedure manual to address
options for water conservation for drought relief and
provide guidance to residents of the unincorporated
areas of San Diego County.
?? Streamline the Temporary Event permit process to
leverage online information resources. Conduct a
workshop for event organizers and vendors with annual
permits to provide them with food safety education and
a sound understanding of the permitting process.
?? Develop an electronic Compliance Inspection Report
(CIR) to replace the existing report that no longer meets
staff requirements. This new CIR will streamline the
inspection paperwork processing time.
?? Complete development of a Virtual Unified Program
inspector training program. This training will allow for
supervised and unsupervised training in a virtual environment
to augment instructor-led and one-on-one
field inspector training.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer Service
?? Provide quality customer service by:
?? Completing the review of septic system layouts
within an average of 10 days.
?? Reviewing and responding to 100% of LOP reports
and work plans within 60 days.
?? Reviewing and processing 100% of monitoring well
permit applications within an average of 8 working
days.
?? Collaborating with the Southern Chapter of the
California Environmental Health Association to
conduct a public pool seminar for regulated
operators in 2015. The seminar will enhance
knowledge, resulting in better compliance for
operators and improved health protection for
bathers.
?? Maintaining average plan review times for new retail
food and public swimming pool projects at levels
that are 50% less than the State law requirement of
20 days.
?? Completing, reviewing and approving 95% of plans
and permits for installation, repair and removal of
Underground Storage Tanks (USTs) within 10
working days of receiving a complete application.
?? Providing three California Environmental Reporting
System (CERS) kiosks for facility owners and
operators throughout the County that need CERS
assistance or may not have access to a computer.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Create reporting tools for internal and external use.
Internal reports will be used for management and field
staff. External reports will be used for Certified Unified
Program Agency (CUPA) reporting requirements for
information not available in CERS.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Work collaboratively with County Fire Authority, Planning
and Development Services, Office of Emergency
Services and other County departments, regional fire
authorities, government agencies, university staff and
community groups to enhance wildfire-related
research. Disseminate information through a minimum
of four outreach activities.
?? Develop and maintain wildfire preparedness, prevention,
and rehabilitation information important to residents
of the county. Disseminate information through a
minimum of four outreach activities via the web, online
seminars or educational events.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Identify threats to water supply systems from pollution,
invasive species, and climate change to develop management
practices that aid growers in meeting the regulatory
requirements of federal, State and local laws
and that also consider the local climate, land use
issues and other resource constraints. Extend the findings
and information to residents through a minimum of
three outreach activities. Provide growers with concrete
ways they can mitigate water supply pollution.
?? Due to drought and ensuing water constraints, work
with the Departments of Agriculture, Weights and Measures,
Environmental Health, Public Works or other
Land Use and Environment Group (LUEG) departments
to evaluate the water needs of current and future crops
for San Diego County, agriculture water runoff and/or
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) impacts. Provide
water needs assessment results at a minimum of four
outreach activities and four visits to the agricultural
community. Provide residents and growers concrete
ways or methods to reduce water usage and/or
TMDL’s.
?? Riparian zones are instrumental in water quality
improvement for both surface runoff and water flowing
into streams through subsurface or groundwater flow.
Identify threats to aquatic and riparian ecosystems
from pollution, invasive species, and climate change.
Provide a minimum of three outreach activities to residents
and other collaborators providing concrete ways
to reduce these threats to riparian ecosystems.
?? Identify problems and potential solutions for endemic
and invasive pests such as insects, diseases, weeds
(Asian Citrus Psyllid, Gold Spotted Oak Borer, Phytophthora,
invasive grasses, etc.) impacting San Diego
agriculture, nursery, ornamental horticultural and landscapes.
Provide a minimum of four outreach activities
to nursery and ornamental horticulture growers, residents
and agricultural community members.
?? Identify problems and potential solutions in nursery and
floriculture industries on issues impacting production
and economic viability of these industries. Disseminate
information through a minimum of four outreach activities
to nursery and floricultural industry growers.
Conduct pruning research on high-density avocado
plantings in order for avocado production in San Diego
County to remain profitable for growers. Disseminate
information through a minimum of four outreach activities
to avocado producers in the county.
?? Evaluate crops such as pitahaya (dragon fruit), blueberries,
strawberries, Gold Nugget mandarins, etc. and
methods of production to improve production and viability
of these as commercial crops. Disseminate the
information through a minimum of four outreach activities
to small farm growers, rare fruit and other agriculture
growers in the county.
?? With assistance and/or input from other County departments
such as Agriculture, Weights and Measures,
begin a needs assessment to identify and develop
resources for sustainable urban farming.
?? Expand market opportunities for agricultural producers
in San Diego County through agricultural tourism,
direct marketing, and value added activities. Disseminate
information through a minimum of four outreach
activities to agricultural producers in the county.
?? Provide business and risk management education to
agricultural producers in areas such as financial management,
food safety, business management, etc.
Maintain the Ag in Uncertain Times website at
www.farmmanagement.org/aginuncertaintimes/,
devoted to providing current information to farmers and
ranchers about the challenges in today’s agricultural
economy. Disseminate information through a minimum
of two outreach activities to the agricultural community.
?? Maintain and manage the volunteer Master Gardener
program to provide research-based information in the
areas of home gardening, community gardening, landscaping,
water conversation, and pest management to
San Diego County residents, Agriculture, Weights and
Measures and other Land Use and Environment Group
departments. Provide a minimum of 400 office consultations,
10 educational exhibits and 4,000 hours of volunteer
service.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Conduct nutrition education for 500 low-income families
with children to reduce the risk of childhood obesity
and chronic diseases (such as diabetes, heart
disease, and high blood pressure) through lifestyle
change related to diet and physical activity.
?? Assess individuals and family behavioral changes by
collecting data on a minimum of 400 families related to
food resource management practices, nutrition and
food safety practices and positive dietary changes.
?? Assist families in achieving and maintaining financial
self-sufficiency through two outreach educational
activities to the residents of San Diego County about
household savings and debt reduction.
?? Recruit and train a minimum of 350 adult and teen 4-H
volunteers to deliver positive youth development experiences
through a minimum of four experiential learning
outreach activities.
?? Participate in the integration of LUEG’s Health in All
Policies (HiAP) initiative through the identification and
engagement of Countywide enterprise collaboration
opportunities.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Provide safe and accessible parks and preserves, foster
innovative programs and initiatives that promote
government agency partnerships and community
involvement, and enhance emergency communication
and preparedness.
?? Enhance the enjoyment and safety for children at
play by replacing playground equipment with new
features at two County parks.
?? In partnership with law enforcement, offer an inmate
services work program at parks for a minimum of
7,000 hours annually.
?? Create safer parks, preserves and recreation centers
by using more than 100,000 hours of volunteer
service to assist with park patrols, operations, and
maintenance.
?? Provide Certified Playground Safety Inspector
training to three DPR employees.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Acquire, develop and maintain facilities that support
and promote park stewardship and environmental sustainability
and efficiency.
?? Conserve irrigation water by installing smart irrigation
controllers at one County park.
?? Enhance recreation opportunities by improving
sports fields by installing new turf at two County
parks.
?? Acquire 500 acres within the MSCP plan areas that
will count toward the County’s commitment to the
MSCP Implementing Agreement.
?? Use Board Policy I-138, Mitigation on County-Owned
Land Managed by the Department of Parks and
Recreation to generate $40,000 of revenue for
acquisitions, operations and maintenance of MSCP
lands.
?? Install photovoltaic panels at one County park to
offset energy consumption and provide a clean
source of renewable energy.
?? Incorporate cultural, historical or environmental
interpretive components at two park facilities.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Develop and enhance the experiences of park patrons
and promote healthy lifestyles by increasing recreational
opportunities and educational programs.
?? Create additional recreational opportunities by
constructing exercise stations along two County
Park trails.
?? Promote healthy lifestyles for 2,000 adults and
seniors through participation in 60 recreation
programs and services that increase physical,
intellectual, social and/or emotional abilities.
?? Foster positive development of 6,500 youth through
180 recreation programs and services that increase
physical, intellectual, social and/or emotional
abilities.
?? Continue the participation and implementation of the
HiAP strategy by assessing and refining policies that
contribute to overall improvement in healthy lifestyles
for families at parks and recreational facilities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled Adaptable
Workforce
?? Train 50% of DPR staff on Live Well San Diego strategies.
?? Contribute to the “Team LUEG” efforts to implement
improvements including collaborative communication
across LUEG departments, improving customer service,
creating business process improvements and efficiencies
and effectively training staff.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Essential
Infrastructure
?? Manage the execution of parks-related capital projects
identified in the Capital Improvement Needs Assessment
as approved by the Board of Supervisors, in a
timely and cost effective manner. For more information
see the Capital Program section.
Guajome Regional Park Electrical, Water and Sewer:
This project consists of upgrading the park’s
electrical distribution system and to provide 50 amp
electrical service to accommodate present-day RVs.
Additionally, the project includes new sewer lines, RV
connections, conveyance systems, potable water
lines, drinking fountains and stabilization of utility
pedestals. Project cost of $1.5 million is budgeted in
the Capital Program.
?? Sweetwater Regional Photovoltaic System Phase II:
This project is for the installation of 98 additional
solar panels that will connect to the existing 250
kilowatt photovoltaic system. Project cost of $0.6
million is budgeted in the Capital Program.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and
improvements are designed and constructed in accordance
with building safety codes.
?? Review proposed building plans to ensure structures
are properly and safely designed.
?? Help customers navigate the building permit and
inspection process by explaining code requirements
and exploring options to achieve compliance.
?? Conduct building inspections during construction to
ensure structures are built in accordance with
approved building plans.
?? Improve community health and safety conditions
through elimination or securing dilapidated buildings
and improving substandard housing conditions.
?? Respond to the public within 24 hours of receiving
code complaints.
?? Resolve complaints regarding unpermitted or
dangerous structures.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Protect the environment and preserve community character
through the efficient application of planning, engineering,
and environmental regulations in the
management of land development permit applications
for discretionary projects.
?? Continue implementation of the PACE program,
which supports the local agriculture industry and the
preservation of community character.
?? Extend easement contract offers to the 15 remaining
program properties.
?? Develop for Board of Supervisors’ consideration a
mechanism that would allow easement land acquired
under the PACE program to be utilized as off-site
mitigation for agricultural impacts resulting from
private development.
?? Improve the efficiency of land use programs that guide
the physical development of the County’s land through
a balance of growth and conservation while collaborating
with communities.
?? Present for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration a
Comprehensive Renewable Energy Plan (CREP) by
summer 2015. The CREP will explore opportunities
for a more comprehensive approach to increasing
renewable energy use, reducing costs for
consumers, and minimizing impacts to the
community and its resources.
?? Complete public review of the North County Multiple
Species Conservation Program (MSCP) text and
environmental document by April 2016.
?? Present for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration a
Form-Based Zoning Code for the Valley Center
South Village by summer 2015. Similar to the Zoning
Ordinance, the Form-Based Codes will include
provisions on allowed uses, setbacks, height and
information on development process. The new codes
will also provide detailed architectural and
landscaping requirements and information to
applicants on required street and trail improvements.
?? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency
through streamlined permit processing.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Enhance integration of the Land Use and Environment
Group’s Health in All Policies (HiAP) initiatives through
identification and engagement of Countywide enterprise
threading opportunities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure effective and efficient management of discretionary
project applications from submittal to final decision
through the use of proactive project and case
management resources.
?? Ensure ongoing customer and stakeholder engagement
through proactive outreach, regular stakeholder
and industry group meetings, and continuous communication
through a variety of formats.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Manage workload and staffing levels by balancing
housing market fluctuations with fiscal and customer
service stability through the appropriate deployment of
resources.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Implement the PDS Workforce Development Program
to cultivate, retain, and attract a workforce that has the
skills, talent, and commitment to achieve organizational
excellence.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Expand the development of project management tools
to improve case and project management within the
department.
?? Conduct an analysis of the building permit pre-review
process to identify and implement improvements to
reduce customer wait and transaction times, while
ensuring continued quality review.
?? Expand online services to reduce transaction times and
the need for customers to visit a County office.
?? Increase the number of permit types offered online.
?? Develop an online tool for customers to renew
existing permits online.
?? For those permit types that require visiting a County
office, develop an online tool that will allow
customers to complete the application online,
reducing time they must spend at the County office
while the plans are reviewed.
?? Develop a 311 style mobile application for the public to
file certain complaints for Code Compliance cases.
?? Continue to develop the continuous improvement program
and create a database of concise “case studies”
that describes best practices that led to the success of
a particular project and the lessons learned.
?? Update the annual Advance Planning Work Program by
June 2015, to prioritize the deployment of resources for
Advance Planning projects that streamline and update
County policies and ordinances related to land development.
?? Develop a performance management program, including
establishment of meaningful performance measures
to maintain the discipline of monitoring and
tracking performance in the areas of Customer Service,
Project Management, and other PDS business operations.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Upgrade the Planning & Development Services public
facing website in accordance with the Countywide
enterprise website transition. This upgrade will
enhance the overall customer experience and usefulness
of the website.
?? Implement the Business Case Management System
(BCMS) upgrade in accordance with the Land Use and
Environment Group BCMS upgrade project.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Facilitate at least one training for federal agency staff
and local aviation community members on foreign flight
student vetting and screening requirements.
?? Flood Control staff will assist communities to prepare
and respond to flood events by inspecting 75% of
flood control facilities annually and maintaining County
flood control facilities to their design capacities by
removing debris from clogged or blocked facilities.
?? Protect public health and the environment by minimizing
the risk of sanitary sewer spills.
?? Clean 390 miles of sanitary sewer collector mains
within the sanitary sewer system.
?? Inspect 20 miles of targeted sewer mains within the
sewer system to identify sewer defects and facilitate
proactive repairs to infrastructure.
?? Start construction on major upgrades to the Rancho
San Diego wastewater pump station.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Protect a sustainable watershed by improving the
health of local waters and minimizing downstream pollutants.
?? Conduct inspections of local commercial areas to
educate local business operators to comply with
stormwater requirements.
?? Provide water quality and watershed education by
conducting 150 presentations to high school
students at 90% of public high schools in the
unincorporated area of the county as part of a longterm
strategy for achieving positive behavioral
changes.
?? Conduct outreach to residents with information and
resources on stormwater pollution prevention at 15
community events throughout the unincorporated
area of the county.
?? Perform stormwater inspections during the
construction phase on private development projects
to ensure compliance with State requirements and
reduce erosion.
?? Monitor 50% of major stormwater outfalls by June
2016 to assess the health of watersheds by
conducting a comprehensive monitoring program.
?? Transportation road crews will remove 25,000 cubic
yards of debris from culverts, drainage channels and
roads through a systematic cleaning program to
keep the debris from entering county waterways.
?? Sweep 16,200 lane-miles of roadway to clean debris
from road surfaces.
?? Manage solid waste and oil generated in the unincorporated
area of the county to maximize the amount of
waste diverted from landfills.
?? Complete 10 oil collection and outreach events to
recycle 75,000 gallons of used oil and 18,000 used
oil filters.
?? Assist 100 businesses and 60 multifamily complexes
in initiating recycling programs.
?? Provide education about recycling programs and
benefits of recycling to 55 classrooms.
?? Promote the County’s recycling hotline and database
to achieve at least 5,000 inquiries from the public.
?? Provide residential composting education at nine
workshops, one community event and three schools
in the unincorporated area of the county. Install one
new composting demonstration site.
?? Add information on 65 recycling centers/events to
the recycling database at www.wastefreesd.org.
?? Provide Recycling Market Development Zone
assistance to 10 businesses. Work collaboratively
with applicable jurisdictions to provide assistance in
siting and permitting of recycling sites.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Repaint and or use thermoplastic to re-mark crosswalks
and roadway legends adjacent to 121 public
school and 12 private school locations in the unincorporated
area of the county. Thermoplastic will be introduced
at some schools sites to minimize the need for
annual repainting.
Work with school administrators to analyze, identify
and implement school zone improvements for pedestrians,
bicyclists, buses and automobiles at 12 schools,
or 9% of all public and private schools in the unincorporated
area of the county.
?? Working within multiple communities, develop a walkability
study to support Live Well San Diego’s Thriving
initiative and LUEG’s Health in All Policies (HiAP) strategy
to pursue programs that make it easier for people
to engage in physical activities in their community.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Reduce the delivery cost of repaving streets in the
unincorporated area by 10% within the next two
years. Delivery costs do not include the cost of materials,
since the department cannot control the cost of the
asphalt paving materials, but DPW can take actions to
control costs for getting those materials installed on
County roads. Reducing costs will benefit the region by
enabling the department to stretch existing dollars
even further, thereby enabling additional lane-miles to
be paved.
?? Seek to reduce costs associated with permits required
as part of running the closed landfill program by partnering
with regulators to evaluate the true risks to the
environment associated with the closed landfills.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Build a stronger relationship with the Regional Water
Quality Control Board (RWQCB) and provide crosstraining
opportunities for staff from the RWQCB, other
jurisdictions, industry and the County to learn and
understand the complex regulations governing clean
water.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement a new Airport Lease Management System
(ALMS), using BCMS, to track County airport leases
and other contracts to replace the current lease management
system, which will no longer be supported.
?? Conduct at least one additional public workshop and
two user group advisory committee meetings to solicit
input on the development of a new 20-year Master Plan
for McClellan-Palomar Airport to determine plans and
priorities for the future of this airport.
?? Replace 2,000 of the County’s existing 6,500 High
Pressure Sodium street lights with energy efficient LED
street lights, which is projected to result in a 60%
reduction in energy use as well as reduced maintenance
costs. There should also be a decrease in greenhouse
gas emissions, aiding with sustaining the
environment. The retrofit will be financed through a 1%
loan from the California Energy Commission, which will
be repaid with savings achieved by the retrofit.
Community Services Group activities over the next two
years will continue to support departments’ efforts toward
becoming world class organizations. These objectives are
dedicated to internal and external customer service, and
maintaining a culture of accountability and transparency in
the use of public resources. Detailed departmental objectives
are on the following pages, and many of them support
public access to County services, either in person,
through additions and improvements to County facilities,
or virtual access, through enhancements to online services.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Maintain the planned schedule of library operations.
?? Provide virtual library services that are available and
relevant such as e-books, audio downloads, video
downloads and access to premium databases.
?? Increase the number of permanent vote-by-mail voters.
?? Continue to recruit and replace non-accessible poll
sites to comply with federal and State accessibility
requirements.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Make contracts available through the internet to the
public by posting at least 90% of new and amended
contracts within five business days of award.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Essential
Infrastructure
?? Complete the master plan for capital improvements to
the animal shelter in Bonita.
?? Begin design-build construction of the new libraries in
Alpine and Imperial Beach.
?? Continue due diligence for donated property, planning,
and design for new Borrego Springs Library.
?? Complete construction of the Cedar and Kettner Development
Parking Structure in summer 2015.
?? Initiate replacement/renewal projects with the Health
and Human Services Agency for key Family Resource
Centers and Levant Adoptions Center.
?? Assess and improve accessibility in County facilities.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Install a 24/7 Library-To-Go kiosk to provide library services
to remote areas currently without library services;
examine the viability and feasibility of rolling out these
devices to other potential locations.
?? Update the Library’s website to maximize customer
usability and access to self-published e-materials and
publishers’ e-book catalogs.
?? Provide enhanced customer service by sharing/
disseminating information on the Housing Choice
Voucher (HCV) program information via the HCD website,
emails, videos, social media and/or Quick
Response (QR) barcodes.
In addition, departments will continue to support the Live
Well San Diego initiatives through a variety of programs:
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Maintain the current levels of services by offering an
average of 300 after-school programs each month, to
offer students and families a safe place for the pursuit
of education and constructive civic engagement in
support of the County’s Live Well San Diego Living
Safely initiative.
?? In support of the County’s Live Well San Diego Living
Safely initiative, expand the use of social media to educate
the public and increase awareness of various
issues such as animal safety, neglect and disaster preparedness
by posting quarterly educational bulletins on
the DAS Facebook page and website.
?? Support the Live Well San Diego Building Better Health
initiative by funding 30 public community projects for
parks, street/sidewalk improvements, American with
Disabilities Act (ADA) improvements, firefighting equipment,
public services, community, youth and family
centers, health clinics, and affordable housing activities
to promote wellness and enhance the quality of life in
San Diego County neighborhoods.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Support the County of San Diego’s Live Well San Diego
Building Better Health initiative by offering more than
200 healthy lifestyle library programs for all ages every
month.
?? Support the Live Well San Diego Building Better Health
initiative, by funding the continuation of the HOME
Tenant-based Rental Assistance programs that serve
up to 65 youth aging-out of the foster care system and
44 families with children that are participants of the
County’s substance abuse recovery and family reunification
programs.
?? Continue to distribute information in support of the
County’s Live Well San Diego Building Better Health
and Living Safely strategies using “filler” pages printed
in the Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets provided to all registered voters for the November 2014
Gubernatorial General and June 2016 Presidential Primary
elections.
?? The Community Services Group is also working with
the Land Use and Environment Group to develop the
third component of Live Well San Diego, the Thriving
initiative, which will be launched during fiscal year
2014–15.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Achieve goal of 0% euthanasia of any healthy, friendly
animal by reuniting lost pets with their owner or
through adoption to a new family.
?? Promote community safety and injury prevention by
conducting a minimum of 80 dog bite prevention presentations
to area schools and other organizations that
encounter dogs during normal operations.
?? Respond to 94.4% of patrol calls on time according to
DAS protocols for responding to various levels of priority
calls.
?? Conduct eight classes for the Responsible Pet Ownership
program to teach responsible pet ownership to
animal law violators and to reduce the burden on the
court system.
?? Inform and educate county residents on emergency
preparedness for their pets and themselves to help
ensure they are protected in case of an emergency.
?? Participate in four Community Emergency Response
Team (CERT) meetings per year.
?? Conduct ten presentations to community groups.
?? Enhance children’s awareness of animal welfare issues
and promote the humane treatment of animals through
participation in a joint facility tour and education program
with the San Diego Humane Society, and by cohosting
a minimum of 12 classroom or youth group visits
per year to the Campus for Animal Care or other
County animal shelters. These educational endeavors
will help ensure that both animals and people are protected
from neglect and abuse, promoting safe communities.
?? In support of the County’s Live Well San Diego Living
Safely initiative, expand the use of social media to educate
the public and increase awareness of various issues such as animal safety, neglect and disaster preparedness
by posting quarterly educational bulletins on
the DAS Facebook page and website.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Assist young people in developing job skills that will
help them become thriving, self-sufficient adults
through providing job training for at least one participant
each in the County’s Workforce Academy for
Youth, the Animal Health Technology Program at Mesa
College, the PIMA Medical Institute, and ROP programs
from various schools in the county.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services
by being responsive to customers’ needs, professional,
courteous, attentive and knowledgeable; achieve a
customer satisfaction rating of 4.72 or higher (on a
scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”).
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Work with the Pets for Patriots organization to place
pets in forever homes with veterans who participate in
this program. The goal is to place ten animals through
the Pets for Patriots’ program.
?? Make eight presentations per year to community or
industry groups describing DAS services, disaster preparedness,
animal health and welfare issues, cruelty
investigations and/or new animal-related legislation.
?? Submit at least three articles to trade journals or community
publications to highlight DAS services, animal
health and welfare issues, and dog bite prevention and/
or adoption opportunities.
?? Provide at least 24 dog bite prevention presentations
per year for County departments and local area companies
to promote the safety of employees who may
encounter dogs in the scope of their duties (e.g.,
SDG&E and the U.S. Postal Service).
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Continue to seek qualified diverse applicants by
attending four job fairs and advertising positions in
periodicals targeted to minority populations in order to
fill positions as needed.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? DAS strives to continuously improve the plight and welfare
of the animals in its care through best practices,
innovation and creative strategies. To fulfill its mission
and provide maximum service and value to the community,
DAS focuses on the following key objectives:
?? Ensure at least 71.4% of an estimated 26,000
sheltered dogs and cats are reunited with their owner
or adopted into a new home.
?? Ensure no more than 12.9% of treatable animals are
euthanized by providing medical care when
resources allow and placing animals with rescue
partners or adopters.
?? Ensure that 100% of staff are trained in the resources
available to members of the public for animals with
treatable medical and behavioral issues, including
those organizations which provide financial assistance
to people facing a hardship in caring for their animal(s).
?? Ensure that staff contact rescue groups on 100% of
animals with a treatable medical or behavioral issue
prior to euthanasia.
?? Develop and implement at least two business process
reengineering improvements that reduce costs or
enhance customer service, productivity or revenue by
June 30, 2015.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Essential
Infrastructure
?? Complete the master plan for capital improvements to
the animal shelter in Bonita.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Maintain the current levels of services by offering an
average of 300 after-school programs each month, to
offer students and families a safe place for the pursuit
of education and constructive civic engagement in
support of the County’s Live Well San Diego Living
Safely initiative.
?? Continue the mentorship program for at-risk teen boys
at two library branches incorporating technology and
reading, and sustain a participation rate of 20% out of
24 participants.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environment
?? Meet the informational, recreational and cultural needs
of the community and actively promote reading and
lifelong learning by ensuring the public has access to
library resources and services and that the SDCL has
the capacity to meet these goals.
?? Maintain the planned schedule of library operations.
?? Provide virtual library services that are available and
relevant such as e-books, audio downloads, video
downloads and access to premium databases.
?? Ensure that collections, materials and programs are
current and relevant to meeting the needs and interests
of a dynamic community.
?? Meet the planned annual average circulation per
item.
?? Maintain participation in adult programs that
promote lifelong learning and civic engagement by
serving 100,000 participants.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Support the County of San Diego’s Live Well San Diego
Building Better Health initiative by offering more than
200 healthy lifestyle programs for all ages every month.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services
by being responsive to customers’ needs, professional,
courteous, attentive and knowledgeable. Achieve an
average customer satisfaction rating of 4.60 or higher
(on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”).
?? Ensure customers are provided with quality programs
that are current, relevant, and engaging. Achieve an
average customer satisfaction rating of 4.75 or higher
(on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”) for SDCL
programs.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Improve County operations through sustainability
efforts such as energy conservation, alternative energy
generation systems, green building design and recycling.
?? Reduce annual building energy use by 6%,
comparing Fiscal Year 2014–15 to a Fiscal Year
2011–12 baseline.
?? Prepare greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories of County
operations for calendar years 2014 and 2015.
Achieve a 1% reduction in total greenhouse gas
emissions each year compared to the prior calendar
year.
?? Achieve 1% vehicle emission reduction in calendar
year 2014 for on- and off-road diesel vehicles and
stationary diesel equipment in accordance with
California Air Resources Board requirements, by
replacing or retrofitting older higher-emission
vehicles.
?? Incorporate the strategies of the Green Fleet Action
plan into the annual vehicle replacement planning
process to reduce the County’s vehicle related
greenhouse gas emissions.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Support client departments in their public safety
efforts.
?? Maintain availability of County-supported fire
apparatus at 91%.
?? Ensure maximum availability of law enforcement
patrol vehicles at 95%.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Essential
Infrastructure
?? Provide time-critical (24/7) maintenance response to
emergency requests involving life and safety issues or
those posing an imminent risk to County assets and
infrastructure, by responding to and initiating corrective
action for 100% of all emergency requests within 4
hours of notification.
?? Complete 96% of targeted preventive maintenance
activities to maximize the operational efficiency of
County assets/infrastructure, as well as maintain or
prolong the design life of these systems.
?? Complete construction of the new Boulevard Fire Station
by spring 2015.
?? By fall 2014, prepare a proposal for review by the Facilities
Planning Board for the interim and permanent relocation
of the justice system support departments that
are not included in the new State Courthouse and will
be displaced by demolition of the old courthouse or are
in leased space. The plan will assist in strategically
placing these departments around the new State
Courthouse once construction is completed.
?? Begin design-build construction of the new Alpine
Library as the first Zero Net Energy County building, for
completion in winter 2015–16. Zero Net Energy is a
building with zero net energy consumption, meaning
the total amount of energy used by the building on an
annual basis is equal to the amount of renewable
energy created at the facility.
?? Continue construction of the new Imperial Beach
Library, targeted for completion in summer 2016.
?? Continue due diligence for donated property, planning
and design for a new Borrego Springs Library.
?? Demolish the existing Las Colinas Women’s Detention
Facility by fall 2014 and begin Phase 2 construction of
the new San Diego County Women’s Detention and
Reentry Facility for completion in January 2016.
?? Complete construction of the Cedar and Kettner Development
Parking Structure in summer 2015.
?? Initiate replacement/renewal projects with the Health
and Human Services Agency for key Family Resource
Centers and Levant Adoptions Center.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Complete 96% of vehicle and mobile equipment preventative
maintenance actions to maximize the operational
effectiveness of County vehicles.
?? Maximize postage discounts by bar coding a minimum
of 95% of all standard business letters.
Monitor leases on County-owned property ensuring
that rents are paid within 30 days of due date for 97%
of the leases.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Provide $68,000 for HHSA’s Hotel/Motel Voucher Program
to help close the ongoing gap in funding for
emergency housing for homeless families in the
County. The Regional Cold Weather Shelter Voucher
Program provides emergency shelter through the issuance
of hotel vouchers for homeless families, disabled
and elderly individuals.
?? Support the Live Well San Diego Building Better Health
initiative, by funding the continuation of the HOME Tenant-
based Rental Assistance programs that serve up to
65 youth aging-out of the foster care system and 44
families with children that are participants of the
County’s substance abuse recovery and family reunification
programs.
?? Provide 18 competitive academic scholarships annually
to heads of household and/or their children who
have established five-year family self-sufficiency goals
in academic or vocational self-sufficiency or who reside
in Public Housing.
?? Promote self-sufficiency by providing permanent housing
for up to 200 eligible homeless families graduating
from transitional housing programs provided by 11
homeless service agencies through the County’s Continuum
of Care program. All eligible homeless families
referred by the 11 agencies will be assisted until the
housing funding allocation is fully expended.
?? Assist families to secure safe, decent and affordable
housing through rental assistance subsidies by using
100% of the anticipated annual funding allocation of
$103.5 million or issue up to 10,756 vouchers to provide
a nurturing and healthy environment while improving
opportunities for children and adults in support of
the Live Well San Diego Building Better Health initiative.
?? Provide rental assistance to permanently house up to
345 homeless veterans through the VASH program.
Utilization of these vouchers is dependent upon HCD
receiving referrals from the VA.
?? Increase the number of participants receiving VASH
security and utility deposit assistance funded through
the Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) funds to ten total
participants, to allow recipients and their families’
access to permanent housing.
?? Provide safe and decent housing opportunities to up to
20 low-income families participating in the Redevelopment
Local Rental Subsidy Program and ensure that
assisted units meet Housing Quality Standards through
annual recertification inspections.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Ensure environmental reviews are performed on 100%
(59 projects) of federally funded programs included in
the Fiscal Year 2014–15 Annual Funding Plans. In
keeping with County policy of functional threading,
environmental reviews will be conducted by the
Department of Public Works. In compliance with HUD
regulations, HCD will ensure environmental reviews will
be completed on all program projects in order to analyze
the effect a proposed project will have on the people
and the natural environment within a designated
project area and the effect the material and social environment
may have on a project.
?? Based on the recently completed Energy Roadmap,
implement two energy efficiency measures at the five
Housing Authority-owned residential properties (e.g.,
replace incandescent bulbs with compact fluorescent
lamps, and install low flow kitchen faucets or faucet
aerators).
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Educate the community by conducting a minimum of
four community outreach meetings throughout the
county regarding affordable housing and community
revitalization funding opportunities available annually
through four federal entitlement programs: Community
Development Block Grant, HOME Investment Partnership
Program, Emergency Solutions Grant and Housing
Opportunities for Persons with AIDS.
Address issues impacting community living standards
by conducting ten community revitalization meetings
with policymakers and stakeholders.
?? Promote fair housing by completing a minimum of 40
random site tests on multifamily rental properties to
ensure compliance with fair housing laws.
?? Provide First-Time Homebuyer assistance or Home
Repair assistance to at least 35 households.
?? Support the Live Well San Diego Building Better Health
initiative by funding 30 public community projects for
parks, street/sidewalk improvements, American with
Disabilities Act (ADA) improvements, firefighting equipment,
public services, community, youth and family
centers, health clinics, and affordable housing activities
to promote wellness and enhance the quality of life in
San Diego County neighborhoods.
?? Inspect 100% of up to 11,147 units that are leased
through the Rental Assistance Division and ensure that
these units are decent, safe and sanitary by meeting
Housing Quality Standards required by HUD.
?? Promote Crime-Free communities by collaborating with
local police departments and renewing annual Crime-
Free certificates at the five Housing Authority-owned
residential properties.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Hold four Section 8 owner/landlord seminars to continue
to educate owners on the requirements of the
program, as well as promoting the benefits of participating
in the program.
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services
by being responsive to customers’ needs, professional,
courteous, attentive and knowledgeable. A key indicator
of how well service is provided will be achievement
of a customer service satisfaction rating or 4.7 or better
(on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”).
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Participate in three State and/or local housing industry
organizations and/or provide three presentations to relevant
groups/events.
?? Provide regional leadership and forge cooperative partnerships
by leveraging resources through the design,
implementation, and administration of a regional
HOME Consortium First-Time Homebuyer Assistance
program serving residents of the unincorporated areas
of the County of San Diego and the cities of Carlsbad,
Encinitas, La Mesa, Santee, San Marcos, and Vista.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Provide enhanced customer service by sharing/disseminating
information on the Housing Choice Voucher
(HCV) program information via the HCD website,
emails, videos, social media and/or Quick Response
(QR) barcodes.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement at least one improved process to help
increase the departments’ ability to recover monies
from former and active program participants.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Two Tenant Commissioners who serve on the Housing
Authority of the County of San Diego (HACSD) Board of
Commissioners will complete biennial ethics training in
Fiscal Year 2015–16.
?? Participate in a public education campaign to heighten
awareness about ethical standards and program integrity
in the Housing Choice Voucher (Section 8) program
to increase potential fraud reports by 10% or 50 (10%
of 500).

Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure departments’ records retention schedules due
for revision in Fiscal Years 2014–15 and 2015–16 are
processed and finalized in compliance with County
policy.
?? Research availability of a Contracts Award & Management
System (CAMS).
?? Initiate and complete the needs assessment and
requirements review of a potential CAMS.
?? Perform market research and availability of a
commercial off-the-shelf CAMS.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Provide training for at least 50 County staff in accessing
and interpreting purchasing-related fiscal data in
Oracle in order to more effectively manage contracts
and budgets.
?? Provide annual, individualized training to all County
departments to ensure implementation of required
operational practices related to records and content
management.
?? Develop and deliver DPC Procurement Academy workshop
to departments within each Group.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Make contracts available through the internet to the
public by posting at least 90% of new and amended
contracts within five business days of award.
?? Conduct “house calls” to all County departments that
have a records retention schedule to ensure departments’
understanding of the County’s records retention
policies and procedures and their responsibilities; and
ensure they have the necessary staff skills and tools to
comply with the County’s Records Management Program.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Compete for a new top tier national industry excellence
award for DPC’s leadership and implementation of
world class procurement and contracting approaches:
?? Initiate and complete review of award criteria and
department gap assessment.
?? Perform industry and market research for options to
fill gaps.
?? Plan, schedule and prioritize improvements.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency, and Ethical Conduct
?? Expeditiously wind down the affairs of the former
County Redevelopment Agency, maintaining compliance
with all laws.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Continue to distribute information in support of the
County’s Live Well San Diego Building Better Health
and Living Safely strategies using “filler” pages printed
in the Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets
provided to all registered voters for the November 2014
Gubernatorial General and June 2016 Presidential Primary
elections.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Continue to distribute information on how to reduce
environmental risks using “filler” pages printed in the
Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets provided
to all registered voters for the November 2014
Gubernatorial General and June 2016 Presidential Primary
elections.
?? Conserve resources by printing the Sample Ballot and
Voter Information Pamphlets on paper containing as
much as 25% post-consumer recycled paper for all
elections conducted in Fiscal Years 2014–16 and refer
military and overseas voters to an online version of
their Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets.
?? Increase the number of permanent vote-by-mail voters
by 3% (or 25,257), for a total of 867,168, for the
November 2014 Gubernatorial General Election and by
an additional 5% (or 43,358), for a total of 910,526, for
the June 2016 Presidential Primary Election, based on
the anticipated number of permanent vote-by-mail voters
(841,911) for the June 3, 2014 Gubernatorial Primary
Election.
?? Continue to recruit and replace non-accessible poll
sites to comply with federal and State accessibility
requirements:
Increase the number of accessible poll sites for the
November 2014 Gubernatorial General Election by
4% (or 28), for a total of 731, based on the
anticipated number of sites for the June 3, 2014
Gubernatorial Primary Election of 703.
?? Increase the number of accessible poll sites for the
June 2016 Presidential Primary Election by 7% (or
51), for a total of 782, based on the anticipated
number of sites for the November 2014
Gubernatorial General Election of 731.
?? Engage the community in the electoral process and
ensure polling sites are sufficiently staffed with qualified
personnel for the November 2014 Gubernatorial
General and June 2016 Presidential Primary elections
by meeting the planned recruitment goals for poll workers.
?? Process 100% of valid registrations received on or
before the 15-day close of registration by the 7th day
before the November 2014 Gubernatorial General and
June 2016 Presidential Primary elections to ensure eligible
registrants are printed in the official roster of voters
and therefore have the opportunity to vote using a
regular ballot, rather than a provisional ballot.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure customer satisfaction with core services by
maintaining a 4.7 or better overall customer satisfaction
rating (on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”)
through the June 2016 Presidential Primary
Election.
?? To encourage overall satisfaction and retention of volunteers,
timely mailing all poll worker stipends in 15
working days or less from Election Day for all elections
in Fiscal Years 2014–16.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Ensure 100% of poll worker trainers complete online
training assessments with scores of 90% or higher no
later than 26 days prior to the November 2014 Gubernatorial
General and June 2016 Presidential Primary
elections, providing knowledgeable instructors who are
available and prepared to train poll workers.
?? In addition to assigning bilingual poll workers to fill
100% of the federally required language allocation
(Chinese, Filipino, Spanish and Vietnamese), a sufficient
number of bilingual poll workers will also be
recruited to fulfill 100% of the additional State language
requirement (Japanese, Hindi, Khmer and
Korean), in accordance with department allocations.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Tally 49% (710 of 1,452) of precincts for the November
2014 Gubernatorial General and 63% (860 of 1,365) of
precincts for the June 2016 Presidential Primary elections
by 11:30 pm on Election Night.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Continue to enhance the processing efficiency of voteby-
mail ballots by maintaining an automated mail ballot
processing system to screen, scan, sort, verify signatures
and open returned mail ballot envelopes, and by
verifying and reconciling ballots returned and counted.
?? Report 85% of eligible mail ballots (those received by
the ROV by the Sunday before Election Day) in the
first Election Night Results Bulletin released shortly
after 8:00 pm for the November 2014 Gubernatorial
General and June 2016 Presidential Primary
elections.
?? Report 33% or more of all ballots cast in the first
Election Night Results Bulletin for the November
2014 Gubernatorial General and June 2016
Presidential Primary elections.
?? Tally 90% of all mail ballots received by the ROV by
Monday after Election Day for the November 2014
Gubernatorial General and June 2016 Presidential
Primary elections.
?? Maintain a per-mail-ballot labor cost for vote-by-mail
ballots returned in the November 2014 Gubernatorial
General and June 2016 Presidential Primary
elections.
?? Offer new online filing services, including online candidate
filing and online campaign financial disclosure filing.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Begin multi-year phased restoration and preservation
project for historical recorded documents. Phase I will
preserve the old microfilm and ensure its survival for
future generations. This project will begin in Fiscal Year
2014–15 and anticipated completion in Fiscal Year
2016–17. Phase II will restore and preserve historical
recorded documents and maps. This project is a three
to five year effort and is estimated to be complete in
Fiscal Year 2018–19.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Upgrade the County’s Kronos employee timekeeping
application. The Kronos 7.0 upgrade initiative will provide
County users with a more supportable timekeeping
platform and enhanced functional capabilities such
as the ability to perform time management tasks on
their mobile devices.
?? Modernize and rebuild the County’s Active Directory
domain (a repository of County users or accounts that
have access to the network) by updating architecture,
migrating accounts, integrating existing services (e.g.,
SharePoint and Virtual Private Network), and converting
accounts to agreed identification naming standards.
?? The County Technology Office, Assessor/Recorder/
County Clerk, Auditor & Controller and the Treasurer-
Tax Collector will continue the design and development
of the Integrated Property Tax System (IPTS), which will
significantly improve property assessment, tax collection
and apportionment activities in the County. The
new system is scheduled for implementation in January
2016.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain a collection rate of 98% for secured taxes and
97% for unsecured taxes by preparing and mailing
property tax bills/notices, and processing tax payments
in a timely manner to ensure timely revenue collection
on behalf of San Diego County’s taxpayers.
?? Resolve 80% or more of all lawsuits against the County
by a court decision/dismissal, and resolve 20% or less
by settlement.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Review and update 545 classification specifications as
part of the Classification Modernization Project by June
30, 2016.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Foster an environment of excellence, innovation and
exceptional customer service among County employees
who serve the public through the County’s intranet
site, posting 140 content items (article or video) in support
of the Strategic Initiatives and Required Disciplines
for Excellence during Fiscal Year 2014–15, and
another 150 during Fiscal Year 2015–16.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Provide open access to County business by making
audio recordings of all Board of Supervisors meetings
available on the Internet within three days of the related
meeting.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Record property ownership in a timely manner, facilitating
access to ownership information for the buying,
selling and financing of property.
?? Locate, identify and appraise all property so the public
and businesses are assured a fair and uniform assessment
of their property under the auspices of all applicable
State property tax laws, rules and regulations.
?? Record births, deaths, marriages and Fictitious Business
Name statements in a timely manner to enable the
public and businesses to establish identity in order to
conduct their affairs.
?? Complete Birth, Death and Marriage Backfile Imaging
Project to electronically preserve critical recorded documents
and vital records. Project completion anticipated
in Fiscal Year 2014–15.
?? Complete the redaction of identity information from
documents recorded during the period 1990 through
2008. Completion of project will ensure compliance
with Government Code 27301a to truncate social security
numbers from documents recorded during the
period 1990 through 2008.
?? Begin multi-year phased restoration and preservation
project for historical recorded documents. Phase I will
preserve the old microfilm and ensure its survival for
future generations. This project will begin in Fiscal Year
2014–15 and anticipated completion in Fiscal Year
2016–17. Phase II will restore and preserve historical
recorded documents and maps. This project is a three
to five year effort and is estimated to be complete in
Fiscal Year 2018–19.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Collect, distribute and account for all mandated fees
and transfer taxes to ensure County departments, federal
and State agencies, cities and special districts can
fulfill their legal obligations.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Implementation of the new integrated recording and
vital records system is scheduled to occur in Fiscal
Year 2014–15. This will allow the ARCC to leverage
necessary new technologies in order to improve
recording services to residents.
?? Implementation of the electronic recording module that
will allow the department to electronically accept
recorded documents, in addition to reducing document
processing time and enhance customer service. System
implementation is dependent on the integrated
recording and vital records system and is expected to
be implemented in Fiscal Year 2014–15.
?? In coordination with the Auditor & Controller, Treasurer-
Tax Collector and the County Technology Office, continue
the design and development of the Integrated
Property Tax System (IPTS), which will significantly
improve property assessment, tax collection and
apportionment activities in the County. The new system
is scheduled for implementation in January 2016.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Provide the public with services that are of value to
them in a competent and professional manner by
achieving a customer service rating of at least 93%.
?? Maintain excellent customer service by ensuring that at
least 50% of new departmental staff complete the customer
service training program initiated by ARCC
before June 30, 2015.
?? Provide the public with a variety of online forms for
submittal and related services. This will provide a more
efficient and effective level of customer service by
leveraging the latest in online form processing and
electronic signature technology.
?? Extend customer services at the Chula Vista and
Kearny Mesa branch offices; document recording services
to be offered following implementation of electronic
recording in Fiscal Year 2014–15.
Treasury
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? To safeguard public funds and maintain public trust,
Treasurer-Tax Collector will efficiently manage the provisions
of banking services for public entities and
County departments. The Treasurer-Tax Collector will
also provide accurate recording of all funds on deposit
and facilitate daily reconciliation of funds.
?? To continue to fund the delivery of superior services
throughout the San Diego County region, the Treasurer-
Tax Collector will invest public monies held in the Treasury
and maximize cash resources, without sacrificing
the principles of safety or liquidity, for an anticipated
weighted average rate of return of 0.40% in Fiscal Year
2014–15 and 0.45% in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
Tax Collection
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain a collection rate of 98% for secured taxes and
97% for unsecured taxes by preparing and mailing
property tax bills/notices, and processing tax payments
in a timely manner to ensure timely revenue collection
on behalf of San Diego County’s taxpayers.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? In coordination with the Assessor/Recorder/County
Clerk, Auditor & Controller and the County Technology
Office, continue the design and development of the
IPTS, which will significantly improve property assessment,
tax collection and apportionment activities in the
County. The new system is scheduled for implementation
in January 2016.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Achieve a customer satisfaction rating of 4.7 on a 5.0
scale, based on formal Customer Satisfaction Survey
results.
Deferred Compensation
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Broaden the Countywide base of employees who are
planning for financial security during retirement by the
following measures:
?? Increase enrollment in the Deferred Compensation
457 Plan to 48.2% through June 30, 2015 and
achieve modest improvement to 48.5% by June 30,
2016.
?? Increase the average participant contribution in the
Deferred Compensation 457 Plan to $91 per pay
period by June 30, 2015 and maintain through June
30, 2016.
?? Continue to educate employees on the Deferred
Compensation Plan by presenting two Investment &
Retirement Symposiums each fiscal year.
?? Continue to increase employee awareness and
understanding by conducting educational
workshops and redesigning promotional materials
and presentations to increase the knowledge base of
all employees by June 30, 2015.
During Fiscal Years 2014–16, the Chief Administrative
Office will work with the Board of Supervisors to ensure
that County government in San Diego remains fiscally
sound, operationally strong and is able to meet the changing
service needs of County residents within available revenues.
To accomplish this, the CAO will continue to use
the County’s General Management System (GMS) to
implement the Board’s priorities, as well as to maintain the
County’s established management disciplines and commitment
to innovation, continuous improvement and
excellence.
The CAO continues to closely monitor changing economic
conditions and key State revenue sources and continued
to work with CAOs in other California counties to protect
local revenues and interests as the State continues to
redefine State/County roles, responsibilities and revenues.
The CAO continues to enhance efficiency, productivity and
service quality throughout the organization by identifying
and implementing new ways of working that enabled the
organization to better meet changing public needs or program
realities - using strategies that include reengineering,
expanded partnerships with other entities that serve similar
customers or have similar goals and use of new technology
tools.
Highlights of the CAO’s Fiscal Year 2014–16 Objectives
and how they relate to the County’s 2014–2019 Strategic
Plan are listed below. Additional accomplishments and
detailed information is provided in individual department
and group Operational Plan narratives. Together, they form
a coordinated strategy that enables the County to achieve
its Mission—“To efficiently provide public services that
build strong and sustainable communities”—and its
Vision—“A County that is safe, healthy and thriving.”
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Protect residents from crime and abuse.
?? Strengthen our prevention and enforcement
strategies to protect San Diego youth against crime,
neglect and abuse.
?? Collaborate with law enforcement agencies and
community services organizations to combat human
trafficking and enhance the support to victims and
education to the community.
?? Enhance enforcement of required standards of care
in long-term care facilities.
?? Promote the safety of vulnerable adults in long-term
care residential facilities by restoring the staffing
levels for the Long Term Care Ombudsman Program.
The increase in staff will allow the program to
address issues such as training needs, facility
inspections, community education, and complaint
resolution.
?? Provide for a strong, collaborative criminal justice system
that holds offenders accountable and protects victims’
rights.
?? Continue participation in multi-agency operations
and multi-agency task forces.
?? Reduce recidivism and help offenders successfully
reenter society.
?? Improve offender reintegration into the community
through a continuum of care and case management
that begins at the Sheriff reentry facilities, includes
the assessment of offenders needs at the
Community Transition Center (CTC) and extends to
Probation’s engagement with and supervision of
offenders.
?? Make neighborhoods safe to live, work and play.
?? Expand data-driven crime prevention and
information-led policing strategies, focus on prolific
offenders and utilize current technologies to reduce
crime at the local and regional level.
?? Improve the quality of life of all San Diego residents
by proactively working to make our streets, parks,
public spaces and buildings safer from crime and
injury.
?? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and
improvements are designed and constructed in
accordance with building safety codes.
?? Protect county residents by conducting 320 safety
inspections on structural fumigations annually in San
Diego County.
?? Provide four workshops for the Local Agency
Management Program to educate our stakeholders
on the new standards and regulations for onsite
wastewater treatment systems.
?? Create safer parks, preserves and recreation centers
by using more than 100,000 hours of volunteer
service to assist with park patrols, operations, and
maintenance.
?? Maintain the current levels of services by offering an
average of 300 after-school programs each month,
to offer students and families a safe place for the 
pursuit of education and constructive civic
engagement in support of the County’s Live Well San
Diego Living Safely initiative.
?? In support of the County’s Live Well San Diego Living
Safely initiative, expand the use of social media to
educate the public and increase awareness of
various issues such as animal safety, neglect and
disaster preparedness by posting quarterly
educational bulletins on the DAS Facebook page and
website.
?? Support the Live Well San Diego Building Better
Health initiative by funding 30 public community
projects for parks, street/sidewalk improvements,
American with Disabilities Act (ADA) improvements,
firefighting equipment, public services, community,
youth and family centers, health clinics, and
affordable housing activities to promote wellness
and enhance the quality of life in San Diego County
neighborhoods.
?? Help communities prepare, respond, and recover from
natural disasters, public health threats, environmental
hazards and other emergencies.
?? Encourage and promote residents to take important
and meaningful steps to protect themselves and their
families for at least 72 hours during a disaster.
?? Complete a disaster preparedness curriculum, which
aligns and complies with the Common Core State
Standards, for San Diego County’s 4th grade
students.
?? Ensure professional, timely emergency response is
provided to the residents of County Service Area 135
through the supervision of the San Diego County Fire
Authority.
?? Provide two stakeholder workshops for the
Environmental Corrective Action Program (ECAP)
which is a program now delegated to DEH by the
Department of Toxic Substances Control to oversee
the clean-up of contaminated sites.
?? Work collaboratively with County Fire Authority,
Planning and Development Services, Office of
Emergency Services and other County departments,
regional fire authorities, government agencies,
University staff and community groups to enhance
wildfire-related research. Disseminate information
through a minimum of four outreach activities.
?? Facilitate at least one training for federal agency staff
and local aviation community members on foreign
flight student vetting and screening requirements.
?? Flood Control staff will assist communities to prepare
and respond to flood events by inspecting 75% of
flood control facilities annually and maintaining
County flood control facilities to their design
capacities by removing debris from clogged or
blocked facilities.
??
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
?? Provide for planning, development, infrastructure and
services that support the local economy and are fundamental
to a strong, vibrant region.
?? Continue to recruit and replace non-accessible poll
sites to comply with federal and State accessibility
requirements.
?? Acquire 500 acres within the MSCP plan areas that
will count toward the County’s commitment to the
MSCP Implementing Agreement.
?? Use Board Policy I-138, Mitigation on County-
Owned Land Managed by the Department of Parks
and Recreation to generate $40,000 of revenue for
acquisitions, operations and maintenance of MSCP
lands.
?? Continue implementation of the Purchase
Agricultural Conservation Easement (PACE) program,
which supports the local agriculture industry and the
preservation of community character.
?? Present for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration a
Form-Based Zoning Code for the Valley Center
South Village by summer 2015. Similar to the Zoning
Ordinance, the Form-Based Codes will include
provisions on allowed uses, setbacks, height and
information on development process. The new codes
will also provide detailed architectural and
landscaping requirements and information to
applicants on required street and trail improvements.
?? Identify problems and potential solutions for endemic
and invasive pests such as insects, diseases, weeds
(Asian Citrus Psyllid, Gold Spotted Oak Borer,
Phytophthora, invasive grasses, etc.) impacting San
Diego agriculture, nursery, ornamental horticultural
and landscapes. Provide a minimum of four outreach
activities to nursery and ornamental horticulture
growers, residents and agricultural community
members.
?? Maintain and manage the volunteer Master Gardener
program to provide research-based information in
the areas of home gardening, community gardening,
landscaping, water conversation, and pest
management to San Diego County residents,
Agriculture, Weights and Measures and other Land
Use and Environment Group departments. Provide a
minimum of 400 office consultations, 10 educational
exhibits and 4,000 hours of volunteer service. ?? Implement strategies that protect our natural and agricultural
resources, diverse habitats and sensitive species,
and promote energy efficiency and conservation.
?? Promote the diversion of recyclable materials from
landfills through recycling events in conjunction with
the Department of Public Works by implementing
two collection events for recycling of used pesticide
containers from the agricultural community.
?? Prevent the spread of the insidious pest Glassy-
Winged Sharpshooter, a serious threat to California’s
$4 billion grape industry, by ensuring 100% of more
than 2,350 plant shipments arrive at destination with
no viable life stages of the pest.
?? Stop the spread of Red Imported Fire Ants (RIFA), a
devastating pest of agriculture and urban
environments, by planning and conducting a
comprehensive survey of high risk habitat throughout
the entire county for RIFA infestations. Conduct three
RIFA training sessions with key personnel from
County of San Diego Parks and Recreation and
Public Works by June 30, 2015.
?? Conserve irrigation water by installing smart irrigation
controllers at one County park.
?? Install additional photovoltaic panels at one County
park to offset energy consumption and provide a
clean source of renewable energy.
?? Present for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration a
Comprehensive Renewable Energy Plan (CREP) by
summer 2015. The CREP will explore opportunities
for a more comprehensive approach to increasing
renewable energy use, reducing costs for
consumers, and minimizing impacts to the
community and its resources.
?? Promote an environment where communities can prosper
and residents can enjoy parks, open spaces, clean
air and water, and outdoor experiences.
?? Enhance recreation opportunities by improving
sports fields by installing new turf at two County
Parks.
?? Monitor 50% of major stormwater outfalls by June
2016 to assess the health of watersheds by
conducting a comprehensive monitoring program.
?? Maintain an inspection program to protect the public
from the harmful effects of air pollution by annually
conducting 7,400 inspections of equipment at
regulated facilities for compliance with air pollution
laws.
?? Test emissions from all natural gas fired reciprocating
internal combustion engines required to show
compliance with the National Emission Standards for
Hazardous Air Pollutants.
?? Maintain the capability to deploy an emergency
network of two fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
monitors within 48 hours of any wildfire and link the
instruments via satellite for real-time data delivery to
the public.
?? In coordination with affected industries, develop
training videos on how to comply with air pollution
control requirements.
?? Encourage residents to engage in community life, civic
activities, volunteering, and recreational interests.
?? Maintain the planned schedule of library operations.
?? Provide virtual library services that are available and
relevant such as e-books, audio downloads, video
downloads and access to premium databases.
?? Increase the number of permanent vote-by-mail
voters.
?? Incorporate cultural, historical or environmental
interpretive components at two park facilities.
?? Assist 100 businesses and 60 multifamily complexes
in initiating recycling programs.
?? Provide residential composting education at nine
workshops, one community event and three schools
in the unincorporated area of the county. Install one
new composting demonstration site.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Help residents adopt a healthy lifestyle.
?? In conjunction with Land Use and Environment
Group’s (LUEG) Thriving Team (composed of many
departments), produce consumer-oriented Certified
Farmer’s Market (CFM) brochure in English and
Spanish with information on availability of healthy,
locally produced fruit, vegetables, and other
agricultural products.
?? Conduct nutrition education for 500 low-income
families with children to reduce the risk of childhood
obesity and chronic diseases (such as diabetes,
heart disease, and high blood pressure) through
lifestyle change related to diet and physical activity.
?? Promote healthy lifestyles for 2,000 adults and
seniors through participation in 60 recreation
programs and services that increase physical,
intellectual, social and/or emotional abilities.
?? Foster positive development of 6,500 youth through
180 recreation programs and services that increase
physical, intellectual, social and/or emotional
abilities.
?? Make neighborhoods healthy places to live, work and
play.
?? Recruit and train a minimum of 350 adult and teen 4-
H volunteers to deliver positive youth development experiences through a minimum of four experiential
learning outreach activities.
?? Repaint and or use thermoplastic to re-mark
crosswalks and roadway legends adjacent to 121
public school and 12 private school locations in the
unincorporated area of the county. Thermoplastic will
be introduced at some schools sites to minimize the
need for annual repainting.
?? Create additional recreational opportunities by
constructing new exercise stations along two County
Park trails.
?? Improve access to high-quality and efficient care that
leads to improved physical and behavioral health.
?? Support positive choices for health by enrolling
100% of newly eligible Medi-Cal recipients as part of
the ACA to increase the number of Americans with
insurance and cut the overall costs of health care to
families and individuals. Medi-Cal is California’s
Medicaid program which provides needed health
care services to eligible children, families and
individuals.
?? Support healthy and safe living by ensuring that a
minimum of 50% (estimated 130) of individuals
participating in the expanded In-Home Outreach
Team (IHOT) program are successfully linked to
behavioral health services or other community
resources. IHOT links treatment-resistant individuals
and their families to existing services within the
adult/older adult behavioral health system. This
outreach and engagement is essential in assisting
this population to willingly receive these needed
services.
?? Build a better service delivery system for children
and youth in foster care by connecting the children in
child welfare to needed mental health services.
?? Assist families in achieving and maintaining selfsufficiency
and promote the future well-being and
prospects of residents. Ensure the success of the
child support program by establishing and enforcing
court orders to support the long-term well-being of
children by collaborating with custodial and noncustodial
parents, courts, government agencies, and
community resources.
Required Disciplines for Excellence:
Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain fiscal stability through key management practices,
including financial planning and forecasting, to
ensure a structurally balanced budget and the availability
of services for customers.
?? Maintain a collection rate of 98% for secured taxes
and 97% for unsecured taxes by preparing and
mailing property tax bills/notices, and processing tax
payments in a timely manner to ensure timely
revenue collection on behalf of San Diego County’s
taxpayers.
?? Resolve 80% or more of all lawsuits against the
County by a court decision/dismissal, and resolve
20% or less by settlement.
?? Reduce the delivery cost of repaving streets in the
unincorporated area by 10% within the next two
years.
Skilled, Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Develop and maintain a skilled, adaptable and diverse
workforce that turns plans and resources into success
while providing opportunities for well-being.
?? Increase understanding among HHSA staff of how
trauma affects individuals, families, groups, and
communities by implementing a “trauma-informed”
model that recognizes how trauma impacts the
overall wellness of clients and staff.
?? Supported the Department of Human Resources
employee wellness initiatives that promote healthy
and safe behaviors in the workplace, including
employee volunteers who serve as Wellness
Champions on the Wellness Committee to promote
activities such as the Stairwell Campaign, and the
blood and bone marrow drive.
?? Foster an environment of excellence, innovation and
exceptional customer service among County
employees who serve the public through the
County’s intranet site, posting 140 content items
(article or video) in support of the Strategic Initiatives
and Required Disciplines for Excellence during Fiscal
Year 2014–15, and another 150 during Fiscal Year
2015–16.
Essential Infrastructure
?? Provide the facilities and structures to ensure superior
service delivery to our residents.
?? Complete the master plan for capital improvements
to the Bonita Animal Shelter.
?? Begin design-build construction of the new libraries
in Alpine and Imperial Beach.
?? Continue due diligence for donated property,
planning, and design for new Borrego Springs
Library.
?? Complete construction of the Cedar and Kettner
Development Parking Structure in summer 2015. ?? Initiate replacement/renewal projects with HHSA for
key Family Resource Centers and Levant Adoptions
Center.
?? Assess and improve accessibility in County facilities.
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure accountability to ourselves and the public by
upholding the highest ethical, financial and legal standards
in addition to requiring that County business be
conducted as openly as possible.
?? Provide open access to County business by making
audio recordings of all Board of Supervisors
meetings available on the Internet within three days
of the related meeting.
?? Begin multi-year phased restoration and preservation
project for historical recorded documents. Phase
One will preserve the old microfilm and ensure its
survival for future generations. This project will begin
in Fiscal Year 2014–15 and anticipated completion in
Fiscal Year 2016–17. Phase Two will restore and
preserve historical recorded documents and maps.
This project is a three to five year effort and is
estimated to be complete in Fiscal Year 2018–19.
?? Ensure responsible stewardship of resources
expended to fulfill Public Records Act requests by
identifying the top three requested public records
and making them available on the Agriculture,
Weights and Measures webpage for 24/7 customer
access.
Information Services
?? The County will be the center of Information Services
innovation for advancing the delivery of County services,
anytime and anywhere.
?? Continue the implementation process of replacing
the Regional Communications System (RCS) with a
state of the art, next-generation communications
system.
?? Improve communications with volunteer firefighters
through the continued implementation of the
Advanced Situational Awareness for Public Safety
Network (ASAP Net).
?? Install a 24/7 Library-To-Go kiosk to provide library
services to remote areas currently without library
services; examine the viability and feasibility of
rolling out these devices to other potential locations.
?? Position the Library’s website to maximize customer
usability and access to self-published e-materials
and publisher’s e-book catalogs.
?? Provide enhanced customer service by sharing/
disseminating information on the Housing Choice
Voucher (HCV) program information via the HCD
website, emails, videos, social media and/or Quick
Response (QR) barcodes.
?? Increase awareness of the Mobile Source Incentive
Program by participating in eight community
outreach events about APCD’s mobile source
emission reduction incentive programs and grant
funding opportunities.
?? Upgrade the County’s Kronos employee timekeeping
application. The Kronos 7.0 upgrade initiative will
provide the County users with a more supportable
timekeeping platform and enhanced functional
capabilities such as the ability to perform time
management tasks on their mobile devices.
?? Modernize and rebuild the County’s active directory
domain (a repository of County users or accounts
that have access to the network) by updating
architecture, migrating accounts, integrating existing
services (e.g., SharePoint and Virtual Private
Network), and converting accounts to agreed
identification naming standards.
Regional Leadership
?? The County forges cooperative partnerships, educates,
and leverages resources to optimize services to residents.
?? Continue to collaborate with other public agencies to
address needs that continue to cross jurisdictional
boundaries.
?? Continue to aggressively represent the needs and
interests of residents at the State and federal level.
?? Continue expansion of the County's leadership and
activism as a member of crucial State and national
county associations including the National
Association of Counties (NACo), the California State
Association of Counties (CSAC) and the San Diego
City/County Managers Association.
?? Share the County's innovative programs and best
practices with local, State and national organizations
as well as monitor the best-in-class activities among
other counties throughout the nation for any new or
innovative ideas that can be replicated in San Diego
County.
?? Provide the County's perspective to the economic
and policy deliberations that occur within the San
Diego Regional Chamber of Commerce through
membership on the Board of Directors.
Continuous Improvement and Innovation
?? Achieve operational efficiency through continuous
efforts to improve and innovate, thereby maximizing
value for residents. ?? To increase efficiency, consistency and accuracy,
implement auto-generated Notices of Proposed
Action (NOPA) for Weights and Measures’ retail fuel
and water meters, develop associated business
practices and conduct staff training.
?? Streamline the Temporary Event permit process to
leverage online information resources. Conduct a
workshop for event organizers and vendors with
annual permits to provide them with food safety
education and a sound understanding of the
permitting process.
?? Conduct an analysis of the building permit prereview
process to identify and implement
improvements to reduce customer wait and
transaction times, while ensuring continued quality
review.
?? Implement a new Airport Lease Management System
(ALMS), using BCMS, to track County airport leases
and other contracts to replace the current lease
management system, which will no longer be
supported.
?? Review and update 545 classification specifications
as part of the Classification Modernization Project by
June 30, 2016.
Customer Satisfaction
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services,
while continually seeking opportunities for an improved
experience.
?? Enhance services for children awaiting adoption, and
the potential permanent families approved to adopt,
by implementing strategies to streamline the Child
Welfare Services Adoption Program.
?? Assist veterans and their dependents to thrive by
facilitating their access to needed benefits by
processing 2,520 compensation and pension claims.
?? Maintain average plan review times for new retail
food and public swimming pool projects at levels
that are 50% less than the State law requirement of
20 days.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? In coordination with the Assessor/Recorder/County
Clerk, Treasurer-Tax Collector and the County Technology
Office, continue the design and development of
the IPTS, which will significantly improve property
assessment, tax collection, and apportionment activities
in the County.
?? Upgrade the County’s Kronos employee timekeeping
application. The Kronos 7.0 upgrade initiative will provide
the County users with a more supportable timekeeping
platform and enhanced functional capabilities
such as the ability to perform time management tasks
on their mobile devices.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Submit 100% of federal, State and local financial
reports and annual financial statements that comply
with regulations and reporting standards for County
departments, outside government agencies, investors
and taxpayers by their due dates to ensure accountability
and transparency of financial transactions.
?? Process 100% of County payments within five business
days after receipt of invoice by Accounts Payable
to ensure timely payment of vendors and contractors.
The prompt payment of invoices ensures that the
County captures any discounts that are available for
early invoice payment.
?? Publish reports in Department’s website of completed
audit services, including State mandated and operational/
performance audits, to ensure the integrity of
management control systems, to improve performance
across the enterprise, and to ensure the most efficient
use of resources.
?? In coordination with the Office of Ethics and Compliance
(OEC), continue the administration of the Ethics
Hotline. Monitor the investigation and resolution of
cases reported through the Ethics Hotline.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Earn the State Controller’s Award for Achieving Excellence
in Financial Reporting for the Fiscal Year ending
June 30, 2013.
?? Continue to apply for recognitions through GFOA—
Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in Financial
Reporting for the CAFR and the Award for Outstanding
Achievement in Popular Annual Financial Reporting for
the PAFR.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Meet or exceed the prior year’s actual recovery rate
percentage (total dollars collected/total available
accounts receivable) of 7.68%. This measure represents
the effectiveness of collection activities performed
by the Office of Revenue & Recovery (ORR).
?? Accurately identify current and future revenue, as well
as cost and cash flow trends, in a timely manner in
order to facilitate the allocation of limited resources to
San Diego County groups and departments.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Complete upgrade of Windows 7 operating system
software on all County workstations prior to the end of
the one-year Windows XP Custom Extended Support
on April 2015.
?? Create the capability to produce Application runbooks
(a collection of supporting documentation that
describes the use and structure of the application) ondemand.
The goal is to eliminate the Microsoft Word
document runbooks and replace them with runbooks
generated by the Applications Manager system to produce
an Application Runbook report. This will synchronize
the runbook with the actual application production
information.
?? Modernize and rebuild the County’s Active Directory
domain (a repository of County users or accounts that
have access to the network) by updating architecture,
migrating accounts, integrating existing services (e.g.,
SharePoint and Virtual Private Network), and converting
accounts to agreed identification naming standards.
?? Expand the use of DocVault, a repository of archived
documents, to include historical documents to provide
a single repository of all critical documents current and
past.
?? Continue to provide Program Management and overall
oversight over the IPTS project. When completed, this
system will significantly improve property assessment,
tax collection and apportionment activities in the
County. The new system is scheduled for implementation
in Fiscal Year 2015–16.
?? Provide technical support for the upgrade of the
County's Kronos employee timekeeping application.
The Kronos 7.0 upgrade initiative will provide County
users with a more supportable timekeeping platform
and enhanced functional capabilities such as the ability
to perform time management tasks on mobile devices.
?? Provide technical support for implementation of the
Knowledge Integration Project (KIP) beginning in Fiscal
Year 2014–15. KIP is an HHSA initiative that, when
completed, will provide HHSA, its community partners and other County departments access to a comprehensive
view of a client's history of past and current
services received and potential need for future services,
creating a true coordinated care network
between multiple providers.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Use the results of the 2013 IT Employee Satisfaction
Surveys to determine specific opportunities for continuous
improvement, including communication and project
management processes.
?? Effectively manage performance of the County’s IT
Outsourcing Provider to ensure timeliness and value of
IT services.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain IT costs for services at rates established in the
IT Outsourcing Agreement. New services will be
reviewed and analyzed for best value to the County to
provide a fair and reasonable price.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Develop and execute a strategy to improve County’s
performance on industry award competitions, such as
the Center for Digital Government awards.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Provide employees and community members with IT
learning opportunities via vendor fairs and IT education
days.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement Phase II of Data Loss Prevention technologies
that will improve mitigation of unauthorized disclosure
of Personal Identifiable Information (PII).
?? Implement Phase II of the CCRM system to identify,
record, and track requests for information and other
communications received from the public. This system
will ensure that County residents receive a timely and
accurate response when making inquiries of County
government.
?? Upgrade the existing SharePoint platform (an Intranet
tool for content and document management) from
SharePoint 2010 to SharePoint 2013. This will allow the
County to stay current with the technology and licensing
requirements, as well as bring additional functionality
that can be leveraged by the County’s SharePoint
user base.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Achieve a positive customer satisfaction rating of 95%
or above. Customer satisfaction surveys focus primarily
on responsiveness, courtesy, and knowledge of
staff.
?? Provide customers with hearings that are fair, impartial
and efficient in order to achieve legally sound decisions.
?? Ensure direct access to information through proper
referral of inquiries from departments, employees,
employee representatives and organizations and the
public, related to human resources matters.
?? Provide a neutral environment that facilitates open discussion
of issues for departments, employees and
employee representatives resulting in fair and unbiased
outcomes.
?? Resolve 55% of personnel disputes without the need
for a full evidentiary hearing resulting in time and cost
savings.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Participate in ongoing training in areas of human
resources, technology, workplace safety and pertinent
legal updates to increase staff’s knowledge in order to
provide superior customer service.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure all decisions made by the Commission will take
into consideration fairness, due process and are in
compliance with the law. The decisions will be thoroughly
reviewed by Commissioners, staff and counsel.
?? Distribute at least 95% of Commission decisions within
48 hours of Commission approval in order to provide
timely notification of outcomes to parties and the public.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Maintain and update desk book manual on Commission
proceedings and easily searchable electronic
database of Commission case law and precedents,
counsel advice, key issues and other relevant information
to increase staff efficiency and effectiveness.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Accountability,
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure the efficiency and transparency of the property
tax assessment appeal process by processing property
tax assessment appeal applications within seven days
of receipt.
?? Provide open access to County business by making
audio recordings of all Board of Supervisors meetings
available on the Internet within three days of the related
meeting.
?? Enhance the efficiency and transparency of the property
tax assessment appeal process by participating in
the development of the Integrated Property Tax System.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure satisfaction with services provided by achieving
consistently high ratings on surveys of more than 2,000
customers.
?? Provide opportunities to San Diego residents by processing
and mailing 100% of completed U.S. Passport
applications on the same day they are received.
?? Complete the vendor selection process to replace current
automated agenda management system to
increase the reliability and efficiency of the Board of
Supervisors agenda creation procedure.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Customer
Satisfaction
Provide quality, accurate, effective and timely legal advice
to all County departments to enable them to fulfill their
mission and objectives in accordance with the law, reduce
the risk of liability and use taxpayer dollars efficiently and
effectively.
?? Complete 98% of all advisory assignments for the
Board of Supervisors and Chief Administrative Officer
by their due dates.
?? Complete 95% or more of all advisory assignments for
County departments by the agreed upon due dates.
?? Continue County Counsel law student internship program
to provide quality service to clients.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
Aggressively represent the County in litigation, maintaining
fiscal stability while advancing the overall interests of the
County of San Diego and the public it serves.
?? Resolve 80% or more of all lawsuits against the County
by a court decision/dismissal, and resolve 20% or less
by settlement.
?? Prevail in 90% or more of court decisions in all lawsuits
filed against the County.
?? Achieve a success rate of 90% or more in County code
enforcement and other lawsuits where the County is
the plaintiff by winning in court or obtaining favorable
financial settlements.
?? Handle 95% or more of the defense of all lawsuits filed
in California against the County, unless a conflict of
interest requires outside counsel to handle a case,
thereby reducing outside counsel costs to the County
and taxpayers.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
Provide effective legal services to the Health and Human
Service Agency (HHSA) in matters relating to children who
have been dependents of the Juvenile Court.
?? Prevail in 98% or more of Juvenile Dependency petitions
filed in Superior Court.
?? Prevail in 95% or more of Juvenile Dependency
appeals and writs filed.
Strategic Initiative: Sustainable Environments
Support the County’s objective of promoting responsible
development, economic vitality and the highest quality of
life.
?? Complete 100% of all draft Environmental Impact
Report reviews within 40 days or less.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
County Counsel attorneys will engage in numerous leadership
roles in the County and throughout the State, which
will provide positive and constructive influences in the professional
practice of law in the region.
?? Maintain significant involvement in the activities of at
least 15 regional organizations and committees.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
Provide education and risk mitigation training to County
officers and employees to support a committed, capable
and diverse workforce.
?? Provide 70 or more education programs on selected
legal subjects for County departments.
?? Provide 50 or more specialized risk mitigation sessions,
such as risk roundtables, case evaluation committee
discussions and post-litigation debriefings to address
risk issues, helping to promote risk management and
decrease future legal liability.
?? Provide 24 or more internal and/or external training
sessions for County Counsel staff, including Mandatory
Continuing Legal Education, to ensure staff continues
to provide the highest quality legal services to the
County by remaining current on developments in the
law.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
Optimize information technology systems to improve
operational efficiency and service to customers.
?? Continue toward development of a centralized document
repository and electronic briefcase system for
Juvenile Dependency-related court documents. This
centralized repository will be shared by multiple
departments (including San Diego Superior Court and
HHSA’s Child Welfare Services) and will result in an efficient
electronic retrieval process, eliminating the need
for paper documents.
?? Complete the transition to a new Web-based office
practice management system (Tymetrix’s T360), which
manages all case and advisory information, has calendaring
capabilities, retains client and contract information,
stores supporting legal documents, and tracks
time and billing information.
?? Continue to expand use of available mobile technologies,
such as implementing web-based solutions or
increasing the use of mobile computing to increase efficiencies.
?? Implement a paperless electronic billing technology
which will streamline invoicing procedures and payment
processes. This technology will create a bidirectional
data feed into the County’s Oracle Financial
system, and will provide efficiencies in data entry and
reconciliation.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Review, prioritize and investigate all citizens’ complaints,
issues and other County matters of civil concern
brought before the Grand Jury by assembling a
well-qualified and widely representative civil panel to
ensure that city and county governmental entities are
operating as efficiently as possible.
?? Support the District Attorney with hearings on criminal
matters in accordance with Penal Code §904.6.
Strategic Initiative: Healthy Families
?? Encourage employee participation in eight Employee
Wellness Program activities to increase employees’
knowledge about what it means to be healthy and support
healthy lifestyles.
?? Encourage employee participation in the Love Your
Heart blood pressure campaign, an annual event offering
free blood pressure screenings at County facilities
as part of Live Well San Diego and American Heart
Health Month, to help reduce heart disease and support
employee wellness.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Increase diversity outreach by including advertisements
in diverse publications on 100% of recruitments.
?? Conduct the Discipline Case Advocacy Institute (DCAI)
by June 30, 2016.
?? Provide Countywide formal, informal and social learning
opportunities in support of the Leadership Development
Model by June 30, 2015.
?? Maintain a high quality workforce by adhering to 98%
of established timelines for recruitment of County
employees.
?? Provide departments with positions that match their
staffing needs by completing 98% of classification
activity requests by established timelines.
?? Develop knowledge activities that complement formal
training to encourage continuous learning opportunities
by June 30, 2016.
?? Redesign Sexual Harassment Prevention for Supervisors
online training by June 30, 2015.
?? Enhance the Veterans Outreach Program by updating
the webpage and increasing community partnerships
by June 30, 2015.
?? Develop and implement the fourth year Employee Wellness
Program components and achieve a 12% overall
employee program participation rate.
?? Partner with Land Use and Environment Group to
develop a life-saving techniques class for any County
employee to attend in support of Live Well San Diego
by December 31, 2014.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Fiscal Stability
?? Negotiate fiscally prudent successor agreements with
11 of 25 bargaining units and 6 of 9 existing employee
organizations by June 30, 2015.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Information
Services
?? Develop and implement an upgrade to the County’s
core Human Resources software application to
improve operational efficiency in personnel record
management by December 2014.
?? Convert Medical Standards paper files, where feasible,
to electronic form to enhance file security, enable more
efficient sharing of data with appropriate staff requiring
file access and reduce costs associated with the storage
and production of paper files by June 30, 2015.
?? Complete coordination of the migration of the Learning
Management System (LMS) to a new hosting environment
to improve operational efficiency by June 30,
2015.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Review and update 545 classification specifications as
part of the Classification Modernization Project by June
30, 2016. 
Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Create awareness among taxpayers about the value of
County programs and services, emphasizing the fact
that the County of San Diego is a responsible steward
of tax dollars by posting 205 video presentations in Fiscal
Year 2014–15 and another 205 in Fiscal Year 2015–
16.
?? Work proactively to deliver vital information including
County news, challenges and successes directly to
San Diego County residents and position the County to
define itself, rather than relying on traditional media to
do so.
?? Update the County News Center regularly to
establish the site as a valid news source. Add at least
one new content item (article or video) every
business day for a total of 315 during Fiscal Year
2014–15, and another 315 during Fiscal Year 2015–
16.
?? Provide easy, on-the-go access to important County
information through social media. Increase number
of followers on Facebook and Twitter by 25% during
Fiscal Year 2014–15, and an additional 25% during
Fiscal Year 2015–16.
Strategic Initiative: Safe Communities
?? Participate in at least two drills this fiscal year to prepare
for and respond to major natural or man-made
disasters impacting the San Diego County region.
?? Provide accurate and timely emergency and recovery
information to the public and media, using a wide variety
of traditional and new media tools, such as the
County’s new emergency website, social media, new
releases, video and mobile technology.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Foster an environment of excellence, innovation and
exceptional customer service among County employees
who serve the public through the County’s intranet
site, posting 140 content items (article or video) in support
of the Strategic Initiatives and Required Disciplines
for Excellence during Fiscal Year 2014–15, and
another 150 during Fiscal Year 2015–16.
Required Discipline for Excellence: Regional
Leadership
?? Organize 1–2 meetings per year of regional Public
Information Officers from various sectors, such as education,
healthcare and government, to review disaster
preparedness and response. Meetings will build critical
relationships needed during regional emergencies and
provide a forum for sharing ideas and resources.
