Align activities of the Public Safety Group with the key outcomes
of the County’s Live Well, San Diego! Living Safely
strategy; addressing the incidence of crime and injury and
the community experience of overall safety. The key outcomes
are: Residents are protected from crime and
abuse; Neighborhoods are safe to work, live and play; and
Communities are resilient to disasters and emergencies.
These objectives facilitate collaborative policy development
across various public agencies, with private sector partners
and support the key outcomes of the Live Well, San Diego!
Living Safely strategy.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Residents are protected from crime or abuse.
?? Monitoring offenders subject to community
supervision to mitigate new crimes.
?? Employ information-led policing strategies to crime
problems at the local and regional levels.
?? Reduce recidivism through evidence-based
practices and services in collaboration with
community and justice partners.
?? Continue proactive law enforcement activities in the
unincorporated area and in cities that contract with
the Sheriff’s Department for law enforcement
services.
?? Expand services to offenders in custody and
increase detention capacity; support the opening of
Phase I of the Women’s Detention Facility and begin
the operation of the East Mesa Detention Re-Entry
and Rehabilitation Facility.
?? Communities are resilient to disasters and emergencies.
?? Collaborate with regional fire service agencies to
improve fire protection and emergency response
services.
?? Engage residents, the private sector and local
jurisdictions through community outreach events and
emergency readiness planning.
?? Coordinate with local and regional agencies’
emergency services and critical first responder
agencies to strengthen the regional emergency
notification system.
?? Incorporate disaster preparedness into programs
and services that target vulnerable populations and
encourage self-sufficiency during and after an
adverse event.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Neighborhoods are safe to work, live and play.
?? Focus on youth in local communities with actions to
steer them in a positive direction.
?? Educate residents through community outreach,
prevention and safety programs.
?? Assist and advocate for the victims of crime.
?? Promote the well-being of children and the selfsufficiency
of families through the success of the
child support program.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Leveraging technology innovations to improve service
delivery and operational efficiency.
?? Continue projects to support improved process
efficiencies and data sharing.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Collaborate with criminal justice partners locally and
statewide to expand the integration and use of DNA
information by prosecutorial agencies, to strengthen
the quality of crime analysis and criminal prosecutions.
?? Expand the District Attorney’s Youth Advisory Board to
two additional high schools to assist students in developing
solutions for issues facing young people in their
respective communities.
?? Work collaboratively with the Superior Court and local
law enforcement to develop and implement the revocation
process in accordance with Public Safety
Realignment.
?? Expand services for domestic violence victims in the
eastern region of San Diego county through the implementation
of a High Risk Domestic Violence Team in
partnership with local providers and law enforcement.
?? Continue to support the Reentry Roundtable comprised
of organizations actively involved in making
neighborhoods safe.
?? Collaborate with Sheriff’s crime lab to expand the integration
and use of fingerprint information by prosecutorial
agencies, to strengthen the quality of crime analysis
and criminal prosecutions.
?? Achieve a conviction on 94% of felony cases prosecuted.
?? Achieve a conviction on 90% of misdemeanor cases
prosecuted.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Settle 70% of adult felony cases prior to preliminary
hearing.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Incorporate an employee wellness presentation into the
District Attorney’s annual office-wide training to create
awareness about employee health and efficiency.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Fully implement information-led policing throughout
the department as the primary philosophy used to
address crime trends in order to establish San Diego as
the safest urban county in the country.
?? Implement the Information Managed Policing
Addressing Community Threats (IMPACT) program at
every station and substation.
?? Increase the use of analytical staff providing
information to field operations.
?? Build regional partnerships with other law
enforcement agencies and the community to share
information, including the creation of Community
Advisory Groups to discuss crime trends and public
safety concerns with residents and businesses.
?? Expand the use of technology to disseminate
information at every station and use facial
recognition software to identify criminals in the
community.
?? Improve the ability of deputies to work with mentally ill
subjects by ensuring that 100% of deputies in the Law
Enforcement Services Bureau complete eight-hour
Psychiatric Evaluation Response Team training by May
2014.
?? Continue to focus on youth in local communities using
a three prong approach of education, awareness and
enforcement to engage and steer youth in a positive
direction by:
?? Increasing the use of social host enforcement
operations by 40% in order to reduce opportunities
for teenage alcohol and drug abuse.
?? Providing Start SMART driving education classes
throughout the year for newly licensed drivers.
?? Providing Sober Graduation enforcement programs
in the months of May and June throughout the
county.
?? Implementing a juvenile traffic citation diversion
program.
?? Establishing a juvenile leadership/mentoring camp
program.
?? Establishing Youth Community Advisory Groups.
?? Evaluate using body scanning equipment to increase
capabilities of detecting contraband (e.g., drugs, weapons,
etc.) as it is smuggled into detention facilities.
?? Complete the update of the Superior Court contract for
services that improves the fiscal health of the contract
over a five-year period.
?? Complete Phase 1 of building improvements for the
new Women's Detention Facility by June 2014. Phase
2 of the project will include the demolition of the existing
jail and will be completed in November 2015.
?? The East Mesa Detention Re-Entry and Rehabilitation
Facility is expected to begin construction in June 2013
and be complete by May 2014. The expansion project
will consist of two new housing units, a new intake area
and classrooms to provide services for 400 inmates.
?? The new Rancho San Diego Station will provide law
enforcement services to the unincorporated areas east
of Lemon Grove. Construction of the new 25,000
square foot station has begun and is expected to be
completed by December 2013.
?? The new Pine Valley Substation is scheduled to begin
construction in June 2013 on a one acre site adjacent
to the County's park and library and is scheduled for
occupancy in April 2014.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Increase hiring to meet department goals of opening
the East Mesa Detention Re-Entry and Rehabilitation
Facility, the Women's Detention Facility and achieving
99% staffing of the Emergency Services Dispatcher
classification.
?? Achieve a higher number of female recruits in each
academy class (eight females per academy class) to
achieve department goals for staffing the new
Women's Detention Facility.
?? Work with other County departments to improve health
and academy readiness of new recruits/cadets and
reduce injuries at the Regional Academy. Develop a
Department Wellness Committee and work with
County Risk Management to develop employee wellness
programs and increase employee attendance.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Maintain the percentage of open cases with an
enforceable order at or above 85% (64,940 of 76,400),
consistent with the statewide goal.
?? Ensure the percentage of cases with parentage established
is at or above 90% (54,200 of 60,200), consistent
with the statewide goal.
?? Increase the percentage of current support collected to
current support owed at or above 65% ($112 million of
$172 million).
?? Increase the percentage of arrears cases with a collection
to 65% (38,350 of 59,000) or above.
?? Maintain collections for child support at or above $182
million.
?? Develop and implement a process to provide customers
with referrals to outside community agencies to
assist in attaining self-sufficiency.
?? Develop a process to assist customers in establishing a
parenting time order along with a child support order to
build healthy relationships and consistent payment.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Ensure residents are protected from crime or abuse.
?? Develop and implement a domestic violence
screening tool for customers seeking to establish a
parenting time order as part of the Parenting Time
Opportunities for Children grant.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Meet or exceed the federal performance measure goal,
which measures program cost effectiveness, by collecting
at least $3.88 for every $1.00 spent on operations.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Increase community awareness of the CLERB through
quarterly stakeholder outreach.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Maintain public accountability of Sheriff and Probation
peace officers, to the extent allowed by law, by conducting
timely investigation and review of citizens’
complaints of misconduct.
?? Issue and publicly distribute monthly workload reports
to the CLERB and the Sheriff’s and Probation departments.
Complete a comprehensive annual report with a
thorough accounting of new complaints and case closures,
including an analysis of citizen complaint trends
and recommendations for policy change.
?? Complete 95% of complaint investigations within one
year of receipt, unless delayed due to lengthy investigations
that may be required in complex cases.
?? Provide monthly “early warning” reports to the Sheriff
and Probation departments regarding the nature of
complaints filed and the identity and assignment of the
employees, when known, to enable corrective action
when necessary.
?? Maintain a transparent and independent citizen complaint
process, to the extent allowed by law, which provides
relevant feedback and recommendations to the
Sheriff and the Chief Probation Officer.
?? Provide redacted case synopses that include relevant
information for the public while respecting peace officer
confidentiality rights.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Continue to implement Business Process Reengineering
measures, which define a standard, measurable
process and reduce the amount of effort and lead time
required to complete high quality investigations.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Process new complaints in a timely manner. Maintain a
complaint turnaround of two working days or less,
measured from when the complaint was received to
when case documents were completed and returned to
the complainant for signature.Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Increase public awareness of the importance of personal
preparedness by providing presentations and
attending safety events for children and adults, for a
total of 20 events.
?? Promote the SD Emergency application for mobile
devices to increase the number of downloads by conducting
10 public service outreach events. SD Emergency
provides interactive access to local disaster
information throughout the county.
?? Ensure communities are resilient to disasters and
emergencies.
?? Promote AlertSanDiego, the County’s mass
notification system, including Accessible
AlertSanDiego, which targets individuals with access
and functional needs, throughout the County to
increase the number of registrants by conducting 10
public service outreach events.
?? Develop a regional preparedness guide for childcare
facilities and conduct outreach to 5,000 registered
childcare facilities. The preparedness guide will
increase the ability of regional childcare facilities to
ready their staff and families for emergencies.
?? Maintain and enhance comprehensive continuity of
operations plans and site evacuation plans for all
County facilities. These plans ensure the safety of
the public while visiting a County facility and
continuity of County core services following a
disaster.
?? Assist in the planning and coordination of three
disaster trainings, summits or exercises that
incorporate community-based organizations.
?? Provide quarterly information, such as bulletins or
other communications, through the ReadySanDiego
Partner Connection website.
?? Ensure readiness in the region by participating in one
nuclear power plant exercise, which will examine the
region’s ability to respond to an event at SONGS. Participants
will include federal, State, and local jurisdictions
and private sector partners.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Translate recently developed preparedness materials
into Spanish, Tagalog, and Vietnamese languages to
assist in the outreach to diverse populations in the
county.
?? Continue to promote and implement training for
regional partners on emergency-related technology.
?? Adapt curriculum, refine the standards for use and
conduct at least one training for regional partners on
the proper use of the AlertSanDiego mass
notification system.
?? Conduct quarterly WebEOC training for regional
partners. WebEOC provides online communication
tools for responders during a crisis.
?? Provide for the development of hazard-specific
annexes to the Operational Area Emergency Plan.
?? Facilitate the development of a cyber-security
hazard-specific annex, to increase the regional ability
to detect and respond to cyber threats.
?? Direct the creation of an earthquake hazard-specific
annex to assist the region’s response to and recovery
from a catastrophic earthquake.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Improve the San Diego County Emergency website and
the SD Emergency application for mobile devices by
integrating detailed and feature-rich maps to enhance
public knowledge of active emergency areas and
recovery facilities.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Continue enabling timely sharing of detailed information
with customers (families, law enforcement agencies,
hospitals, insurance companies, media, etc.)
regarding the cause and manner of death.
?? Complete 85% of investigative reports in 60 days or
less.
?? Complete 95% of toxicology reports in 60 days or
less.
?? Complete 80% of examination reports in 60 days or
less.
?? Complete 95% of case reports in 7 days or less.
?? Enable timely progress of the justice system by completing
95% of homicide examination reports in 60
days or less.
?? Ensure neighborhoods are safe to work, live and play.
?? Gather epidemiology information to address public
health issues and partner with agencies to alert the
community on patterns and trends. These trends will
be communicated through press releases and an
annual report published online.
?? Continue to train medical residents, students and
first responders on forensic investigations by fulfilling
100% of requests, at least 75, within 4 months of the
request.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Continue to contribute to research efforts in childhood
death by providing statistics and case examples, and
lending expertise through active participation in groups
such as the San Diego County Child Fatality Committee,
the Methamphetamine Strike Force, MECAP,
NICHD, Prescription Drug Task Force, Domestic Violence
Task Force and the California SIDS Advisory
Council.
?? Continue to contribute to research efforts in
Alzheimer’s, Epilepsy, Autism and Schizophrenic studies
by providing tissue to academic research organizations,
with family consent.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Continue to assist in the healing process of those who
have lost a loved one by providing timely and compassionate
service and accurate information about Medical
Examiner procedures.
?? Notify 90% of next-of-kin for identified Medical
Examiner cases in 12 hours or less.
?? Enable timely funeral services for families by making
97% of bodies ready for release in 7 days or less.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Increase public safety and reduce crime by providing
supervision and services so that 70% of juvenile probationers
complete their probation without a new sustained
law violation.
?? Provide rehabilitative services to youth in custody to
prepare them for success in the community.
?? Continue to provide employment readiness services
to at least 85% of youth in custody who are over the
age of 16.
?? Continue to provide services to reduce delinquency
in at least 95% of youth in custody who are at high
risk of delinquency.
?? Continue to provide substance abuse services to at
least 90% of youth assessed to have substance
abuse needs.
?? Provide rehabilitative opportunities in order to reduce
future criminal offenses by connecting adult and juvenile
offenders with appropriate community resources.
?? Link high-risk juvenile probationers to communitybased
services associated with the juvenile’s
assessed need.
?? Link high-risk adult offenders under supervision to Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Residents are protected from crime and abuse.
?? Increase public safety and reduce crime by providing
supervision and services using evidence-based and
best practices to adults under supervision.
?? Sixty-five percent of adult probationers will complete
their probation without being convicted of a new
crime.
?? Expand the number of post release offenders who
complete their supervision without being convicted
of a new crime.
?? Maximize the number of searches on probationers by
conducting at least 6,300 searches to ensure that
probationers are in compliance with their terms of
supervision and not in possession of illegal
contraband such as weapons, drugs, child
pornography and/or gang-related paraphernalia.
?? Partner with local, State and federal law enforcement
agencies to monitor high-risk offenders.
?? Increase the percentage of participation in multiagency
operations including gang operations,
truancy sweeps, probation and parole sweeps, and
sobriety checkpoints by 5% to at least 285
operations.
?? Educate crime victims of their constitutional rights and
provide victim input to the court regarding sentencing,
restitution and other conditions of probation.
?? Contact 99% of available victims and inform them of
their right to restitution and a victim impact
statement.
?? Increase the percentage of restitution collected from
adult probationers by 20% to a total of
approximately $2.5 million to increase services for
crime victims.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Ensure continuous improvement and innovation by
improving processes.
?? Expand the use of the Community Resource
Directory to juvenile supervision, which supports a
balanced approach by providing access to
community resources based on offender needs.
?? Develop a web-based enrollment for work projects to
improve efficiency.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Residents are protected from crime or abuse.
?? Reduce recidivism and help offenders successfully
reenter society by encouraging clients to take
advantage of programs that will allow them to thrive
by successfully completing probation and reduce the
likelihood of reoffending.
?? File approximately 350 misdemeanor expungement
requests to help clients obtain meaningful
employment.
?? File approximately 400 felony expungement
requests to help clients obtain meaningful
employment.
?? Represent approximately 250 prison inmates with
life sentences who qualify for a sentence recall and
resentence under Proposition 36, State Three
Strikes Law, which was approved by voters in
November 2012.
?? Promote collaborative justice by establishing a professional
rapport and bond of trust with clients and work
with criminal justice partners to ensure a reasonable
and efficient criminal justice system and obtain the
best possible outcome for the client.
?? Resolve 70% of misdemeanor cases prior to trial
when doing so benefits the client more than
litigation.
?? Resolve 62% of felony cases within 60 days of
arraignment when doing so benefits the client more
than litigation.
?? Promote collaborative justice by participating in specialty
courts aimed at linking services to clients with
specialized needs.
?? Participate in Offender Reentry Court, Adult and
Juvenile Drug Court, and Homeless Court to help
ensure clients obtain the services they need to
become self-sufficient and maintain a crime-free
lifestyle.
?? Maintain 90% of caseload capacity in the Behavioral
Health Court Calendar.
?? Maintain 90% of caseload capacity in the Veterans
Treatment Review Calendar.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Improve opportunities for children and families by
assisting juvenile delinquency clients to be successful
in their rehabilitation programs and on probation.
?? Use juvenile record sealing statutes to assist juvenile
clients in clearing their records to gain employment
or to participate in training and/or education
programs, for 80% of requests.
?? Maintain the number of elapsed days between
admission and sentencing in juvenile cases at an
average of 28 days to accelerate rehabilitation.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of services
by storing case-related information electronically.
?? Receive discovery electronically on 65% of incoming
adult felony cases.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Ensure a qualified, well-trained and diverse workforce
to effectively represent all cases appointed to the
department.
?? Achieve 15 hours of annual continuing legal
education for all attorneys.
?? Achieve eight hours of annual investigation-related
training for all investigators.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Develop and maintain partnerships with educational
and community organizations to leverage resources
and address common needs.
?? Maintain at least 90,000 hours provided by
volunteers.
?? Participate in four community outreach events
through the Public Defender’s Community Outreach
Program.
?? Train approximately 725 non-staff attorneys
concurrently with staff attorneys to build
relationships and strengthen the criminal justice
system.
?? Provide 50 streaming video trainings to the
department’s branch offices and other indigent
defense agencies.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Provide regional leadership with the implementation of
the County’s Fire Master Plan and continue collaboration
with other fire agencies to improve overall efficiency
through consolidation and sharing of resources.
?? Continue to support efforts towards implementation
of Step III of the County’s Fire and Life Safety
Reorganization Report.
?? Continue to build relationships to improve regional
fire protection and emergency response services,
including collaboration with Tribal Governments.
?? Collaborate with other fire agencies to review and
explore options to improve the alternate energy fire
standards.
?? Ensure neighborhoods are safe to work, live and play.
?? Provide vegetation management/defensible space
outreach and education by distributing flyers to
property owners within CSA 135. Evaluate the
feasibility of expanding the Vegetation Management
Program to additional fire agencies in the
unincorporated area.
?? Amend the County Fire Code for consistency with
the revised California Code of Regulations, California
Fire Code and present the County Fire Code to the
Board of Supervisors for adoption by June 30, 2014.
?? Develop the 2014 Consolidated Fire Code, which will
consolidate the fire codes of the 16 individual fire
protection districts and present the Consolidated
Fire Code to the Board of Supervisors for adoption
by December 31, 2014.
?? Submit the County Fire Code and Consolidated Fire
Code to the State Board of Forestry for certification
by June 30, 2015.
?? Ensure communities are resilient to disasters and
emergencies.
?? Implement programs that will help protect residents
from wildfire and other natural disasters.
?? Establish and implement programs to enhance
volunteer firefighter emergency training and
readiness.
?? Continue implementation of the ASAP NET and
evaluation of the volunteer fire stations’ connectivity
network to improve communications with volunteer
firefighters.
?? Oversee completion of the U.S. Forest Service’s Fire
Safety and Fuels Reduction grant program to remove
approximately 3,500 large dead, dying and diseased
trees from private property within the Greater Julian
area.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Pursue grant funding opportunities to support the partnering
fire services agencies, including collaboration
with non-profit and other governmental agencies.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Conduct site visits to volunteer fire stations in CSA 135
to ensure contract compliance.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative - Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system that is innovative,
impactful, and outcome driven. A few examples
include the following:
?? Provide public health nurse home visits to CCTP
participants to help them proactively manage their
chronic medical conditions and avoid costly hospital
readmissions.
?? Continue implementation of the multi-year
Community Transformation Grant to support public
health efforts to reduce chronic diseases, promote
healthier lifestyles, reduce health disparities, and
decrease health care costs.
?? Strengthen Child Welfare Services by implementing/
expanding trauma-informed practices to and colocating
with staff from community based
organizations to improve outcomes such as timely
reunification and stable out-of-home placements.
?? Support positive choices that empower residents to
take responsibility for their own health and wellbeing.
A few examples include the following:
?? Continue implementation of the multi-year
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Education (SNAP-Ed) grant to promote nutrition
education and obesity prevention services to lowincome
families that are potentially eligible for the
federally funded CalFresh food assistance program.
This project is a continuation of the grant formerly
known as the Community Nutrition Education
program.
?? Implement a program for high-risk individuals with
severe mental illness to take required medications
and participate in treatment.
?? Pursue policy and environmental changes that
make it easier for people to engage in healthy and
safe behaviors. A few examples include the following:
?? Implement regional community health improvement
plans through the participation or leadership of
Resident Leadership Academy (RLA) graduates. The
purpose of RLA is to build community capacity for
health improvement in local neighborhoods.
?? Support Department of Human Resources wellness
initiatives that promote healthy and safe behaviors in
the workplace.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Continue transition of Healthy Families and Low
Income Health Program participants into appropriate
health programs to promote continuity of care and a
medical home, providing patient-centered, comprehensive,
and coordinated care.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Accountability
and Transparency
?? Pursue voluntary Public Health Accreditation status to
promote accountability and continuous improvement.
?? Continue electronic information exchange activities
including Beacon Health Information Exchange with
hospitals and KIP procurement efforts.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by providing protection,
permanency and stability to children who are
at-risk or have been abused and neglected.
?? Improve outcomes for children by having 44% (2,442
of 5,550) of families participate in joint case planning
and meetings.
?? Support stability of foster youth by placing 49%
(1,421 of 2,900) with a relative or non-related
extended family member.
?? Support stability of children in foster care (8 days or
more, but less than 12 months) by ensuring 83%
(1,718 of 2,070) have fewer than three placements
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system to maximize the
health and well-being of at-risk children and families,
and vulnerable adults
?? Promote healthy outcomes by ensuring 41% (31 of
75) of women in the Maternal Child Health and NFP
programs continue to breastfeed their infant at 6
months of age.
?? Reduce the onset of preventable illness or disease
by immunizing 98% (1,583 of 1,615) of children age
0-4 years and 98% (1,470 of 1,500) of children and
adolescents age 11-18 years served at Public Health
Centers and clinics.
?? Enroll 80% (98,320 of 122,900) of Health Care
Options attendees in a managed care plan of their
choice.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Advance operational excellence in customer service
through technology, timely processing and improved
accuracy.
?? Implement plan to enroll newly eligible Medi-Cal
recipients anticipated from the federal Affordable
Care Act.
?? Implement technological enhancements to improve
customer service at the Family Resource Centers.
?? Implement plan to improve accuracy and timely
processing of CalFresh benefits.
?? Increase by 20% (from 52 to 62) the number of
ACCESS call center agents trained to perform
eligibility determinations for more than two public
assistance programs.
?? Ensure timely processing of 91% (of 12,000) of
CalFresh applications at the Family Resource
Centers and the ACCESS call center.
South Region
The South Region has four cities and seven communities
and is bordered in the south by Mexico. HHSA staff from
the South Region provide regional services, lead the
Healthy Eating Active Communities (HEAC) project, and
manage the South Region NFP and Families as Partners
(FAP). HEAC aims to prevent childhood obesity and ensure
healthy adulthood by reducing health risks associated with
obesity. NFP is an evidence-based program that helps firsttime,
high-risk, low-income mothers. FAP is a public-private
partnership that will provide a community safety net for
South Region’s children and youth who are at risk of entering
foster care or who are currently in the system.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Promote stability and permanency by implementing the
Neighborhood for Kids initiative which strives to keep
abused and neglected children in safe, familiar environments
such as schools.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Improve customer service and operational efficiencies
by increasing the number of customers using the webbased
online appointment scheduling system by 40%
(from 46 to 64) for accessing Public Health services.
Central Region
The Central Region encompasses San Diego city’s urban
core consisting of 50 neighborhoods with a multitude of
diverse culture and population. Central Region is bordered
to the North by Interstate 8, extending eastward to the cities
of Lemon Grove and La Mesa, continuing south to
National City, and westward to the San Diego Bay. HHSA
staff from the Central Region provide regional services and
lead countywide efforts such as a pilot on eliminating disparities
of African-American children in Child Welfare and
key initiatives on improving access and outcomes for the
homeless population. Effective Fiscal Year 2013-14, the
ACCESS Customer Service Center, an extension of the
County of San Diego’s Family Resource Centers will be
reported under Central Region. ACCESS serves residents,
providers and other agencies related to self-sufficiency programs
and services.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Promote stability and permanency by developing and
implementing a strategic plan for the Neighborhood for
Kids initiative using data, to keep abused and
neglected children in safe, familiar environments such
as schools.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Improve customer service and access to public assistance
benefits by establishing video interviewing in a
Southeast community in Central Region.
North Central Region
The North Central Region comprises the central-western
portions of the County, 38 diverse communities that extend
from coastal to inland, stretching from Del Mar in the north,
to Point Loma in the south, and east to Scripps Ranch and
Mira Mesa. Interstate 8 marks the regions southern border.
Also within the region are three military installations and two
major universities. HHSA staff support the large military
population found in North Central Region by participating in
efforts through multiple venues and access points, such as
engaging in efforts through the Healthy Start Military Cluster
and San Diego Military Family Collaborative including
the North Central Live Well, San Diego! initiative. Effective
Fiscal Year 2013-14, the Health Coverage Access program
will be reported under North Central Region. This program
assists clients with accessing healthcare at more than 35
sites including hospitals and mental/physical health clinics.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system through NFP,
resulting in healthy outcomes for children of NFP participants.
?? 90% (124 of 138) of NFP participants will initiate
breast feeding.
?? 90% (66 of 73) of children enrolled in the NFP
program will receive their required immunizations by
6 months of age.
?? Support community involvement and participation by
developing leaders and making positive changes to the
quality of life in neighborhoods by encouraging participation
in the Resident Leadership Academies (RLA)
and the Communities of Excellence projects. The purpose
of the RLA is to build community capacity for
health improvement in local neighborhoods.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Advance operational excellence through customer service.
?? Enhance customer experience by making
improvements to lobby and application process.
?? Expand outreach activities and sites to accept
CalFresh applications thereby increasing access to
nutritious food.
East Region
The East Region is a mixture of urban, suburban and rural
communities, including several Native American reservations
and a large Iraqi refugee population. East Region was
the first region to administer NFP, an evidence-based program
helping first-time, low-income mothers to succeed.
East Region also administers Neighborhoods for Kids, an
initiative that strives to keep abused and neglected children
in safe, familiar environments and in their same schools.
East Region houses the Document Processing Center
which supports Family Resources Centers in all regions by
converting documents to electronic records.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system that promotes
stability and permanency of at-risk children through the
Neighborhood for Kids initiative.
?? 75% (236 of 315) of children will be placed in a
familiar environment, such as protective custody with
a relative or family friend, or a school.
?? 48% (72 of 150) of children will be placed with their
parents within 12 months.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Support positive choices for healthy living of NFP participants
and their children.
?? 92% (782 of 850) of NFP participants will initiate
breast-feeding.
?? 33% (13 of 40) of NFP parents will decrease
smoking.
?? Promote healthy living of children in protective custody
by ensuring they are up to date on health exams.
?? 90% (222 of 247) of children in protective custody
are current on annual medical exams.
?? 90% (142 of 158) of children in protective custody
are current on annual dental exams.
?? Support positive choices by linking culturally appropriate
service providers to refugee families to promote
self-sufficiency by supporting community involvement
and participation.
?? Develop leaders through participation in the RLA and
Communities of Excellence projects.
North Inland Region
The North Inland Region includes four cities, remote desert
communities, historic mountain towns, rural homes and
farms, and numerous Native American reservations. The
region’s eastern border is the Imperial County line. In addition
to providing core regional services, North Inland
Region facilitates the Rural Health Network and North
County Cares. The Rural Health Network is a forum that
brings together government and community service providers
to collaborate and leverage health resources for rural
San Diego County communities. North County Cares is a
collaboration of the HHSA, community partners, families,
and child welfare services working together to improve outcomes
for North County children and their families.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by implementing
the second year of the Neighborhood for Kids model.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system through NFP,
improving health outcomes for NFP children.
?? 91% (58 of 64) of NFP participants’ children will be
current with immunizations.
?? 91% (67 of 74) of NFP participants will initiate
breastfeeding.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Service
?? Advance operational excellence in customer service by
improving access to public assistance programs by
increasing the number of video interview clients by 5%
(from 1,000 to 1,050).
North Coastal Region
The North Coastal Region consists of six cities, Camp
Pendleton and more than a dozen communities. The
region’s northern border is the Orange County line. In addition
to providing core regional services, HHSA staff from
the North Coastal Region facilitate HealthLink North County
and North County Cares. HealthLink North County is a
school health-focused, public-private partnership to
improve health and education outcomes for North County's
school children. North County Cares is a collaboration of
the HHSA, community partners, families, and child welfare
services working together to improve outcomes for North
County children and their families.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by providing
PHN services and implementing the second year of the
Neighborhood for Kids model.
?? Provide at least 640 PHN service contacts to military
families, in order to support the safety and protection
of children and military families.
?? Implement the second year of the Neighborhood for
Kids model which will support stability and
educational growth of children coming into
protective custody by placing these children in a
home where they can attend their school of origin.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system through NFP,
improving health outcomes for vulnerable children.
?? 91% (30 of 33) of NFP participants’ children will be
current with their immunizations.
?? 91% (31 of 34) of NFP participants will initiate
breastfeeding.
Effective Fiscal Year 2013-14, HHSA reorganized SPOS to
facilitate operational effectiveness and efficiency in order to
improve service delivery to clients. Two major functions,
eligibility operations and health care policy will be part of
Regional Operations. The remaining function, strategy
innovation will be part of Administrative Support.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system by safeguarding
and protecting vulnerable adults from neglect and
abuse, including financial, physical and emotional.
?? 96% (7,200 of 7,500) of face-to-face contacts are
conducted within 10 days of receiving an APS
referral.
?? 91% (6,825 of 7,500) of APS cases are not rereferred
within six months of case closing
?? Ensure that 100% (1,230) of conservatorship
investigations for Public Guardian (PG) and Public
Conservator (PC) begin within two business days of
assignment to an investigator as mandated by the
Omnibus Conservatorship and Guardianship Reform
Act.
?? Complete 95% (119 of 125) of follow-up face-to-face
visits with conservatees living in San Diego County
within 30 days of previous date of face–to-face visit.
?? Begin 96% (480 of 500) of all bank inquiries within
two business days to safeguard and protect the
assets and resources of clients.
?? Submit 100% (10) of Inventory and Appraisal reports
of all estate cases in the PG Program within 90 days
of receiving letters of conservatorship to the Court.
?? Ensure 95% (998 of 1,050) of Public Administrator
(PA) investigations are begun within two business
days of a referral being assigned for investigation.
?? Submit 100% (20) Inventory and Appraisal reports of
all formal probate cases in the PA Program within
120 days of receiving letters of Administration to the
Court. A formal probate case is an estate valued over
$150,000 and is under court supervision.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system to improve quality
and efficient care for vulnerable adults ensuring
90% (3,111 of 3,457) of high-risk CCTP Medicare feefor-
service beneficiaries who receive a Care Transitions
Intervention (CTI) or CTI Care Enhancement intervention
by AIS, will have a home visit completed within
three (3) calendar days of discharge from a partner
Acute Care Hospital or Skilled Nursing Facility.
?? Support positive choices that foster independence
among seniors and educational opportunities for veterans
and their families.
?? Connect 2,318 older adults with volunteer
opportunities, promoting Live Well, San Diego!
through active living.
?? Maintain 96% (528 of 550) participation in the MSSP
case management program helping to avoid, delay
or remedy inappropriate placement in nursing
facilities.
?? Notify 99% (4,950 of 5,000) of customers assisted by
Veteran’s Services within 14 calendar days of the
result of their college tuition waiver application.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Advance operational excellence in customer service by
ensuring 96% (15,840 of 16,500) of annual IHSS reassessments
are recertified timely so that clients receive
the appropriate level of care to remain safely in their
own home.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Advance operational excellence of a skilled workforce
by maintaining 100% (19) mandated California State
PA/PG certification for applicable PA/PG staff in order
to improve services to conservatees and families of
decedents.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system for children and
adults with behavioral and physical health needs by
providing timely intervention to children who have complex
behavioral/emotional needs through the KidSTART
program by serving 250 children ages 0-5 years
?? Build a better service delivery system through the integration
of physical and behavioral health services with
two modified service delivery system programs.
?? ICARE program.
?? Maintain baseline of 3% (6 of 200) of participants
reporting inpatient hospitalization for physical
health reasons.
?? Maintain baseline of 20% (40 of 200) of
participants reporting an emergency room visit.
?? Maintain current levels of program satisfaction
among participants.
?? SmartCare program.
?? Continue enhancement of psychiatric consultation
services.
?? Increase the use of the wellness blog in the online
newspaper Ramona Patch that serves the rural
community.
?? Maintain 90% (270 of 300) client satisfaction with
the integrated care model.
?? Support positive choices among participants in alcohol
and drug treatment programs.
?? Support educational growth and overall well-being of
adolescents who complete alcohol and drug
treatment by ensuring 90% (833 of 925) either
complete high school (or the equivalent) or are
enrolled in an educational setting.
?? Support healthy and safe living by ensuring that 35%
(4,550 of 13,000) of participants complete alcohol
and drug treatment.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Advance operational excellence in customer service
through timely and improved access to services.
?? Ensure access to outpatient mental health
assessments for at-risk children and youth by
maintaining an average wait time of five days or less.
?? Ensure access to care and treatment in
nonresidential alcohol and drug treatment programs
for adolescents by admitting 85% (1,224 of 1,440)
within 14 days
?? Improve access for older adults by serving an
additional 5% (from 5,832 to 6,123), including
through senior-focused prevention, early
intervention, and treatment services.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Advance operational excellence by demonstrating
accountability and commitment to outstanding patient
care.
?? Maintain full accreditation with the Joint Commission
Standards Compliance for SDCPH.
?? Maintain a State rating of substantial compliance for
Edgemoor DPSNF.
?? Maintain a readmission rate at SDCPH that is lower
than the readmission rate for fee-for-service
hospitals of 26.56% for Fiscal Year 2012-13.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system to protect vulnerable
children and youth by improving child welfare
practices.
?? Improve community engagement and service
integration by identifying new opportunities for colocation
of Child Welfare Services staff with staff from
community-based organizations and other public
agencies in order to make it easier for children and
parents to access services in their neighborhoods
and in familiar environments.
?? Improve child well-being outcomes, such as timely
reunification and stable out-of-home placements,
through the implementation of a practice framework that includes continuous quality improvement,
trauma-informed practice, and improved staff
development and training.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system for vulnerable
children and youth by strengthening families and supporting
transitions to adulthood.
?? Place 70% (175 of 250) of youth enrolled in intensive
home-based services (i.e. Wraparound) in a homelike
setting to improve their connections to home and
community and to reduce the use of costly group
home placements.
?? Promote housing stability by maintaining safe and
secure placements for at least 96% (259 of 270) of
the young adults that are in Extended Foster Care in
order to promote self-sufficiency and prevent
homelessness.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Build a trauma informed Child Welfare system by
developing and implementing an action plan to
address the negative impact of trauma on children’s
development, which can include behavioral and physical
problems in adulthood.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people at the right time, for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Build a better service delivery system through implementation
of programs to protect the health of the public.
?? Reduce the spread of disease by investigating 99%
(130) of reported selected communicable disease
cases within 24 hours.
?? Prevent transmission of tuberculosis (TB) by ensuring
96% (260) of cases are reported within one working
day from start of treatment.
?? Increase access to healthcare by connecting 98%
(980 of 1,000) of new case management clients with
an HIV primary care provider within 90 days.
?? Ensure preparedness for response during a disaster
or public health threat by activating the public health
emergency response system a minimum of five
times.
?? Support Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA)
regions in the implementation and monitoring of Live
Well, San Diego! Community Health Improvement
Plans.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Build a better service delivery system for vulnerable
children.
?? Ensure preventive health examinations are
performed to identify and correct health issues for
86% (2,580 of 3,000) of children in out-of-home
placement.
?? Expedite California Children Services (CCS) referrals
and improve accuracy by receiving 60% (39,000 of
65,000) of referrals electronically.
?? Promote positive nutrition choices throughout the
county.
?? Work with the San Diego Unified School District to
change procurement practices that will lead to
improved school meals that incorporate more fresh
fruits and vegetables and decrease sodium content
as part of the Community Transformation Grant
activities.
?? Implement the first year of the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program Education (SNAP-Ed) activities, to
provide nutrition education and obesity prevention services
to low-income families who are potentially eligible
for the federally funded CalFresh food assistance program.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Advance operational excellence through continuous
improvement.
?? Conduct a minimum of six quality improvement
projects.
?? Apply to the Public Health Accreditation Board for
national public health accreditation.
Effective Fiscal Year 2013-14, Public Administrator/Public
Guardian and Behavioral Health Conservator unit will
become part of Aging and Independence Services to reflect
the reorganization of HHSA to improve effectiveness and
efficiency in service delivery.
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time for the best possible outcome.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Support positive choices by ensuring 50% (650 of
1,300) of youth participating in a juvenile diversion program
do not enter, or reenter, the system.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Support operational excellence in the workforce by
implementing a comprehensive ergonomic plan,
including a thorough assessment of new employees
within 90 days of their start date.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Advance operational excellence by ensuring public
funds are used in accordance with funding requirements.
?? Complete 21 comprehensive financially focused
compliance review of contractors. A comprehensive
financial focused compliance review consists of
testing financial material, review of contractor
financial systems and controls, and observation of
contractor systems, activities and processes. A
review can take from one month to nine months to
complete.
?? Complete 15 quality assurance reviews of Region/
Divisions to ensure adherence to contracting policies
and procedures. Beginning Fiscal Year 2013-14, the
selection methodology for review has been revised
to reflect integration of administrative efforts within
HHSA. All departments with contracts will receive
one integrated quality assurance review report.
Departments, such as Behavioral Health Services
(BHS) and Public Health Services (PHS), both with
more than 100 contracts will receive two integrated
quality assurance review reports.
?? Conduct 15 internal reviews of offices with petty
cash to ensure appropriate controls are in place.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Advance operational excellence by supporting implementation
of Live Well, San Diego! through efforts such
as the Resident Leadership Academy (RLA). The purpose
of RLA is to build community capacity for health
improvement in local neighborhoods.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Advance operational excellence by supporting
improvements in HHSA’s technological framework to
help HHSA build a better service delivery system.
?? Establish policies and practices to improve access to
quality data and information so that services are
delivered efficiently and effectively.
?? Identify and move program information to more
efficient and cost-effective IT systems.
?? Implement second phase of Knowledge Integration
Project to procure vendor for electronic information
exchange system.
?? Establish an operations research unit and use
discipline to analyze and improve services to the
community.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Repaint and re-mark all crosswalks and roadway legends
adjacent to all 121 public school and 12 private
school locations in the unincorporated areas of the
county.
?? Reduce vandalism and theft by installing safety/security
cameras at three park facilities.
?? Install Wi-Fi at one park site to provide staff and customers
greater access to online emergency notifications
and information.
?? Protect public health and the environment by minimizing
the risk of sewer spills.
?? As the Goldspotted Oak Borer (GSOB) continues to
decimate oak trees, expand and enhance the existing
program established as a foundation for GSOB education
and outreach. Create online training and self-testing
modules for public land managers, homeowners,
recreationalists and other groups as needed, on the
biology, impacts and symptoms, and best management
practices relating to GSOB.
?? Work with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and Baja California, Mexico as the U.S. Co-Chair
of the Border 2020 Emergency Preparedness and
Response Group for the San Diego-Tijuana region to:
?? Coordinate and conduct binational emergency
training with the goal of ensuring that responders in
the region use the same equipment, procedures and
have the same training.
?? Integrate the Office of Emergency Services
Operational Area Emergency Operations Center and
the Tijuana Protection Civil’s Emergency Operations
Center into binational exercises.
?? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and
improvements are designed and constructed in accordance
with building safety codes.
?? Review proposed building plans to ensure structures
are properly and safely designed.
?? Help customers navigate the building permit and
inspection process by explaining code requirements
and exploring options to achieve compliance.
?? Conduct building inspections during construction to
ensure structures are built in accordance with
approved building plans.

Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Ensure agricultural commodities meet international
shipping requirements by continuing cropland trapping
for the Light Brown Apple Moth. Inspect 300 cropland
traps once every 30 days to meet export requirements
for Canada and Mexico.
?? Increase industry’s awareness of pesticide regulators’
roles and responsibilities in protecting human health,
safety and the environment by conducting 12 outreach
activities and regulatory updates during Fiscal Year
2013-14.
?? Provide staff to assist in the coordination and training
of 1,000 volunteers through the Master Gardener and
4-H programs to provide 205,000 hours of volunteer
service.
?? Save 30 million gallons of water at 19 park facilities that
have converted to smart irrigation controllers, resulting
in water conservation.
?? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency
through economic incentives such as reduced fees and
fee waivers. Issue 2,000 photovoltaic permits for solar
power systems under an expedited fee waiver program.
?? Partner with East Otay Mesa property owners, the San
Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG), the California
Department of Transportation (CalTrans) and the
City of San Diego to plan and construct a regional sanitary
sewer network to support the phased implementation
of the East Otay Mesa Specific Plan while
safeguarding public health and the environment.
?? Reduce air pollution emissions and health risk from
freight movement using State Goods Movement Emission
Reduction Program (Proposition1B) funds to
award grants to equipment owners to replace older,
higher emitting heavy-duty diesel equipment with
newer, cleaner models.
?? Protect the health of the public by reducing exposure
to hazardous air pollutants by implementing test emissions
from all natural gas, expanding the network of air
monitors for carbonyl compounds, and developing the
capability to deploy an emergency network of 2 fine
particulate matter (PM2.5) monitors within 48 hours of
any wildfire and link the instruments via satellite for
real-time data delivery to the public.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Provide administrative and instructional material support
for 350 4-H adult and youth volunteer leaders to
conduct community-based educational programs to 25
4-H clubs, 7 after-school sites and 8 military 4-H sites.
?? Create safer parks, preserves and recreation centers
using volunteers to assist with park patrols, operations,
and maintenance by contributing more than 96,000
hours annually.
?? Promote healthy lifestyles for 2,000 adults and seniors
through participation in 60 recreation programs.
?? Ensure that all construction work by utility companies
and private developers in the County’s right-of-way
that is within 1,000 feet of a school site provides safe
access to schools for families and children.
?? Educate 5,000 children on awareness of and protection
from mosquito-borne diseases and other vectorrelated
diseases, environmental health careers, and
food and pool safety by conducting outreach presentations
to primary and/or secondary school children at
schools or other outreach events throughout the year.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Complete 85% of all (over 130) investigative reports of
pesticide illness complaints within 120 days by implementing
efficiencies identified during the Pesticide
Regulation Program’s Business Process Re-engineering
and using the functionality of BCMS by June 30,
2014.
?? Implement changes and monitor the Community Event
Permit (CEP) process for improved customer service.
?? Develop and implement a streamlined application process
for grants under the Goods Movement Emission
Reduction Program to allow easier application completion
and to reduce APCD processing times, resulting in
faster project completion and earlier emission reductions.
?? Conduct a study on the use of a rapid molecular diagnostic
test to improve the response to sewage-contaminated
beach water.
?? Complete the development of a new online payment
tool for land development projects. The new tool will
accept electronic payment for permits, fees and
deposits, reducing the need for customers to physically
visit an office.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Increase participation in the Mobile Incentive Program
by participating in eight community outreach events
about APCD’s mobile source emission reduction incentive
programs and grant funding opportunities.
?? Use State Air Quality Improvement Program grant
funding to implement an Advanced Hybrid School Bus
Demonstration Project in partnership with Transportation
Power, Inc. (TransPower), an electric propulsion
system manufacturer located in Poway. San Diego
County school districts will be given the opportunity to
gain hands-on experience with the advanced hybrid
school bus during the demonstration period.
?? Provide excellent customer service by diagnosing
100% of over 31,000 plant and insect samples within
two weeks of submission.
?? Ensure consumers get what they pay for by completing
100% of annual inspections for fuel meters, taxi
meters, water dispensers and computing scales, and
90% of all counter scales.
?? Implement the use of an online intake form to receive
public complaints of food borne illness.
?? Develop a new customer service program for PDS,
including identification of customer and stakeholder
priorities, customer service training and an online customer
satisfaction survey to measure performance.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Create a program that allows applicants for privatelyinitiated
development projects that are consistent with
the General Plan densities to rely on the General Plan
Update Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for certain
environmental impact assessments. As a result, applicants
of these projects no longer will need to assess,
analyze and/or mitigate cumulative project impacts that
are required under the California Environmental Quality
Act, saving applicants money and several months in
the permit process.
?? Host a Hazardous Analysis and Critical Control Points
workshop in coordination with the restaurant industry,
the Food and Drug Administration and the California
Department of Public Health to educate local industry
and regulators; invite regulators from neighboring jurisdictions
to participate in the training.
?? Work with the Industrial Environmental Association
(IEA) to provide the annual “IEA-APCD Blue Sky Leadership
Award” to three local businesses.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Continue to refine and enhance the BCMS Accela
Automation system that integrates land development
permit operations, time accounting and finances of
land development permits.
?? Convert all 14 of the County’s intranet and internet
mapping applications to the current industry-standard
technology ArcGIS Server using Microsoft Silverlight.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Ensure agricultural commodities meet international
shipping requirements by continuing cropland trapping
for the Light Brown Apple Moth. Inspect 300 cropland
traps once every 30 days to meet export requirements
for Canada and Mexico.
?? During Fiscal Year 2013-14, protect commercial produce,
residential gardens and parks from pest infestation
by placing and maintaining over 10,700 traps
designed for early pest detection, thereby mitigating
the need for widespread use of pesticides in the environment.
?? Ensure safe and effective pest management by sending
monthly email communications to County Integrated
Pest Control Coordinators to promote the use of Integrated
Pest Management methods in County facilities
each year.
?? Increase the number of potential pest detection trapping
sites by 10%, (5,500) by distributing multi-lingual
Pest Detection brochures at Certified Farmers’ Markets.
Increasing the pool of trap locations improves the
ability to protect commercial produce, residential gardens
and the environment from pest infestations.
?? Increase industry’s awareness of pesticide regulators’
roles and responsibilities in protecting human health,
safety and the environment by conducting 12 outreach
activities and regulatory updates during Fiscal Year
2013-14.
?? Prevent the spread of the insidious pest Glassy-
Winged Sharpshooter by ensuring 100% of over 2,700
plant shipments arrive at destination with no viable life
stages of the pest.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Improve efficiency and accuracy of the export certification
database, and merge data from two different
sources into one so that reliable data is readily available
to provide reports and make informed decisions
regarding resources and planning in the export program.
?? Improve efficiency and staff access to information by
digitizing 100% of 770 Gypsy Moth and Japanese beetle
host locations developed in the updated statewide
mapping grid by June 30, 2014.
?? Increase operational efficiency and the ability to locate
high priority host plants by incorporating 30% of previously
developed trapping sites (16,440 of 54,825) into
the recently implemented statewide mapping grid system
by June 30, 2014.
?? Complete 85% of all (over 130) investigative reports of
pesticide illness complaints within 120 days by implementing
efficiencies identified during the Pesticide
Regulation Program’s Business Process Reengineering
and using the functionality of BCMS by June 30, 2014.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Improve training for inspectors by developing a comprehensive
list of BCMS Frequently Asked Questions
with answers and posting on SharePoint by June 30,
2014.
?? By June 30, 2014, identify the departmental information
that is needed by new Agricultural/Standards
Inspectors within their first year of employment to facilitate
a successful move to the next level of departmental
excellence and to prepare for the development of a
departmental Basic Inspector Academy.
?? Incorporate best management practices for terrestrial
weed control into the annual pesticide safety training
for Integrated Pest Control staff to continue protecting
the natural environment from unintentional pesticide
discharges.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Develop a pilot program to allow Plant Health and Pest
Prevention customers to request and schedule inspections
online using Accela Citizen Access by June 30,
2014.
?? Improve communication with Spanish-speaking customers
by posting one outreach presentation regarding
Point of Sale Inspections and compliance in Spanish
on the AWM webpage and translating any required
retail consumer notice posting into Spanish by June
30, 2014.
?? By June 30, 2014, develop an automated notice of proposed
action for gas pump compliance in BCMS to
improve accuracy and timeliness for customers.
?? Provide excellent customer service by diagnosing
100% of over 31,000 plant and insect samples within
two weeks of submission.
?? Ensure consumers get what they pay for by completing
100% of annual inspections for fuel meters, taxi
meters, water dispensers and computing scales, and
90% of all counter scales.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? By June 30, 2014, implement a “near-road” air quality
monitoring station that meets EPA requirements to
measure the emissions impact of on-road motor vehicles.
?? Reduce air pollution emissions and health risk from
freight movement using State Goods Movement Emission
Reduction Program (Proposition1B) funds to
award grants to equipment owners to replace older,
higher emitting heavy-duty diesel equipment with
newer, cleaner models.
?? Maintain an inspection program to protect the public
from the harmful effects of air pollution by annually
conducting 7,400 inspections of equipment at regulated
facilities for compliance with air pollution laws.
?? Collect valid ozone concentration data on at least 90%
of monitoring days in the year, thereby exceeding the
EPA standard of 75% valid samples.
?? Reduce mobile source air pollutant emissions by up to
300 tons by providing incentive grants to projects that
remove high polluting vehicles and engines from service.
?? Support the Juror Transit Pass program in cooperation
with the San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG),
the San Diego Metropolitan Transit System
(MTS), and the courts to reduce transportation-related
emissions resulting from jury duty.
?? Protect the health of the public by reducing exposure
to hazardous air pollutants by implementing the following
actions:
?? Test emissions from all natural gas fired reciprocating
internal combustion engines required to show
compliance with the National Emission Standards for
Hazardous Air Pollutants.
?? Expand the network of air monitors for carbonyl
compounds (toxic air pollutants) to include the
Environmental Justice area of the Barrio Logan
community of San Diego and the Otay Mesa border
crossing. The chemical analysis of air samples will
include tests for formaldehyde, a significant driver of
cancer risk in the nation.
?? Develop the capability to deploy an emergency
network of two fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
monitors within 48 hours of any wildfire and link the
instruments via satellite for real-time data delivery to
the public.
?? Propose a rule for Air Pollution Control Board
consideration to reduce air contaminant emissions
from house paints and other architectural coatings,
reflecting the California Air Resources Board's
Suggested Control Measure for Architectural
Coatings and the current market availability of loweremitting
coatings.
?? Propose a rule for Air Pollution Control Board
consideration to reduce air contaminant emissions
from new, natural gas-fired residential-type water
heaters, reflecting the current market availability of
lower-emitting technologies.
?? In coordination with affected industries, develop
training videos on how to comply with air pollution
control requirements applicable to marine coating
operations.
?? Modify AQI calculations and reporting procedures
used for daily air quality forecasts and reports to
reflect the revised National Ambient Air Quality
Standard for inhalable particulate matter (PM2.5).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Provide excellent customer service by responding to
and investigating 100% of an estimated 545 annual air
pollution complaints from the public.
?? Improve customer service by promptly reviewing all
Carl Moyer Program grant applications upon receipt
and within five business days and notifying applicants
of any additional information that may be required.
?? Use State Air Quality Improvement Program grant
funding to implement an Advanced Hybrid School Bus
Demonstration Project in partnership with Transportation
Power, Inc. (TransPower), an electric propulsion
system manufacturer located in Poway. San Diego
County school districts will be given the opportunity to
gain hands-on experience with the advanced hybrid
school bus during the demonstration period.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Participate in meetings of the San Diego Regional
Clean Cities Coalition and the San Diego Regional
Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Working Group to promote
the use of alternative fuels and alternative fuel
vehicles in the region.
?? In order to provide the public and industry with
resources to help reduce their emissions of air pollutants
the APCD will develop a webpage linkage to educational
resources on the science and impacts of
climate change and actions being taken to curb greenhouse
gas emissions.
?? Collaborate with the San Diego Foundation on its Climate
Initiative and help coordinate with government,
nonprofits, businesses, and consumers to advance
regional efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
?? The APCD will support public awareness and enhance
support of reduction in emissions by recognizing local
leaders in reducing emissions.
?? Coordinate the VIP (Very Important Planet) reception
and the annual San Diego APCD Clean Air Award
hosted by the County of San Diego Third District.
?? Work with the Industrial Environmental Association
(IEA) to provide the annual “IEA-APCD Blue Sky Leadership
Award” to three local businesses.
?? Create greater public awareness of the harmful impacts
of air pollution by participating in two public outreach
events and coordinating activities with events such as
the Earth Day fair.
?? Increase participation in the Mobile Incentive Program
by participating in eight community outreach events
about APCD’s mobile source emission reduction incentive
programs and grant funding opportunities.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Obtain inspection reports for 100% of the equipment
funded through the Carl Moyer Program and Goods
Movement Emission Reduction Program to ensure that
the new or upgraded equipment meets program-specific
requirements to achieve emission reductions.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop and implement a streamlined application process
for grants under the Goods Movement Emission
Reduction Program to allow easier application completion
and to reduce APCD processing times, resulting in
faster project completion and earlier emission reductions.
?? Provide assistance with air pollution rules and regulations
to the business community by creating two new
compliance assistance videos and posting them on the
APCD website.
?? Evaluate the Federal Clean Air Act Title V permit processing
procedures and implement process improvements
in order to better meet APCD’s business needs.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Implement an APCD file digitization pilot project and
digitize all Proposition 1B Lower-Emission School Bus
program files that are required to be sent to the California
Air Resources Board for retention for the remainder
of the required 35-year bond records retention time
frame.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Work with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and Baja California, Mexico as the U.S. Co-Chair
of the Border 2020 Emergency Preparedness and
Response Group for the San Diego-Tijuana region to:
?? Coordinate and conduct binational emergency
training with the goal of ensuring that responders in
the region use the same equipment, procedures and
have the same training.
?? Integrate the Office of Emergency Services
Operational Area Emergency Operations Center and
the Tijuana Protection Civil’s Emergency Operations
Center into binational exercises.
?? Improve collaboration with federal, State, County and
city prosecutors, investigators and other regulatory
agencies to prosecute environmental crimes, both
locally and Statewide, by hosting hazardous waste
task force meetings, hosting joint training on personal
protective equipment and sampling, and sending two
inspectors to the Federal Law Enforcement Training
Center’s advanced environmental crimes multi-jurisdictional
task force training.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Educate 5,000 children on awareness and protection
from mosquito-borne diseases and other vectorrelated
diseases, environmental health careers, and
food and pool safety by conducting outreach presentations
to primary and/or secondary school children at
schools or other outreach events throughout the year.
?? Trap rodents twice per year at port of entry sites where
freight from foreign origin is received by boat, airplane
or truck in order to conduct tests for plague and identify
flea species.
?? Trap at 40 locations and test captured mice (by taking
blood samples) for the presence of Hantavirus, a rare
pulmonary syndrome caused by the virus.
?? Inspect at least 50% of the 259 identified waste tire
sites in the Tire Enforcement Agency Inspection Work
Plan to ensure compliance and reduce illegal handling
and disposal of waste tires.
?? Collaborate with the Southern Chapter of the California
Environmental Health Association to conduct a public
housing seminar for regulated operators and regulators
in 2014 and in 2015, resulting in a more knowledgeable
housing industry that is aware of resources available to
them so that they may make better-informed decisions
to reduce violations.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Provide quality customer service by:
?? Reducing the average food and housing complaint
response time from five days to three.
?? Maintaining average plan review times for new retail
food and public swimming pool projects at levels
that are 50% less than the State law requirement.
?? Contacting complainants regarding mosquitoes, rats
and flies within three days.
?? Closing mosquito control requests for service within
21 days or less after initial contact.
?? Completing review of septic system layouts within an
average of 10 days.
?? Completing review and approving 95% of plans and
permits for installation, repair and removal of
Underground Storage Tanks (UST) within 10 working
days of receiving a complete application.
?? Reviewing and responding to 100% of Local
Oversight Program (LOP) reports and work plans
within 60 days.
?? Reviewing, processing and approving 100% of
monitoring well permit applications within an average
of 8 working days.
?? Develop an online mosquito complaint form for the
public with automatic receipt of confirmation, which
will allow DEH to initiate a response more efficiently.
?? Implement the use of an online intake form to receive
public complaints of food borne illness.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Coordinate with local cities in the region to adopt local
requirements in the County Code of Regulatory Ordinances
related to body art, public housing and public
pools to improve the uniformity of regional inspection
programs.
?? Co-host the annual statewide Mosquito and Vector
Control Association Conference in 2014.
?? Work with cities that currently delegate to the County
the authority to implement the massage, pet shop and
bath house inspection programs in their jurisdictions to
reflect changes in State law that make those programs
no longer subject to regulation by the County.
?? Host a Hazardous Analysis and Critical Control Points
workshop in coordination with the restaurant industry,
the Food and Drug Administration and the California
Department of Public Health to educate local industry
and regulators; invite regulators from neighboring jurisdictions
to participate in the training.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement changes and monitor the Community Event
Permit (CEP) process for improved customer service.
?? Conduct a study on the use of a rapid molecular diagnostic
test to improve the response to sewage contaminated
beach water.
?? Submit a request for proposal to develop Phase I of Virtual
Unified Program inspector training and select a
contractor. This training will allow for supervised and
unsupervised training in a virtual environment to augment
instructor lead and one-on-one field inspector
training.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Develop the capability of accepting online applications
and payments for at least one permit type in the Food
and Housing Division.
?? Complete development of an automatic electronic data
transfer for compliance monitoring and enforcement
information from the BCMS to the California Electronic
Reporting System and U.S. EPA’s databases. Once
this data transfer has been developed, create reporting
tools that will allow the Hazardous Materials Division to
monitor the information.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? As wildfires continue to pose a threat to San Diego area
residents, continue to investigate stakeholder needs
and additional resource opportunities to further
develop wildfire education and outreach programming.
?? As the GSOB continues to decimate oak trees, expand
and enhance the existing program established as a
foundation for GSOB education and outreach. Create
online training and self-testing modules for public land
managers, homeowners, recreationalists and other
groups as needed, on the biology, impacts and symptoms,
and best management practices relating to
GSOB.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Protect water quality and promote water conservation.
?? Complete ten agricultural water workshops to
educate agricultural and other water users about
stormwater regulations and requirements, best
management practices, record keeping and
employee training.
?? Provide printed outreach materials such as
management booklets, self-assessment surveys,
record keeping systems and agricultural water
quality best management pocket field guides to
educate growers and other land managers.
?? Provide an annual display at the Flower Fields at
Carlsbad Ranch on examples of water quality and
runoff control best management practices for
growers and the public to view and use the selfassessment
materials on their own properties.
?? Continue conducting at least two research projects on
various crop types to evaluate water use levels and
newer varieties or alternate crops for the region, including
blueberries, avocados, guava, mandarins, pomegranate
and carambola (starfruit/dragonfruit). As water
prices continue to rise, these new crop types are anticipated
to consume less water thereby bolstering economic
growth.
?? Provide staff to assist in the coordination, and training
of 1,000 volunteers through the Master Gardener and
4-H programs to provide 205,000 hours of volunteer
service.
?? Using the volunteer Master Gardener program, provide
research-based information in the areas of home gardening,
landscaping and pest management to county
residents through consultations, educational exhibits
and seminar classes.
?? Using the Master Gardener program, provide outreach
and assistance in creating and maintaining over 300
school and community gardens throughout San Diego
County.
?? Expand the number and size of demonstration pilot
sites of habitat restoration techniques learned from
research in collaboration with U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, city and County departments of Parks and
Recreation, Barnett Ranch Open Space Park, University
of California, Irvine and the Irvine Ranch Conservancy
from 150 acres in Fiscal Year 2012-13 to 200
acres.Improve youth development and nutrition in the region.
?? Provide administrative and instructional material
support for 350 4-H adult and youth volunteer
leaders to conduct community-based educational
programs to 25 4-H clubs, 7 after-school sites and 8
military 4-H sites.
?? Provide nutrition education for 500 low-income
families with children, emphasizing healthful nutrition
practices, food resource management and food
safety.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Provide safe and accessible parks and preserves, foster
innovative programs and initiatives that promote
government agency partnerships and community
involvement, and enhance emergency communication
and preparedness.
?? Perform small water sampling training on potable
water requirements for park operations staff to
further educate staff working in parks with small
water systems on how to ensure safe drinking water
is supplied to park patrons.
?? In collaboration with the Health and Human Services
Agency, provide training on child abuse prevention
for all after-school full-time program coordinators
and 50% (8 of 16) of seasonal staff to develop as
trauma-informed knowledge workers.
?? Facilitate community service projects, through court
order and/or school participation, at park facilities for
a minimum of 15,000 hours.
?? Reduce vandalism and theft by installing safety/
security cameras at three park facilities.
?? Provide training through Agriculture, Weights and
Measures for 100 staff in park facilities on proper
protocols and procedures for the use of herbicides.
?? Install Wi-Fi at one park site to provide staff and
customers greater access to online emergency
notifications and information.
?? Improve access at park and recreation facilities by
adding Americans with Disabilities Act access to
three park facilities.
?? Create safer parks, preserves and recreation centers by
using volunteers to assist with park patrols, operations,
and maintenance and contributing more than 96,000
volunteer hours annually.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Acquire, develop and maintain facilities that support
and promote park stewardship and environmental sustainability
and efficiency.
Install five new solar trash compacting receptacles at
parks to maintain service levels and reduce
maintenance costs and staffing time for trash
disposal.
?? Provide three new special events, such as concerts
in the park or a celebration event, to further engage
residents in community life, civic, and recreational
activities.
?? Replace diseased, dying or dead trees at 10 park
locations to protect the current tree population and
replace with varieties of pest-resistant trees.
?? Mitigate fire fuel hazards and maintain fire safe zones
in 40 park facilities through continued
implementation of fuel management practices.
?? Implement a green building GIS mapping layer that
demonstrates DPR’s achievements in developing
sustainable facilities in County parks.
?? Incorporate cultural, historical or environmental
interpretive components at three DPR facilities.
?? Acquire 300 acres within the MSCP plan areas that
will count toward the County’s commitment of 9,425
acres as required by the MSCP Implementing
Agreement.
?? Use Board Policy I-138, Mitigation on County-Owned
Land Managed by the Department of Parks and
Recreation to generate $80,000 of revenue for
acquisitions, operations and maintenance of MSCP
lands.
?? Save 30 million gallons of water at 19 park facilities
that have converted to smart irrigation controllers
resulting in water conservation.
?? Develop a park design manual that guides the development
of future park and recreation facilities.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Develop and enhance the experiences of park patrons
and promote healthy lifestyles by increasing recreational
opportunities and educational programs.
?? Promote healthy lifestyles for 2,000 adults and
seniors through participation in 60 recreation
programs.
?? Implement the TRACK Trails interpretative program
at two parks, which encourages children and families
to participate in outdoor recreation through earning
small rewards, such as stickers, pencils, badges and
nature journals, for completing activities and hikes
and recording them online.
?? Participate in the County’s efforts in the Community
Transformation Grant, specifically by participating in
the Health in All Policies strategy to identify a
comprehensive integrated Active Transportation Plan
for specific communities that would incorporate the
County’s Trails, Bike and Pedestrian Plans.
?? Foster positive development of 6,000 youth through
180 recreation programs and services that increase
physical, intellectual, social and/or emotional
abilities.
?? Develop and enhance two County park trails to
promote health and fitness.
?? Perform comprehensive active living assessments at
three parks using DPR’s new Healthy Edge Park
Design Guidelines. Use the assessments to develop
a “health report card” and improvement strategy for
facilities.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Essential
Infrastructure
?? Manage the execution of parks-related capital projects
identified in the Capital Improvement Needs Assessment
as approved by the Board of Supervisors, in a
timely and cost effective manner.
?? San Elijo Lagoon Gateway Property Acquisition –
This project is to acquire a triangle of open space
between Solana Beach and the Lagoon, just east of
the Cardiff State Beach, and incorporate it into the
San Elijo Ecological Reserve. Project cost of $1.8
million is budgeted in the Capital Program.
?? San Diego Botanic Garden Expansion – This project
is for planning and development of the future
expansion to the San Diego Botanic Garden.
Project cost of $1.0 million is budgeted in the Capital
Program.
?? 4S Ranch Synthetic Turf South Ball Fields – The
project consists of the conversion of 239,000 square
feet of multi-purpose grass fields into synthetic turf,
which will conserve water. Project cost of $2.5
million is budgeted in the Capital Program.
?? Lake Morena Electrical Upgrade – This project
consists of removing old electrical system
infrastructure, currently providing 15 and 30 amp
service and install an upgraded system that provides
50 amp service. Project cost of $2.0 million is
budgeted in the Capital Program.
?? Tijuana River Valley Trails Construction - This project
is for the design and construction of 18 additional
miles of trails and other related improvements within
the park. Project cost of $1.9 million is budgeted in
the Capital Program.
San Luis Rey River Park – The project consists of the
acquisition of approximately 250 acres which will
provide for active recreation sites when the River
Park is developed. Project cost of $3.1 million is
budgeted in the Capital Program.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Achieve 76% of camping reservations through an online
reservation system delivering service anytime, anywhere.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Ensure public safety through application of public road
standards into the design of county roadways for new
land development projects.
?? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and
improvements are designed and constructed in accordance
with building safety codes.
?? Review proposed building plans to ensure structures
are properly and safely designed.
?? Help customers navigate the building permit and
inspection process by explaining code requirements
and exploring options to achieve compliance.
?? Conduct building inspections during construction to
ensure structures are built in accordance with
approved building plans.
?? Improve community health and safety conditions
through elimination of dilapidated buildings and
removal of substandard housing.
?? Respond to the public within 24 hours of receipt of
code complaints.
?? Abate hazardous living conditions such as
abandoned homes and dilapidated structures.
?? Expand the new Geographic Information System (GIS)
damage assessment tool to standardize the County
and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
format for reporting damage assessment data, improving
the timeliness of reporting data.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Protect the environment and preserve community character
through efficient application of planning, engineering,
and environmental regulations in the
management of land development permit applications
for discretionary projects.
?? Improve the efficiency of land use programs that guide
the physical development of the county’s land through
a balance of growth and conservation while collaborating
with communities.
?? Present for Board of Supervisors consideration
Form-Based Zoning Codes for the Ramona Town
Center by June 2014. Similar to the Zoning
Ordinance, the Form-Based Codes will include
provisions on allowed uses, setbacks, height and
information on development processes. The new
codes will also provide detailed architectural and
landscaping requirements and information to
applicants on required street and trail improvements.
?? Present for Board of Supervisors consideration the
General Plan/Zoning Cleanup, which will resolve
mapping errors, omissions and include other minor
editorial changes.
?? Complete public review of the North County Multiple
Species Conservation Program text and
environmental document by June 2015.
?? Present for Board of Supervisors consideration the
Forest Conservation Initiative General Plan
Amendment which will ensure a sustainable
environment and promote economic opportunities in
the East County.
?? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency
through economic incentives such as reduced fees and
waivers.
?? Ensure effective and efficient management of discretionary
project applications from submittal to final decision.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Develop a new customer service program for PDS,
including identification of customer and stakeholder
priorities, customer service training and an online customer
satisfaction survey to measure performance.
?? Provide quality customer service to customers by
deploying performance improvements that minimize
Building and Zoning Counter wait times.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Manage workload and staffing levels by balancing
housing market fluctuations with fiscal and customer
service stability.
?? Present the annual Advance Planning Work Program to
the Board for consideration by June 2014 to prioritize
the deployment of resources for Advance Planning
projects that streamline and update County policies
and ordinances related to land development.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Develop a comprehensive workforce development program
to enhance the skills of employees. The program
will focus on assessment of current capabilities, areas
of future growth and development and will include a
targeted training program.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop mobile applications to improve the efficiency
of operations and service to customers.
?? Enable building inspectors to access the Business
Case Management System (BCMS) from the field,
enhancing the efficiency of conducting field
inspections.
?? Enable permit research by customers, reducing the
need to visit or call a County office.
?? Expand the use of electronic plan check correction lists
to replace paper copy correction lists for use in building
permits. Use of electronic correction lists improves
processing times and communication with customers,
as well as document management practices for PDS.
?? Complete the development of a new online payment
tool for land development projects. The new tool will
accept electronic payment for permits fees and deposits,
reducing the need for customers to physically visit
an office.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Technology
?? Continue to refine and enhance the BCMS that integrates
land development permit operations, time
accounting and finances of land development permits.
?? Convert all 14 of the County’s intranet and internet
mapping applications to the current industry-standard
technology ArcGIS Server using Microsoft Silverlight.
?? Develop six new GIS layers in the Enterprise Data
Maintenance Environment that will result in greater
access and transparency of land use data management
in the GIS system.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Complete four public outreach presentations to North
County neighborhood associations and local organizations
regarding McClellan-Palomar Airport operations
and the County’s efforts to minimize noise impacts.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Design and initiate construction on at least 12 road and
road-related infrastructure improvement projects that
enhance the long-term sustainability of the transportation
network.
?? Work with contractors that are committed to the development
and construction of sustainable, environmentally-
efficient projects involving the use of recycled
asphalt in County airport runway projects and the use
of eco-friendly LED lighting on airport property.
?? Protect a sustainable watershed and minimize downstream
pollutants.
?? Provide water quality and watershed education by
conducting 150 presentations to high school
students at 90% of public high schools in the
unincorporated area of the county as part of a longterm
strategy for achieving positive behavioral
changes.
?? Conduct outreach to residents with information and
resources on stormwater pollution prevention at 15
community events throughout the unincorporated
area of the county.
?? Perform stormwater inspections during the
construction phase on private development projects
to ensure compliance with State requirements and
reduce erosion.
?? Remove 25,000 cubic yards of debris from culverts,
drainage channels and roads through a systematic
cleaning program.
?? Sweep 16,200 lane-miles of roadway to clean debris
from road surfaces.
?? Incorporate erosion control measures on 100% of 25
new infrastructure construction sites using
stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) for
erosion and sediment control, as required by State
and regional stormwater permits.
?? Manage solid waste and oil generated in the unincorporated
area of the county.
?? Work with all private developments with permits or
permits pending that have 40,000 square feet or
more of building space (estimated 45), to increase
the tonnage of construction and demolition materials
diverted from landfills, with a goal of diverting 3,000
tons or 90% of inert materials and 70% of other
recyclable materials. Goals for recycling diversion
are limited by the number of projects, debris
volumes, and how much is recycled.
?? Complete 15 oil collection and outreach events to
recycle 80,000 gallons of used oil and 20,000 used
oil filters.
?? Assist 10,080 businesses and 4,020 multifamily
complexes in initiating recycling programs.
?? Provide education about recycling programs and
benefits of recycling to 55 school classrooms.
?? Provide residential composting education at nine
workshops, two community events and two schools
in the unincorporated area of the county. Install one
new composting demonstration site.
?? Promote the County’s recycling hotline and database
to achieve at least 5,000 inquiries from the public.
?? Add information on 65 recycling centers/events to the
recycling database at www.wastefreesd.org.
?? Provide Recycling Market Development Zone assistance
to 10 businesses. Work collaboratively with
applicable jurisdictions to provide assistance in siting
and permitting of recycling sites.
?? Partner with East Otay Mesa property owners, SANDAG,
CalTrans and the City of San Diego to plan and
construct a regional sanitary sewer network to support
the phased implementation of the East Otay Mesa
Specific Plan while safeguarding public health and the
environment.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Protect public health and the environment by minimizing
the risk of sanitary sewer spills.
?? Clean 390 miles of sanitary sewer collector mains
within the sanitary sewer system.
?? Inspect 20 miles of targeted sewer mains within the
sanitary sewer system to identify sewer defects and
facilitate proactive facility repairs.
?? Plan and design a major upgrade of the Rancho San
Diego wastewater pump station facility.
?? Ensure that all construction work by utility companies
and private developers in the County’s right-of-way
that is within 1,000 feet of a school site provides safe
access to schools for families and children.
?? Repaint and re-mark crosswalks and roadway legends
adjacent to 121 public school and 12 private school
locations in the unincorporated area of the county.
?? Work with school administrators to analyze, identify
and implement school zone improvements for pedestrians,
bicyclists, buses and automobiles at 12 schools,
or 9% of all public and private schools in the unincorporated
area of the county.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Build stronger customer relationships through meetings
and other communication with industry and
resource agencies.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Develop and use a technical advisory staff group to
recommend technical training, provide cross training
and use other means to enhance the knowledge of
technical and engineering staff.
Community Services Group activities over the next two
years continue the departments’ support of the County’s
Strategic Initiatives, dedication to internal and external customer
service, and maintaining a culture of accountability
and transparency in the use of public resources. Objectives
include:
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Support regional efforts with a variety of programs and
outreach to reduce homelessness among families and
veterans and increase self-sufficiency.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Celebrate 100 years of the County Library with
branches as centers of communities, while looking
ahead to the use of technology in service delivery.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Essential
Infrastructure
?? Plan and design facilities to serve the growing needs of
County residents including new capital projects for
libraries in Alpine and Imperial Beach, infrastructure
improvements at Lake Morena, and a new office for the
Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk in El Cajon.
?? Construct the new Registrar of Voters (ROV) building
on the County Operations Center Campus, relocation
of ROV operations and equipment in time to conduct
the 2014 election cycle, and sale of the County Operations
Center Annex, the current location of the ROV.
?? Maintain County facilities by performing preventive
maintenance on buildings and systems according to
schedule.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Deliver training in procurement, contracting, and
records management through both classroom and
online.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Achieve goal of 0% euthanasia of any healthy, friendly
animal by reuniting animals with their owner or through
adoption.
?? Promote child safety and injury prevention by conducting
a minimum of 80 animal safety and dog bite prevention
presentations to area schools and other
organizations that encounter dogs during normal operations.
?? Respond to 94.4% of patrol calls on time according to
DAS protocols for responding to various levels of priority
calls.
?? Conduct eight classes for the Responsible Pet Ownership
program to teach responsible pet ownership to
animal law violators and to reduce the burden on the
court system.
?? Inform and educate county residents on emergency
preparedness for their pets and themselves to help
ensure they are protected in case of an emergency.
?? Participate in four Community Emergency Response
Team (CERT) meetings per year.
?? Conduct 10 presentations to community groups.
?? Enhance children’s awareness of animal welfare issues
and promote the humane treatment of animals through
participation in a joint facility tour and education program
with the San Diego Humane Society, and by cohosting
a minimum of 12 classroom or youth group visits
per year to the Campus for Animal Care or other
County animal shelters. These educational endeavors
will help ensure that both animals and people are protected
from neglect and abuse, promoting safe communities.
?? In support of the County’s Live Well San Diego! Living
Safely initiative, expand the use of social media to educate
the public and increase awareness of various
issues such as animal safety, neglect and disaster preparedness
by posting quarterly educational bulletins on
the DAS Facebook and website.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Encourage children to read by supporting the County
Library’s Read for a Reason program and by providing
an additional incentive to read through supporting animals.
?? Assist young people in developing job skills that will
help them become thriving, self-sufficient adults
through providing job training for at least one participant
each in the County’s Workforce Academy for Youth, the Animal Health Technology Program at Mesa
College, the PIMA Medical Institute and Regional
Occupation Programs from various schools in the
county.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services
by being responsive to customers’ needs, professional,
courteous, attentive and knowledgeable; achieve a
customer satisfaction rating of 4.72 or higher (on a
scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Make eight presentations per year to community or
industry groups describing DAS services, disaster preparedness,
animal health and welfare issues, cruelty
investigations and/or new animal-related legislation.
?? Submit at least three articles to trade journals or community
publications to highlight DAS services, animal
health and welfare issues, dog bite prevention and/or
adoption opportunities.
?? Provide at least 24 dog bite prevention presentations
per year for County departments and local area companies
to promote the safety of employees who may
encounter dogs in the scope of their duties (e.g.,
SDG&E and the U.S. Postal Service).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Continue to seek qualified diverse applicants by
attending four job fairs and advertising positions in
periodicals targeted to minority populations in order to
fill positions as needed.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? DAS strives to continuously improve the plight and welfare
of the animals in its care through best practices,
innovation and creative strategies. To fulfill its mission
and provide maximum service and value to the community,
DAS focuses on the following key objectives:
?? Ensure at least 71.4% of an estimated 26,000
sheltered dogs and cats are reunited with their owner
or adopted into a new home.
?? Ensure no more than 12.9% of treatable animals are
euthanized by providing medical care when
resources allow and placing animals with rescue
partners or adopters.
?? Develop and implement at least two business process
reengineering improvements that reduce costs or
enhance customer service, productivity or revenue by
June 30, 2015.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Maintain the current levels of services by offering an
average of 200 after-school programs each month, to
offer students and families a safe place for the pursuit
of education and constructive civic engagement in
support of the County’s Live Well San Diego! Living
Safely initiative.
?? Implement a pilot mentorship program for at-risk teen
boys at two library branches incorporating technology
and reading, and sustain a participation rate of 20%
out of 24 participants.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Meet the informational, recreational and cultural needs
of the community and actively promote reading and
lifelong learning by ensuring the public has access to
library resources and services and that the SDCL has
the capacity to meet these goals.
?? Maintain the planned schedule of library operations.
?? Provide virtual library services that are available and
relevant such as e-books, audio downloads, video
downloads and access to premium databases.
?? Ensure that collections, materials and programs are
current and relevant to meeting the needs and interests
of a dynamic community.
?? Meet the planned annual average circulation per
item.
?? Maintain participation in adult programs that
promote lifelong learning and civic engagement by
serving 100,000 participants.
?? Host events celebrating the County Library’s
centennial, “100 Years of Stories,” including
collecting customer stories in branch and online at
www.sdcl.org/centennial that note how library
services change lives.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Support the County of San Diego’s Live Well, San
Diego! Building Better Health initiative by offering more
than 140 healthy lifestyle programs for all ages every
month.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services
by being responsive to customers’ needs, professional,
courteous, attentive and knowledgeable. Achieve an
average customer satisfaction rating of 4.70 or higher
(on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “Excellent.”)
?? Ensure customers are provided with quality programs
that are current, relevant, and engaging. Achieve an
average customer satisfaction rating of 4.75 or higher
(on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “Excellent”) for
SDCL programs.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Complete the implementation of the 24/7 Library-To-
Go pilot project at the County Operations Center to
provide library services to remote areas currently without
library services; post implementation assessment
and review at 6 months; install another 24/7 Library-To-
Go kiosk in Bonsall; examine the viability and feasibility
for rolling out these devices to other potential locations.
?? Plan and install, as needed, radio frequency-enabled
loss prevention security gates to deter theft of library
materials.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Improve County operations through sustainability
efforts such as energy conservation, alternative energy
generation systems, green building design and recycling.
?? Reduce total electricity usage at County facilities
each year by 2% over prior fiscal year usage based
on a kWh per square foot metric.
?? Reduce vehicle emissions by 3% of 4,371 metric
tons (2011 baseline) for on- and off-road diesel
vehicles and stationary diesel equipment in
accordance with California Air Resources Board
requirements, by replacing or retrofitting older
higher-emission vehicles.
?? Prepare greenhouse gas inventories of County
operations for calendar years 2013 and 2014.
Achieve a 1% reduction in total greenhouse gas
emissions each year compared to the prior calendar
year.
?? Implement Green Fleet Action Plan
recommendations to reduce the County’s vehicle
related greenhouse gas emissions.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Support client departments in their public safety
efforts.
?? Maintain availability of County-supported fire
apparatus at a minimum of 95%.
?? Ensure maximum availability of law enforcement
patrol vehicles at 95%.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Essential
Infrastructure
?? Provide time-critical (24/7) maintenance response to
emergency requests involving life and safety issues or
those posing an imminent risk to County assets and
infrastructure, by responding to and initiating corrective
action for 100% of all emergency requests within 4
hours of notification.
?? Complete 96% of targeted preventive maintenance
activities to maximize the operational efficiency of
County assets/infrastructure, as well as maintain or
prolong the design life of these systems.
?? Complete the sale of COC Annex property by January
2014.
Complete 100% of lease inspections on all County
asset leases, excluding regional communication system
radio sites, to ensure the maximum life of the asset
is maintained.
?? Plan and execute the County’s capital projects and
other infrastructure projects in a timely and cost-effective
manner, to meet departments’ needs.
?? Complete occupancy of Phase 1 of the new
Women’s Detention Facility project by summer 2014,
with construction of the facility anticipated to be
completed by January 2016, subject to State
funding.
?? Complete construction of East Mesa Re-Entry and
Rehabilitation Facility, and related support facilities in
spring 2014.
?? Complete Phase 1 of the County Administration
Center Waterfront Park in fall 2013 and Phase 2 in
spring 2014.
?? Complete construction of the Rancho San Diego
Sheriff Station in fall 2013.
?? Complete COC emergency generation consolidation
in summer 2013.
?? Coordinate with Administrative Office of the Courts
to begin construction of the new Downtown
Courthouse, related Prisoner Transfer Tunnel and
Courthouse/Hall of Justice Bridge by winter 2014
and completion by 2016.
?? By fall 2014, prepare a proposal for review by the
Facilities Planning Board for the interim and
permanent relocation of the justice system support
departments that are not included in the new State
Courthouse and will be displaced by demolition of
the old courthouse or are in leased space. The plan
will assist in strategically placing these departments
around the new State Courthouse once construction
is completed.
?? Complete the new design-build Pine Valley Sheriff
Station project by summer 2014.
?? Award a design-build contract for the new Boulevard
Fire Station for completion by winter 2014-15.
?? Award a design-build contract for the replacement of
the Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk’s El Cajon
office for completion in winter 2015.
?? Coordinate with key departments to prepare longterm
facility effectiveness assessments and master
plans to be used as tools in the development of the
Capital Improvement Needs Assessment and Major
Maintenance Improvement Plan.
?? Award a design-build contract for the construction of
a new 13,500 square feet Alpine library to replace the
existing 3,018 square feet facility, for completion in
spring of 2015.
?? Award a design-build contract for the construction of
a new 14,000 square feet Imperial Beach branch
library to replace the existing 5,100 square feet
facility, with connectivity and potential improvements
to the existing adjacent community center, for
completion in spring 2015.
?? Initiate the next three-year cycle of facility condition
assessments, including an assessment survey of
parks infrastructure, to refresh the maintenance and
renewal recommendations to the capital and major
maintenance planning programs.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Complete 96% of vehicle and mobile equipment preventative
maintenance actions to maximize the operational
effectiveness of County vehicles.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal
Discipline
?? Maximize postage discounts by bar coding a minimum
of 95% of all standard business letters.
?? Monitor leases on County-owned property ensuring
that rents are paid within 30 days of due date for 97%
of the leases.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Provide $65,000 for HHSA’s Hotel/Motel Voucher Program
to help close the ongoing gap in funding for
emergency housing for homeless families in the
County’s jurisdiction as identified by the Regional Task
Force on the Homeless. The Regional Cold Weather
Shelter Voucher Program provides emergency shelter
through the issuance of hotel vouchers for homeless
families, disabled and elderly individuals.
?? Support the Live Well, San Diego! Building Better
Health initiative, by funding the continuation of the
HOME Tenant-based Rental Assistance programs that
serve up to 65 youth aging-out of the foster care system
and 40 families with children that are participants
of the County’s substance abuse recovery and family
reunification programs.
?? Provide 15 competitive academic scholarships annually
to heads of household and/or their children who
have established five-year family self-sufficiency goals
in academic or vocational self- sufficiency or that
reside in Public Housing.
?? Promote self-sufficiency by providing permanent housing
for up to 200 eligible homeless families graduating
from transitional housing programs provided by 11
homeless service agencies through the County’s Continuum
of Care program. All eligible homeless families
referred by the 11 agencies will be assisted until the
housing funding allocation is fully expended.
?? Assist families to secure safe, decent and affordable
housing through rental assistance subsidies by using
100% of the anticipated annual funding allocation of
$102.7 million or issue up to 11,195 vouchers to provide
a nurturing and healthy environment while improving
opportunities for children and adults in support of
the Live Well, San Diego! Building Better Health initiative.
?? Provide rental assistance to permanently house up to
305 homeless veterans through the VASH program.
Utilization of these vouchers is dependent upon HCD
receiving referrals from the VA.
?? Increase the number of participants receiving VASH
security and utility deposit assistance funded through
the Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) funds to 10 total
participants, to allow recipients and their families
access to permanent housing.
?? Use the Family Self Sufficiency and Ross Service Coordinator
Program Coordinating Committee (PCC) to provide
program participants three new resources to
promote self-sufficiency.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Ensure environmental reviews are performed on 100%
(minimum of 62) of federally funded programs included
in the Fiscal Year 2013-14 Annual Funding Plans. In
keeping with County policy of functional threading,
environmental reviews will be conducted by the
Department of Public Works. In compliance with HUD
regulations, HCD will ensure environmental reviews will
be completed on all program projects in order to analyze
the effect a proposed project will have on the people
and the natural environment within a designated
project area and the effect the material and social environment
may have on a project.
?? Based on the recently completed Energy Roadmap,
implement two energy-efficiency measures at the five
Housing Authority-owned residential properties (e.g.,
replace incandescent bulbs with compact fluorescent
lamps, replace refrigerators with ENERGY STAR models,
install motion-sensor lighting and install low-flow
kitchen faucets or faucet aerators).
?? Educate the community by conducting a minimum of
four community outreach meetings throughout the
county regarding affordable housing and community
revitalization funding opportunities available annually
through four federal entitlement programs: Community
Development Block Grant, HOME Investment Partnership
Program, Emergency Solutions Grant and Housing
Opportunities for Persons with AIDS.
?? Address issues impacting community living standards
by conducting 10 community revitalization meetings
with policymakers and stakeholders.
?? Promote fair housing by completing a minimum of 35
random site tests on multifamily rental properties to
ensure compliance with fair housing laws.
?? Provide First-Time Homebuyer assistance or HOME
Repair assistance to at least 30 households.
?? Support the Live Well, San Diego! Building Better
Health initiative by funding 23 public community projects
for parks, street/sidewalk improvements, public
services, community, youth and family centers, health
clinics, American with Disabilities Act (ADA) improvements
and affordable housing activities to promote
wellness and enhance the quality of life in San Diego
County neighborhoods.
?? Inspect 100% of 11,395 units that are leased through
the Rental Assistance Division and ensure that these
units are decent, safe and sanitary by meeting Housing
Quality Standards required by HUD.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Hold four Section 8 owner/landlord seminars to continue
to educate owners on the requirements of the
program, as well as promoting the benefits of participating
in the program.
?? Ensure customers are provided with superior services
by being responsive to customers’ needs, professional,
courteous, attentive and knowledgeable. A key indicator
of how well service is provided will be to achieve a
customer service satisfaction rating of 4.7 or better (on
a scale of 1 to 5 with 5 being “excellent”).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Provide regional leadership through participation in two
housing industry organizations and/or by providing up
to three presentations to relevant groups/events.
?? Participate in the regular San Diego Housing Federation
Policy Committee meetings. The Federation leads
the region’s efforts in identifying housing opportunities
and challenges affecting the local community. HCD
represents the County’s interests in the effort to produce,
improve, and preserve local housing options.
The Federation conducts its advocacy efforts in all 18
cities in the San Diego region and the unincorporated
areas of San Diego County. The Federation also monitors
and takes positions on State and federal housing
programs, regulations and legislation.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Implement a newly created web-based module for
rental assistance applications. It is anticipated that
2,500 applicants will establish user accounts to update
rental assistance applications and that the self-service
application will reduce processing time for waiting list
database updates from 7 days to 1 and enhance customer
service.
?? Provide enhanced customer service by sharing/disseminating
information on Housing Quality Standards
(HQS) inspections via the HCD website, emails, videos,
social media and/or Quick Response (QR) barcodes.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Two Tenant Commissioners who serve on the Housing
Authority of the County of San Diego (HACSD) Board of
Commissioners will complete ethics training.
?? To encourage the highest level of ethical standards,
engage in a public education campaign to heighten
awareness of program integrity. Due to increased
awareness, it is anticipated that the number of reports
of potential program fraud will increase by 10% to 40 of
400 total fraud reports.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Conduct a minimum of 12 outreach activities in Fiscal
Year 2013-14 and 12 in Fiscal Year 2014-15 for the
local business community to increase the supplier base
and opportunities for competition.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Achieve cost savings of $3.3 million in Fiscal Year
2013-14 and $3.5 million in Fiscal Year 2014-15 for
County customer departments by using innovative procurement
methods such as reverse auctions, cooperative
agreements, blanket purchase agreements and PCard
usage (which serves as a credit card for small
purchases).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure departments’ records retention schedules due
for revision in Fiscal Years 2013-14 and 2014-15 are
processed and finalized in compliance with County
policy.
?? Expedite services to County customer departments by
converting requisitions to Standard Purchase Orders in
a timely and efficient manner.
?? Convert at least 75% of customer requisitions to
Standard Purchase Orders within 21 calendar days
of receipt.
?? Convert 50% of customer requisitions to Standard
Purchase Orders within 15 calendar days of receipt.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Provide training for at least 50 County staff in accessing
and interpreting purchasing-related fiscal data in
Oracle in order to more effectively manage contracts
and budgets.
?? Provide annual, individualized training to all County
departments to ensure implementation of required
operational practices related to records and content
management.
?? Deploy contract administration training electronically in
Fiscal Year 2013-14, making training available to all
County staff that require it.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Complete the technological enhancement project for
two-step proposals and bids submitted via BuyNet.
The first step is for potential suppliers to submit their
qualifications for review before proceeding to the next
step, the submission of bids and/or proposals by those
suppliers deemed qualified. This will shorten procurement
timelines and clarify communication with proposers.
This project also supports P&C’s move toward
electronic receipt of all solicitations.
?? Create and publish four new Oracle LMS classes and
classroom-based courses giving greater flexibility for
end-users to access training.
?? Complete the requirements for a project that provides a
secure, efficient and time-saving method for the public
to obtain relevant contract information from the
County’s website. This effort will enable self-service
while maintaining document security and will be
deployed into production in Fiscal Year 2014-15.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency, and Ethical Conduct
?? Expeditiously wind down the affairs of the former
County Redevelopment Agency, maintaining compliance
with all laws.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Distribute information in support of the County’s Live
Well, San Diego! Building Better Health and Living
Safely strategies using “filler” pages printed in the
Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets provided
to all registered voters for the June 2014 Gubernatorial
Primary and November 2014 Gubernatorial
General elections.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Continue to distribute information on reducing environmental
risks using “filler” pages printed in the Sample
Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets provided to all
registered voters for the June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary
and November 2014 Gubernatorial General elections.
?? Conserve resources by printing the Sample Ballot and
Voter Information Pamphlets for all elections conducted
in Fiscal Years 2013-15 on paper containing as
much as 25% post-consumer recycled paper.
?? Based on the number of permanent vote-by-mail voters
(798,020) for the November 6, 2012 Presidential
General Election, increase the number of permanent
vote-by-mail voters by 3% (or 23,950), for a total of
821,970, for the November 2014 Gubernatorial General
Election.
?? Continue to recruit and replace non-accessible poll
sites to comply with federal and State accessibility
requirements:
?? Increase the number of accessible poll sites for the
June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary Election by 7% (or
46), for a total of 703, based on the number of sites
for the November 6, 2012 Presidential General
Election of 657.
Increase the number of accessible poll sites for the
November 2014 Gubernatorial General Election by
3% (or 21), for a total of 724, based on the
anticipated number of sites for the June 2014
Gubernatorial Primary Election of 703.
?? Engage the community in the electoral process and
ensure polling sites are sufficiently staffed with qualified
personnel for the June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary
and the November 2014 Gubernatorial General elections
by meeting the planned recruitment goals for poll
workers.
?? Process 100% of valid registrations received on or
before the 15-day close of registration by the 7th day
before the election to ensure eligible registrants are
printed in the official roster of voters and therefore have
the opportunity to vote using a regular ballot.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure customer satisfaction with core services by
maintaining a 4.7 or better overall customer satisfaction
rating (on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being “excellent”)
during and after the transition to a new ROV
facility planned for December 2013.
?? To encourage overall satisfaction and retention of volunteers,
mail all poll worker stipends in 15 working
days or less from Election Day for all elections in Fiscal
Years 2013-15, ensuring all poll workers are reimbursed
in a timely manner.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Ensure 100% of poll worker trainers complete online
training assessments with scores of 90% or higher no
later than 26 days prior to the June 2014 Gubernatorial
Primary and the November 2014 Gubernatorial General
elections, ensuring knowledgeable instructors are
available and prepared to train poll workers.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Increase public access to the election process, specifically
the processing of the vote-by-mail ballots and
tabulation of ballots.
?? Ensure 33% (528 of 1,600) precincts are tallied by
11:30 p.m. on Election Night for the June 2014 Gubernatorial
Primary and November 2014 Gubernatorial
General elections.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Continue to enhance the processing efficiency of voteby-
mail ballots by maintaining an automated mail ballot
processing system to screen, scan, sort, verify signature
and open returned mail ballot envelopes, and by
verifying and reconciling ballots returned and counted.
?? Report 85% of eligible mail ballots received by the
ROV by the Sunday before Election Day in the first
Election Night Results Bulletin released shortly after
8:00 p.m. for the June 2014 Gubernatorial Primary
and November 2014 Gubernatorial General
elections.
?? Report 33% or more of all mail ballots cast in the first
Election Night Results Bulletin for the June 2014
Gubernatorial Primary and November 2014
Gubernatorial General elections.
?? By Monday after Election Day, tally 85% of mail
ballots received by the ROV for the June 2014
Gubernatorial Primary and November 2014
Gubernatorial General elections.
?? Achieve a per-mail-ballot labor cost for vote-by-mail
ballots returned in the June 2014 Gubernatorial
Primary and November 2014 Gubernatorial General
elections of no more than 40 cents.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? County Counsel will provide effective legal services to
the Health and Human Service Agency (HHSA) in matters
relating to children who have been dependents of
the Juvenile Court.
?? Prevail in 98% or more of Juvenile Dependency
petitions filed in Superior Court.
?? Prevail in 95% or more of Juvenile Dependency
appeals and writs filed.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? County Communications Office will participate in at
least two drills each fiscal year to prepare for and
respond to major natural or man-made disasters
impacting the San Diego County region. Provide accurate
and timely emergency and recovery information to
the public and media, using a wide variety of traditional
and new media tools, such as the County’s new emergency
website, social media, news releases, video and
mobile technology.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Full system implementation of the new integrated
recording and vital records system is scheduled to
occur by June 2014. This will allow the Assessor/
Recorder/County Clerk to leverage necessary new
technologies in order to maintain a high level of fiscal
stability and service to citizens.
?? Develop and implement an upgrade to the County’s
core Human Resources software application to
improve operational efficiency in personnel record
management, by December 2014.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain the County’s strong issuer credit ratings of
Aa1 (GSR) (Moody’s Investors Service), AAA (Standard
& Poor’s) and AAA (Fitch Ratings) to ensure lower debt
interest costs.
?? To continue to fund the delivery of superior services
throughout the San Diego County region, the Treasurer-
Tax Collector will invest public monies held in the Treasury
and maximize cash resources, without sacrificing
the principles of safety or liquidity, for an anticipated
weighted average rate of return of 0.60% in Fiscal Year
2013-14 and 0.70% in Fiscal Year 2014-15.
?? Accurately identify current and future revenue, as cost
and cash flow trends, in a timely manner in order to
facilitate allocation of limited resources to County
groups and departments.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Record property ownership in a timely manner, facilitating
access to ownership information for the buying,
selling and financing of property.
?? Locate, identify and appraise all property so the public
and businesses are assured a fair and uniform assessment
of their property under the auspices of all applicable
State property tax laws, rules and regulations.
?? Record births, deaths, marriages and Fictitious Business
Name statements in a timely manner to enable the
public and businesses to establish identity in order to
conduct their affairs.
?? Complete Birth, Death and Marriage Backfile Imaging
Project to electronically preserve critical recorded documents
and vital records. Project to be completed in
Fiscal Year 2013-14.
?? In order to comply with Government Code 27301a, a
contract to redact identity information from documents
recorded during the period 1990 through 2008 was
awarded in Fiscal Year 2012-13. Project to be completed
in Fiscal Year 2013-14.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Collect, distribute and account for all mandated fees
and transfer taxes to ensure County departments, federal
and State agencies, cities and special districts can
fulfill their legal responsibilities.
?? Continue to review departmental fee structure to
ensure that costs for services are fully recovered.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Full system implementation of the new integrated
recording and vital records system is scheduled to
occur by June 2014. This will allow the ARCC to leverage
necessary new technologies in order to maintain a
high level of fiscal stability and service to citizens.
?? Implementation of the electronic recording module that
will allow the department to electronically accept
recorded documents, in addition to reducing document
processing time and enhance customer service.
?? Develop and implement an external ARCC SharePoint
site, a file sharing application. This will provide a venue
for all departmental services and information to the
public.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Provide the public with services that are of value to
them in a competent and professional manner and
achieve a customer service rating of at least 93%.
?? Maintain excellent customer service by ensuring all
departmental staff complete the customer service
training program initiated by ARCC before June 30,
2014.
?? Provide the public with a variety of online forms and
related services. This will provide a more efficient and
effective level of customer service by leveraging the latest
in online form processing and electronic signature
technology.
?? Extend customer services at the Chula Vista and
Kearny Mesa branch offices; document recording services
to be offered in January 2014.

Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? To safeguard public funds and maintain public trust,
Treasurer-Tax Collector will efficiently manage the provisions
of banking services for public entities and
County departments. The Treasurer-Tax Collector will
also provide accurate recording of all funds on deposit
and facilitate daily reconciliation of funds.
?? To continue to fund the delivery of superior services
throughout the San Diego County region, the Treasurer-
Tax Collector will invest public monies held in the Treasury
and maximize cash resources, without sacrificing
the principles of safety or liquidity, for an anticipated
weighted average rate of return of 0.60% in Fiscal Year
2013-14 and 0.70% in Fiscal Year 2014-15.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? To assist public agencies in making informed decisions
that minimize taxpayer cost when issuing debt and
ensuring correct and timely payments to bond holders,
the Treasurer-Tax Collector will provide broad-based
financial and consulting services to public agencies
within the San Diego County region.
?? Provide a learning platform and forum to address current
government finance issues by facilitating four seminars
including Fraud Prevention, Cash Handling, Debt
Financing and Investment of Public Funds for local
agencies.
Tax Collection
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain a collection rate of 98% for secured taxes and
97% for unsecured taxes by preparing and mailing
property tax bills/notices, and processing tax payments
in a timely manner to ensure timely revenue collection
on behalf of San Diego County’s taxpayers, by
June 30, 2014.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Participate in the development of IPTS with the Assessor/
Recorder/County Clerk, Auditor and Controller and
County Technology Office to prepare IPTS for deployment.
Deferred Compensation
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Broaden the Countywide base of employees who are
planning for financial security during retirement by the
following measures:
?? Increase enrollment in the Deferred Compensation
457 Plan to 48.2% through June 30, 2014 and
maintain it through June 30, 2015.
?? Increase the average participant contribution in the
Deferred Compensation 457 Plan to $91 per pay
period by June 30, 2014 and maintain through June
30, 2015.
?? Continue to educate employees on the Deferred
Compensation Plan by presenting two Investment &
Retirement Symposiums each fiscal year.
?? Continue to increase employee awareness and
understanding by conducting educational
workshops and redesigning promotional materials
and presentations to increase the knowledge base of
all employees by June 30, 2014.
During Fiscal Years 2013-15, the Chief Administrative Office
will work with the Board of Supervisors to ensure that
County government in San Diego remains fiscally sound,
operationally strong and able to meet the changing service
needs of County residents within available revenues. To
accomplish this, the CAO will continue to use the County’s
General Management System (GMS) to implement the
Board’s priorities, as well as to maintain the County’s established
management disciplines and commitment to innovation,
continuous improvement and excellence.
The CAO will continue to closely monitor changing economic
conditions and the uncertainties surrounding key
State revenue sources and will continue to work with CAOs
in other California counties to protect local revenues and
interests as the State continues to redefine State/County
roles, responsibilities and revenues.
The CAO will also continue to enhance efficiency, productivity
and service quality throughout the organization by
identifying and implementing new ways of working that
enable the organization to better meet changing public
needs or program realities - using strategies that include
reengineering, expanded partnerships with other entities
that serve similar customers or have similar goals and use
of new technology tools.
Highlights of the CAO’s Fiscal Year 2013-15 Objectives and
how they relate to the County’s 2013-2018 Strategic Plan
are listed below. Additional accomplishments and detailed
information is provided in individual department and group
Operational Plan narratives. Together, they form a coordinated
strategy that enables the County to achieve its Mission
– “To efficiently provide public services that build
strong and sustainable communities” – and its Vision – “A
County that is safe, healthy and thriving.”
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Promote and implement strategies that protect residents
from crime or abuse:
?? Employ information-led policing strategies to crime
problems at the local and regional levels.
?? Reduce recidivism through evidence-based
practices and services in collaboration with
community and justice partners.
?? Promote strategies that make neighborhoods safe
places to live, work and play:
?? Reduce risks to lives by ensuring buildings and
improvements are designed and constructed in
accordance with building safety codes.
?? Continue to strengthen the County’s and communities’
ability to prepare, respond and recover from disasters.
?? Coordinate with local and regional agencies’
emergency services and critical first responder
agencies to strengthen the regional emergency
notification system.
?? Collaborate with regional fire service agencies to
improve fire protection and emergency response
services.
?? Incorporate disaster preparedness into programs
and services that target vulnerable populations and
encourage self-sufficiency during and after an
adverse event.
?? Work with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and Baja California, Mexico as the U.S. Co-
Chair of the Border 2020 Emergency Preparedness
and Response Group for the San Diego-Tijuana
region to:
?? Coordinate and conduct binational emergency
training with the goal of ensuring that responders in
the region use the same equipment, procedures
and have the same training.
?? Integrate the Office of Emergency Services
Operational Area Emergency Operations Center
and the Tijuana Protection Civil’s Emergency
Operations Center into binational exercises.
?? County Communications Office will participate in at
least two drills each fiscal year to prepare for and
respond to major natural or man-made disasters
impacting the San Diego County region. Provide
accurate and timely emergency and recovery
information to the public and media, using a wide
variety of traditional and new media tools, such as
the County’s new emergency website, social media,
new releases, video and mobile technology.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
?? Promote green building, including sustainable building
practices, renewable energy and energy efficiency
through economic incentives such as reduced fees and
fee waivers. Issue 2,000 photovoltaic permits for solar
power systems under an expedited fee waiver program.
?? Partner with East Otay Mesa property owners, the San
Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG), the California
Department of Transportation (CalTrans) and the
City of San Diego to plan and construct a regional sanitary
sewer network to support the phased implementation
of the East Otay Mesa Specific Plan while
safeguarding public health and the environment.
?? Save 30 million gallons of water at 19 park facilities that
have converted to smart irrigation controllers, resulting
in water conservation.
?? Reduce air pollution emissions and health risk from
freight movement using State Goods Movement Emission
Reduction Program (Proposition1B) funds to
award grants to equipment owners to replace older,
higher emitting heavy-duty diesel equipment with
newer, cleaner models.
?? Protect the health of the public by reducing exposure
to hazardous air pollutants by implementing test emissions
from all natural gas, expand the network of air
monitors for carbonyl compounds, and develop the
capability to deploy an emergency network of 2 fine
particulate matter (PM2.5) monitors within 48 hours of
any wildfire and link the instruments via satellite for
real-time data delivery to the public.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
Ensure integration and achievement of Live Well, San
Diego! strategies to provide the right services, to the right
people, at the right time.
?? Build a better service delivery system that is innovative
and outcome driven.
?? Implement the multi-year Community Transformation
Grant (CTG) to support public health efforts to
reduce chronic diseases, promote healthier lifestyles,
reduce health disparities, and decrease health care
costs.
?? Provide Public Health Nurse home visits to
participants in the Community Based Care
Transitions Programs (CCTP) to help them
proactively manage their chronic medical conditions.
?? Co-locate Child Welfare Services staff with staff from
community based organizations to improve service
integration.
?? Celebrate 100 years of the County Library with
branches as centers of communities, while looking
ahead to the use of technology in service delivery
?? Create safer parks, preserves and recreation centers
using volunteers to assist with park patrols,
operations, and maintenance by contributing more
than 96,000 hours annually.
?? Ensure that all construction work by utility
companies and private developers in the County’s
right-of-way that is within 1,000 feet of a school site
provides safe access to schools for families and
children.
?? Support positive choices that empower residents to
take responsibility for their own health and well-being.
?? Implement the multi-year Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program Education (SNAP-Ed) project to
promote nutrition education and obesity prevention
services to low-income families in the regions that
are potentially eligible for the federally funded
CalFresh food assistance program.
?? Support regional efforts with a variety of programs
and outreach to reduce homelessness among families
and veterans and increase self-sufficiency.
?? Promote healthy lifestyles for 2,000 adults and
seniors through participation in 60 recreation
programs.
?? Pursue policy and environmental changes that make it
easier for people to engage in healthy and safe behaviors.
?? Implement regional community health improvement
plans through the participation or leadership of
Resident Leadership Academy (RLA) graduates. The
purpose of the RLA is to build community capacity
for health improvement in local neighborhoods.
?? Implement third phase of the succession plan to
advance Live Well, San Diego!
Required Disciplines for Excellence
Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain the County’s strong issuer credit ratings of
Aa1 (GSR) (Moody’s Investors Service), AAA (Standard
& Poor’s) and AAA (Fitch Ratings) to ensure lower debt
interest costs.
?? Accurately identify current and future revenue, as cost
and cash flow trends, in a timely manner in order to
facilitate allocation of limited resources to County
groups and departments.
Skilled, Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? To ensure the smooth delivery of future services and
continued organizational growth and improvement,
complete the second round of the County Mentor Partnership
Program and develop succession planning
tools that departments can use to enhance employees’
leadership skills and support succession planning
efforts.
Essential Infrastructure
?? Plan and design facilities to serve the growing needs of
County residents including new capital projects for
libraries in Alpine and Imperial Beach, infrastructure
improvements at Lake Morena, a new Registrar of Voters
building on the County Operations Center Campus
and a new office for the Assessor/Recorder/County
Clerk in El Cajon. Continue significant multi-year projects:
?? CAC Waterfront Park
?? Parking structure at Cedar and Kettner streets in San
Diego
?? Replacement Women’s Detention Facility
?? New Rancho San Diego Sheriff’s Station
?? East Mesa Detention Re-Entry and Rehabilitation
Facility
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Submit 100% of federal, State and local financial
reports and annual financial statements that comply
with regulations and reporting standards for County
departments, outside government agencies, investors
and taxpayers by their due dates to ensure accountability
and transparency of financial transactions.
Information Services
?? Continue the phased upgrade of the region’s aging
Regional Communication System (RCS), planning for
replacement of subsequent major components to
begin in Fiscal Year 2013-14.
?? Continue the replacement of the County’s aging legacy
Property Tax Collection system with a modern Integrated
Property Tax System in Fiscal Year 2013-14.
This project will replace the old technology currently
used to value properties, collect taxes and distribute
the revenue collected with a new system that will
enable the County to be more efficient, automate many
processes, and require less maintenance and support.
The new system will also give County property owners
the ability to complete certain required forms online
instead of traveling to County facilities or mailing physical
documents, improving customer satisfaction and
reducing the need for travel and printing.
?? Develop and implement an upgrade to the County’s
core Human Resources software application to
improve operational efficiency in personnel record
management by December 2014.
?? Full system implementation of the new integrated
recording and vital records system is scheduled to
occur by June 2014. This will allow the ARCC to leverage
necessary new technologies in order to maintain a
high level of fiscal stability and service to its citizens.
?? Leverage technology innovations to improve service
delivery and operational efficiency. Continue projects to
support improved process efficiencies and data sharing.
?? Complete the implementation of the 24/7 Library-To-
Go pilot project at the County Operations Center to
provide library services to remote areas currently without
library services; post implementation assessment
and review at 6 months; examine the viability and feasibility
for rolling out these devices to other potential
locations.
?? Continue to refine and enhance the Accela Automation
system that integrates land development permit operations,
time accounting and finances of land development
permits.
?? Convert all 14 of the County’s intranet and internet
mapping applications to the current industry-standard
technology ArcGIS Server using Microsoft Silverlight.
Regional Leadership
?? Host a Hazardous Analysis and Critical Control Points
workshop in coordination with the restaurant industry,
the Food and Drug Administration and the California
Department of Public Health to educate local industry
and regulators; invite regulators from neighboring jurisdictions
to participate in the training.
?? Work with the Industrial Environmental Association
(IEA) to provide the annual “IEA-APCD Blue Sky Leadership
Award” to three local businesses.
?? Pursue voluntary Public Health Accreditation status to
promote accountability and continuous improvement.
Continuous Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement changes and monitor the Community Event
Permit (CEP) process for improved customer service.
?? Complete the development of a new online payment
tool for land development projects. The new tool will
accept electronic payment for permits fees and deposits,
reducing the need for customers to physically visit
an office.
?? Effective Fiscal Year 2013-14, Public Administrator/
Public Guardian and Behavioral Health Conservator
unit will become part of Aging and Independence Services
to reflect Health and Human Services Agency’s
reorganization to improve effectiveness and efficiency
in service delivery.
Customer Satisfaction
?? Ensure consumer value by completing 100% of annual
inspections for fuel meters, taxi meters, water dispensers
and computing scales, and 90% of all counter
scales.
?? Implement the use of an online intake form to receive
public complaints of food borne illness.
?? Transition Healthy Families and Low Income Health
Program participants into appropriate health programs
to promote continuity of care and a medical home, providing
patient-centered, comprehensive, and coordinated
care.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Submit 100% of federal, State and local financial
reports and annual financial statements that comply
with regulations and reporting standards for County
departments, outside government agencies, investors
and taxpayers by their due dates to ensure accountability
and transparency of financial transactions.
?? Process 100% of County payments within five business
days after receipt of invoice by Accounts Payable
to ensure timely payment of vendors and contractors.
The prompt payment of invoices ensures that the
County captures any discounts that are available for
early invoice payment.
?? Provide high quality audit services, including State
mandated and operational/performance audits, to
ensure the integrity of management control systems, to
improve performance across the enterprise, and to
ensure the most efficient use of resources.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain the County’s strong issuer credit ratings of
Aa1 (GSR) (Moody’s Investors Service), AAA (Standard
& Poor’s) and AAA (Fitch Ratings) to ensure lower debt
interest costs.
?? Accurately identify current and future revenue, as well
as cost and cash flow trends, in a timely manner in
order to facilitate allocation of limited resources to San
Diego County groups and departments.
?? Meet or exceed the prior year’s actual recovery rate
percentage (total dollars collected / total available
accounts receivable) of 7.25%. This measure represents
the effectiveness of collection activities performed
by the Office of Revenue & Recovery (ORR).
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Earn the State Controller’s Award for Achieving Excellence
in Financial Reporting for the Fiscal Year ending
June 30, 2012.
?? Continue to apply for recognitions through GFOA –
Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in Financial
Reporting for the CAFR and the Award for Outstanding
Achievement in Popular Annual Financial Reporting for
the PAFR.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? In coordination with the Assessor/Recorder/County
Clerk, Treasurer-Tax Collector and the County Technology
Office, continue implementation of the IPTS, which
will significantly improve property assessment, tax collection
and apportionment activities in the County.
?? Complete the upgrade of the County’s budget application.
The upgrade of this application, which supports
the County’s overall budget process; will ensure continued
product support of this key application.
?? Replace the County’s existing Miscellaneous Transaction
Batch Transfer/Deposit (MTB-DT) with a new
Fusion Middleware based application Deposit AR Reallocation
Transfer (DART). This new application will provide
County users with improved functionality and
simplify future upgrades.
?? Upgrade County Data Warehouse to latest application
release (OBIEE 11G) which includes many new features
such as: updated dashboards, better user interface
(UI), and improved integration with web services and
other applications.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Complete upgrade of the Windows 7 operating system
software on all County desktop and laptop workstations
prior to the April 2014 Windows XP support deadline.
?? Create a single repository called DocVault to store
Applications work products that is accessible to
County staff. This repository will have fundamental taxonomy
and search tools.
?? Implement an enterprise constituent contact management
and request management solution that will provide
the County with a cohesive system for tracking
constituent contact information and referrals. The system
will be used by the five County Board of Supervisors
offices, as well as County departments who
receive and process requests for information from the
public.
?? Implement Service Manager (HPES application) to
replace the aging MyRequest System.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Utilize the results of the 2012 IT Customer Satisfaction
Surveys (including All County and IT Management Surveys)
to conduct targeted research and determine specific
opportunities for continuous improvement,
develop strategies for implementing improvement
activities, and advance satisfaction in key focus areas.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Maintain IT costs for services at rates established in the
IT Outsourcing Agreement. New services will be
benchmarked and analyzed for best value to the
County to provide a fair and reasonable price.
?? Effectively manage performance of the County’s Outsourcing
Provider to ensure timeliness and value of IT
services.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Redesign and reimplement the County’s public-facing
website on new technology that will allow for ease of
design and sizing for mobile viewing as well as provide
the ability for each County department to manage their
specific content and features easily and cost-effectively.
?? Re-architect the Documentum environment to enable
new features of Documentum version 6.7 and tightly
integrate with Captiva for capture solution. The first two
applications to utilize the platform will be CalWin Electronic
Records Management System (ERMS) and Xendocs.
?? Implement Adobe LiveCycle solution to allow forms
development, data loss prevention of Adobe document,
and enable additional product feature capabilities.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
?? Provide regional and national leadership through participation
on advisory boards and speaking engagements.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Develop and implement Organization Change Management
Plan for the Integrated Property Tax System
(IPTS) project
?? Provide employees and community members with IT
learning opportunities via vendor fairs and IT education
days.
?? Provide County user training for the updated IT cost
management system to improve efficiencies in monitoring
and reporting IT costs.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Implement a new Customer Relationship Management
system to identify, record, and track requests for information
and other communications received from the
public. This system will ensure that County residents
receive a timely and accurate response when making
inquiries of County government.
?? Provide technical oversight and support for the Knowledge
Integration Project (KIP), a Health and Human
Services Agency (HHSA) initiative that will set the foundation
for centralized client care information. When
completed, this new system will integrate information
from several different HHSA systems to provide both
County and external providers with a quick and accurate
online information resource.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Achieve a positive customer satisfaction rating of 95%
or above.
?? Provide customers with hearings that are fair, impartial
and efficient in order to achieve legally sound decisions.
?? Ensure direct access to information through proper
referral of inquiries from departments, employees,
employee representatives and organizations and the
public, related to human resources matters.
?? Provide a neutral environment that facilitates open discussion
of issues for departments, employees and
employee representatives resulting in fair and unbiased
outcomes.
?? Resolve 55% of personnel disputes without the need
for a full evidentiary hearing resulting in time and cost
savings.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Participate in ongoing training in areas of human
resources, technology, workplace safety and pertinent
legal updates to increase staff’s knowledge in order to
provide superior customer service.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure all decisions made by the Commission will take
into consideration fairness, due process and are in
compliance with the law. The decisions will be thoroughly
reviewed by Commissioners, staff and counsel.
?? Distribute at least 95% of Commission decisions within
48 hours of Commission approval in order to provide
timely notification of outcomes to parties and the public.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Maintain and update desk book manual on Commission
proceedings and easily searchable electronic
database of Commission case law and precedents,
counsel advice, key issues and other relevant information
to increase staff efficiency and effectiveness.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Ensure the efficiency and transparency of the property
tax assessment appeal process by processing property
tax assessment appeal applications within five days of
receipt.
?? Provide open access to County business by making
audio recordings of all Board of Supervisors meetings
available on the Internet within five days of the related
meeting.
?? To encourage public involvement in government,
develop an online video about how the public can participate
in Board of Supervisors meetings.
?? To provide more universal access to public documents,
convert official records of the Board of Supervisors to
Portable Document Format (PDF).
?? Enhance the efficiency and transparency of the property
tax assessment appeal process by participating in
the development of the Integrated Property Tax System.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Ensure satisfaction with services provided by achieving
consistently high ratings on surveys of over 2,000 customers.
?? Provide opportunities to San Diego residents by processing
and mailing 100% of completed U.S. Passport
applications on the same day they are received.
?? Increase customer satisfaction by improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of the U.S. Passport check-in
process.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
County Counsel will provide quality, accurate, effective and
timely legal advice to all County departments to enable
them to fulfill their mission and objectives in accordance
with the law, reduce the risk of liability and use taxpayer
dollars efficiently and effectively.
?? Complete 98% of all advisory assignments for the
Board of Supervisors and Chief Administrative Officer
by their due dates.
?? Complete 95% or more of all advisory assignments for
County departments by the agreed upon due dates.
?? Continue County Counsel law student internship program
to provide quality service to clients.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
County Counsel will aggressively represent the County in
litigation, maintaining fiscal stability while advancing the
overall interests of the County of San Diego and the public
it serves.
?? Resolve 80% or more of all lawsuits against the County
by a court decision/dismissal, and resolve 20% or less
by settlement.
?? Prevail in 90% or more of court decisions in all lawsuits
filed against the County.
?? Achieve a success rate of 90% or more in County code
enforcement and other lawsuits where the County is
the plaintiff by winning in court or obtaining favorable
financial settlements.
?? Handle 95% or more of the defense of all lawsuits filed
in California against the County, unless a conflict of
interest requires outside counsel to handle a case,
thereby reducing outside counsel costs to the County
and taxpayers.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
County Counsel will provide effective legal services to the
Health and Human Service Agency (HHSA) in matters relating
to children who have been dependents of the Juvenile
Court.
?? Prevail in 98% or more of Juvenile Dependency petitions
filed in Superior Court.
?? Prevail in 95% or more of Juvenile Dependency
appeals and writs filed.
Strategic Initiative – Sustainable Environments
County Counsel will support the County’s objective of promoting
responsible development, economic vitality and the
highest quality of life.
?? Complete 100% of all draft Environmental Impact
Report reviews within 40 days or less.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Regional
Leadership
County Counsel attorneys will engage in numerous leadership
roles in the County and throughout the State, which
will provide positive and constructive influences in the professional
practice of law in the region.
?? Maintain significant involvement in the activities of at
least 15 regional organizations and committees.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
County Counsel will provide education and risk mitigation
training to County officers and employees to support a
committed, capable and diverse workforce.
?? Provide 50 or more education programs on selected
legal subjects for County departments.
?? Provide 50 or more specialized risk mitigation sessions,
such as risk roundtables, case evaluation committee
discussions and post-litigation debriefings to address
risk issues, helping to promote risk management and
decrease future legal liability.
?? Provide 24 or more internal and/or external training
sessions for County Counsel staff, including Mandatory
Continuing Legal Education, to ensure staff continues
to provide the highest quality legal services to the
County by remaining current on developments in the
law.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
County Counsel will optimize its information technology
systems to improve operational efficiency and service to
customers.
?? Continue toward development of a centralized document
repository and electronic briefcase system for
Juvenile Dependency-related court documents. This
centralized repository will be shared by multiple
departments (including San Diego Superior Court and
HHSA’s Child Welfare Services) and will result in an efficient
electronic retrieval process, eliminating the need
for paper documents.
?? Complete the transition to a new web-based office
practice management system (Tymetrix’s T360), which
manages all case and advisory information, has calendaring
capabilities, retains client and contract information,
stores supporting legal documents, and tracks
time and billing information.
?? Improve the County Counsel intranet site by continuing
to provide legal links, up-to-date training materials and
other information which could support client departments.
?? Continue to expand use of available mobile technologies,
such as implementing web-based solutions or
increasing the use of mobile computing to increase efficiencies.
?? Implement a paperless electronic billing technology
which will streamline invoicing procedures and payment
processes. This technology will create a bidirectional
data feed into the County’s Oracle financial
system, and will provide efficiencies in data entry and
reconciliation.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Review, prioritize and investigate all citizens’ complaints,
issues and other County matters of civil concern
brought before the Grand Jury by assembling a
well-qualified and widely representative civil panel to
ensure that city and county governmental entities are
operating as efficiently as possible.
?? Support the District Attorney with hearings on criminal
matters in accordance with Penal Code §904.6
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Increase diversity outreach by including advertisements
in diverse publications on 100% of recruitments.
?? Conduct the Labor Relations Academy training by
March 31, 2014.
?? Support the training needs of the Office of Emergency
Services on the Advanced Recovery Initiative by transforming
Local Assistance Center (LAC) Orientation
classroom training to an e-learning module in order to
provide training as soon as an employee is identified as
a LAC worker by June 30, 2014.
?? Provide Countywide formal, informal, and social learning
opportunities in support of the Leadership Development
Model by June 30, 2015.
?? Maintain a high quality workforce by adhering to 98%
of established timelines for recruitment of County
employees.
?? Provide departments with positions that match their
staffing needs by completing 98% of classification
activity requests by established timelines.
Strategic Initiative – Healthy Families
?? Develop and implement the third year Employee Wellness
Program components and achieve a 15%
employee program participation rate.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Fiscal Stability
?? Negotiate fiscally prudent successor agreement with
the 2 bargaining units within the Deputy Sheriffs’ Association
by July 2014.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Information
Services
?? Develop and implement an upgrade to the County’s
core Human Resources software application to
improve operational efficiency in personnel record
management by December 2014.
?? Review and Update Labor Relations Intranet website
content by December 31, 2013.
?? Convert Medical Standards paper files, where feasible,
to electronic form to enhance file security, enable more
efficient sharing of data with appropriate staff requiring
file access and reduce costs associated with the storage
and production of paper files by June 30, 2015.
?? Enhance recruiting webpage to include various means
of social media in order to better attract the new generation
of candidates.
?? Coordinate the migration of the Learning Management
System (LMS) from HP to SumTotal hosting to improve
operational efficiency by June 30, 2015.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Customer
Satisfaction
?? Procure a portable fingerprinting machine to facilitate
off-site background process and improve customer
service by June 30, 2014.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Conduct Countywide study on all IT classifications to
evaluate the appropriate current and future use of all IT
classifications and determine if there is a need to
streamline or modify class functions.
?? Analyze current Workers’ Compensation claims management
system and conduct research into alternative
systems to ensure optimal performance and best use
of County resources by June 30, 2014.
?? Competitively procure an Employee Benefits Broker
and Consultant Services Contract by January 2014.
?? Utilize autoscore feature in NeoGov on all recruitments
with fifty or more applicants in order to automate verification
of minimum qualifications and reduce the
amount of time spent by staff to review individual applications.
Required Discipline for Excellence –
Accountability, Transparency and Ethical Conduct
?? Create awareness among taxpayers about the value of
County programs and services, emphasizing the fact
that the County of San Diego is a responsible steward
of tax dollars by posting 200 video presentations in Fiscal
Year 2013-14 and another 205 in Fiscal Year 2014-
15.
?? Work proactively to deliver vital information including
County news, challenges and successes directly to
San Diegans and position the County to define itself,
rather than relying on traditional media to do so.
?? Update the County News Center regularly to
establish the site as a valid news source. Add at least
one new content item (article or video) every
business day for a total of 310 during Fiscal Year
2013-14, and another 315 during Fiscal Year 2014-
15.
?? Provide easy, on-the-go access to important County
information through social media. Increase number
of followers on Facebook and Twitter by 10% during
Fiscal Year 2013-14, and an additional 10% during
Fiscal Year 2014-15.
Strategic Initiative – Safe Communities
?? Participate in at least two drills each fiscal year to prepare
for and respond to major natural or man-made
disasters impacting the San Diego County region. Provide
accurate and timely emergency and recovery
information to the public and media, using a wide variety
of traditional and new media tools, such as the
County’s new emergency website, social media, new
releases, video and mobile technology.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Skilled,
Adaptable and Diverse Workforce
?? Foster an environment of excellence, innovation and
exceptional customer service among County employees
who serve the public through the County’s intranet
site, posting 135 content items (article or video) in support
of the Strategic Initiatives and Required Disciplines
during Fiscal Year 2013-14, and another 140
during Fiscal Year 2014-15.
Required Discipline for Excellence – Continuous
Improvement and Innovation
?? Work together with the County Technology Office to
redesign the County’s public-facing website, emphasizing
design and content that enhances the public’s
ability to access information about the County’s programs
and services from a variety of mobile devices.
