Effective Policies, Ordinances and Resolutions: It is essential to the Board of Supervisors to stay connected with department operations and the needs of the public in order to maximize service output for the community. As liaisons for the people of San Benito County, the Board hopes to maximize efficiencies, partnerships, and accessibility. Doing so will ensure that county funding is used effectively, appropriately, and in the best interest of the people.
Strategic Plan: Pending the completion of a study by Optimity Advisors, the Board, with County staff, will develop a strategic plan that addresses sustaining revenues and controlling expenses into the future.

Goal for FY 14/15 include: Paperless contracts with the implementation of the ERP; storage of BOS documents in one location and in proper order; and implementing a visual as well as audio timer system for public speakers.

Organizational Efficiency: Determine efficiency of current department organization to maximize cost savings, better public service,
Strategic Plan: develop strategic plans for multiple areas of the County including a general strategic plan relating to securing funding levels, developing and training staff, retaining employees, making work process more efficient using technology, and maximizing the availability of data and best management practices
Effective Policies & Procedures: analyzing current policy, and addressing critical areas in need of written policies and/or procedures including evaluating relevance of current policy and to determine whether updates are warranted with a focus on recession resistant policies that mitigate impacts
OPEB, PARs: ensure annual report evaluation of PARS first-year investment

The County Counsel’s Office will accomplish the following goals and objectives: Continue to provide timely professional legal advice in the most cost efficient manner possible; improve communications and work processes between the Office of County Counsel and the Departments it serves; and monitor outside counsel assigned to County litigation to ensure cost containment and delivery of quality legal services.

departments, Board of Supervisors, the public, and various federal and state agencies.
Software: Implement new Financial Accounting Software for A/P, Payroll and General Ledger Accounting
Excellence: Complete 2013/14 Audit and submission to GFOA by December 31, 2014 for Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting Program.
Training: Develop training and implementation standards for Risk Management Cost Allocation and Management Reporting.The Elections Office has identified server goals and objectives for FY 14/15 including:
SouthTech System: Coordinate the implementation of the newly purchased SouthTech System for maintaining the campaign financial and statement of economic interest filings.
ADA Website Development: Continue the with Phase 2 development of a fully accessible website that meet ADA and voters’ with special needs requirements.
Address Accuracy: Collaborate with GIS and the Address Subcommittee to ensure that voters are only registered at valid city or county addresses for voting purposes, as required by statute.
Master Voter Files: Update master voter files, including cleanup of inactive and/or deceased voters to maximize cost savings efficiency, and data file accuracy.
Archive System: Continue the development of a departmental archive system that can be presented and adopted by the Board of Supervisors for all historical election, candidate/campaign and voter information.

New Hire: Recruit an Assistant for this department to assist with overseeing activities of both Treasury and Public Administration
Technology, ERP: Go live with the Treasury portion of the new ERP system with as few glitches as possible at start of fiscal year.

The County Tax collector has identified the following goals that are dependent improve collections by implementing new methods of enforcement if we are provided the Assistant position to help with analyzing the needs, coordinating and overseeing the requirements of the operation; complete backlogged workload as time and resources permit; hold an auction sale of tax-defaulted property in the Spring; continue timely generation and mailing of notices and liens

Completion of Assessment Roll – Compute the assessment roll by June 30, 2015, which includes completion of basic workload that is driven by changes in ownership, completion of new construction, the processing of business & agricultural property statements along with the special assessments and the annual computation of the Land Conservation Act values. We will continue our efforts to reduce the backlog of pending appraisals.
Proposition 8 Reviews – Continue to review and monitor all relevant market real estate sales data to determine if further value adjustments are warranted for those properties that are eligible for Proposition 8 (decline in value) reduction or increase in assessment. For those properties under Proposition 8, the Assessor is obligated to annually review and enroll the lesser of either the fair market value or the Proposition 13 factored base year value for the January 1st assessment date.
GIS Maps – Continue to review, verify and correct GIS Assessor Parcel Maps to eventually replace the current Assessor Parcel Maps in order to process assessment information geographically increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the Assessor’s Office and improving customer service to the taxpayers of San Benito County.
Assessor’s Website – Continue to update the Assessor’s website to include more information about the assessment of property in San Benito County and the most frequently used and requested forms. Establish and continue to maintain the Assessor’s On-Line Business Statement Filing System.

ERP: Ensure successful completion/implementation of an ERP System for Human Resources transactions and processing involving County departments as partners
Health Benefits: Achieve full compliance with the Affordable Health Care Act
Labor Negotiations: Successfully complete labor negotiations with all County employee groups to achieve cost containment and ensure fiscal stability; and develop ongoing positive and productive relationships with County labor groups

Equipment Replacement Plan: equipment needs to be tracked and analyze to have a planned strategy for replacing equipment based on most urgent need, highest work output, and costs.
ERP System, Live!: Portions of the ERP system will go live in 14/15. This will be the year to focus on functionality and perfecting the system that are operating.

Social Media, Policies: With the surge of social media used by the public, the IT Department is focusing on a policy and procedure so San Benito County can benefit form social media networks relating to maintenance needs, outreach and education, and other areas that County Departments would like to connect with the public.

Strategic Plan: Review an update of the GIS Strategic Plan to include a description of the GIS Program, program sustainability, department utilization of the program and the benefits, and future applications to implement.
Program Sustainability: facilitate GIS Steering and Technical Committees to ensure the success of the GIS program including budgeting, mapping and data maintenance to secure accuracy of information with our partners; and provide exceptional service to program users.

Due to an improving economy and slightly better consumer confidence, increases in revenue are expected in the areas of property taxes, sales taxes, franchise fees and interest by approximately 8% overall. RECOMMENDED BUDGET FY 2014-2015 Page 106
The Teeter Plan will be providing funding for OPEB and Vacation and Sick Accruals for the general fund departments. The funding for OPEB of $2,800,000 represents the FY 14/15 payment plus a catch-up of prior year’s shortfall in OPEB funding. $500,000 is also allocated from the Teeter Plan for the estimated Vacation and Sick accruals that will be charged to GF departments with the implementation of the ERP system.Given staff availability, Buildings and Ground has the following goals for FY 14/15:
INFRASTRUCTURE: Countywide Roof Assessment and HVAC infrastructure analysis
COMMUNICATION: Increase communication with internal department customers through additional staff and better preventative maintenance.At minimum, the following goals have been determined for FY 14/15:
Detention Facility: Complete design phase and proceed with bid process of new Adult Detention Facility
River Parkway: Continue property negotiations and acquisition for River Parkway Project
Courthouse: Design work on Courthouse Renovation Project.

The Grand Jury will set their annual goals after a new grand jury and foreperson has been appointed once the new fiscal year has commenced. FY 14/15 brings more focus on recruitment for members.

Policies and Procedures: Adoption of a Brady Policy; and adoption of policy & procedures for the office
Case Management System: Develop a case management system that is compatible with other law enforcement systems

Communication: Continue to work closely with law enforcement agencies to coordinate services to crime victims.
Volunteers: Increase efforts to recruit volunteers to assist program in providing services to all crime victims.

Performance Standards: Exceed the State determined performance goals.
Collections: Increase total dollars collected
Orders: Increase the percentage of cases with Court orders

Maintenance: Insure the County’s Alternate PSAP, telecommunications, and radios are maintained and serviced in a ready state to provide a direct link to the SCR911 Center.
Equipment: Administer budget, contracts for phones, technology, radio infrastructure, radio maintenance, repeater site lease agreements and other maintenance issues in regards to the County Alternate PSAP.
Partnerships: Administer contract agreements with City of Hollister, City of San Juan and the County Emergency Medical Services Agency for contracted communication and radio infrastructure services that the county provides.

Training: Provide additional training to Operational Area stakeholders. Coordinate/participate in EOC tabletop exercise.
Grants: Apply for grant funding made available to the county.
EOP Plan: Complete and receive FEMA approval of the Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan.

Autopsy Services: Obtain alternative contracts for autopsy services and or continue to collaborate with sister agencies.
Deceased Indigent Program: Continue cooperative efforts regarding the Deceased Indigent Program. Assumption of the County's deceased indigent program will have very little impact on the department. If it is determined that the decedent does not have family or if the family cannot pay, the County will make arrangements for cremation. Staff is researching alternative crematoriums since the local cost is between $800 and $900 per cremation. The Treasurer will continue the responsibility for tracking down any assets the decedent may have

Drug Activity: Reduce activities of those responsible for the illegal manufacturing, possession and sales of controlled substances through coordinated effort from law enforcement, prosecution, probation and the social services
Efficiency: Use existing state and federal laws for prosecution and case resolution
Partnerships and Service: Continue to focus on the victims of drug related offenses and the violence associated with those crimes. UNET will continue to work with social services for the safety and well-being of children and other victims.

Interagency Collaboration: Continue efforts focusing on interagency collaboration and task forces to combine resources; protect and promote agriculture, the environment and the citizens of San Benito County; and continue to locate and dismantle drug labs

Provide functional work stations; review and update Department Policy and Procedures regularly; update and enhance Department Website; implement Monthly Statistical Reporting; evaluate warrant bank backlog and develop action plan to reduce the amount of warrants; Complete MOU with School Districts to commence an enhanced Truancy

Reduction Program; Implement re-entry model which is an interagency coordination to include assessing and effective re-entry service to offenders.

Program Improvement: Implementing Case Planning at Juvenile Hall; updating Juvenile Hall Policy and Procedures Manual; creating a safer living environment for the minors at juvenile hall; and
Educational Program Improvement: Enhancing educational programs in the juvenile hall facility beyond four hours a day.
Funding: Seeking SB81 Grant for Juvenile Hall

Juvenile Review Board through adding permanent staff member to Probation to oversee these two essential services.
Strategic Plan: Complete 5 year strategic plan for Gang Prevention efforts and utilize this plan to inform budget decisions and Policy recommendations.
Improve Literacy: Engage in an intensive collaborative building effort to improve literacy as a means to inoculate youth from gang involvement; improve information and resource sharing; improve services to clients; enhance the “Continuum of Care” in San Benito County.

Proactive Efforts: Continue to be proactive instead of reactive in regards to locating and treating areas favorable for mosquito generation.
Education & Outreach: Continue public education and outreach by participating in community events such as the County Fair, Farmer’s Markets and other activities where the public can be reached.
Pools: Quickly identify and treat abandoned “green” swimming pools before they become a public nuisance.

Collaboration: continue communication efforts with the Board of Supervisors to identify areas of focus from the public perspective.
Outreach/Education: maximize outreach efforts for environmentally responsible behavior through State and Local websites.

To continue a high level of service to the public and animals of San Benito County through adoption services, timely response to stray calls, rabies control, and sufficient shelter.



Fire House #3: Prepare MOU between County and City regarding new fire location; prepare and receive approval for a design plan for renovations including costs; begin work.

Digital Records: Continue to digitally image all Birth, Marriage and Death Records, until all records dating back to the late 1800’s to present are available electronically.
Digital Equipment: The Department purchase digital photography equipment, which allow \ identification cards to be prepared in a more modern and professional format. This has reduced the time it takes to produces these identification cards by half.
Restoration: Review all Vital Records to identify priority of book restoration. Develop an annual budget to restore all records over the next several years.

Official Record Book Restoration Project: Continuing the Official Record book restoration project of the early 1900s.
Online Payments: Update accessibility to the public’s records via website by adding the ability of purchasing Official Records by credit card payment over the internet.
Maps: Development of new access to electronic maps for internal county departmental uses and contract for engineers and external agencies.


New Hires: Secure more Staff to process what is anticipated to be an ever-increasing workload.
Ongoing Projects: Complete processing ongoing projects including over 1500 approved vacant residential lots, multiple residential developments requesting over 1500 new lots, the Panoche Valley solar project, as well as numerous other ongoing and anticipated commercial and industrial projects.

Complete the comprehensive update of the General Plan in FY 14-15.
Develop and implement an Impact Fee to pay for future General Plan Updates.
Begin the process to amend the Zoning Ordinance to comply with and be consistent with the new General Plan.
Update the Housing Element in 2014.

First-Time Homebuyers: Expend existing County and City HOME housing grant funds by originating new First-Time Homebuyer Down Payment Assistance second loans.
Housing Grants: Continue to apply for new housing grant funds through upcoming Notice of Funding Availability’s (NOFA’s) and facilitate community workshops.

New Hires: Re-establish a sufficient level of Administrative Services support staff which will provide proper financial management of five division budgets and special projects and personnel needs.
Managing Workload: Continue road design, surveying, right-of-way acquisition, transportation planning, and roads and bridge improvements with current staff levels in order to expand and meet the need of increasing development applications and inspections.

The following goals have been set for FY 14/15:
John Smith Road Overlay Project
Various Guardrail Projects
Construction Phase for Union Road and Hospital Road Bridge Projects.

Completion of Phase 2: Water Meter Replacement and Installation Project for the CSA #31 Stonegate Water Improvement Project.
Fee Structure Change: Prop 218 election for CSA #31 changing fee structure to billing by water usage.

Grant Funding: Continue to seek state and federal funding through grants and apportionments for priority transportation and planning projects in the San Benito region and for member jurisdictions.
Route 156: Work with Caltrans on moving the Route 156 Project forward as supported by the COG and member jurisdictions.
Highway 25: Complete the Highway 25 Bypass transfer to Caltrans and close-out/dissolve the Measure A Authority.
Begin updating the Transportation Impact Mitigation Fee Nexus Study.
Collaboration with Partners: Continue coordination with partners including Caltrans and the Valley Transportation Authority on State Highway projects impacting San Benito County.
Safe Routes: Continue looking into pedestrian friendly complete streets to ensure the safety of our community remains a top priority including enhancing crosswalks for common and safe routes to schools.
Public Transit Services: Work with community partners on opportunities to provide public transit service to community events including the Hollister Air Show and County Fair.

Partnerships: Develop a working relationship between the Physical Health Care enrolled Providers and San Benito County MCP (Physical Health Managed Care), Anthem Blue Cross
First Aid: Continue expansion of members of our community who are trained and certified to deliver Mental Health First Aid.
Consumer Employment: Continue expansion of consumer employment and consumer peer run services.

Drug MediCal: Expand the number of Drug MediCal reimbursement eligible Treatment Groups at San Benito High School, San Andreas Continuation High School, and Pinnacles Alternative Education School site.
Alcohol, Adult Accountability: It is the Substance Abuse Treatment Program’s goal to have an ordinance implemented by the county in FY 2014-15 that hold adults accountable through potential imposing of legal sanctions if found to be responsible for the hosting of underage drinking at their residence or other social gathering.
Retail Merchant Awards Program: A program to reinforce local merchant’s positive, responsible alcohol marketing behavior by recognition through certificates, plaques, and display banners. The awards would be given for such behaviors as adherence to the Lee law that limits the maximum area of retail merchant window space to no more than 33% of window area occupied with displays of alcohol advertisements. Another example of positive merchant advertising behavior would be for merchant’s awareness of not placing alcoholic beverages next to soft drink and energy drink beverages popular with and favored by teens.

Programmatic: Complete the contract requirements for mandated public health programs; Reportable Communicable Diseases (CD) CMS, EP, IZ, MCAH, Tobacco, STD and Vital Statistics.
Immunizations: Increase immunization clinics from once a month to once a week to improve immunization rates in children while simultaneously providing a gateway to health insurance and allow for more Medi-Cal billable service reimbursement.
Promote Wellness: Partner with Anthem Blue Cross to expand Medi-Cal billable services such as health education sessions and other wellness promotion activities.
Reimbursements: Provide strategic staff to become Covered California Assistors to will allow for increased reimbursements to public health.
Data Analysis: Use new community data to begin to address health inequities and trends that have ill effects on morbidity and mortality.
Equipment and technology purchase and update: Purchase three computers, memory, data drops and subsequent phone wiring upgrades with funds from the Vital Statistics Trust specifically targeted for vital statistics technology; and utilize public health realignment monies for building repairs, medical equipment and furniture purchases.
Organizational Structure: Budget and create Public Health Division Deputy Director position; increase Health Officer FTEs and hire anew; promote/reclassify the HES; hire 2-3 health assistants.

Committees: Continue to participate on the County and City Design Review Committees as well as with the Economic Development Corporation
Reporting: Maintain new electronic reporting requirements under AB 2286 for hazardous materials reporting and research feasibility of extending to other environmental health areas.
Grants: investigate the feasibility of obtaining grant money to support one FTE position for Environmental Health Services for an EHS Technician to assist in accomplishing hazardous materials programmatic assignments, specifically to assist in the initial conversion and long term maintenance of electronic hazardous generator reporting systems to facilitate mandated reporting by the regulated community.
Fee Schedule: Maintain adopted fee schedule and forecast anticipated costs/expenses to request annual percentage fee increases to ensure all programs are maintained and adequately covered.
RECOMMENDED

Emergency Medical Services Plan: Revise and update the Emergency Medical Services plan
Website: Revise and update the EMS website and move it to the County Server.
Smart Phone Application: Develop a smart phone application for EMS field personnel to access policies and procedures.

Contracting/Purchasing: Complete RFP process and provide project and permitting assistance to successful proposers
Gas to Energy Contract: Complete contract for landfill gas to energy project
Strategic Plan: Consideration should be given to planning for new activities on sections of the landfill that will be in final closure in the next five (5) years

New Program: Initiate restaurant food waste diversion program
Community Garden Project: Development of a community garden project incorporating the homeless and providing food for Food Bank as well as accepting food waste for compost.
Training: Successful training of new Recycling and Resource Recovery Coordinator

Cooperative Work: Provide substance abuse services in collaboration with Behavioral Health Department; provide counseling services to child welfare families by contracting with several local providers; provide drug testing and expand random drug testing by contracting with a private provider; and make aforementioned services accessible by providing transportation, if needed.

Emergency Response: San Benito County Health and Human Services Child Welfare Services Emergency Response Unit will continue to provide our community’s children with protection from current and future exposure to various forms of abuse and neglect. In addition, child welfare Emergency Response Unit strives to provide our community’s families with information and resources to help improve their quality of life, maintain familial structure, promote the safety, health and well being of children in our community, and increase child abuse prevention efforts through community engagement and awareness.
Case Management: San Benito County Child Welfare Services will continue to provide professional case management Services to children and families of children who have been abused or neglected. The goal is to maintain children in their homes with their families of origin whenever possible, facilitate timely reunification when out-of-home placement is necessary, and develop and implement optimal permanent plans when reunification is not an option. The Social Workers collaborate with children, their families, community partners, and identified support individuals to develop sustainable safety networks. Social Workers work with families to provide accountable public services and track and maintain timely, accurate, and relevant data and case records to further the efficiency and effectiveness of Child Welfare interventions that will help maintain families and reunify families that have their children in out of home placement.
Recruitment & Retention: Develop strategies to for recruitment and retention of competent and skilled social workers that are knowledgeable and skilled in best practice methods that reduce the length to permanence and increases timely reunification

Database, Adult Protective Services: purchase and implement an Adult Protective Program data base that will help track case management records, referrals; for years APS program has manually done case management and data reports. A data base system will provide the basis for an effective case management tool that will enable the APS program social worker to maximize resources, time and services for the client.

In-Home Supportive Services Program: conduct assessments and re-assessments in a timely manner to all San Benito County IHSS program clients and new enrollees; assess and link IHSS clients to identified services; conduct follow-up assessments in a timely manner; decrease board and care facility admitting through IHSS program services.

The CSWD Budget Unit will accomplish the following goals and objectives:
To be awarded the CDBG Application in the amount of $2,000,000 to support a year-round homeless center and other public services
To provide exceptional customer service that is efficient, effective and responsive to the needs of our customers.
To provide quality safety-net services that includes one-time rental assistance and utility, shelter, and food assistance for low-income residents.
To operate the One Stop Career Center and provide workforce development services to displaced workers and low-income community members.
To continue to collaborate with local non-profits and consortiums in order to strengthen the community’s safety net for food, shelter, and other needs of our low-income residents

Council Meetings: facilitate three to five tenant council meetings for families, with presentations by various organizations offering services that are of benefit to these families.
Collaboration & Resources: Secure additional resources through collaborative efforts for resident families to meet their economic, health and well-being needs

Goals for FY 14/15 include: seeking library funding opportunities to enhance library services; maintaining Library Core Services; and continuing to increase the use of the County’s social capital to strengthen limited resources.

Youth, Families and Communities: Improve the amount and type of professional development opportunities available to after school program professionals and volunteers. Continue to develop and enhance the 4-H community club program to develop citizenship, leadership and life skills in a positive youth development environment for youth ages 7 to 19 and their adult volunteers.
Agricultural Research and Extension: Continue to provide research extension and creative activity to address the agricultural needs of San Benito County; develop partnerships and relationships with local ranchers to meet their research and extension needs around drought, nutrition and grazing research practices; develop a vibrant and robust UCCE program such that we are the “go to department” for agriculture, natural resource and youth development answers and resources; and enhance the County budget and staffing levels for the UCCE Office.

BBQ Pits: Current BBQ pits are rusting and many are require additional welding supports. Staff would like to replace existing pits with new cinder block pits that will withstand rental use and minimize maintenance needs.
Bertha Briggs: This building, typically referred to as the “Girl Scout House” by users, needs various improvements, security, and efficiency upgrades such as windows, doors and flooring, etc. Current conditions are substandard to other rental facilities in the area.