In an effort to coordinate efforts with the County Administrative Office, the Board of Supervisors shares
some of the important goals regarding employee benefits and sustainable long term solutions to the fiscal
challenges that face the County.
 Evaluate the three major components of employee benefits and how they impact the County’s
ability to meet its fiscal responsibility not only to employees but the public as well. Those
components are: OPEB, countywide health insurance and PERS.
 Develop a three (3) year strategic plan to address the above?mentioned components of employee
benefits.
 Address the impact that the furlough program has had on county operations and service to the
public and develop a sustainable plan. The furlough program instituted in FY 2009?10 coupled
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 32
with the step freezes that were implemented in FY 2010?11 were initially intended to be a short
term solution to balance those fiscal year budgets. As a result, the County has accrued massive
vacation liabilities, and the public has suffered due to office closures and less staff time available
to serve the public.
 Assess the bare minimum staffing in key general services areas, such as the Auditor’s office,
Assessor’s office and direct public service departments. Coordinate with staff to bring those
departments to sustainable levels so that the basic, vital work is being performed and the public is
being served.
 Increase building and development interest along with subsequent and sustainable revenue in San
Benito County through coordinated efforts between the Board, Public Works, Assessor and
Planning & Building departments.

Consolidate and organize the archive of Board of Supervisors documents in one place, which were
disbursed to different locations upon being relocated from the County courthouse.
 Continue to provide a high standard of service in support of the Board of Supervisors, County
Board of Equalization, Assessment Appeals Board, San Benito County Financing Corporation, San
Benito County Fish & Game Advisory Commission, Intergovernmental Committee and Fire
Protection Committee with reduced staff.

Evaluate the three major components of employee benefits and how they impact the County’s
ability to meet its fiscal responsibility not only to employees but the public as well. Those
components are: OPEB, countywide health insurance and PERS.
 Develop a three (3) year strategic plan to address the above?mentioned components of employee
benefits.
 Address the impact that the furlough program has had on county operations and service to the
public and develop a sustainable plan. The furlough program instituted in FY 2009?10 coupled
with the step freezes that were implemented in FY 2010?11 were initially intended to be a short
term solution to balance those fiscal year budgets. As a result, the County as accrued massive
vacation liabilities, and the public has suffered due to office closures and less staff time available
to serve the public.
 Assess the bare minimum staffing in key general services areas, such as the Auditor’s office,
Assessor’s office and direct public service departments. Coordinate with staff to bring those
departments to sustainable levels so that the basic, vital work is being performed and the public is
being served.
 Complete due diligence and current contract negotiations for the purchase and implementation of
a new enterprise resource program (ERP), thus providing the much needed workflow, human
resources, position control and budgeting modules to compliment the county general ledger.
 Complete the transition process for the narrow?banding of radio frequencies and equipment with
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) deadline extension of June 30, 2013.

Provide timely professional legal advice in the most cost efficient manner possible.
 Improve communications and work processes between the Office of County Counsel and the
Departments it serves.
 Monitor outside counsel assigned to county litigation to ensure cost containment and delivery of
quality legal services.

The recommended budget reflects the increase of a Deputy County Counsel III from .7 to .8 FTE, with a
corresponding increase in revenue from the Health and Human Services Agency. Additionally, reductions
in previous budget years resulted in the elimination of all office support staff from the County Counsel’s
office. The proposed budget includes funding in the amount of $7,363 which would allow the front office
to be staffed eight hours per week with a temporary employee. The primary duty of this part?time
employee is to ensure that the County Counsel’s office properly bills and receives revenue for legal
services provided to billable departments and outside agencies.

Implement Phase One of the new County?wide Financial Accounting Information System.
 Provide timely financial reporting and budgetary information to the departments, Board of
Supervisors, the public, and various federal and state agencies.

Conduct the June 3, 2014 Statewide Primary Election. This election includes the party?nominated
office for all Statewide and Legislative Offices, Countywide Offices, and Supervisorial Offices,
statewide propositions and local measures.
 Coordinate the implementation of the newly purchased SouthTech System for maintaining the
campaign financial and statement of economic interest filings. This project will be implemented
with the collaboration of the Clerk of the Board, Human Resources, Office of Education and county
departments. The first year goal is to double the number of on time filings.
 Continue the with Phase 2 development of a fully accessible website that meet ADA and voters’
with special needs requirements. This project includes polling place, voter registration and other
lookup functionalities.
 Complete the pre?primary purge of inactive voters and residency confirmation of active voters,
thus reducing election mailing cost and allow the voter file to be updated prior to the Statewide
Primary in June.
 Perform a database scrubbing of master voter file with national social security, DMV and official
records databases to identify any potential deceased voter registration records.

Continue working with GIS and the Address Committee to coordinate the synchronization of the
official county and city addresses with the master street index of the Election Information
Management System (EIMS). This is to key to ensure that voters are only registered at valid city or
county addresses for voting purposes, as required by statute.
? Increase staff to allow for the increase in office hours to support public counter.
 
The department has requested to be relocated and consolidated into one central location that allows the
public records to be accessible to all citizens. If this request is approved the department’s goal is to
consolidate all public historical records into one location, reduce risk, improve public access to meet ADA
accessibility requirements and provide complete access of the “people’s records” to the all residents of
San Benito County. Final approval for this relocation is pending.

? Purchase legal investments permitted to local agencies, as defined by the State of California
Government Codes, consistent with current conditions and the other dominant objectives
pursuant to managing a local agency portfolio.
? Maintain a safe return of all principal on investments.
? Invests on the philosophy that all investments could require immediate liquidation in order to
meet unexpected cash calls therefore manages the portfolio as a cash management fund.
? Maintains that money will be available, without risk of trading loss, to pay normal cash
requirements.
? Obtain a desirable return yet that it not be the driving force in determining the selection of
investments.
 
The current MAI software acquired in the early 80’s is unable to interface with the County’s Bi?Tech
Financial system. With the pending implementation of a new ERP, staff will prepare to move treasury
records and activities to the new system.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 48
The Treasurer’s budget unique in that the expenses equal the revenue earned which produces a zero net
county cost. If funding is not provided for expenses, then revenue suffers by the same amount that
expenses are reduces by. Please refer to Government Code §27013.
There is no other existing management level position in this budget unit to oversee or act in the absence
of the department head. The Board of Supervisors has elected not to replace or provide a second
management position for the Treasurer since 2004. The Treasurer, Tax Collector and Public Administrator
budget units operate as a combined office and are operated exclusively by the elected Treasurer?Tax
Collector.

Collect all monies as is available for collection, but will be dependent upon the resources provided
by the Board of Supervisors to accomplish this.
? Perform the most important activities charged to the tax collector and as much of the remainder
of the work as able to considering the current staff level of 2 FTEs.
? Provide exemplary and cordial service with accountability to our residents.
? Tax Collector is committed to execute the duties of the tax collector that can be performed (based
on staffing levels) as per the laws of the State of California.
 
The Tax Collector collects and maintains records for the largest portion of the County’s revenue with
minimal staffing. In FY 2012?13 the staffing level was reduced to one (1) clerical person and one (1) line
supervisor compared to 2004 when the budget unit operated with one (1) manager, one (1) line
supervisor and three (3) clerical staff. Current staffing levels date back to earlier than 1983, creating a
backlog of tasks to be completed. A .5FTE accounting technician has been approved for FY2013?14.

Completion of Assessment Roll – Compute the assessment roll by June 30, 2014, which includes
completion of basic workload that is driven by changes in ownership, completion of new
construction, the processing of business & agricultural property statements along with the special
assessments and the annual computation of the Land Conservation Act values.
? Proposition 8 Reviews – Continue to review all real property sales in the last decade to determine
those properties that are eligible for Proposition 8 (decline in value) reduction or increase in
assessment.
? GIS Maps – Continue to review, verify and correct GIS Assessor Parcel Maps to eventually replace
the current Assessor Parcel Maps in order to process assessment information geographically
increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the Assessor’s Office and improving customer service
to the taxpayers of San Benito County.
? Assessor’s Website – Continue to update the Assessor’s website to include more information
about the assessment of property in San Benito County and the most frequently used and
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 54
requested forms. Establish and continue to maintain the Assessor’s on?line filing of business
property statements.
 
The Assessor’s Office has a tremendous workload at this time due to the economic turmoil in the real
estate market. Annually, the office works on over 8000 Prop 8 property re?assessments, 2500 change in
ownership & new construction valuations and has experienced a high volume in taxpayer inquiries –
phone calls, emails and office visits. With the current reduced staffing levels staff is experiencing an
overwhelming and difficult task to complete the Assessor’s duties.
There was a substantial increase in the Megabyte computer system maintenance/support contract for
FY2012?13 which affected San Benito County as well as the other twenty?one (21) Megabyte counties.
Megabyte Systems, Inc. indicated the need to increase the maintenance charge was strictly a result of
increased client requests for an enhanced level of maintenance services. Megabyte also added additional
features and levels of service to the maintenance contract that were not previously included. As a result of
these changes, a portion of the cost increase was allocated to the Tax Collector and Auditor for prior and
current years.
Due to the extreme economic budget crisis in the county, the Assessor’s Office was forced to reduce
overall costs to assist in eliminating the large county deficit for FY2012?13. As a result five (5) FTE
positions were eliminated in FY2012?13. This 33% reduction in staff is comparable to 1968 staffing levels
and has impacted the positive appraisal momentum, resulting in a potential loss of county revenue which
will be felt in the upcoming years. In general, the Assessor’s staff has begun to fall behind in property
assessments, reduction of backlogs, and processing escape assessments.
It should also be mentioned that the California Assessors’ Association is continuing to work on legislation
to restore the Property Tax Administration Program (PTAP) which was highly successful from 1995 to
2004. This grant program would provide each county with funds to be used in the administration of the
Assessor’s Office to help with generating revenues. If the legislation came to fruition, the San Benito
County Assessor’s Office would receive a minimum of $100,000 annually for an extended period of time.
This potential revenue has not been included in the current year revenues, as it is an unknown at this
point in time.

Assess current Memorandums of Understanding, contracts and personnel policies as related to
current health care reform and attain a 25% overall cost savings.
? Administer the County Human Resources Division in compliance with the Fair Labor Standards,
personnel rules and regulations, while retaining and balancing position control, recruitment and
maintenance of personnel files for the county organization.
? Administer the County Purchasing Division to support the county organization in compliance with
the Purchasing Ordinance and interpretation of the Purchasing and Contracting Manual, to
provide guidance with the procurement of goods and services, contracting, the competitive bid
procedures and the public contract code.
? Administer service contracts for Communications, Fire, Animal Control, Information Technology,
and GIS.
? Prepare the County Annual Impact Fee Report.
? Explore and analyze alternatives for cost control and/or reduce costs in personnel resources and
goods and services for county departments and the county organization.
 
The CAO is analyzing the pros and cons of a re?organization of this budget unit in conjunction with other
county administrative units. With the impending implementation of an ERP, staff is anticipating a more
streamlined work flow for position control, purchasing, contract management, data repository and
document management. The possibility exists for this budget unit to develop into a type of “general
services” function, thus providing efficiencies and cost?savings administratively.

Risk Internal Service Fund has been created as an accounting process to capture workers compensation
and general liability costs currently being managed by the Trindel Insurance Fund. It is management’s
intention that these costs be properly charged to all departments, as part of the direct charges and cost
plan charges. There will be no FTEs charged to this budget unit however staff time may be captured as it
applies to the management and implementation of described programs.

? Upgrade financial system ? Workflow automation /collaboration tools
? Install a Voice over IP system for the County's new building and possibly integrate throughout the
County
? Establish Regional partnerships
? Sustain IT Capital Investments

Manage and coordinate the GIS Enterprise consisting of the GIS Steering Committee, GIS Technical
Committee and GIS Addressing Committee.
? Maintain and update the base map and map layers for the Countywide GIS System.

Maintain and update a Centralized Addressing Data Base for the County.
? Assist and train partnering agencies and departments in the capabilities of the program.

Revise and refine countywide building assessment.
? Continue to provide a high level of maintenance and repairs throughout the County.
? Continue to improve the process to handle evaluation, inventory, and storage of surplus
equipment.

? Provide financial management for countywide utilities.
? Monitor all contracts related to utility charges for the county.

The FY 2013?14 Recommended Capital Budget includes one (1) road equipment purchase, six (6)
information technology projects, and fifteen (15) facility improvement projects. The Recommended
Capital Outlay Fund totals $7,374,982 and includes $170,000 for equipment purchases, $671,700 for
technology purchases and $6,533,282 for new facilities, facility improvements, environmental,
programming and/or design.

The Grand Jury will set their annual goals after a new grand jury and foreperson has been appointed after
the once the new fiscal year has commenced.

? Complete high profile murder and sexual assault cases.
? Seek administrative fees in the collection of restitution in court?ordered matters.
? Identify new revenue sources and continue to be frugal in expenses.

Program staff proposes to provide direct services to at least 500 new victims and make at least 500
continuing contacts with these victims during FY 2013?14. The majority of contacts are made at the center
or by telephone; however, field visits will be conducted when deemed necessary and appropriate by staff.
Priority of services will be given to clients based on a client’s trauma?response needs, and the capabilities
of that client. The center’s goal is to provide a comprehensive range of services to meet the needs of
crime victims in this county. This will require on?going cooperation and coordination with law
enforcement and other agencies.

An overarching objective for 2013?14 will be to meet or exceed the State determined performance
goals, with an emphasis on increasing the total dollars collected.

? Work collaboratively with the City of Hollister to continue to suppress gang activity.
? Maintain Peace Officers Standards and Training (POST).
? Pursue grant opportunities.

• Administer the contract with SCR911 to provide 911 Communication services that include
providing dispatching services, personnel, equipment and facilities.
• Insure the County’s Alternate PSAP, equipment and radios are maintained and are ready for
service to provide a direct link to the SCR911 Center.
• Administer contracts for phones, technology, radio infrastructure, radio maintenance, repeater
site lease agreements and other maintenance issues in regards to the County’s Alternate PSAP.
• Administer contract agreements with City of Hollister, City of San Juan and the County Emergency
Medical Services Agency for contracted communication and radio infrastructure services that the
County provides.

? Meet all training requirements as mandated by the Board of Corrections.
? Maintain officer and inmate safety despite an increasingly violent and highly sophisticated inmate
population and minimal staff.
? Continue to seek educational and vocational courses for the benefit of the inmates.

? Provide additional training to Operational Area stakeholders.
? Coordinate/participate in EOC tabletop exercise.
? Apply for grant funding made available to the county.
? Complete and receive FEMA approval of the Multi?Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan.
? Assist departments with development of Standardized Operational Procedures (SOP’s) as they
pertain to Emergency Mitigation, Planning, Response and Recovery efforts.
? Continue to develop a volunteer base of community members to actively participate in Citizen
Emergency Response Team (CERT) and Radio Auxiliary Communication Emergency Service (RACES)
programs.
? Complete the countywide radio network infrastructure’s Narrow Band Project.

? Seek alternative contracts for autopsy services.
? Assume responsibility of the County’s Deceased Indigent Program.

? Reduce illegal activities of targeted offenders.
? Conduct criminal investigations leading to the identification, arrest, and prosecution of street level
drug dealers.
? Disrupt drug manufacturing activities by dismantling drug labs and seizing assets, weapons, and
other controlled substances.

Grant funding under this budget unit runs October – September. At time of publication, there has been no
confirmation as to whether funding will be allocated commencing October, 2013.

Grant funding under this budget unit runs October – September. At time of publication, there has been no
confirmation as to whether funding will be allocated commencing October, 2013.

? Implement Thinking for a Change to all clients which is a nationwide evidence?based program, the
objective being to get the offenders to make better choices to become a successful citizen.
? Implement a guideline sentencing Matrix, which is a tool used for the adult offenders in
appropriately making recommendations to the Court, based on their risk assessments. Matrix will
assist staff to become more consistent by using rewards and behavior modifications.
? Implement a pre?trial release program which staff recently created as a tool for the San Benito
County Jail to screen adult offenders for pre?trial release. The objective is to provide a report to
the Court for medium and low risk offenders, who would then be placed on electronic monitoring
in the community, thus improving community safety by incarcerating high risk offenders and
releasing the lower risk offenders.

Implement Thinking for a Change to all minors in the Juvenile Hall, which is a nationwide
evidence?based program, the objective is to teach the minors to make better choices to become
successful citizens.
? Enhance the existing Lifeskills Program to the minors in the Juvenile Hall by presenting outside
speakers with expertise in areas such as skills to pay the bills, thus helping to prevent recidivism
and give the minors the skills to successfully transition into adulthood.
? Collaborate with local schools in an effort to introduce the Gang Resistance Education and
Training (G.R.E.A.T.) Program to the community, which is an evidence?based and effective gang
and violence prevention program, built around school?based, law enforcement officer?instructed
classroom curricula. G.R.E.A.T. is intended as an immunization against delinquency, youth
violence, and gang membership for children in the years immediately before the prime ages for
introduction into gangs and delinquent behavior.
? Maintenance items include installation of a new bathtub in the intake bathroom; scrape, clean
and paint shower doors and professionally clean all carpeting.

? Address youth violence and gang activity through prevention, intervention and
suppression activities.
? Cultivate additional resources for prevention, intervention, and suppression activities.

? Ensure that both agricultural and residential pesticide use is conducted in a safe and effective
manner.
? Maintain close oversight of weighing and measuring devices used in trade to ensure consumer
protection.
? Prevent the introduction and establishment of exotic harmful pests.
? Continue focus on phyto?santiary

Quickly identify and treat abandoned “green” swimming pools before they become a public
nuisance.
? Continue to be proactive instead of reactive in regards to locating and treating areas favorable for
mosquito generation.
? Continue public education and outreach by participating in community events such as the County
Fair, Farmer’s Markets and other activities where the public can be reached.
? Continue to develop more efficient control techniques.

? 24?Hour Emergency Services for injured, vicious or stray animals creating a traffic hazard.
? Sheltering for stray, abandoned and injured animals.
? Stray Animal After?Hours Drop Kennels provides for a stray animal drop off after normal business
hours, to safely house stray animals.
? Field Services respond to reports of stray domestic animals, animal cruelty complaints, biting
animals, aggressive animals, and dead animals in roadways, rabies control, and code enforcement
complaints, such as barking dogs.
? Adoption Services offered for dogs, puppies, cats and kittens.
? Enforcement of state and local laws regarding animals and administrative citations, licensing,
suppression of rabies, vaccinations, and quarantines.

? Achieve a collaborative and acceptable standard of response to incidents occurring throughout
the County for the deployment of fire suppression operations, emergency medical operations and
special operations to the public.
? Maintain personnel and fire stations which are essential to meet the current county needs.

? Streamline procedures and documentation to allow for more efficient work flow and maximize the
database management system. This will include an ongoing scanning of birth, death and marriage
records into digital format to meet current system configuration requirements. This project will
occur over several years and will eventually eliminate manual handling of public records. Digital
archive and database retrieval is the end goal for all the historical records in the Clerk/Recorders
office.
? With the goal of documenting of every procedure and service that is performed by the County
Clerk, the department has initiated a central database repository. The institutional knowledge
database will aide employees in providing greater customer service and will provide a resource for
orderly succession of staff. This resource will be used for training and testing new employees.
? Timely and professional customer service with continued dedication to the community of San
Benito County is our continued goal.
? Continue the ongoing cross training of employees to ensure continuous customer service for the
Clerk, Recorder and Elections Departments.

Complete Phase 1 and 2 of the official record book restoration project. The first two (2) phases of
this project are to restore records and historically preserve the official transcribed land transaction
from both Monterey and Fresno County from the 1850’s to 1873. These records will be restored,
microfilmed, digitally scanned, encapsulated and re?bound for public access today and for future
generations. This restoration project will continue for several years until it is complete with the
funding specifically allocated for the maintenance and restoration per state statute.
? Continue the ongoing Map Digitalization Project. This project is being collaborated with both GIS
and Public Works to provide recorded parcel and subdivision maps electronically via an enhanced
GIS parcel map layer shape file. The overall goal is to have the recorded maps and official records
connected to specific parcels of land to view the historical land transactions.

With the goal of documenting of every procedure and service that is performed by the County
Recorder, the Department has initiated a central database repository. The institutional knowledge
database will aide employees in providing greater customer service and will provide a resource for
orderly succession of staff. This resource will used for training and testing new employees.
? Increase staff to allow for the increase in office hours to the support the public counter and Hall of
Records.

The department has requested to be relocated and consolidated into one central location that allows the
public records to be accessible to all citizens. If this request is approved the department’s goal is to
consolidate all public historical records into one location, reduce risk, improve public access to meet ADA
accessibility requirements and provide complete access of the “people’s records” to the all residents of
San Benito County. Final approval for this relocation is pending.

Provide quality services consistent with available resources.
? Manage estates prudently with care and good judgment.
Comply with existing local, state and federal laws as a guide for the fulfillment of responsibilities
for managing decedents’ estates.
? Eliminate any possibility of conflict of interest or appearance thereof.

The Public Administrator has no control as to the number of cases that will be referred to the department.
Every estate case is different. Some require a minimal amount of time and effort to process, while others
may take a couple of years to complete the final distribution. Time and effort expended in each case is
dependent upon the type and quantity of assets administered.
Economic development & job creation through the development of commercial, industrial,
recreational, and tourist/hospitality projects along with a wide variety of housing types.
? Streamline permitting processes, review fees and fee structure for recommendations to the Board
of Supervisors.
? Increase revenues where feasible and attempt to recover the cost of services from applicants for
entitlements and permits.
? Employ the Development Agreement process to establish the fiscally neutral master planned
communities, provide for needed infrastructure and encourage well planned parks and affordable
housing.
? Monitor and participate in State and Federal programs that effect local land use, such as SB375,
Climate Action Plans, Foothills Legacy Area and others.
? Review the potential for steps leading to the implementation of an HCP program and appropriate
uses of the HCP Impact fees collected to date.
? Clarify and implement the Transfer of Development Credit program to preserve agricultural
resources and encourage development in appropriate locations.
? Complete new oil well ordinance, groundwater ordinance, General Plan Update reimbursement
ordinance, and other necessary revisions as staffing allows.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 128

The ability to produce revenues for the County will be largely dependent upon the ability to efficiently
process land development projects and other land use applications. The Department needs to maintain
the current staff of competent planners in order to lead these projects through the long and complicated
entitlement process. Planners’ knowledge of CEQA, the Subdivision Map Act, Federal and State regulatory
permitting and numerous other processes are critical to the ongoing fiscal success of San Benito County.
Any further reductions of planning staff will delay and inhibit the County’s ability to move projects of
economic significance through the necessary entitlement steps to allow implementation of these projects.
In order to have projects online for construction in 2015, entitlement efforts will need to begin this fiscal
year. It is imperative to maintain the ability to efficiently process this anticipated workload.
In addition to current applications and projects, Planning is also focusing on long range, revenue
generating projects that do not necessarily result in significant building permit income but rather in
commercial projects, tourism and other “revenue capturing” projects. The Planning Division continues to
be active which typically generates revenue in the Building Division.

Prevent the physical and aesthetic deterioration of the community.
? Assist homeowners in maintaining property values by reducing blight.
? Continue to tag and tow junk/inoperable/abandoned vehicles from right?of?way and private
properties.

Complete the comprehensive update of the General Plan by December, 2013.
? Develop and implement an Impact Fee to pay for future General Plan Updates.
? Begin the process to amend the Zoning Ordinance to comply with and be consistent with the new
General Plan.
? Update the Housing Element in 2014.

Public review of the DRAFT EIR is ongoing through the spring of 2013. There have been less than fifty (50)
comments to date. Building & Planning are in the process of responding to those comments received and
will address them in an open public meeting, thus ensuring transparency of the process. Based on the
current project schedule, it is anticipated that the General Plan Update will be completed by December of
2013.

Expend existing County and City HOME housing grant funds by originating new First?Time
Homebuyer Down Payment Assistance second loans.
? Continue to apply for new housing grant funds through upcoming Notice of Funding Availability’s
(NOFA’s) and facilitate community workshops.

The Housing Coordinator position has been funded by the County’s Inclusionary Housing Fund for the past
five (5) years. There will be approximately $16,000 in unused funds available to be applied towards salary
and benefits for FY 2013?14; however, that amount is insufficient to finance this position for the entire
year.
The Housing Programs Coordinator has proposed to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with the County Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA) and County Community Services Workforce
Development (CSWD) to operate a new Financial Literacy Program which would generate up to $25,000 in
new revenue for FY 2013?14. Sixty percent (60.0%) or $15,000 would be funded by CSWD Community
Service Block Grant (CSBG) grant funds and forty percent (40.0%) or $10,000 would be funded directly by
the HHSA by for a total of $25,000. The MOU is proposed to be finalized the end of FY2012?13. Even with
this additional revenue, the position would not be fully funded.
Revision of the existing Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the City of Hollister and the
County, in which the Housing Coordinator provides services to the City of Hollister, additional revenue of
approximately $40,000 will be generated if approved in FY 2013?14.
Promote safe and pleasant conditions for residents, pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists on
neighborhood streets.
? Improve San Benito County arterial/collector roadway system.
? Provide financial management, contract monitoring, technical assistance and administrative
support.
? Interact with Federal and State agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and California Department of Transportation.

Grade roadway shoulders throughout the county.
? Repair culverts and replace deteriorated ones as needed.
? Repair and patch potholes on all county roadways.

The department is working with Human Resources to establish criteria that will modify both Road
Maintenance Worker and Heavy Equipment Mechanic Job Specifications. If successful, both classifications
will become flexible class positions, providing Road Maintenance Workers and Heavy Equipment
Mechanics an incentive to personally obtain equipment operation certifications, which will benefit the
Road Division by providing flexibility with staff operating equipment. This process requires meet and
confer with union representatives. Approval of the FY 13?14 budget does not approve the proposed job
specification modifications.

The Fixed Assets for this Budget Unit are Capital Road and Bridge Improvement Projects presented as a
separate document. The budget requested is based on project schedules and the necessity to have
funding available for the design and/or construction contract awards. Therefore, portions of the FY 2013?
14 recommended budgets may be re?budgeted in FY 2014?15 to complete design or construction efforts.
The FY 2013?14 recommended project budget appropriations total $44,652,937 and include an estimated
$43,297,397 in re?budgets from FY 2012?13.

Continue to communicate with CSA representatives to discuss services and encourage dialogue
with property owners.
? Coordinate with LAFCO to establish additional services for the following CSA’s:
1. Santa Rosa Acres (CSA 4)
2. Hillcrest/El Toro (CSA 5)
3. Bonnie View(CSA 8)
4. Ridgemark (CSA 9)
5. Barnes Lane(CSA 11)
? Maintain maintenance schedules for identified CSA services and update property owners as
needed when schedules require change.
? Coordinate with property owners in the remaining four (4) CSAs that do not currently have a
property?related fee to either de?activate the CSA or hold Prop 218 elections and establish
services and fees.

Complete Council of Governments work associated with the transfer of the Highway 25 existing
route and Bypass.
? Continue work on the update of the Regional Transportation Plan.
? Seek state and federal funding through grants and apportionments for priority projects in the San
Benito region.
? Work with cities and County on documenting Complete Streets needs assessment to incorporate
into the Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments Sustainable Communities Strategy to
better integrate land use and transportation planning.
? Increase the visibility of the Council of Governments as a collaborative, responsive agency focused
on project delivery and meeting the needs of the region.
? Plan and develop projects of the Airport Land Use Commission.
? Review proposed development projects within the San Benito County region.
? Collaborate with public and private partners on commodity movement issues.

Increase service delivery capacity and the administrative support systems to support the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) program expansions. The division is experienced in capturing MediCal
revenue reimbursement through the Mental Health Services Programs but staff must be
successful at capturing needed MediCal revenue to help support the need for expanded service
capacity.
? Integrate Behavioral Health Services with Physical Health Primary Care Providers through
placement of a Behavioral Health service provider at the San Benito Health Foundation.

Promote the importance of early identification and engagement in treatment for mental illness.
Bringing the issues of mental illness out of the shadows and putting the importance of mental
health care on par with other illnesses challenges the Behavioral Health Department to continue
to expand and improve programs.
? Continue public education efforts to eliminate the stigma often associated with mental illness and
the need to seek treatment and to educate the public that mentally ill individuals are more often
victims of violent crime rather than perpetrators.
? Continue the objective of sustaining core service programs in the face of increasing caseload
growth and to remain vigilant in capitalizing on opportunities to expand services whenever fiscally
feasible.

The Behavioral Health Department’s Mental Health Services can realize a new expanded revenue stream
resulting from the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The ACA includes the lowering of the eligibility requirements
for access to MediCal, thereby enlarging the pool of MediCal beneficiaries. The Affordable Care Act
includes incentives to integrate services. In anticipation of the healthcare reforms it is the division’s goal
to continue to expand efforts and abilities to capture revenue reimbursement to sustain such service
expansions.
Staff has received positive news that based on recent state tax collection information that, the division will
benefit from a recent spike in state tax revenues. Individuals, fearful that the effects of the recent fiscal
cliff situation if unresolved would result in higher capital gains tax rates, rushed to liquidate investments in
the last quarter of tax year 2012 as a strategy to avoid being subjected to an anticipated higher capital
gains tax rate in 2013. The liquidation of those investments were still subjected to 2012 capital gains tax
resulting in a spike of state fourth quarter tax collections. The Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) from
which the division receives its largest portion of revenue benefits is derived from a 1% tax levied on
personal income in excess of one million dollars per year. Many of the individuals in this income bracket
participated in the 2012, fourth quarter investment and securities selling spike generating an increased
collection of tax revenues for the state. Additionally the passage of Proposition 30 resulted in significant
increased estimated tax payments in January 2013. Staff has reviewed figures released on the higher than
previously estimated FY 2013?14 MHSA funding availability state totals, but this has not yet been
translated to what this amounts to at the local level.
Another major source of mental health revenue is derived through realignment sales tax funds. Minor
growth is expected in realignment funding as it is based on the performance of consumer spending.
Increase service delivery capacity and the administrative support systems to support the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) program expansions. The division is experienced in capturing MediCal
revenue reimbursement through the Mental Health Services Programs but staff must be
successful at capturing needed MediCal revenue to help support the need for expanded service
capacity.
We will be challenged to:
? Sustain some of the innovative services such as the Residential Sober Living Environment and
Substance Abuse Peer Mentors that the AB109 Grant Project was designed to serve as the grant
sunsets.
? Maintain and sustain core service programs in the face of increasing service demands and to
remain vigilant in capitalizing on opportunities to expand services whenever fiscally feasible.


Support the most basic and legally mandated public health services, including disease control,
environmental health, emergency medical, health education, and maternal and child health,
among others.
? Test public health emergency response systems by conducting an exercise with critical partners.
? Support health and injury prevention efforts such as Kids at the Park and Car Seat Check Up
events.

Health realignment is the primary revenue source for the mandated services presented above as well as
other mandated health budget units. Health realignment revenues continue to be unstable. Public Health
has been able to sustain its staff and programs the last two years; however if the funds do not continue to
grow with the cost of doing business, staff will have to revise this budget. The elimination of Healthy
Families and the Federal Affordable Care Act Prevention funding may impact future budgeting.

Provide a CDC/CDE approved peer?to?peer prevention curriculum for 6th?8th graders which
includes tobacco education by providing a tobacco education training program for peer educators
and teachers, a minimum of six (6) middle (K?8th and 6th?8th grades) schools, including one
alternative school.
? Attain 100% of San Benito County (including Hollister) licensed family day care homes will be in
full compliance with the state law (Health & Safety Code 1596.795) requiring smoke?free indoor
areas during hours of operation; and in addition attain 100% participation of these homes in
adopting voluntary policy requiring smoke?free indoor environments 24 hours a day.
? Increase current membership in the San Benito County Tobacco Education Coalition to adequately
reflect non?traditional partners and/or ethnically/racially diverse groups in San Benito County.
? Renew Tobacco Education Grant for another three year consecutive term.

Provide outreach presentations to various child?serving organizations to encourage participation
in Medi?Cal, Healthy Families, and CHDP programs and refer eligible children to CHDP providers.
? Provide public health nurse case management services for children in the County’s foster care and
probation systems.
? Reconcile CHDP data base to Medi?Cal data base and Improve tracking method of CHDP rating
assessment forms.

Continue to participate on the County and City Design Review Committees as well as with the
Economic Development Corporation.
? Maintain new electronic reporting requirements under AB 2286 for hazardous materials reporting
and research feasibility of extending to other environmental health areas.
? Investigate the feasibility of obtaining grant money to support one FTE position (EHS Technician)
to assist current staff in accomplishing hazardous materials programmatic assignments, and to
specifically assist in the initial conversion and long?term maintenance of electronic hazardous
generator reporting systems to facilitate mandated reporting by the regulated community.
? Implement recently adopted fee schedule.

The revised fee schedule will not fully sustain Environmental Health. Health realignment funds will be
needed to balance this budget. The department is currently understaffed by 1.0 FTE (Environmental
Health Specialist). It is recommended that if the economy continues to grow, an additional Environmental
Health Specialist be added to the authorized positions for this budget unit. A request for a temporary
Environmental Health Specialist may be necessary during the high peak event season.

Provide case management services to AFLP clients.
? Increase public partner participation in both the Healthy Mothers Healthy Babies and Child Injury
Prevention Coalitions.
? Support AFLP teens in graduating from high school, direct them to resources for furthering their
education, help develop effective parenting skills in teen parents, and increase the numbers of
male teen fathers who are enrolled in AFLP.

Provide case management services to MCAH clients.
? Increase public partner participation in both the Healthy Mothers Healthy Babies and Child Injury
Prevention Coalitions.
? Support teens enrolled in the AFLP component to meet high school graduation requirements,
direct them to resources for furthering their education, help develop effective parenting skills in
teen parents, and increase the numbers of male teen fathers who are enrolled in AFLP.

MCAH receives an allocation that has not been increased in several years. These funds are matched by
health realignment funds. The funds are matched by federal and state dollars at specific percentages
depending on the activities performed. Because health realignments funds have been unstable; it is
possible that staff could have to revisit these budgets in the upcoming year.

Implement areas of the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS)/Cities Readiness Initiative (CRI) plan by
conducting drills and exercises including mass vaccination clinics as needed and coordinating the
planning and implementation of the 2012 Statewide Medical & Health Exercise with agencies that
are part of the county operational area.
? Coordinate with CA Department of Public Health (CDPH) in relocating County’s allocation of
medical surge assets from CDPH facility to local jurisdiction.
? Coordinate with volunteer agencies to identify adequate volunteer staffing for Points of
Dispensation (PODs) for vaccines and other pharmaceuticals. This may be conducted through
Disaster Healthcare Volunteers (DHV) and the use of the California Health Alert Network System
(CAHAN) with participating agencies i.e., local hospital, clinics and skilled nursing facilities.
? Coordinate with local hospital, clinic partners, and local Emergency Services Agency to establish
disaster/emergency response procedures, ensuring availability of resources in the event of a
medical surge during a countywide disaster or emergency.

Accept referrals and conduct eligibility determination for potential CCS client’s access.
? Develop protocols and procedures for high risk CCS clients requiring medical follow?up.
? Minimize back log of clients from the time of application to the CCS program to the time of
receiving services

CCS is a state?mandated program placing the burden on counties to provide mandated services that may
not be fully?funded. Realignment revenues support the required local match for this program and could
be insufficient to support the program with one or several unanticipated high?cost medical cases.

Revise and update the Emergency Medical Services Plan.
? Review the Hazel Hawkins Base Hospital Contract for to assure compliance as well assess the need
for revision.
? Review the Ambulance Service Agreement for Emergency Ambulance Services to assure
compliance and determine need for revision as part of the contract extension.
? Revise the EMS website and move it to the county server as well as create a smart phone
application for EMS field personnel to access policies and procedures.
? Establish partners to provide EMT and/or Emergency Medical Responder certification and
refresher courses within San Benito County.

The overall budget has been greatly decreased from years past, due to a recommended change in
processes regarding the Maddy Fund distributions. Beginning next fiscal year the Maddy Funds distributed
to the Physicians and the Hospital and the reimbursements made from the Richie Fund will be paid
directly from the those trusts. Therefore, those expenses are not recognized in the budget for FY 2013?14.
In addition, the Benefit Assessment Units that determine collections from the CSA have been reduced in
numbers. This is primarily due to the loss of business in San Benito County. By using CSA and Maddy EMS
Trust fund balances, staff was able to keep the CSA at the same rate as last year. It is staff’s intention to
keep the CSA at the lowest possible rate for the taxpayers in San Benito County.

Complete revised Environmental Impact Report and bring completed project forward for Board of
Supervisors consideration regarding the proposed Resource Recovery Park.
? Pending approval of the Resource Recovery Park, solicit businesses for same.
? Transition to new Landfill Operating Contract.

Use Food Waste Pilot data to broaden outreach to initiate food scrap diversion programs.
? Initiation of Community Garden Project /Composting (yard and food waste) project: interdisciplinary
partners through illegal dumping abatement, homeless job skill, youth activity, and surplus food
supply for Food Bank.
? Continue Community Outreach (both residential and commercial) on Economic and Environmental
Benefits/ Sustainability of Source Reduction, Reuse and Recycling.

The Integrated Waste Management Regional Agency serves the Cities of Hollister, San Juan Bautista and
the unincorporated areas of San Benito County. This budget is based on full cost reimbursement for the
member jurisdictions. Grant funding (Oil Payment Grants and Division of Recycling Grants) are subject to
Legislative reduction; therefore affected program activities will be metered to match available funds.

Implement re?designed Cal WORK’s program changes.
? Implement expanded MediCal/CMSP caseloads with shift of Health Families to Medi
Cal and expansion of Path2Health CMSP program.
? Implement extended Foster Care program for youth ages 18 ?21.
? Comply with federal/state application processing times for public assistance programs.
? Comply with state and federal requirements in the areas of safety, permanency and child/family
well?being regarding child welfare services.

The Health Care Reform Act and the elimination of Healthy Families will substantially increase the volume
of caseloads. It is unknown at this time the amount of cases; however, the counties that are transitioning
from Healthy Families to MediCal are finding that the numbers of cases are dramatically higher than the
original estimates. The eligibility staff is being increased; however, the training for these positions will
take six months to a year before new staff members can carry a full caseload.
The funding for child welfare staffing and related overhead costs, as well as Foster Care Assistance (BU
514) and Child Welfare Services (BU 515), are dependent upon the 2011 realignment, which is based on
sales and vehicle licenses taxes. Currently there is only eighteen (18) months of data to predict whether
or not Realignment 2011 will sustain the mandated costs. The budgets will be monitored closely.

Provide cash grant assistance for eligible families.
? Continue to implement programmatic changes as follows:
o CalWORKs division into three (3) sub?programs providing enhanced services in the first
twenty?four (24) months on aid.
o Implement the revised Welfare?To?Work program requirements.

The Welfare?To?Work program changes will require additional staff time to monitor. Currently the
CalWORKS unit is understaffed and a redesign of the program is being implemented. The continued years
of understaffing created a backlog in the area of reconciling state reporting systems with client
verifications, which could eventually result in costly fines. No additional funds are provided for this
transition.

Place children in a foster care setting that best meets their needs and is the least disruptive to
their lives.
? Strive for foster children’s placement in NRFEM settings.
? Collaborate with Behavioral Health, Probation, and other agencies on the CICC, especially with
cases where a high level of care facility is being considered as placement.
? Recruit additional foster care homes and increase efforts to notify relatives (family finding) as this
increases familial support and placement options.

At time of publication, the Agency does not have any children in high?level care facilities; however,
Probation does have three (3) Probation youth in said facilities. At this writing, there are five (5) at risk
youth that potentially could require a higher level of care. Any increase in placements in high level of care
facilities could significantly increase projected costs in this budget unit. The average monthly cost in a
Level 12 facility is approximately $8,067, or $96,804 per year per youth.
Foster care assistance funding is incorporated into the 2011 Realignment. There is only 18 months of data,
which limits the ability to project average yearly revenue. This budget will be monitored closely.
The 2012 implementation of AB 12, Extended Foster Care in for youth ages 18 to 21 that were in the child
welfare system at age 18 impacts this budget unit. We have factored foster care costs for 4?5 youth per
year.

Provide substance abuse services in collaboration with Behavioral Health Department.
? Provide counseling services to child welfare families by contracting with several local providers.
? Provide drug testing and expand random drug testing by contracting with a private provider.
? Make aforementioned services accessible by providing transportation, if needed.

The Department was understaffed by three social workers during FY 2012?13. These positions will be
filled by the FY 2013?14 budget hearings; however, there will be a delay in assigning them full caseloads
due to the training process.

Continue to assist Cal Work’s clients by providing case management plans which outline goals and
milestones leading to employment.
? Provide clients with assistance in needed education, vocational training, childcare and
transportation to enhance the clients’ marketability in the workforce.
? Continue with the sub?programs Cal Works Basic, Cal Works Plus, and Child Maintenance which
provide for extra incentives for families meeting Work Participation Rates (WPR).

Staff expects a reduction of costs as revised requirements are implemented for the Welfare?To?Work
program.

Continue offering IHSS provider services to eligible recipients.
? Continue with mandated criminal background checks and fraud prevention trainings for new and
current provider.
? Continue with First Aid/CPR and other homecare provider trainings as appropriate.
? Continue enrolling new providers in the Registry.

In FY 2012?13, the state established a Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for all counties. The county MOE is the
sum of FY 2011?12 county expenditures for IHSS County Administration, Public Authority Administration,
and provider costs, less the amount of the Community First Choice Option (CFCO) refund. Any negotiated
wage and benefit increases would be paid entirely by County realignment funding.

Provide exceptional customer service that is efficient, effective and responsive to the needs of
customers.
? Provide quality safety?net services that include one?time rental assistance and utility, shelter, and
food assistance for low?income residents.
? Provide workforce development services to displaced workers and low?income community
members.

Provide safe and affordable housing for at least sixty?seven (67) migrant families during the farm
seasonal months of May through November.
? Facilitate three to five tenant council meetings for families, with presentations by various
organizations offering services that are of benefit to these families.
? Secure additional resources for resident families to meet their economic, health and well?being
needs

This budget has been built based on staff’s funding request to State Office of Migrant Services (OMS).
Talks are continuing that OMS funding may be decreased by the final state budget. If the state reduces
the funding for this program, staff will revise budget as needed.
There is a pending long?time employee retirement expected this fiscal year, which could have a significant
pay?out. Due to the nature of the funding for this program, the cost may have to be absorbed by the
General Fund.

Explore and coordinate with the CAO office space that is more compatible and accessible to the
local Veteran population within a county building, possibly in conjunction with the new
courthouse transition.
? Extend outreach programs.

Partner with local agencies (County Library, YMCA and Chamberlains Children’s Center) to deliver
the TechXcite Engineering program for middle school aged youth. In partnership with UC and
Duke University, agencies will receive free curriculum materials and education to deliver this
program at their facilities.
? Continue to develop and enhance the 4?H community club program to develop citizenship,
leadership and life skills in a positive youth development environment for youth ages 7 to 19 and
their adult volunteers.
? Continue to provide research extension and creative activity to address the agricultural needs of
San Benito County in the areas of agriculture, livestock and education.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 224

San Benito County is being considered for a new UC Faculty/Advisor position in Natural Resources, as well
as a staff position to address nutrition education. However, UC is reluctant to dedicate additional
resources to San Benito County due to the lack of funding provided to manage the current operations. If
the County contribution to this budget unit does not increase, UC will not allocate any further positions to
the County as these positions cannot be adequately supported under the current budget allocations.

Continue to provide a high level of maintenance and repairs throughout Veterans Memorial Park.

The utilities line item has significantly increased from prior years reflecting anticipated water charges that
will no longer be subsidized by the City of Hollister. Staff is in the process of constructing a well which will
establish a permanent water source and greatly reduce the costs to the users of Veterans Memorial Park
in future years.

In an effort to coordinate efforts with the County Administrative Office, the Board of Supervisors shares
some of the important goals regarding employee benefits and sustainable long term solutions to the fiscal
challenges that face the County.
? Evaluate the three major components of employee benefits and how they impact the County’s
ability to meet its fiscal responsibility not only to employees but the public as well. Those
components are: OPEB, countywide health insurance and PERS.
? Develop a three (3) year strategic plan to address the above?mentioned components of employee
benefits.
? Address the impact that the furlough program has had on county operations and service to the
public and develop a sustainable plan. The furlough program instituted in FY 2009?10 coupled
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 32
with the step freezes that were implemented in FY 2010?11 were initially intended to be a short
term solution to balance those fiscal year budgets. As a result, the County has accrued massive
vacation liabilities, and the public has suffered due to office closures and less staff time available
to serve the public.
? Assess the bare minimum staffing in key general services areas, such as the Auditor’s office,
Assessor’s office and direct public service departments. Coordinate with staff to bring those
departments to sustainable levels so that the basic, vital work is being performed and the public is
being served.
? Increase building and development interest along with subsequent and sustainable revenue in San
Benito County through coordinated efforts between the Board, Public Works, Assessor and
Planning & Building departments.

Consolidate and organize the archive of Board of Supervisors documents in one place, which were
disbursed to different locations upon being relocated from the County courthouse.
? Continue to provide a high standard of service in support of the Board of Supervisors, County
Board of Equalization, Assessment Appeals Board, San Benito County Financing Corporation, San
Benito County Fish & Game Advisory Commission, Intergovernmental Committee and Fire
Protection Committee with reduced staff.

Evaluate the three major components of employee benefits and how they impact the County’s
ability to meet its fiscal responsibility not only to employees but the public as well. Those
components are: OPEB, countywide health insurance and PERS.
? Develop a three (3) year strategic plan to address the above?mentioned components of employee
benefits.
? Address the impact that the furlough program has had on county operations and service to the
public and develop a sustainable plan. The furlough program instituted in FY 2009?10 coupled
with the step freezes that were implemented in FY 2010?11 were initially intended to be a short
term solution to balance those fiscal year budgets. As a result, the County as accrued massive
vacation liabilities, and the public has suffered due to office closures and less staff time available
to serve the public.
? Assess the bare minimum staffing in key general services areas, such as the Auditor’s office,
Assessor’s office and direct public service departments. Coordinate with staff to bring those
departments to sustainable levels so that the basic, vital work is being performed and the public is
being served.
? Complete due diligence and current contract negotiations for the purchase and implementation of
a new enterprise resource program (ERP), thus providing the much needed workflow, human
resources, position control and budgeting modules to compliment the county general ledger.
? Complete the transition process for the narrow?banding of radio frequencies and equipment with
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) deadline extension of June 30, 2013.

The Board of Supervisors approved a 1.0 FTE position for an Assistant County Administrative Officer at the
May 28, 2013 board meeting. As part of the analysis and assessment for a possible re?organization in the
Administrative Office, it is recommended that this position be recruited expeditiously to help with the
daily management duties of administration and internal services.

Provide timely professional legal advice in the most cost efficient manner possible.
? Improve communications and work processes between the Office of County Counsel and the
Departments it serves.
? Monitor outside counsel assigned to county litigation to ensure cost containment and delivery of
quality legal services.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 40

The recommended budget reflects the increase of a Deputy County Counsel III from .7 to .8 FTE, with a
corresponding increase in revenue from the Health and Human Services Agency. Additionally, reductions
in previous budget years resulted in the elimination of all office support staff from the County Counsel’s
office. The proposed budget includes funding in the amount of $7,363 which would allow the front office
to be staffed eight hours per week with a temporary employee. The primary duty of this part?time
employee is to ensure that the County Counsel’s office properly bills and receives revenue for legal
services provided to billable departments and outside agencies.

Implement Phase One of the new County?wide Financial Accounting Information System.
? Provide timely financial reporting and budgetary information to the departments, Board of
Supervisors, the public, and various federal and state agencies.

Conduct the June 3, 2014 Statewide Primary Election. This election includes the party?nominated
office for all Statewide and Legislative Offices, Countywide Offices, and Supervisorial Offices,
statewide propositions and local measures.
? Coordinate the implementation of the newly purchased SouthTech System for maintaining the
campaign financial and statement of economic interest filings. This project will be implemented
with the collaboration of the Clerk of the Board, Human Resources, Office of Education and county
departments. The first year goal is to double the number of on time filings.
? Continue the with Phase 2 development of a fully accessible website that meet ADA and voters’
with special needs requirements. This project includes polling place, voter registration and other
lookup functionalities.
? Complete the pre?primary purge of inactive voters and residency confirmation of active voters,
thus reducing election mailing cost and allow the voter file to be updated prior to the Statewide
Primary in June.
? Perform a database scrubbing of master voter file with national social security, DMV and official
records databases to identify any potential deceased voter registration records.

Continue working with GIS and the Address Committee to coordinate the synchronization of the
official county and city addresses with the master street index of the Election Information
Management System (EIMS). This is to key to ensure that voters are only registered at valid city or
county addresses for voting purposes, as required by statute.
? Increase staff to allow for the increase in office hours to support public counter.

The department has requested to be relocated and consolidated into one central location that allows the
public records to be accessible to all citizens. If this request is approved the department’s goal is to
consolidate all public historical records into one location, reduce risk, improve public access to meet ADA
accessibility requirements and provide complete access of the “people’s records” to the all residents of
San Benito County. Final approval for this relocation is pending.

Purchase legal investments permitted to local agencies, as defined by the State of California
Government Codes, consistent with current conditions and the other dominant objectives
pursuant to managing a local agency portfolio.
? Maintain a safe return of all principal on investments.
? Invests on the philosophy that all investments could require immediate liquidation in order to
meet unexpected cash calls therefore manages the portfolio as a cash management fund.
? Maintains that money will be available, without risk of trading loss, to pay normal cash
requirements.
? Obtain a desirable return yet that it not be the driving force in determining the selection of
investments.

The current MAI software acquired in the early 80’s is unable to interface with the County’s Bi?Tech
Financial system. With the pending implementation of a new ERP, staff will prepare to move treasury
records and activities to the new system.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 48
The Treasurer’s budget unique in that the expenses equal the revenue earned which produces a zero net
county cost. If funding is not provided for expenses, then revenue suffers by the same amount that
expenses are reduces by. Please refer to Government Code §27013.
There is no other existing management level position in this budget unit to oversee or act in the absence
of the department head. The Board of Supervisors has elected not to replace or provide a second
management position for the Treasurer since 2004. The Treasurer, Tax Collector and Public Administrator
budget units operate as a combined office and are operated exclusively by the elected Treasurer?Tax
Collector.
Collect all monies as is available for collection, but will be dependent upon the resources provided
by the Board of Supervisors to accomplish this.
? Perform the most important activities charged to the tax collector and as much of the remainder
of the work as able to considering the current staff level of 2 FTEs.
? Provide exemplary and cordial service with accountability to our residents.
? Tax Collector is committed to execute the duties of the tax collector that can be performed (based
on staffing levels) as per the laws of the State of California.

The Tax Collector collects and maintains records for the largest portion of the County’s revenue with
minimal staffing. In FY 2012?13 the staffing level was reduced to one (1) clerical person and one (1) line
supervisor compared to 2004 when the budget unit operated with one (1) manager, one (1) line
supervisor and three (3) clerical staff. Current staffing levels date back to earlier than 1983, creating a
backlog of tasks to be completed. A .5FTE accounting technician has been approved for FY2013?14.



Completion of Assessment Roll – Compute the assessment roll by June 30, 2014, which includes
completion of basic workload that is driven by changes in ownership, completion of new
construction, the processing of business & agricultural property statements along with the special
assessments and the annual computation of the Land Conservation Act values.
? Proposition 8 Reviews – Continue to review all real property sales in the last decade to determine
those properties that are eligible for Proposition 8 (decline in value) reduction or increase in
assessment.
? GIS Maps – Continue to review, verify and correct GIS Assessor Parcel Maps to eventually replace
the current Assessor Parcel Maps in order to process assessment information geographically
increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the Assessor’s Office and improving customer service
to the taxpayers of San Benito County.
? Assessor’s Website – Continue to update the Assessor’s website to include more information
about the assessment of property in San Benito County and the most frequently used and
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 54
requested forms. Establish and continue to maintain the Assessor’s on?line filing of business
property statements.

The Assessor’s Office has a tremendous workload at this time due to the economic turmoil in the real
estate market. Annually, the office works on over 8000 Prop 8 property re?assessments, 2500 change in
ownership & new construction valuations and has experienced a high volume in taxpayer inquiries –
phone calls, emails and office visits. With the current reduced staffing levels staff is experiencing an
overwhelming and difficult task to complete the Assessor’s duties.
There was a substantial increase in the Megabyte computer system maintenance/support contract for
FY2012?13 which affected San Benito County as well as the other twenty?one (21) Megabyte counties.
Megabyte Systems, Inc. indicated the need to increase the maintenance charge was strictly a result of
increased client requests for an enhanced level of maintenance services. Megabyte also added additional
features and levels of service to the maintenance contract that were not previously included. As a result of
these changes, a portion of the cost increase was allocated to the Tax Collector and Auditor for prior and
current years.
Due to the extreme economic budget crisis in the county, the Assessor’s Office was forced to reduce
overall costs to assist in eliminating the large county deficit for FY2012?13. As a result five (5) FTE
positions were eliminated in FY2012?13. This 33% reduction in staff is comparable to 1968 staffing levels
and has impacted the positive appraisal momentum, resulting in a potential loss of county revenue which
will be felt in the upcoming years. In general, the Assessor’s staff has begun to fall behind in property
assessments, reduction of backlogs, and processing escape assessments.
It should also be mentioned that the California Assessors’ Association is continuing to work on legislation
to restore the Property Tax Administration Program (PTAP) which was highly successful from 1995 to
2004. This grant program would provide each county with funds to be used in the administration of the
Assessor’s Office to help with generating revenues. If the legislation came to fruition, the San Benito
County Assessor’s Office would receive a minimum of $100,000 annually for an extended period of time.
This potential revenue has not been included in the current year revenues, as it is an unknown at this
point in time.

Assess current Memorandums of Understanding, contracts and personnel policies as related to
current health care reform and attain a 25% overall cost savings.
? Administer the County Human Resources Division in compliance with the Fair Labor Standards,
personnel rules and regulations, while retaining and balancing position control, recruitment and
maintenance of personnel files for the county organization.
? Administer the County Purchasing Division to support the county organization in compliance with
the Purchasing Ordinance and interpretation of the Purchasing and Contracting Manual, to
provide guidance with the procurement of goods and services, contracting, the competitive bid
procedures and the public contract code.
? Administer service contracts for Communications, Fire, Animal Control, Information Technology,
and GIS.
? Prepare the County Annual Impact Fee Report.
? Explore and analyze alternatives for cost control and/or reduce costs in personnel resources and
goods and services for county departments and the county organization.

The CAO is analyzing the pros and cons of a re?organization of this budget unit in conjunction with other
county administrative units. With the impending implementation of an ERP, staff is anticipating a more
streamlined work flow for position control, purchasing, contract management, data repository and
document management. The possibility exists for this budget unit to develop into a type of “general
services” function, thus providing efficiencies and cost?savings administratively.

Risk Internal Service Fund has been created as an accounting process to capture workers compensation
and general liability costs currently being managed by the Trindel Insurance Fund. It is management’s
intention that these costs be properly charged to all departments, as part of the direct charges and cost
plan charges. There will be no FTEs charged to this budget unit however staff time may be captured as it
applies to the management and implementation of described programs.

Upgrade financial system ? Workflow automation /collaboration tools
? Install a Voice over IP system for the County's new building and possibly integrate throughout the
County
? Establish Regional partnerships
? Sustain IT Capital Investments

Manage and coordinate the GIS Enterprise consisting of the GIS Steering Committee, GIS Technical
Committee and GIS Addressing Committee.
? Maintain and update the base map and map layers for the Countywide GIS System.

Maintain and update a Centralized Addressing Data Base for the County.
? Assist and train partnering agencies and departments in the capabilities of the program.

Revise and refine countywide building assessment.
? Continue to provide a high level of maintenance and repairs throughout the County.
? Continue to improve the process to handle evaluation, inventory, and storage of surplus
equipment.

Provide financial management for countywide utilities.
? Monitor all contracts related to utility charges for the county.

The FY 2013?14 Recommended Capital Budget includes one (1) road equipment purchase, six (6)
information technology projects, and fifteen (15) facility improvement projects. The Recommended
Capital Outlay Fund totals $7,374,982 and includes $170,000 for equipment purchases, $671,700 for
technology purchases and $6,533,282 for new facilities, facility improvements, environmental,
programming and/or design.

Program staff proposes to provide direct services to at least 500 new victims and make at least 500
continuing contacts with these victims during FY 2013?14. The majority of contacts are made at the center
or by telephone; however, field visits will be conducted when deemed necessary and appropriate by staff.
Priority of services will be given to clients based on a client’s trauma?response needs, and the capabilities
of that client. The center’s goal is to provide a comprehensive range of services to meet the needs of
crime victims in this county. This will require on?going cooperation and coordination with law
enforcement and other agencies.

Work collaboratively with the City of Hollister to continue to suppress gang activity.
? Maintain Peace Officers Standards and Training (POST).
? Pursue grant opportunities.

• Administer the contract with SCR911 to provide 911 Communication services that include
providing dispatching services, personnel, equipment and facilities.
• Insure the County’s Alternate PSAP, equipment and radios are maintained and are ready for
service to provide a direct link to the SCR911 Center.
• Administer contracts for phones, technology, radio infrastructure, radio maintenance, repeater
site lease agreements and other maintenance issues in regards to the County’s Alternate PSAP.
• Administer contract agreements with City of Hollister, City of San Juan and the County Emergency
Medical Services Agency for contracted communication and radio infrastructure services that the
County provides.

Meet all training requirements as mandated by the Board of Corrections.
? Maintain officer and inmate safety despite an increasingly violent and highly sophisticated inmate
population and minimal staff.
? Continue to seek educational and vocational courses for the benefit of the inmates.

? Provide additional training to Operational Area stakeholders.
? Coordinate/participate in EOC tabletop exercise.
? Apply for grant funding made available to the county.
? Complete and receive FEMA approval of the Multi?Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan.
? Assist departments with development of Standardized Operational Procedures (SOP’s) as they
pertain to Emergency Mitigation, Planning, Response and Recovery efforts.
? Continue to develop a volunteer base of community members to actively participate in Citizen
Emergency Response Team (CERT) and Radio Auxiliary Communication Emergency Service (RACES)
programs.
? Complete the countywide radio network infrastructure’s Narrow Band Project.

Implement Thinking for a Change to all clients which is a nationwide evidence?based program, the
objective being to get the offenders to make better choices to become a successful citizen.
? Implement a guideline sentencing Matrix, which is a tool used for the adult offenders in
appropriately making recommendations to the Court, based on their risk assessments. Matrix will
assist staff to become more consistent by using rewards and behavior modifications.
? Implement a pre?trial release program which staff recently created as a tool for the San Benito
County Jail to screen adult offenders for pre?trial release. The objective is to provide a report to
the Court for medium and low risk offenders, who would then be placed on electronic monitoring
in the community, thus improving community safety by incarcerating high risk offenders and
releasing the lower risk offenders.

Implement Thinking for a Change to all minors in the Juvenile Hall, which is a nationwide
evidence?based program, the objective is to teach the minors to make better choices to become
successful citizens.
? Enhance the existing Lifeskills Program to the minors in the Juvenile Hall by presenting outside
speakers with expertise in areas such as skills to pay the bills, thus helping to prevent recidivism
and give the minors the skills to successfully transition into adulthood.
? Collaborate with local schools in an effort to introduce the Gang Resistance Education and
Training (G.R.E.A.T.) Program to the community, which is an evidence?based and effective gang
and violence prevention program, built around school?based, law enforcement officer?instructed
classroom curricula. G.R.E.A.T. is intended as an immunization against delinquency, youth
violence, and gang membership for children in the years immediately before the prime ages for
introduction into gangs and delinquent behavior.
? Maintenance items include installation of a new bathtub in the intake bathroom; scrape, clean
and paint shower doors and professionally clean all carpeting.

Address youth violence and gang activity through prevention, intervention and
suppression activities.
? Cultivate additional resources for prevention, intervention, and suppression activities.

? Ensure that both agricultural and residential pesticide use is conducted in a safe and effective
manner.
? Maintain close oversight of weighing and measuring devices used in trade to ensure consumer
protection.
? Prevent the introduction and establishment of exotic harmful pests.
? Continue focus on phyto?santiary certification services that facilitate trade of agricultural products
with other states and countries.

? Quickly identify and treat abandoned “green” swimming pools before they become a public
nuisance.
? Continue to be proactive instead of reactive in regards to locating and treating areas favorable for
mosquito generation.
? Continue public education and outreach by participating in community events such as the County
Fair, Farmer’s Markets and other activities where the public can be reached.
? Continue to develop more efficient control techniques.

? 24?Hour Emergency Services for injured, vicious or stray animals creating a traffic hazard.
? Sheltering for stray, abandoned and injured animals.
? Stray Animal After?Hours Drop Kennels provides for a stray animal drop off after normal business
hours, to safely house stray animals.
? Field Services respond to reports of stray domestic animals, animal cruelty complaints, biting
animals, aggressive animals, and dead animals in roadways, rabies control, and code enforcement
complaints, such as barking dogs.
? Adoption Services offered for dogs, puppies, cats and kittens.
? Enforcement of state and local laws regarding animals and administrative citations, licensing,
suppression of rabies, vaccinations, and quarantines.

? Achieve a collaborative and acceptable standard of response to incidents occurring throughout
the County for the deployment of fire suppression operations, emergency medical operations and
special operations to the public.
? Maintain personnel and fire stations which are essential to meet the current county needs.

? Streamline procedures and documentation to allow for more efficient work flow and maximize the
database management system. This will include an ongoing scanning of birth, death and marriage
records into digital format to meet current system configuration requirements. This project will
occur over several years and will eventually eliminate manual handling of public records. Digital
archive and database retrieval is the end goal for all the historical records in the Clerk/Recorders
office.
? With the goal of documenting of every procedure and service that is performed by the County
Clerk, the department has initiated a central database repository. The institutional knowledge
database will aide employees in providing greater customer service and will provide a resource for
orderly succession of staff. This resource will be used for training and testing new employees.
? Timely and professional customer service with continued dedication to the community of San
Benito County is our continued goal.
? Continue the ongoing cross training of employees to ensure continuous customer service for the
Clerk, Recorder and Elections Departments.

Complete Phase 1 and 2 of the official record book restoration project. The first two (2) phases of
this project are to restore records and historically preserve the official transcribed land transaction
from both Monterey and Fresno County from the 1850’s to 1873. These records will be restored,
microfilmed, digitally scanned, encapsulated and re?bound for public access today and for future
generations. This restoration project will continue for several years until it is complete with the
funding specifically allocated for the maintenance and restoration per state statute.
? Continue the ongoing Map Digitalization Project. This project is being collaborated with both GIS
and Public Works to provide recorded parcel and subdivision maps electronically via an enhanced
GIS parcel map layer shape file. The overall goal is to have the recorded maps and official records
connected to specific parcels of land to view the historical land transactions.

With the goal of documenting of every procedure and service that is performed by the County
Recorder, the Department has initiated a central database repository. The institutional knowledge
database will aide employees in providing greater customer service and will provide a resource for
orderly succession of staff. This resource will used for training and testing new employees.
? Increase staff to allow for the increase in office hours to the support the public counter and Hall of
Records.

The department has requested to be relocated and consolidated into one central location that allows the
public records to be accessible to all citizens. If this request is approved the department’s goal is to
consolidate all public historical records into one location, reduce risk, improve public access to meet ADA
accessibility requirements and provide complete access of the “people’s records” to the all residents of
San Benito County. Final approval for this relocation is pending.

? Provide quality services consistent with available resources.
? Manage estates prudently with care and good judgment.
Comply with existing local, state and federal laws as a guide for the fulfillment of responsibilities
for managing decedents’ estates.
? Eliminate any possibility of conflict of interest or appearance thereof.

The Public Administrator has no control as to the number of cases that will be referred to the department.
Every estate case is different. Some require a minimal amount of time and effort to process, while others
may take a couple of years to complete the final distribution. Time and effort expended in each case is
dependent upon the type and quantity of assets administered.

Economic development & job creation through the development of commercial, industrial,
recreational, and tourist/hospitality projects along with a wide variety of housing types.
? Streamline permitting processes, review fees and fee structure for recommendations to the Board
of Supervisors.
? Increase revenues where feasible and attempt to recover the cost of services from applicants for
entitlements and permits.
? Employ the Development Agreement process to establish the fiscally neutral master planned
communities, provide for needed infrastructure and encourage well planned parks and affordable
housing.
? Monitor and participate in State and Federal programs that effect local land use, such as SB375,
Climate Action Plans, Foothills Legacy Area and others.
? Review the potential for steps leading to the implementation of an HCP program and appropriate
uses of the HCP Impact fees collected to date.
? Clarify and implement the Transfer of Development Credit program to preserve agricultural
resources and encourage development in appropriate locations.
? Complete new oil well ordinance, groundwater ordinance, General Plan Update reimbursement
ordinance, and other necessary revisions as staffing allows.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 128

The ability to produce revenues for the County will be largely dependent upon the ability to efficiently
process land development projects and other land use applications. The Department needs to maintain
the current staff of competent planners in order to lead these projects through the long and complicated
entitlement process. Planners’ knowledge of CEQA, the Subdivision Map Act, Federal and State regulatory
permitting and numerous other processes are critical to the ongoing fiscal success of San Benito County.
Any further reductions of planning staff will delay and inhibit the County’s ability to move projects of
economic significance through the necessary entitlement steps to allow implementation of these projects.
In order to have projects online for construction in 2015, entitlement efforts will need to begin this fiscal
year. It is imperative to maintain the ability to efficiently process this anticipated workload.
In addition to current applications and projects, Planning is also focusing on long range, revenue
generating projects that do not necessarily result in significant building permit income but rather in
commercial projects, tourism and other “revenue capturing” projects. The Planning Division continues to
be active which typically generates revenue in the Building Division.

Expend existing County and City HOME housing grant funds by originating new First?Time
Homebuyer Down Payment Assistance second loans.
? Continue to apply for new housing grant funds through upcoming Notice of Funding Availability’s
(NOFA’s) and facilitate community workshops.

The Housing Coordinator position has been funded by the County’s Inclusionary Housing Fund for the past
five (5) years. There will be approximately $16,000 in unused funds available to be applied towards salary
and benefits for FY 2013?14; however, that amount is insufficient to finance this position for the entire
year.
The Housing Programs Coordinator has proposed to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with the County Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA) and County Community Services Workforce
Development (CSWD) to operate a new Financial Literacy Program which would generate up to $25,000 in
new revenue for FY 2013?14. Sixty percent (60.0%) or $15,000 would be funded by CSWD Community
Service Block Grant (CSBG) grant funds and forty percent (40.0%) or $10,000 would be funded directly by
the HHSA by for a total of $25,000. The MOU is proposed to be finalized the end of FY2012?13. Even with
this additional revenue, the position would not be fully funded.
Revision of the existing Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the City of Hollister and the
County, in which the Housing Coordinator provides services to the City of Hollister, additional revenue of
approximately $40,000 will be generated if approved in FY 2013?14.

Promote safe and pleasant conditions for residents, pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists on
neighborhood streets.
? Improve San Benito County arterial/collector roadway system.
? Provide financial management, contract monitoring, technical assistance and administrative
support.
? Interact with Federal and State agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and California Department of Transportation.

Grade roadway shoulders throughout the county.
? Repair culverts and replace deteriorated ones as needed.
? Repair and patch potholes on all county roadways.

The department is working with Human Resources to establish criteria that will modify both Road
Maintenance Worker and Heavy Equipment Mechanic Job Specifications. If successful, both classifications
will become flexible class positions, providing Road Maintenance Workers and Heavy Equipment
Mechanics an incentive to personally obtain equipment operation certifications, which will benefit the
Road Division by providing flexibility with staff operating equipment. This process requires meet and
confer with union representatives. Approval of the FY 13?14 budget does not approve the proposed job
specification modifications.

The Fixed Assets for this Budget Unit are Capital Road and Bridge Improvement Projects presented as a
separate document. The budget requested is based on project schedules and the necessity to have
funding available for the design and/or construction contract awards. Therefore, portions of the FY 2013?
14 recommended budgets may be re?budgeted in FY 2014?15 to complete design or construction efforts.
The FY 2013?14 recommended project budget appropriations total $44,652,937 and include an estimated
$43,297,397 in re?budgets from FY 2012?13.

Continue to communicate with CSA representatives to discuss services and encourage dialogue
with property owners.
? Coordinate with LAFCO to establish additional services for the following CSA’s:
1. Santa Rosa Acres (CSA 4)
2. Hillcrest/El Toro (CSA 5)
3. Bonnie View(CSA 8)
4. Ridgemark (CSA 9)
5. Barnes Lane(CSA 11)
? Maintain maintenance schedules for identified CSA services and update property owners as
needed when schedules require change.
? Coordinate with property owners in the remaining four (4) CSAs that do not currently have a
property?related fee to either de?activate the CSA or hold Prop 218 elections and establish
services and fees.

Complete Council of Governments work associated with the transfer of the Highway 25 existing
route and Bypass.
? Continue work on the update of the Regional Transportation Plan.
? Seek state and federal funding through grants and apportionments for priority projects in the San
Benito region.
? Work with cities and County on documenting Complete Streets needs assessment to incorporate
into the Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments Sustainable Communities Strategy to
better integrate land use and transportation planning.
? Increase the visibility of the Council of Governments as a collaborative, responsive agency focused
on project delivery and meeting the needs of the region.
? Plan and develop projects of the Airport Land Use Commission.
? Review proposed development projects within the San Benito County region.
? Collaborate with public and private partners on commodity movement issues.

Increase service delivery capacity and the administrative support systems to support the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) program expansions. The division is experienced in capturing MediCal
revenue reimbursement through the Mental Health Services Programs but staff must be
successful at capturing needed MediCal revenue to help support the need for expanded service
capacity.
? Integrate Behavioral Health Services with Physical Health Primary Care Providers through
placement of a Behavioral Health service provider at the San Benito Health Foundation.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 152
? Promote the importance of early identification and engagement in treatment for mental illness.
Bringing the issues of mental illness out of the shadows and putting the importance of mental
health care on par with other illnesses challenges the Behavioral Health Department to continue
to expand and improve programs.
? Continue public education efforts to eliminate the stigma often associated with mental illness and
the need to seek treatment and to educate the public that mentally ill individuals are more often
victims of violent crime rather than perpetrators.
? Continue the objective of sustaining core service programs in the face of increasing caseload
growth and to remain vigilant in capitalizing on opportunities to expand services whenever fiscally
feasible.

The Behavioral Health Department’s Mental Health Services can realize a new expanded revenue stream
resulting from the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The ACA includes the lowering of the eligibility requirements
for access to MediCal, thereby enlarging the pool of MediCal beneficiaries. The Affordable Care Act
includes incentives to integrate services. In anticipation of the healthcare reforms it is the division’s goal
to continue to expand efforts and abilities to capture revenue reimbursement to sustain such service
expansions.
Staff has received positive news that based on recent state tax collection information that, the division will
benefit from a recent spike in state tax revenues. Individuals, fearful that the effects of the recent fiscal
cliff situation if unresolved would result in higher capital gains tax rates, rushed to liquidate investments in
the last quarter of tax year 2012 as a strategy to avoid being subjected to an anticipated higher capital
gains tax rate in 2013. The liquidation of those investments were still subjected to 2012 capital gains tax
resulting in a spike of state fourth quarter tax collections. The Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) from
which the division receives its largest portion of revenue benefits is derived from a 1% tax levied on
personal income in excess of one million dollars per year. Many of the individuals in this income bracket
participated in the 2012, fourth quarter investment and securities selling spike generating an increased
collection of tax revenues for the state. Additionally the passage of Proposition 30 resulted in significant
increased estimated tax payments in January 2013. Staff has reviewed figures released on the higher than
previously estimated FY 2013?14 MHSA funding availability state totals, but this has not yet been
translated to what this amounts to at the local level.
Another major source of mental health revenue is derived through realignment sales tax funds. Minor
growth is expected in realignment funding as it is based on the performance of consumer spending.

Increase service delivery capacity and the administrative support systems to support the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) program expansions. The division is experienced in capturing MediCal
revenue reimbursement through the Mental Health Services Programs but staff must be
successful at capturing needed MediCal revenue to help support the need for expanded service
capacity.
We will be challenged to:
? Sustain some of the innovative services such as the Residential Sober Living Environment and
Substance Abuse Peer Mentors that the AB109 Grant Project was designed to serve as the grant
sunsets.
? Maintain and sustain core service programs in the face of increasing service demands and to
remain vigilant in capitalizing on opportunities to expand services whenever fiscally feasible.

The Behavioral Health Department, Substance Abuse Division’s funding is always a fragile situation. The
size and scope of alcohol and drug treatment needs are huge but these programs have never been
adequately funded on a national or state level. Numerous reasons exist for the inequity of funding priority
between mental illness and substance abuse disorders, but the same arguments remain as impediments
to adequate funding of substance abuse treatment. Philosophically the funding priorities of criminal
enforcement of drug related crimes through interdiction and suppression versus treatment and recovery
continue to compete. Also the dilemma of public understanding of addictions and substance abuse as a
medical condition versus a self?induced problem of choice continues to diffuse the direction of where or
whether funds will be allocated for treatment.
Although realignment of the state funded portions of alcohol and treatment programs has occurred, staff
expects little growth in realignment funding, as the sales tax source this funding is derived from is
projected to move forward with only minor improvement. It is hoped that the funding commitments from
the federal portion of substance abuse service programs will remain intact and possibly improve. Nothing
is certain, however, at the federal level as the federal government continues to argue about spending cuts
and debt ceiling limits with the final outcome not determined yet.
In recent years the division has successfully obtained portions of substance abuse funding through the
pursuit of grant awards; but this is a difficult cycle to depend on as grants eventually end, with no
certainty of finding the next grant situation that fits program needs and capabilities, nor the guarantee of
obtaining the award.
One such grant in current progress and has great value targets treatment service delivery for individuals
with substance abuse treatment needs that are categorically classified as part of the AB109 (early prison
release, or no longer eligible for prison sentencing). The Substance Abuse Program has expanded services
to address the changes to inmate incarceration resulting from the passage of AB109, which realigned the
responsibility of incarcerating prison level inmates to local jurisdiction. It is estimated that as many as
80% of this population have substance abuse treatment needs. Access to substance abuse treatment is a
key to successful rehabilitation of this population. This grant program supports out?patient substance
abuse counseling services, peer mentors and dedicated bed purchases at a project initiated Sober Living
Center. Additional funding for substance abuse treatment services is received through AB109 funding
allocated through the County Probation Department. These services are proving to have successful results
with positive client treatment outcomes. Staff will be challenged to sustain these services when the grant
terminates at year end.

Support the most basic and legally mandated public health services, including disease control,
environmental health, emergency medical, health education, and maternal and child health,
among others.
? Test public health emergency response systems by conducting an exercise with critical partners.
? Support health and injury prevention efforts such as Kids at the Park and Car Seat Check Up
events.

Health realignment is the primary revenue source for the mandated services presented above as well as
other mandated health budget units. Health realignment revenues continue to be unstable. Public Health
has been able to sustain its staff and programs the last two years; however if the funds do not continue to
grow with the cost of doing business, staff will have to revise this budget. The elimination of Healthy
Families and the Federal Affordable Care Act Prevention funding may impact future budgeting.

Provide a CDC/CDE approved peer?to?peer prevention curriculum for 6th?8th graders which
includes tobacco education by providing a tobacco education training program for peer educators
and teachers, a minimum of six (6) middle (K?8th and 6th?8th grades) schools, including one
alternative school.
? Attain 100% of San Benito County (including Hollister) licensed family day care homes will be in
full compliance with the state law (Health & Safety Code 1596.795) requiring smoke?free indoor
areas during hours of operation; and in addition attain 100% participation of these homes in
adopting voluntary policy requiring smoke?free indoor environments 24 hours a day.
? Increase current membership in the San Benito County Tobacco Education Coalition to adequately
reflect non?traditional partners and/or ethnically/racially diverse groups in San Benito County.
? Renew Tobacco Education Grant for another three year consecutive term.

Provide outreach presentations to various child?serving organizations to encourage participation
in Medi?Cal, Healthy Families, and CHDP programs and refer eligible children to CHDP providers.
? Provide public health nurse case management services for children in the County’s foster care and
probation systems.
? Reconcile CHDP data base to Medi?Cal data base and Improve tracking method of CHDP rating
assessment forms.

Continue to participate on the County and City Design Review Committees as well as with the
Economic Development Corporation.
? Maintain new electronic reporting requirements under AB 2286 for hazardous materials reporting
and research feasibility of extending to other environmental health areas.
? Investigate the feasibility of obtaining grant money to support one FTE position (EHS Technician)
to assist current staff in accomplishing hazardous materials programmatic assignments, and to
specifically assist in the initial conversion and long?term maintenance of electronic hazardous
generator reporting systems to facilitate mandated reporting by the regulated community.
? Implement recently adopted fee schedule.

The revised fee schedule will not fully sustain Environmental Health. Health realignment funds will be
needed to balance this budget. The department is currently understaffed by 1.0 FTE (Environmental
Health Specialist). It is recommended that if the economy continues to grow, an additional Environmental
Health Specialist be added to the authorized positions for this budget unit. A request for a temporary
Environmental Health Specialist may be necessary during the high peak event season.

Provide case management services to AFLP clients.
? Increase public partner participation in both the Healthy Mothers Healthy Babies and Child Injury
Prevention Coalitions.
? Support AFLP teens in graduating from high school, direct them to resources for furthering their
education, help develop effective parenting skills in teen parents, and increase the numbers of
male teen fathers who are enrolled in AFLP.

Provide case management services to MCAH clients.
? Increase public partner participation in both the Healthy Mothers Healthy Babies and Child Injury
Prevention Coalitions.
? Support teens enrolled in the AFLP component to meet high school graduation requirements,
direct them to resources for furthering their education, help develop effective parenting skills in
teen parents, and increase the numbers of male teen fathers who are enrolled in AFLP.

MCAH receives an allocation that has not been increased in several years. These funds are matched by
health realignment funds. The funds are matched by federal and state dollars at specific percentages
depending on the activities performed. Because health realignments funds have been unstable; it is
possible that staff could have to revisit these budgets in the upcoming year.

Implement areas of the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS)/Cities Readiness Initiative (CRI) plan by
conducting drills and exercises including mass vaccination clinics as needed and coordinating the
planning and implementation of the 2012 Statewide Medical & Health Exercise with agencies that
are part of the county operational area.
? Coordinate with CA Department of Public Health (CDPH) in relocating County’s allocation of
medical surge assets from CDPH facility to local jurisdiction.
? Coordinate with volunteer agencies to identify adequate volunteer staffing for Points of
Dispensation (PODs) for vaccines and other pharmaceuticals. This may be conducted through
Disaster Healthcare Volunteers (DHV) and the use of the California Health Alert Network System
(CAHAN) with participating agencies i.e., local hospital, clinics and skilled nursing facilities.
? Coordinate with local hospital, clinic partners, and local Emergency Services Agency to establish
disaster/emergency response procedures, ensuring availability of resources in the event of a
medical surge during a countywide disaster or emergency.
Accept referrals and conduct eligibility determination for potential CCS client’s access.
? Develop protocols and procedures for high risk CCS clients requiring medical follow?up.
? Minimize back log of clients from the time of application to the CCS program to the time of
receiving services

CCS is a state?mandated program placing the burden on counties to provide mandated services that may
not be fully?funded. Realignment revenues support the required local match for this program and could
be insufficient to support the program with one or several unanticipated high?cost medical cases.

Accept referrals and conduct eligibility determination for potential CCS client’s access.
? Develop protocols and procedures for high risk CCS clients requiring medical follow?up.
? Minimize back log of clients from the time of application to the CCS program to the time of
receiving services

CCS is a state?mandated program placing the burden on counties to provide mandated services that may
not be fully?funded. Realignment revenues support the required local match for this program and could
be insufficient to support the program with one or several unanticipated high?cost medical cases.

Revise and update the Emergency Medical Services Plan.
? Review the Hazel Hawkins Base Hospital Contract for to assure compliance as well assess the need
for revision.
? Review the Ambulance Service Agreement for Emergency Ambulance Services to assure
compliance and determine need for revision as part of the contract extension.
? Revise the EMS website and move it to the county server as well as create a smart phone
application for EMS field personnel to access policies and procedures.
? Establish partners to provide EMT and/or Emergency Medical Responder certification and
refresher courses within San Benito County.

The overall budget has been greatly decreased from years past, due to a recommended change in
processes regarding the Maddy Fund distributions. Beginning next fiscal year the Maddy Funds distributed
to the Physicians and the Hospital and the reimbursements made from the Richie Fund will be paid
directly from the those trusts. Therefore, those expenses are not recognized in the budget for FY 2013?14.
In addition, the Benefit Assessment Units that determine collections from the CSA have been reduced in
numbers. This is primarily due to the loss of business in San Benito County. By using CSA and Maddy EMS
Trust fund balances, staff was able to keep the CSA at the same rate as last year. It is staff’s intention to
keep the CSA at the lowest possible rate for the taxpayers in San Benito County.

Complete revised Environmental Impact Report and bring completed project forward for Board of
Supervisors consideration regarding the proposed Resource Recovery Park.
? Pending approval of the Resource Recovery Park, solicit businesses for same.
? Transition to new Landfill Operating Contract.

Use Food Waste Pilot data to broaden outreach to initiate food scrap diversion programs.
? Initiation of Community Garden Project /Composting (yard and food waste) project: interdisciplinary
partners through illegal dumping abatement, homeless job skill, youth activity, and surplus food
supply for Food Bank.
? Continue Community Outreach (both residential and commercial) on Economic and Environmental
Benefits/ Sustainability of Source Reduction, Reuse and Recycling.

The Integrated Waste Management Regional Agency serves the Cities of Hollister, San Juan Bautista and
the unincorporated areas of San Benito County. This budget is based on full cost reimbursement for the
member jurisdictions. Grant funding (Oil Payment Grants and Division of Recycling Grants) are subject to
Legislative reduction; therefore affected program activities will be metered to match available funds.

Implement re?designed Cal WORK’s program changes.
? Implement expanded MediCal/CMSP caseloads with shift of Health Families to Medi
Cal and expansion of Path2Health CMSP program.
? Implement extended Foster Care program for youth ages 18 ?21.
? Comply with federal/state application processing times for public assistance programs.
? Comply with state and federal requirements in the areas of safety, permanency and child/family
well?being regarding child welfare services.

The Health Care Reform Act and the elimination of Healthy Families will substantially increase the volume
of caseloads. It is unknown at this time the amount of cases; however, the counties that are transitioning
from Healthy Families to MediCal are finding that the numbers of cases are dramatically higher than the
original estimates. The eligibility staff is being increased; however, the training for these positions will
take six months to a year before new staff members can carry a full caseload.
The funding for child welfare staffing and related overhead costs, as well as Foster Care Assistance (BU
514) and Child Welfare Services (BU 515), are dependent upon the 2011 realignment, which is based on
sales and vehicle licenses taxes. Currently there is only eighteen (18) months of data to predict whether
or not Realignment 2011 will sustain the mandated costs. The budgets will be monitored closely.

Provide cash grant assistance for eligible families.
? Continue to implement programmatic changes as follows:
o CalWORKs division into three (3) sub?programs providing enhanced services in the first
twenty?four (24) months on aid.
o Implement the revised Welfare?To?Work program requirements.

The Welfare?To?Work program changes will require additional staff time to monitor. Currently the
CalWORKS unit is understaffed and a redesign of the program is being implemented. The continued years
of understaffing created a backlog in the area of reconciling state reporting systems with client
verifications, which could eventually result in costly fines. No additional funds are provided for this
transition.

Place children in a foster care setting that best meets their needs and is the least disruptive to
their lives.
? Strive for foster children’s placement in NRFEM settings.
? Collaborate with Behavioral Health, Probation, and other agencies on the CICC, especially with
cases where a high level of care facility is being considered as placement.
? Recruit additional foster care homes and increase efforts to notify relatives (family finding) as this
increases familial support and placement options.

At time of publication, the Agency does not have any children in high?level care facilities; however,
Probation does have three (3) Probation youth in said facilities. At this writing, there are five (5) at risk
youth that potentially could require a higher level of care. Any increase in placements in high level of care
facilities could significantly increase projected costs in this budget unit. The average monthly cost in a
Level 12 facility is approximately $8,067, or $96,804 per year per youth.
Foster care assistance funding is incorporated into the 2011 Realignment. There is only 18 months of data,
which limits the ability to project average yearly revenue. This budget will be monitored closely.
The 2012 implementation of AB 12, Extended Foster Care in for youth ages 18 to 21 that were in the child
welfare system at age 18 impacts this budget unit. We have factored foster care costs for 4?5 youth per
year.

Provide substance abuse services in collaboration with Behavioral Health Department.
? Provide counseling services to child welfare families by contracting with several local providers.
? Provide drug testing and expand random drug testing by contracting with a private provider.
? Make aforementioned services accessible by providing transportation, if needed.

The Department was understaffed by three social workers during FY 2012?13. These positions will be
filled by the FY 2013?14 budget hearings; however, there will be a delay in assigning them full caseloads
due to the training process.

Continue to assist Cal Work’s clients by providing case management plans which outline goals and
milestones leading to employment.
? Provide clients with assistance in needed education, vocational training, childcare and
transportation to enhance the clients’ marketability in the workforce.
? Continue with the sub?programs Cal Works Basic, Cal Works Plus, and Child Maintenance which
provide for extra incentives for families meeting Work Participation Rates (WPR).

Staff expects a reduction of costs as revised requirements are implemented for the Welfare?To?Work
program.

Provide exceptional customer service that is efficient, effective and responsive to the needs of
customers.
? Provide quality safety?net services that include one?time rental assistance and utility, shelter, and
food assistance for low?income residents.
? Provide workforce development services to displaced workers and low?income community
members.

Provide safe and affordable housing for at least sixty?seven (67) migrant families during the farm
seasonal months of May through November.
? Facilitate three to five tenant council meetings for families, with presentations by various
organizations offering services that are of benefit to these families.
? Secure additional resources for resident families to meet their economic, health and well?being
needs

This budget has been built based on staff’s funding request to State Office of Migrant Services (OMS).
Talks are continuing that OMS funding may be decreased by the final state budget. If the state reduces
the funding for this program, staff will revise budget as needed.
There is a pending long?time employee retirement expected this fiscal year, which could have a significant
pay?out. Due to the nature of the funding for this program, the cost may have to be absorbed by the
General Fund.

Explore and coordinate with the CAO office space that is more compatible and accessible to the
local Veteran population within a county building, possibly in conjunction with the new
courthouse transition.
? Extend outreach programs.

Partner with local agencies (County Library, YMCA and Chamberlains Children’s Center) to deliver
the TechXcite Engineering program for middle school aged youth. In partnership with UC and
Duke University, agencies will receive free curriculum materials and education to deliver this
program at their facilities.
? Continue to develop and enhance the 4?H community club program to develop citizenship,
leadership and life skills in a positive youth development environment for youth ages 7 to 19 and
their adult volunteers.
? Continue to provide research extension and creative activity to address the agricultural needs of
San Benito County in the areas of agriculture, livestock and education.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 224

San Benito County is being considered for a new UC Faculty/Advisor position in Natural Resources, as well
as a staff position to address nutrition education. However, UC is reluctant to dedicate additional
resources to San Benito County due to the lack of funding provided to manage the current operations. If
the County contribution to this budget unit does not increase, UC will not allocate any further positions to
the County as these positions cannot be adequately supported under the current budget allocations.

The utilities line item has significantly increased from prior years reflecting anticipated water charges that
will no longer be subsidized by the City of Hollister. Staff is in the process of constructing a well which will
establish a permanent water source and greatly reduce the costs to the users of Veterans Memorial Park
in future years.

Examine program for the replacement of trees removed.
? Continue to provide a high level of maintenance and repairs throughout Parks and Recreation
Facilities.

In an effort to coordinate efforts with the County Administrative Office, the Board of Supervisors shares
some of the important goals regarding employee benefits and sustainable long term solutions to the fiscal
challenges that face the County.
? Evaluate the three major components of employee benefits and how they impact the County’s
ability to meet its fiscal responsibility not only to employees but the public as well. Those
components are: OPEB, countywide health insurance and PERS.
? Develop a three (3) year strategic plan to address the above?mentioned components of employee
benefits.
? Address the impact that the furlough program has had on county operations and service to the
public and develop a sustainable plan. The furlough program instituted in FY 2009?10 coupled
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 32
with the step freezes that were implemented in FY 2010?11 were initially intended to be a short
term solution to balance those fiscal year budgets. As a result, the County has accrued massive
vacation liabilities, and the public has suffered due to office closures and less staff time available
to serve the public.
? Assess the bare minimum staffing in key general services areas, such as the Auditor’s office,
Assessor’s office and direct public service departments. Coordinate with staff to bring those
departments to sustainable levels so that the basic, vital work is being performed and the public is
being served.
? Increase building and development interest along with subsequent and sustainable revenue in San
Benito County through coordinated efforts between the Board, Public Works, Assessor and
Planning & Building departments.

Consolidate and organize the archive of Board of Supervisors documents in one place, which were
disbursed to different locations upon being relocated from the County courthouse.
? Continue to provide a high standard of service in support of the Board of Supervisors, County
Board of Equalization, Assessment Appeals Board, San Benito County Financing Corporation, San
Benito County Fish & Game Advisory Commission, Intergovernmental Committee and Fire
Protection Committee with reduced staff.

Evaluate the three major components of employee benefits and how they impact the County’s
ability to meet its fiscal responsibility not only to employees but the public as well. Those
components are: OPEB, countywide health insurance and PERS.
? Develop a three (3) year strategic plan to address the above?mentioned components of employee
benefits.
? Address the impact that the furlough program has had on county operations and service to the
public and develop a sustainable plan. The furlough program instituted in FY 2009?10 coupled
with the step freezes that were implemented in FY 2010?11 were initially intended to be a short
term solution to balance those fiscal year budgets. As a result, the County as accrued massive
vacation liabilities, and the public has suffered due to office closures and less staff time available
to serve the public.
? Assess the bare minimum staffing in key general services areas, such as the Auditor’s office,
Assessor’s office and direct public service departments. Coordinate with staff to bring those
departments to sustainable levels so that the basic, vital work is being performed and the public is
being served.
? Complete due diligence and current contract negotiations for the purchase and implementation of
a new enterprise resource program (ERP), thus providing the much needed workflow, human
resources, position control and budgeting modules to compliment the county general ledger.
? Complete the transition process for the narrow?banding of radio frequencies and equipment with
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) deadline extension of June 30, 2013.

Provide timely professional legal advice in the most cost efficient manner possible.
? Improve communications and work processes between the Office of County Counsel and the
Departments it serves.
? Monitor outside counsel assigned to county litigation to ensure cost containment and delivery of
quality legal services.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 40

The recommended budget reflects the increase of a Deputy County Counsel III from .7 to .8 FTE, with a
corresponding increase in revenue from the Health and Human Services Agency. Additionally, reductions
in previous budget years resulted in the elimination of all office support staff from the County Counsel’s
office. The proposed budget includes funding in the amount of $7,363 which would allow the front office
to be staffed eight hours per week with a temporary employee. The primary duty of this part?time
employee is to ensure that the County Counsel’s office properly bills and receives revenue for legal
services provided to billable departments and outside agencies.

Conduct the June 3, 2014 Statewide Primary Election. This election includes the party?nominated
office for all Statewide and Legislative Offices, Countywide Offices, and Supervisorial Offices,
statewide propositions and local measures.
? Coordinate the implementation of the newly purchased SouthTech System for maintaining the
campaign financial and statement of economic interest filings. This project will be implemented
with the collaboration of the Clerk of the Board, Human Resources, Office of Education and county
departments. The first year goal is to double the number of on time filings.
? Continue the with Phase 2 development of a fully accessible website that meet ADA and voters’
with special needs requirements. This project includes polling place, voter registration and other
lookup functionalities.
? Complete the pre?primary purge of inactive voters and residency confirmation of active voters,
thus reducing election mailing cost and allow the voter file to be updated prior to the Statewide
Primary in June.
? Perform a database scrubbing of master voter file with national social security, DMV and official
records databases to identify any potential deceased voter registration records.

Continue working with GIS and the Address Committee to coordinate the synchronization of the
official county and city addresses with the master street index of the Election Information
Management System (EIMS). This is to key to ensure that voters are only registered at valid city or
county addresses for voting purposes, as required by statute.
? Increase staff to allow for the increase in office hours to support public counter.

The department has requested to be relocated and consolidated into one central location that allows the
public records to be accessible to all citizens. If this request is approved the department’s goal is to
consolidate all public historical records into one location, reduce risk, improve public access to meet ADA
accessibility requirements and provide complete access of the “people’s records” to the all residents of
San Benito County. Final approval for this relocation is pending.

Purchase legal investments permitted to local agencies, as defined by the State of California
Government Codes, consistent with current conditions and the other dominant objectives
pursuant to managing a local agency portfolio.
? Maintain a safe return of all principal on investments.
? Invests on the philosophy that all investments could require immediate liquidation in order to
meet unexpected cash calls therefore manages the portfolio as a cash management fund.
? Maintains that money will be available, without risk of trading loss, to pay normal cash
requirements.
? Obtain a desirable return yet that it not be the driving force in determining the selection of
investments.

The current MAI software acquired in the early 80’s is unable to interface with the County’s Bi?Tech
Financial system. With the pending implementation of a new ERP, staff will prepare to move treasury
records and activities to the new system.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 48
The Treasurer’s budget unique in that the expenses equal the revenue earned which produces a zero net
county cost. If funding is not provided for expenses, then revenue suffers by the same amount that
expenses are reduces by. Please refer to Government Code §27013.
There is no other existing management level position in this budget unit to oversee or act in the absence
of the department head. The Board of Supervisors has elected not to replace or provide a second
management position for the Treasurer since 2004. The Treasurer, Tax Collector and Public Administrator
budget units operate as a combined office and are operated exclusively by the elected Treasurer?Tax
Collector.

Collect all monies as is available for collection, but will be dependent upon the resources provided
by the Board of Supervisors to accomplish this.
? Perform the most important activities charged to the tax collector and as much of the remainder
of the work as able to considering the current staff level of 2 FTEs.
? Provide exemplary and cordial service with accountability to our residents.
? Tax Collector is committed to execute the duties of the tax collector that can be performed (based
on staffing levels) as per the laws of the State of California.

The Tax Collector collects and maintains records for the largest portion of the County’s revenue with
minimal staffing. In FY 2012?13 the staffing level was reduced to one (1) clerical person and one (1) line
supervisor compared to 2004 when the budget unit operated with one (1) manager, one (1) line
supervisor and three (3) clerical staff. Current staffing levels date back to earlier than 1983, creating a
backlog of tasks to be completed. A .5FTE accounting technician has been approved for FY2013?14.

Completion of Assessment Roll – Compute the assessment roll by June 30, 2014, which includes
completion of basic workload that is driven by changes in ownership, completion of new
construction, the processing of business & agricultural property statements along with the special
assessments and the annual computation of the Land Conservation Act values.
? Proposition 8 Reviews – Continue to review all real property sales in the last decade to determine
those properties that are eligible for Proposition 8 (decline in value) reduction or increase in
assessment.
? GIS Maps – Continue to review, verify and correct GIS Assessor Parcel Maps to eventually replace
the current Assessor Parcel Maps in order to process assessment information geographically
increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the Assessor’s Office and improving customer service
to the taxpayers of San Benito County.
? Assessor’s Website – Continue to update the Assessor’s website to include more information
about the assessment of property in San Benito County and the most frequently used and
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 54
requested forms. Establish and continue to maintain the Assessor’s on?line filing of business
property statements.

The Assessor’s Office has a tremendous workload at this time due to the economic turmoil in the real
estate market. Annually, the office works on over 8000 Prop 8 property re?assessments, 2500 change in
ownership & new construction valuations and has experienced a high volume in taxpayer inquiries –
phone calls, emails and office visits. With the current reduced staffing levels staff is experiencing an
overwhelming and difficult task to complete the Assessor’s duties.
There was a substantial increase in the Megabyte computer system maintenance/support contract for
FY2012?13 which affected San Benito County as well as the other twenty?one (21) Megabyte counties.
Megabyte Systems, Inc. indicated the need to increase the maintenance charge was strictly a result of
increased client requests for an enhanced level of maintenance services. Megabyte also added additional
features and levels of service to the maintenance contract that were not previously included. As a result of
these changes, a portion of the cost increase was allocated to the Tax Collector and Auditor for prior and
current years.
Due to the extreme economic budget crisis in the county, the Assessor’s Office was forced to reduce
overall costs to assist in eliminating the large county deficit for FY2012?13. As a result five (5) FTE
positions were eliminated in FY2012?13. This 33% reduction in staff is comparable to 1968 staffing levels
and has impacted the positive appraisal momentum, resulting in a potential loss of county revenue which
will be felt in the upcoming years. In general, the Assessor’s staff has begun to fall behind in property
assessments, reduction of backlogs, and processing escape assessments.
It should also be mentioned that the California Assessors’ Association is continuing to work on legislation
to restore the Property Tax Administration Program (PTAP) which was highly successful from 1995 to
2004. This grant program would provide each county with funds to be used in the administration of the
Assessor’s Office to help with generating revenues. If the legislation came to fruition, the San Benito
County Assessor’s Office would receive a minimum of $100,000 annually for an extended period of time.
This potential revenue has not been included in the current year revenues, as it is an unknown at this
point in time.

Assess current Memorandums of Understanding, contracts and personnel policies as related to
current health care reform and attain a 25% overall cost savings.
? Administer the County Human Resources Division in compliance with the Fair Labor Standards,
personnel rules and regulations, while retaining and balancing position control, recruitment and
maintenance of personnel files for the county organization.
? Administer the County Purchasing Division to support the county organization in compliance with
the Purchasing Ordinance and interpretation of the Purchasing and Contracting Manual, to
provide guidance with the procurement of goods and services, contracting, the competitive bid
procedures and the public contract code.
? Administer service contracts for Communications, Fire, Animal Control, Information Technology,
and GIS.
? Prepare the County Annual Impact Fee Report.
? Explore and analyze alternatives for cost control and/or reduce costs in personnel resources and
goods and services for county departments and the county organization.

The CAO is analyzing the pros and cons of a re?organization of this budget unit in conjunction with other
county administrative units. With the impending implementation of an ERP, staff is anticipating a more
streamlined work flow for position control, purchasing, contract management, data repository and
document management. The possibility exists for this budget unit to develop into a type of “general
services” function, thus providing efficiencies and cost?savings administratively.

Risk Internal Service Fund has been created as an accounting process to capture workers compensation
and general liability costs currently being managed by the Trindel Insurance Fund. It is management’s
intention that these costs be properly charged to all departments, as part of the direct charges and cost
plan charges. There will be no FTEs charged to this budget unit however staff time may be captured as it
applies to the management and implementation of described programs.

Upgrade financial system ? Workflow automation /collaboration tools
? Install a Voice over IP system for the County's new building and possibly integrate throughout the
County
? Establish Regional partnerships
? Sustain IT Capital Investments

Manage and coordinate the GIS Enterprise consisting of the GIS Steering Committee, GIS Technical
Committee and GIS Addressing Committee.
? Maintain and update the base map and map layers for the Countywide GIS System.

Maintain and update a Centralized Addressing Data Base for the County.
? Assist and train partnering agencies and departments in the capabilities of the program.

Due to an improving economy and slightly better consumer confidence, increases in revenue are expected
in the areas of property taxes, sales taxes, franchise fees and interest by approximately 8% overall. The
County is expecting re?instatement of Welfare Recoupment through Child Support Services in the amount
of $50,000. A transfer from HHSA in the amount of $1.6 million will satisfy some of the prior years’
overpayments of the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) by the General Fund. This amount will be used to
balance the FY 2013?14 Budget.

The FY 2013?14 Recommended Capital Budget includes one (1) road equipment purchase, six (6)
information technology projects, and fifteen (15) facility improvement projects. The Recommended
Capital Outlay Fund totals $7,374,982 and includes $170,000 for equipment purchases, $671,700 for
technology purchases and $6,533,282 for new facilities, facility improvements, environmental,
programming and/or design.

Program staff proposes to provide direct services to at least 500 new victims and make at least 500
continuing contacts with these victims during FY 2013?14. The majority of contacts are made at the center
or by telephone; however, field visits will be conducted when deemed necessary and appropriate by staff.
Priority of services will be given to clients based on a client’s trauma?response needs, and the capabilities
of that client. The center’s goal is to provide a comprehensive range of services to meet the needs of
crime victims in this county. This will require on?going cooperation and coordination with law
enforcement and other agencies.

Administer the contract with SCR911 to provide 911 Communication services that include
providing dispatching services, personnel, equipment and facilities.
• Insure the County’s Alternate PSAP, equipment and radios are maintained and are ready for
service to provide a direct link to the SCR911 Center.
• Administer contracts for phones, technology, radio infrastructure, radio maintenance, repeater
site lease agreements and other maintenance issues in regards to the County’s Alternate PSAP.
• Administer contract agreements with City of Hollister, City of San Juan and the County Emergency
Medical Services Agency for contracted communication and radio infrastructure services that the
County provides.

? Meet all training requirements as mandated by the Board of Corrections.
? Maintain officer and inmate safety despite an increasingly violent and highly sophisticated inmate
population and minimal staff.
? Continue to seek educational and vocational courses for the benefit of the inmates.

? Provide additional training to Operational Area stakeholders.
? Coordinate/participate in EOC tabletop exercise.
? Apply for grant funding made available to the county.
? Complete and receive FEMA approval of the Multi?Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan.
? Assist departments with development of Standardized Operational Procedures (SOP’s) as they
pertain to Emergency Mitigation, Planning, Response and Recovery efforts.
? Continue to develop a volunteer base of community members to actively participate in Citizen
Emergency Response Team (CERT) and Radio Auxiliary Communication Emergency Service (RACES)
programs.
? Complete the countywide radio network infrastructure’s Narrow Band Project.

? Reduce illegal activities of targeted offenders.
? Conduct criminal investigations leading to the identification, arrest, and prosecution of street level
drug dealers.
? Disrupt drug manufacturing activities by dismantling drug labs and seizing assets, weapons, and
other controlled substances.
Implement Thinking for a Change to all clients which is a nationwide evidence?based program, the
objective being to get the offenders to make better choices to become a successful citizen.
? Implement a guideline sentencing Matrix, which is a tool used for the adult offenders in
appropriately making recommendations to the Court, based on their risk assessments. Matrix will
assist staff to become more consistent by using rewards and behavior modifications.
? Implement a pre?trial release program which staff recently created as a tool for the San Benito
County Jail to screen adult offenders for pre?trial release. The objective is to provide a report to
the Court for medium and low risk offenders, who would then be placed on electronic monitoring
in the community, thus improving community safety by incarcerating high risk offenders and
releasing the lower risk offenders.

Implement Thinking for a Change to all minors in the Juvenile Hall, which is a nationwide
evidence?based program, the objective is to teach the minors to make better choices to become
successful citizens.
? Enhance the existing Lifeskills Program to the minors in the Juvenile Hall by presenting outside
speakers with expertise in areas such as skills to pay the bills, thus helping to prevent recidivism
and give the minors the skills to successfully transition into adulthood.
? Collaborate with local schools in an effort to introduce the Gang Resistance Education and
Training (G.R.E.A.T.) Program to the community, which is an evidence?based and effective gang
and violence prevention program, built around school?based, law enforcement officer?instructed
classroom curricula. G.R.E.A.T. is intended as an immunization against delinquency, youth
violence, and gang membership for children in the years immediately before the prime ages for
introduction into gangs and delinquent behavior.
? Maintenance items include installation of a new bathtub in the intake bathroom; scrape, clean
and paint shower doors and professionally clean all carpeting.

Address youth violence and gang activity through prevention, intervention and
suppression activities.
? Cultivate additional resources for prevention, intervention, and suppression activities.

Ensure that both agricultural and residential pesticide use is conducted in a safe and effective
manner.
? Maintain close oversight of weighing and measuring devices used in trade to ensure consumer
protection.
? Prevent the introduction and establishment of exotic harmful pests.
? Continue focus on phyto?santiary certification services that facilitate trade of agricultural products
with other states and countries.

Quickly identify and treat abandoned “green” swimming pools before they become a public
nuisance.
? Continue to be proactive instead of reactive in regards to locating and treating areas favorable for
mosquito generation.
? Continue public education and outreach by participating in community events such as the County
Fair, Farmer’s Markets and other activities where the public can be reached.
? Continue to develop more efficient control techniques.

24?Hour Emergency Services for injured, vicious or stray animals creating a traffic hazard.
? Sheltering for stray, abandoned and injured animals.
? Stray Animal After?Hours Drop Kennels provides for a stray animal drop off after normal business
hours, to safely house stray animals.
? Field Services respond to reports of stray domestic animals, animal cruelty complaints, biting
animals, aggressive animals, and dead animals in roadways, rabies control, and code enforcement
complaints, such as barking dogs.
? Adoption Services offered for dogs, puppies, cats and kittens.
? Enforcement of state and local laws regarding animals and administrative citations, licensing,
suppression of rabies, vaccinations, and quarantines.

Achieve a collaborative and acceptable standard of response to incidents occurring throughout
the County for the deployment of fire suppression operations, emergency medical operations and
special operations to the public.
? Maintain personnel and fire stations which are essential to meet the current county needs.

Streamline procedures and documentation to allow for more efficient work flow and maximize the
database management system. This will include an ongoing scanning of birth, death and marriage
records into digital format to meet current system configuration requirements. This project will
occur over several years and will eventually eliminate manual handling of public records. Digital
archive and database retrieval is the end goal for all the historical records in the Clerk/Recorders
office.
? With the goal of documenting of every procedure and service that is performed by the County
Clerk, the department has initiated a central database repository. The institutional knowledge
database will aide employees in providing greater customer service and will provide a resource for
orderly succession of staff. This resource will be used for training and testing new employees.
? Timely and professional customer service with continued dedication to the community of San
Benito County is our continued goal.
? Continue the ongoing cross training of employees to ensure continuous customer service for the
Clerk, Recorder and Elections Departments.

Complete Phase 1 and 2 of the official record book restoration project. The first two (2) phases of
this project are to restore records and historically preserve the official transcribed land transaction
from both Monterey and Fresno County from the 1850’s to 1873. These records will be restored,
microfilmed, digitally scanned, encapsulated and re?bound for public access today and for future
generations. This restoration project will continue for several years until it is complete with the
funding specifically allocated for the maintenance and restoration per state statute.
? Continue the ongoing Map Digitalization Project. This project is being collaborated with both GIS
and Public Works to provide recorded parcel and subdivision maps electronically via an enhanced
GIS parcel map layer shape file. The overall goal is to have the recorded maps and official records
connected to specific parcels of land to view the historical land transactions.

With the goal of documenting of every procedure and service that is performed by the County
Recorder, the Department has initiated a central database repository. The institutional knowledge
database will aide employees in providing greater customer service and will provide a resource for
orderly succession of staff. This resource will used for training and testing new employees.
? Increase staff to allow for the increase in office hours to the support the public counter and Hall of
Records.

The department has requested to be relocated and consolidated into one central location that allows the
public records to be accessible to all citizens. If this request is approved the department’s goal is to
consolidate all public historical records into one location, reduce risk, improve public access to meet ADA
accessibility requirements and provide complete access of the “people’s records” to the all residents of
San Benito County. Final approval for this relocation is pending.

Provide quality services consistent with available resources.
? Manage estates prudently with care and good judgment.
Comply with existing local, state and federal laws as a guide for the fulfillment of responsibilities
for managing decedents’ estates.
? Eliminate any possibility of conflict of interest or appearance thereof.

The Public Administrator has no control as to the number of cases that will be referred to the department.
Every estate case is different. Some require a minimal amount of time and effort to process, while others
may take a couple of years to complete the final distribution. Time and effort expended in each case is
dependent upon the type and quantity of assets administered.

Economic development & job creation through the development of commercial, industrial,
recreational, and tourist/hospitality projects along with a wide variety of housing types.
? Streamline permitting processes, review fees and fee structure for recommendations to the Board
of Supervisors.
? Increase revenues where feasible and attempt to recover the cost of services from applicants for
entitlements and permits.
? Employ the Development Agreement process to establish the fiscally neutral master planned
communities, provide for needed infrastructure and encourage well planned parks and affordable
housing.
? Monitor and participate in State and Federal programs that effect local land use, such as SB375,
Climate Action Plans, Foothills Legacy Area and others.
? Review the potential for steps leading to the implementation of an HCP program and appropriate
uses of the HCP Impact fees collected to date.
? Clarify and implement the Transfer of Development Credit program to preserve agricultural
resources and encourage development in appropriate locations.
? Complete new oil well ordinance, groundwater ordinance, General Plan Update reimbursement
ordinance, and other necessary revisions as staffing allows.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 128

The ability to produce revenues for the County will be largely dependent upon the ability to efficiently
process land development projects and other land use applications. The Department needs to maintain
the current staff of competent planners in order to lead these projects through the long and complicated
entitlement process. Planners’ knowledge of CEQA, the Subdivision Map Act, Federal and State regulatory
permitting and numerous other processes are critical to the ongoing fiscal success of San Benito County.
Any further reductions of planning staff will delay and inhibit the County’s ability to move projects of
economic significance through the necessary entitlement steps to allow implementation of these projects.
In order to have projects online for construction in 2015, entitlement efforts will need to begin this fiscal
year. It is imperative to maintain the ability to efficiently process this anticipated workload.
In addition to current applications and projects, Planning is also focusing on long range, revenue
generating projects that do not necessarily result in significant building permit income but rather in
commercial projects, tourism and other “revenue capturing” projects. The Planning Division continues to
be active which typically generates revenue in the Building Division.

Prevent the physical and aesthetic deterioration of the community.
? Assist homeowners in maintaining property values by reducing blight.
? Continue to tag and tow junk/inoperable/abandoned vehicles from right?of?way and private
properties.

Expend existing County and City HOME housing grant funds by originating new First?Time
Homebuyer Down Payment Assistance second loans.
? Continue to apply for new housing grant funds through upcoming Notice of Funding Availability’s
(NOFA’s) and facilitate community workshops.

The Housing Coordinator position has been funded by the County’s Inclusionary Housing Fund for the past
five (5) years. There will be approximately $16,000 in unused funds available to be applied towards salary
and benefits for FY 2013?14; however, that amount is insufficient to finance this position for the entire
year.
The Housing Programs Coordinator has proposed to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with the County Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA) and County Community Services Workforce
Development (CSWD) to operate a new Financial Literacy Program which would generate up to $25,000 in
new revenue for FY 2013?14. Sixty percent (60.0%) or $15,000 would be funded by CSWD Community
Service Block Grant (CSBG) grant funds and forty percent (40.0%) or $10,000 would be funded directly by
the HHSA by for a total of $25,000. The MOU is proposed to be finalized the end of FY2012?13. Even with
this additional revenue, the position would not be fully funded.
Revision of the existing Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the City of Hollister and the
County, in which the Housing Coordinator provides services to the City of Hollister, additional revenue of
approximately $40,000 will be generated if approved in FY 2013?14.

Promote safe and pleasant conditions for residents, pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists on
neighborhood streets.
? Improve San Benito County arterial/collector roadway system.
? Provide financial management, contract monitoring, technical assistance and administrative
support.
? Interact with Federal and State agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and California Department of Transportation.

Grade roadway shoulders throughout the county.
? Repair culverts and replace deteriorated ones as needed.
? Repair and patch potholes on all county roadways.

The department is working with Human Resources to establish criteria that will modify both Road
Maintenance Worker and Heavy Equipment Mechanic Job Specifications. If successful, both classifications
will become flexible class positions, providing Road Maintenance Workers and Heavy Equipment
Mechanics an incentive to personally obtain equipment operation certifications, which will benefit the
Road Division by providing flexibility with staff operating equipment. This process requires meet and
confer with union representatives. Approval of the FY 13?14 budget does not approve the proposed job
specification modifications.

The Fixed Assets for this Budget Unit are Capital Road and Bridge Improvement Projects presented as a
separate document. The budget requested is based on project schedules and the necessity to have
funding available for the design and/or construction contract awards. Therefore, portions of the FY 2013?
14 recommended budgets may be re?budgeted in FY 2014?15 to complete design or construction efforts.
The FY 2013?14 recommended project budget appropriations total $44,652,937 and include an estimated
$43,297,397 in re?budgets from FY 2012?13.

Continue to communicate with CSA representatives to discuss services and encourage dialogue
with property owners.
? Coordinate with LAFCO to establish additional services for the following CSA’s:
1. Santa Rosa Acres (CSA 4)
2. Hillcrest/El Toro (CSA 5)
3. Bonnie View(CSA 8)
4. Ridgemark (CSA 9)
5. Barnes Lane(CSA 11)
? Maintain maintenance schedules for identified CSA services and update property owners as
needed when schedules require change.
? Coordinate with property owners in the remaining four (4) CSAs that do not currently have a
property?related fee to either de?activate the CSA or hold Prop 218 elections and establish
services and fees.

Complete Council of Governments work associated with the transfer of the Highway 25 existing
route and Bypass.
? Continue work on the update of the Regional Transportation Plan.
? Seek state and federal funding through grants and apportionments for priority projects in the San
Benito region.
? Work with cities and County on documenting Complete Streets needs assessment to incorporate
into the Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments Sustainable Communities Strategy to
better integrate land use and transportation planning.
? Increase the visibility of the Council of Governments as a collaborative, responsive agency focused
on project delivery and meeting the needs of the region.
? Plan and develop projects of the Airport Land Use Commission.
? Review proposed development projects within the San Benito County region.
? Collaborate with public and private partners on commodity movement issues.

Increase service delivery capacity and the administrative support systems to support the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) program expansions. The division is experienced in capturing MediCal
revenue reimbursement through the Mental Health Services Programs but staff must be
successful at capturing needed MediCal revenue to help support the need for expanded service
capacity.
? Integrate Behavioral Health Services with Physical Health Primary Care Providers through
placement of a Behavioral Health service provider at the San Benito Health Foundation.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 152
? Promote the importance of early identification and engagement in treatment for mental illness.
Bringing the issues of mental illness out of the shadows and putting the importance of mental
health care on par with other illnesses challenges the Behavioral Health Department to continue
to expand and improve programs.
? Continue public education efforts to eliminate the stigma often associated with mental illness and
the need to seek treatment and to educate the public that mentally ill individuals are more often
victims of violent crime rather than perpetrators.
? Continue the objective of sustaining core service programs in the face of increasing caseload
growth and to remain vigilant in capitalizing on opportunities to expand services whenever fiscally
feasible.

The Behavioral Health Department’s Mental Health Services can realize a new expanded revenue stream
resulting from the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The ACA includes the lowering of the eligibility requirements
for access to MediCal, thereby enlarging the pool of MediCal beneficiaries. The Affordable Care Act
includes incentives to integrate services. In anticipation of the healthcare reforms it is the division’s goal
to continue to expand efforts and abilities to capture revenue reimbursement to sustain such service
expansions.
Staff has received positive news that based on recent state tax collection information that, the division will
benefit from a recent spike in state tax revenues. Individuals, fearful that the effects of the recent fiscal
cliff situation if unresolved would result in higher capital gains tax rates, rushed to liquidate investments in
the last quarter of tax year 2012 as a strategy to avoid being subjected to an anticipated higher capital
gains tax rate in 2013. The liquidation of those investments were still subjected to 2012 capital gains tax
resulting in a spike of state fourth quarter tax collections. The Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) from
which the division receives its largest portion of revenue benefits is derived from a 1% tax levied on
personal income in excess of one million dollars per year. Many of the individuals in this income bracket
participated in the 2012, fourth quarter investment and securities selling spike generating an increased
collection of tax revenues for the state. Additionally the passage of Proposition 30 resulted in significant
increased estimated tax payments in January 2013. Staff has reviewed figures released on the higher than
previously estimated FY 2013?14 MHSA funding availability state totals, but this has not yet been
translated to what this amounts to at the local level.
Another major source of mental health revenue is derived through realignment sales tax funds. Minor
growth is expected in realignment funding as it is based on the performance of consumer spending.

Increase service delivery capacity and the administrative support systems to support the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) program expansions. The division is experienced in capturing MediCal
revenue reimbursement through the Mental Health Services Programs but staff must be
successful at capturing needed MediCal revenue to help support the need for expanded service
capacity.
We will be challenged to:
? Sustain some of the innovative services such as the Residential Sober Living Environment and
Substance Abuse Peer Mentors that the AB109 Grant Project was designed to serve as the grant
sunsets.
? Maintain and sustain core service programs in the face of increasing service demands and to
remain vigilant in capitalizing on opportunities to expand services whenever fiscally feasible.

Support the most basic and legally mandated public health services, including disease control,
environmental health, emergency medical, health education, and maternal and child health,
among others.
? Test public health emergency response systems by conducting an exercise with critical partners.
? Support health and injury prevention efforts such as Kids at the Park and Car Seat Check Up
events.

Health realignment is the primary revenue source for the mandated services presented above as well as
other mandated health budget units. Health realignment revenues continue to be unstable. Public Health
has been able to sustain its staff and programs the last two years; however if the funds do not continue to
grow with the cost of doing business, staff will have to revise this budget. The elimination of Healthy
Families and the Federal Affordable Care Act Prevention funding may impact future budgeting.

Provide a CDC/CDE approved peer?to?peer prevention curriculum for 6th?8th graders which
includes tobacco education by providing a tobacco education training program for peer educators
and teachers, a minimum of six (6) middle (K?8th and 6th?8th grades) schools, including one
alternative school.
? Attain 100% of San Benito County (including Hollister) licensed family day care homes will be in
full compliance with the state law (Health & Safety Code 1596.795) requiring smoke?free indoor
areas during hours of operation; and in addition attain 100% participation of these homes in
adopting voluntary policy requiring smoke?free indoor environments 24 hours a day.
? Increase current membership in the San Benito County Tobacco Education Coalition to adequately
reflect non?traditional partners and/or ethnically/racially diverse groups in San Benito County.
? Renew Tobacco Education Grant for another three year consecutive term.

Provide outreach presentations to various child?serving organizations to encourage participation
in Medi?Cal, Healthy Families, and CHDP programs and refer eligible children to CHDP providers.
? Provide public health nurse case management services for children in the County’s foster care and
probation systems.
? Reconcile CHDP data base to Medi?Cal data base and Improve tracking method of CHDP rating
assessment forms.

Continue to participate on the County and City Design Review Committees as well as with the
Economic Development Corporation.
? Maintain new electronic reporting requirements under AB 2286 for hazardous materials reporting
and research feasibility of extending to other environmental health areas.
? Investigate the feasibility of obtaining grant money to support one FTE position (EHS Technician)
to assist current staff in accomplishing hazardous materials programmatic assignments, and to
specifically assist in the initial conversion and long?term maintenance of electronic hazardous
generator reporting systems to facilitate mandated reporting by the regulated community.
? Implement recently adopted fee schedule.

The revised fee schedule will not fully sustain Environmental Health. Health realignment funds will be
needed to balance this budget. The department is currently understaffed by 1.0 FTE (Environmental
Health Specialist). It is recommended that if the economy continues to grow, an additional Environmental
Health Specialist be added to the authorized positions for this budget unit. A request for a temporary
Environmental Health Specialist may be necessary during the high peak event season.

Provide case management services to AFLP clients.
? Increase public partner participation in both the Healthy Mothers Healthy Babies and Child Injury
Prevention Coalitions.
? Support AFLP teens in graduating from high school, direct them to resources for furthering their
education, help develop effective parenting skills in teen parents, and increase the numbers of
male teen fathers who are enrolled in AFLP.

Provide case management services to MCAH clients.
? Increase public partner participation in both the Healthy Mothers Healthy Babies and Child Injury
Prevention Coalitions.
? Support teens enrolled in the AFLP component to meet high school graduation requirements,
direct them to resources for furthering their education, help develop effective parenting skills in
teen parents, and increase the numbers of male teen fathers who are enrolled in AFLP.

MCAH receives an allocation that has not been increased in several years. These funds are matched by
health realignment funds. The funds are matched by federal and state dollars at specific percentages
depending on the activities performed. Because health realignments funds have been unstable; it is
possible that staff could have to revisit these budgets in the upcoming year.

Implement areas of the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS)/Cities Readiness Initiative (CRI) plan by
conducting drills and exercises including mass vaccination clinics as needed and coordinating the
planning and implementation of the 2012 Statewide Medical & Health Exercise with agencies that
are part of the county operational area.
? Coordinate with CA Department of Public Health (CDPH) in relocating County’s allocation of
medical surge assets from CDPH facility to local jurisdiction.
? Coordinate with volunteer agencies to identify adequate volunteer staffing for Points of
Dispensation (PODs) for vaccines and other pharmaceuticals. This may be conducted through
Disaster Healthcare Volunteers (DHV) and the use of the California Health Alert Network System
(CAHAN) with participating agencies i.e., local hospital, clinics and skilled nursing facilities.
? Coordinate with local hospital, clinic partners, and local Emergency Services Agency to establish
disaster/emergency response procedures, ensuring availability of resources in the event of a
medical surge during a countywide disaster or emergency.

Accept referrals and conduct eligibility determination for potential CCS client’s access.
? Develop protocols and procedures for high risk CCS clients requiring medical follow?up.
? Minimize back log of clients from the time of application to the CCS program to the time of
receiving services

CCS is a state?mandated program placing the burden on counties to provide mandated services that may
not be fully?funded. Realignment revenues support the required local match for this program and could
be insufficient to support the program with one or several unanticipated high?cost medical cases.

Revise and update the Emergency Medical Services Plan.
? Review the Hazel Hawkins Base Hospital Contract for to assure compliance as well assess the need
for revision.
? Review the Ambulance Service Agreement for Emergency Ambulance Services to assure
compliance and determine need for revision as part of the contract extension.
? Revise the EMS website and move it to the county server as well as create a smart phone
application for EMS field personnel to access policies and procedures.
? Establish partners to provide EMT and/or Emergency Medical Responder certification and
refresher courses within San Benito County.

The overall budget has been greatly decreased from years past, due to a recommended change in
processes regarding the Maddy Fund distributions. Beginning next fiscal year the Maddy Funds distributed
to the Physicians and the Hospital and the reimbursements made from the Richie Fund will be paid
directly from the those trusts. Therefore, those expenses are not recognized in the budget for FY 2013?14.
In addition, the Benefit Assessment Units that determine collections from the CSA have been reduced in
numbers. This is primarily due to the loss of business in San Benito County. By using CSA and Maddy EMS
Trust fund balances, staff was able to keep the CSA at the same rate as last year. It is staff’s intention to
keep the CSA at the lowest possible rate for the taxpayers in San Benito County.

Complete revised Environmental Impact Report and bring completed project forward for Board of
Supervisors consideration regarding the proposed Resource Recovery Park.
? Pending approval of the Resource Recovery Park, solicit businesses for same.
? Transition to new Landfill Operating Contract.

Use Food Waste Pilot data to broaden outreach to initiate food scrap diversion programs.
? Initiation of Community Garden Project /Composting (yard and food waste) project: interdisciplinary
partners through illegal dumping abatement, homeless job skill, youth activity, and surplus food
supply for Food Bank.
? Continue Community Outreach (both residential and commercial) on Economic and Environmental
Benefits/ Sustainability of Source Reduction, Reuse and Recycling.

The Integrated Waste Management Regional Agency serves the Cities of Hollister, San Juan Bautista and
the unincorporated areas of San Benito County. This budget is based on full cost reimbursement for the
member jurisdictions. Grant funding (Oil Payment Grants and Division of Recycling Grants) are subject to
Legislative reduction; therefore affected program activities will be metered to match available funds.

Implement re?designed Cal WORK’s program changes.
? Implement expanded MediCal/CMSP caseloads with shift of Health Families to Medi
Cal and expansion of Path2Health CMSP program.
? Implement extended Foster Care program for youth ages 18 ?21.
? Comply with federal/state application processing times for public assistance programs.
? Comply with state and federal requirements in the areas of safety, permanency and child/family
well?being regarding child welfare services.

The Health Care Reform Act and the elimination of Healthy Families will substantially increase the volume
of caseloads. It is unknown at this time the amount of cases; however, the counties that are transitioning
from Healthy Families to MediCal are finding that the numbers of cases are dramatically higher than the
original estimates. The eligibility staff is being increased; however, the training for these positions will
take six months to a year before new staff members can carry a full caseload.
The funding for child welfare staffing and related overhead costs, as well as Foster Care Assistance (BU
514) and Child Welfare Services (BU 515), are dependent upon the 2011 realignment, which is based on
sales and vehicle licenses taxes. Currently there is only eighteen (18) months of data to predict whether
or not Realignment 2011 will sustain the mandated costs. The budgets will be monitored closely.

Provide cash grant assistance for eligible families.
? Continue to implement programmatic changes as follows:
o CalWORKs division into three (3) sub?programs providing enhanced services in the first
twenty?four (24) months on aid.
o Implement the revised Welfare?To?Work program requirements.

The Welfare?To?Work program changes will require additional staff time to monitor. Currently the
CalWORKS unit is understaffed and a redesign of the program is being implemented. The continued years
of understaffing created a backlog in the area of reconciling state reporting systems with client
verifications, which could eventually result in costly fines. No additional funds are provided for this
transition.

Place children in a foster care setting that best meets their needs and is the least disruptive to
their lives.
? Strive for foster children’s placement in NRFEM settings.
? Collaborate with Behavioral Health, Probation, and other agencies on the CICC, especially with
cases where a high level of care facility is being considered as placement.
? Recruit additional foster care homes and increase efforts to notify relatives (family finding) as this
increases familial support and placement options.

At time of publication, the Agency does not have any children in high?level care facilities; however,
Probation does have three (3) Probation youth in said facilities. At this writing, there are five (5) at risk
youth that potentially could require a higher level of care. Any increase in placements in high level of care
facilities could significantly increase projected costs in this budget unit. The average monthly cost in a
Level 12 facility is approximately $8,067, or $96,804 per year per youth.
Foster care assistance funding is incorporated into the 2011 Realignment. There is only 18 months of data,
which limits the ability to project average yearly revenue. This budget will be monitored closely.
The 2012 implementation of AB 12, Extended Foster Care in for youth ages 18 to 21 that were in the child
welfare system at age 18 impacts this budget unit. We have factored foster care costs for 4?5 youth per
year.

Provide substance abuse services in collaboration with Behavioral Health Department.
? Provide counseling services to child welfare families by contracting with several local providers.
? Provide drug testing and expand random drug testing by contracting with a private provider.
? Make aforementioned services accessible by providing transportation, if needed.

The Department was understaffed by three social workers during FY 2012?13. These positions will be
filled by the FY 2013?14 budget hearings; however, there will be a delay in assigning them full caseloads
due to the training process.

Continue to assist Cal Work’s clients by providing case management plans which outline goals and
milestones leading to employment.
? Provide clients with assistance in needed education, vocational training, childcare and
transportation to enhance the clients’ marketability in the workforce.
? Continue with the sub?programs Cal Works Basic, Cal Works Plus, and Child Maintenance which
provide for extra incentives for families meeting Work Participation Rates (WPR).

Continue offering IHSS provider services to eligible recipients.
? Continue with mandated criminal background checks and fraud prevention trainings for new and
current provider.
? Continue with First Aid/CPR and other homecare provider trainings as appropriate.
? Continue enrolling new providers in the Registry.

In FY 2012?13, the state established a Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for all counties. The county MOE is the
sum of FY 2011?12 county expenditures for IHSS County Administration, Public Authority Administration,
and provider costs, less the amount of the Community First Choice Option (CFCO) refund. Any negotiated
wage and benefit increases would be paid entirely by County realignment funding.

Provide exceptional customer service that is efficient, effective and responsive to the needs of
customers.
? Provide quality safety?net services that include one?time rental assistance and utility, shelter, and
food assistance for low?income residents.
? Provide workforce development services to displaced workers and low?income community
members.

Provide safe and affordable housing for at least sixty?seven (67) migrant families during the farm
seasonal months of May through November.
? Facilitate three to five tenant council meetings for families, with presentations by various
organizations offering services that are of benefit to these families.
? Secure additional resources for resident families to meet their economic, health and well?being
needs

This budget has been built based on staff’s funding request to State Office of Migrant Services (OMS).
Talks are continuing that OMS funding may be decreased by the final state budget. If the state reduces
the funding for this program, staff will revise budget as needed.
There is a pending long?time employee retirement expected this fiscal year, which could have a significant
pay?out. Due to the nature of the funding for this program, the cost may have to be absorbed by the
General Fund.

Explore and coordinate with the CAO office space that is more compatible and accessible to the
local Veteran population within a county building, possibly in conjunction with the new
courthouse transition.
? Extend outreach programs.

Partner with local agencies (County Library, YMCA and Chamberlains Children’s Center) to deliver
the TechXcite Engineering program for middle school aged youth. In partnership with UC and
Duke University, agencies will receive free curriculum materials and education to deliver this
program at their facilities.
? Continue to develop and enhance the 4?H community club program to develop citizenship,
leadership and life skills in a positive youth development environment for youth ages 7 to 19 and
their adult volunteers.
? Continue to provide research extension and creative activity to address the agricultural needs of
San Benito County in the areas of agriculture, livestock and education.
Recommended Budget FY 2013?2014 Page 224

San Benito County is being considered for a new UC Faculty/Advisor position in Natural Resources, as well
as a staff position to address nutrition education. However, UC is reluctant to dedicate additional
resources to San Benito County due to the lack of funding provided to manage the current operations. If
the County contribution to this budget unit does not increase, UC will not allocate any further positions to
the County as these positions cannot be adequately supported under the current budget allocations.