The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $4.4
million for the Academy is $0.4 million, or 10.1 percent,
higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $4.0 million. A
significant amount of this increase is due to increases in
salary and fringe benefits costs, as well as and additional
funding allocated to the Academy for capital renewal and
facilities maintenance. The FY 2013-14 budget represents
60 percent of the direct expenditures for the Steinhart
Aquarium, which total $6.7 million. Consistent with prior
years, the Academy will fund this difference through a
draw on the organization’s endowment.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $4.3 million for the
Academy is $0.2 million, or 3.7 percent, less than the FY
2013-14 budget of $4.4 million. A significant portion of
this decrease is due to the expiration of the FY 2012-13
and FY 2013-14 capital planning contributions to facilities
maintenance.
Contributing to San Francisco’s Economy
In FY 2011-12, the Academy attracted 1.3 million visitors,
148,000 special events attendees, and over 700 volunteers.
Seventy-three percent of these visitors and volunteers are
estimated to be non-San Francisco residents, generating
incremental tourism spending and impacts to the City.
Excluding any economic activity generated by San
Francisco residents, the economic benefits of the Academy
to San Francisco are estimated to total $122.3 million.
The Academy’s presence is estimated to have created 922
additional jobs in the City, primarily in the food and
beverage, retail, and hotel sectors; this figure is exclusive
of the 415 San Francisco-based Academy employees. The
Academy remains dedicated to playing its part in San
Francisco’s vital tourism sector.
Promoting Science Literacy
The Academy strives to be a global leader in enhancing
science literacy about nature, life, and sustainability for
people of all ages. To this end, the Academy works to
offer highly creative and effective programs that amplify

the guest experience, engage youth with science in a
personal and direct way, and inspire students to take up
careers in science. The Academy hosts over 44,000 San
Francisco school group visitors annually and continues to
provide free access through Quarterly Free Sundays and
Neighborhood Free Days. The Academy provides a variety
of Out-of-School-Time and Digital Learning programs
for middle and high school-aged youth, including paid
internships. Participation in the free Community Access
Ticket Service and the San Francisco Public Library’s free
Family Pass program are also Academy priorities.
Animal Care and Conservation Facility
In order to maintain professional accreditation with the
Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA), the Academy
has begun construction of its $3.0 million Animal Care
and Conservation Facility and is projected to complete
construction in FY 2013-14. Increasing the quality and
quantity of the Steinhart Aquarium’s animal care facilities
allows the Academy to maintain a greater diversity of
species on display, particularly for specimens gathered on
research expeditions. In addition, these improvements
will increase staff efficiency and align workflows by
moving offices closer together. The areas vacated by staff
are being reconfigured to create new holding, husbandry,
and quarantine areas. The end result of this project will
be a 2,000 square foot increase combined with substantial
improvements to the existing 3,500 square feet of animal
care, holding, and quarantine space.

The Airport is one of four Enterprise departments that is
entering the second year of a fixed Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-
13 and 2013-14 budget. The FY 2013-14 adopted budget
of $866.9 million is $23.3 million, or 1.6 percent, higher
than the FY 2012-13 budget of $843.5 million. A significant
amount of this increase is due to the annualization of
positions added in the prior year; proposed new positions;
cost increases for operating the shuttle buses and AirTrain;
a new guest services training program; and aviation
security consulting services. In addition, debt service
expenses are higher as a result of scheduled increases for
previously issued bonds. The Mayor’s Office has introduced
a policy supplemental appropriation to adjust the budget by
$1.6 million to $868.5 million. This supplemental reflects
policy and fiscal changes that were unknown and thus
unbudgeted in the original two-year budget, including the
increase in the Annual Service Payment to the City due to
higher than projected concession revenues. The amended
budget of $868.4 million reflects the policy supplemental
as well as work order cost adjustments and other citywide
technical adjustments.
The Airport does not have a budget for FY 2014-15 because
it is operating on a fixed two-year budget cycle, which will
begin anew next year for FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16.
Supporting Tourism and Trade
The Airport forecasts that enplanements (the number
of passengers boarding a plane) will reach 22.5 million
in FY 2013-14, a 5.4 percent increase from FY 2012-13.
While the Airport has experienced dramatic growth
in domestic traffic over the last several fiscal years, this
growth is expected to moderate over the next few years. For
international service, the Airport has added new seasonal
service from SAS to Copenhagen and additional flights to
Europe and Mexico by current air carriers. By attracting
new and expanding existing airline service, the Airport
supports tourism and international trade, promotes lower
airfares, and improves its competitive position. The Airport
projects that expanding international traffic will be the
source of its long-term growth.

Providing Local Business Opportunities
and Revenue
The Airport’s concession program continues to perform
well, with passenger spending rates that are among the
highest in North America. The concessions include highend
retailers, many restaurants, and vendors that offer a
broad range of services. In 2011, SFO ranked fourth among
the top performing airports for retail, food, and beverage
concessions with an overall spend-per-passenger of $12.21.
In calendar year 2012, Terminal 2 (which opened in 2011
and has many unique concession offerings) had a spending
rate of $14.22 per passenger. The budget for concession
revenues is 8.4 percent higher than FY 2012-13, which will
increase the Airport’s Annual Service Payment to the City’s
General Fund.
In recognition of its continued success in its concession
program, Airport Revenue News (ARN) honored SFO
with four awards: “Airport with the Best Concessions
Management Team;” “Airport with the Best Overall
Concession Program” in the Large Airport category; and
SFO’s Terminal 2 was recognized as the “Airport with the
Most Unique Services” and “Airport with the Best Overall
Concession Program.”
Capital Investment and Job Creation
The Airport’s $4.1 billion Ten-Year Capital Plan will
support the local economy and businesses by investing
in Airport infrastructure. The Airport Capital Plan will
create approximately 36,000 jobs over the 10-year period.
The Plan includes $2.89 billion in investments in terminal
improvements, including the renovation of Boarding Area
B in Terminal 1; $327.4 million on airport support projects,
such as a new air traffic control tower, access control system
upgrades, public safety facilities and equipment, and cargo
and hangar facilities; $699.0 million in spending on the
airfield for runway safety areas and other improvements;
$163.2 million for utility infrastructure; and $102.8 million
on roadways, AirTrain, and parking facilities.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $27.0
million for the Adult Probation Department is $2.0
million, or 8.1 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget
of $25.0 million. A significant amount of this increase
is due to funding for the Public Safety Realignment
initiative implemented on October 1, 2011. In addition,
the FY 2013-14 proposed budget includes funding for the
continued implementation and improvement of evidencebased
supervision to enhance public safety and maximize
offender restitution, reconciliation, and restorative
services to victims of crime. The newly implemented
risk and needs assessment tool and training will allow
the Department to accurately classify an offender’s risk
for recidivism and direct staff and resources toward the
offenders who are more likely to reoffend.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $27.8 million for ADP
is $0.8 million, or 2.8 percent, higher than the FY 2013-
14 budget of $27.0 million. A significant amount of this
increase is due to increases in salary and fringe benefits
costs.
Using Data to Improve Services
The Adult Probation Department is collecting, reporting,
analyzing, and interpreting data to improve the
effectiveness of its supervision and reentry services, as
well as outcomes for clients. The Department produces
management reports on various metrics to assess
performance of the organization, including quality
assurance reports developed through its new case
management system. Over the next two fiscal years, the
Department will continue to expand the evaluation of
reentry services, treatment, and housing as they relate
to the outcomes of ADP clients permanently exiting
the criminal justice system. The Department reports
on reentry services, treatment, and housing referrals
monthly, and will expand these reports to continuously
inform decisions related to current and projected service
level needs.
State Realignment AB109
Assembly Bill (AB) 109 State Public Safety Realignment
was implemented in October 2011 as a State budget
initiative to reduce prison costs by releasing non-serious,
non-violent, non-sex offenders back to their county of
origin while allocating resources directly to the county
responsible for public safety. The Department has
experienced an increase in caseloads from the addition of
the post-release community supervision population. In
response the Department has established a Post-Release
Community Supervision division and a Pre-Release
Team that provides intensive supervision of the postrelease
community supervision population. The Pre-
Release Team is responsible for coordinating the release
of inmates from county jail or State prison to County
Community Supervision, administering a risk needs
assessment, and reviewing special conditions with clients
prior to their release to community supervision in order
to address individual needs and improve outcomes.
Client Supportive Services
In FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15, ADP will continue to work
collaboratively with the Department of Public Health,
the Human Services Agency, and Child Support Services
to provide a seamless continuum of care and support
to clients in order to increase successful outcomes and
to reduce recidivism and victimization. In addition, the
Department’s Community Assessment Center will open
in June 2013 to better coordinate benefits and services for
ADP clients.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $14.0
million for the Arts Commission is $2.5 million, or 21.9
percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $11.5
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to
$2.2 million in one time funding towards capital renewal
and facilities maintenance projects. In addition the Arts
Commission is increasing Cultural Equity grants by $0.2
million.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $12.3 million for the
Arts Commission is $1.8 million, or 12.7 percent, lower
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $14.0 million. A significant
amount of this decrease is due to the expiration of one-time
capital funds.
The proposed budget does not include funding for the
Arts Commission’s largest program—the Public Art
Program—which is funded with capital improvement
project funds, as stipulated by the City’s Art Enrichment
ordinance. These funds are not allocated annually in
the budget process, but rather are transferred to the
Department on a project-by-project basis. Depending on
project size, this funding may span several years.
Data-Driven Decision Making
In FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15, the Arts Commission will
continue to conduct a strategic assessment and planning
process to identify key needs and opportunities within
the San Francisco arts ecology, enable the Department to
better connect information and resources from citywide
initiatives to the arts community, and improve the
City’s responsiveness to community need. The analysis
will result in measurable objectives and goals for the
Department, and will include an implementation plan.
Caring for Capital Assets
The FY 2013-14 and 2014-15 proposed budget includes
capital funding for the Veterans War Memorial
renovation project, as the Department plans to move
into the building in May 2015. The Department
anticipates occupying space in the building on three
floors, with administrative offices on the third floor, a
gallery and public programming space on the first floor,
and basement storage space for the civic art collection.
Additionally, the FY 2013-14 and 2014-15 proposed budget
includes capital maintenance funding for the City’s four
cultural centers as well as funding for critical restoration
and conservation projects.
Civic Art Collection Inventory
The Arts Commission plans to complete a comprehensive
inventory of the City’s civic art collection at the end of
FY 2013-14. The information gathered will allow the
Department to assess the maintenance and conservation
requirements of the collection in order to better anticipate
future capital funding needs and identify revenue sources.
The Arts Commission is also investigating the creation
of a cost-neutral rotating arts loan program for City
departments in order to ensure that a greater portion of
the collection is on display and publicly accessible.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $8.7
million for the Asian Art Museum is $0.4 million, or
5.2 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $8.3
million. A significant amount of this increase is due
to increases in salary and fringe benefits costs and an
increase in capital expenditures.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $9.3 million for the
Asian Art Museum is $0.6 million, or 6.7 percent, higher
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $8.7 million. A significant
amount of this increase is also due to increases in salary
and fringe benefits costs and an increase in capital
renewal and facility maintenance allocations.
The Department’s budget represents a unique privatepublic
partnership: AAM receives funding from the
General Fund to cover approximately one-third of its
budget; the remaining two-thirds are funded through the
Asian Art Museum Foundation (the Foundation).
Featured Programming
Over the course of the next two fiscal years, AAM will
host a number of notable exhibitions representing the
diversity and depth of Asian art and culture, including:
In the Moment: Japanese Art from the Larry
Ellison Collection (FY 2013-14)
In the summer of 2013, as the America’s Cup Challenger
Series takes to San Francisco Bay, the Asian Art Museum
will present an exhibition of Japanese art from the
rarely seen collection of Larry Ellison, Oracle CEO and
owner of ORACLE TEAM USA, defender of the 2013
America’s Cup. In the Moment: Japanese Art from the Larry
Ellison Collection introduces approximately 80 artworks
spanning 1,300 years, and explores the dynamic nature of
art selection and display in traditional Japanese settings.
Included are significant works by noted artists of the
Momoyama (1573-1615) and Edo (1615-1868) periods,
along with other important examples of religious art,
lacquer, woodwork, and metalwork. Highlights include
a 13-14th century wooden sculpture of Shotoku Taishi;
six-panel folding screens dating to the 17th century by 
Kano Sansetsu; and 18th century paintings by acclaimed
masters Maruyama Okyo and Ito Jakuchu.
In Grand Style: Celebrations in Korean Art
(FY 2013-14)
In Grand Style: Celebrations in Korean Art explores the
importance and cultural significance of celebrations
during Korea’s Joseon dynasty (1392-1911). During this
period, Confucianism was culturally embedded in society
as the governing state belief, and festivities marking
important rites of passage – political appointments,
birthdays, weddings, funerals – followed elaborate
protocols. In Grand Style features approximately 150
objects from 13 Korean institutions representing this
tradition – from kings’ and queens’ seals and protocol
books (uigwe) with paintings of royal banquets, to
special ceremonial robes and furniture. The exhibition
reveals the cultural and political significance at the
core of the celebrations. Nearly all of the artworks and
their accompanying narratives will be presented to U.S.
audiences for the first time through this exhibit.
Yoga: The Art of Transformation (FY 2013-14)
All over the world, millions of people practice yoga to find
spiritual insight or better health. Practitioners and nonpractitioners
alike are aware of yoga’s origins in India,
but few know of yoga’s goal of transforming body and
consciousness, its profound philosophical underpinnings,
its presence within Jain, Buddhist, and Sufi as well as
Hindu traditions, or the surprisingly diverse social
roles played by male and female yogic practitioners over
centuries.
Borrowed from 25 museums and private collections in
India, Europe, and the United States, Yoga: The Art of
Transformation includes an installation that reunites for
the first time three monumental stone yogini goddesses
from a 10th-century Chola temple; 10 folios from the first
illustrated compilation of asanas (yogic postures); and a
Thomas Edison film, Hindoo Fakir (1906), the first movie
ever produced about India.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $54.0
million for First 5 is $14.6 million, or 37.0 percent, higher
than the FY 2012-13 budget of $39.4 million. A significant
amount of this increase is due to a $8.0 million increase
in the Department’s Proposition H (Prop H) allocation.
In addition, First 5 is receiving a $4.7 million Child
Signature Program grant from First 5 California and
a $328,150 Race to the Top federal grant through the
California Department of Education.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $47.6 million for
First 5 is $6.4 million, or 11.8 percent, lower than the FY
2013-14 budget of $54.0 million. A significant amount
of this decrease is due to a $5.6 million decrease in the
Department’s Prop H allocation. Prop H, passed by the
voters in March 2004, creates an annual City General
Fund allocation for K-12 and preschool education. Up to
25 percent of the allocation may be deferred by the City in
the event that the City projects a budget shortfall greater
than $100 million. The proposed budget allocates all
Prop H funds in FY 2013-14, but defers 25 percent of the
allocation in FY 2014-15 to balance the City’s projected
$256.1 million shortfall.
First 5’s allocation of Prop H dollars in FY 2012-13 was
$17.7 million; the proposed FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15
allocation is $25.7 million and $20.2 million, respectively.
In FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15, First 5 continues to face
declining revenue from its statewide tobacco tax revenue
(Proposition 10). This decline is not unexpected, and the
Department has created a sustainability plan to guide
its funding decisions. To partially offset these declining
revenues, First 5 will draw down its sustainability fund
over time.
Partnering for Sustained Effectiveness
First 5’s 2012-2015 Strategic Plan focuses on promoting
school readiness and school success, and engages many
community and city partners to achieve these goals.
Approximately 30 percent of First 5 funds are committed
to the joint funding of child and family well-being
initiatives with other city departments.
FY 2012-13 marked the first year of a new three-year $10
million initiative by First 5, the Human Services Agency
(HSA), and the Department of Children, Youth & their
Families (DCYF) to support neighborhood-based and
population-focused family resource centers. These centers
are in neighborhoods throughout the City with varying
levels of services based on the needs of local families.
Population-focused family resource centers provide
services to families citywide, but focus on children and
families who are homeless and under-housed, recent
immigrants, populations with special needs, LGBTQ
and teen families, and families with children exposed to
violence.
In FY 2013-14, First 5 will continue to contribute
approximately $6.6 million to jointly fund early care and
education (ECE) initiatives with DCYF and HSA. These
efforts include funding for health screening and early
childhood mental health consultation; childcare subsidies
for low-income families with infants and toddlers;
a variety of professional development and education
attainment activities for teachers; and inclusion strategies
for children with special needs.
Preschool for All (PFA)
In addition to overseeing Proposition 10 dollars, First 5
is also responsible for implementing the City’s Universal
Preschool for All Program (PFA), which is funded by
local General Fund revenues as part of Proposition
H. The Department began the implementation of
PFA in FY 2005-06 and expanded the program in FY
2008-09 to serve all neighborhoods. In FY 2013-14, the
Department anticipates funding half-day free preschool
for approximately 3,500 four-year-olds, and will continue
to target PFA funds to children from low-income families.
The Department’s high level organization chart reflects
a change to the division formally referred to as the
“Preschool for All” division. First 5 has added federal
and state grant funding to its preschool initiatives, which
is now referred to as the Child Development and Early
Childhood Education division to reflect the broader scope
and funding sources involved.
Improving Child Care Quality
Over the next two fiscal years, First 5 will focus on
improving the quality of child care in San Francisco by
investing $12.2 million in their SF Quality Rating and
Improvement System (SF-QRIS). SF-QRIS is a system of
on-going program improvement that ensures that City
investments in early care and education are outcomesbased
and data driven, and coordinates and connects
external assessment of performance and technical
assistance services. SF QRIS data will guide ECE providers
in making program improvements, track technical
assistance services and their outcomes, and increase the
capacity of policymakers to make data-driven decisions.

Prop H One-Time Funds
As a result of the City’s full funding of the Proposition H
allocation in FY 2013-14, First 5 is receiving an additional
$6.4 million in funding. The Department plans to use
these one-time funds to improve early care and education
facilities; improve special education preschool classrooms
and bring them into the PFA network; improve the
coordination, data and evaluation capabilities of the early
care and education network; enhance the availability
of developmentally appropriate educational materials;
and identify gaps in service and develop a plan to ensure
sustainability of the network during federal, state, and
local policy changes.
Filling Gaps in Early Care and Education
The Department is committing part of its sustainability
reserve to backfill state cuts to early care and education
(ECE) services, including by: preserving 100 childcare
vouchers for CalWORKs 4-year olds expected to lose
their vouchers from the State; ensuring 170 children will
retain full day Head Start; and helping the City continue
to backfill the 10 percent Title V cut passed down from
the State last year. First 5 is also committing funds to pull
an additional 200 children off the City’s ECE/childcare
waitlist.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $70.9
million for the City Attorney is $3.3 million, or 4.9
percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $67.6
million. A significant amount of this increase is due
to increases in salary and fringe benefits costs, and an
increase in rent costs associated with a new office lease.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $73.1 million for the
City Attorney is $2.2 million, or 3.0 percent, higher than
the FY 2013-14 budget of $70.9 million. A significant
amount of this increase is due to increases in salary and
fringe benefits costs.
Affirmative Litigation Program
Since 1998, the Department’s Affirmative Litigation
Program has successfully advanced important public
policy initiatives in San Francisco and across the United
States, and has proven to be of critical importance to the
protection of the health, social, and financial interests
of San Francisco and its citizens. In collaboration with
Yale University, the Department’s Affirmative Litigation
Working Group researches potential litigation and
explores innovative public policy litigation strategies. In
FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15, the program will continue to
focus on:
• The investigation and prosecution of public integrity
cases to ensure the probity and transparency of the
City’s contracting and decision-making processes,
and to seek damages where public funds have been
misappropriated;
• The exposure and elimination of unscrupulous
business practices, and the pursuit of restitution on
behalf of consumers;
• The filing of anti-trust cases on behalf of the City to
recover overcharges due to price fixing and other antitrust
violations; and
• The filing of cases on behalf of the City to require
federal and State agencies to fulfill their legal duties to
protect the citizens of San Francisco.
Protecting San Francisco’s Neighborhoods
and Residents
The Department’s Neighborhood and Resident Protection
team is responsible for the enforcement of municipal and
State laws governing public nuisance. Over the course of
the next two fiscal years, through a coordinated effort
with relevant City agencies, the team will investigate
complaints of public nuisance and, when appropriate,
enforce the law to abate that nuisance through all
necessary means, including litigation. Public nuisance
actions usually result in substantial penalties and generate
the recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs.
The Neighborhood and Resident Protection team will
also continue to abate gang-related problems through
the civil gang injunction. The Department now has four
permanent, active injunctions in Bayview Hunters Point,
the Mission, Visitacion Valley, and the Western Addition.
The team cooperates with local, state, and federal law
enforcement to minimize gang-related violence in San
Francisco. Neighborhoods in San Francisco that experience
isolated instances of criminal activity may benefit from
other legal options, such as drug abatement actions and
unfair competition actions. The team works closely with
the San Francisco Police Department to implement the
most effective solutions to crimes and other undesirable
activities throughout the City.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $0.9
million for the Civil Service Commission is $66,188, or
7.7 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $0.9
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
increases in salary and fringe benefits costs.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $1.0 million for the
Civil Service Commission is $28,608, or 3.1 percent,
higher than the FY 2013-14 budget of $0.9 million. A
significant portion of this increase is also due to increases
in salary and fringe benefits costs.

At the time the Mayor submitted the proposed Fiscal
Year (FY) 2012-13 budget, all operations of the former
Redevelopment Agency were transferred to the City and
County of San Francisco based on AB 26 and the actions
of the Board of Supervisors. Subsequent amendments
made to the Dissolution Law in June of 2012 established
that the Successor Agency to the former Redevelopment
Agency must remain a separate legal entity from the City
and County of San Francisco, while remaining under
the legislative authority of the Board of Supervisors.
Accordingly, in FY 2013-14, the OCII budget is being
considered separately from the City and County budget.
The OCII operates with an annual budget, so only the FY
2013-14 budget is presented here.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $311.2
million is $157.8 million, or 102.9 percent, higher than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $153.4 million. This increase is
primarily due to the issuance of bonds for the Mission
Bay North and South project areas, developer fees that
will be applied toward affordable housing, and previously
appropriated fund balance for affordable housing
expenditures and commitments.
Major Approved Development Projects
Hunters Point Ship Yard / Candlestick Park
The Hunters Point Shipyard and Candlestick Point
form 770 acres along the southeastern waterfront of San
Francisco. These two sites are the subject of the Hunters
Point Shipyard Redevelopment Plan and the Bayview
Hunters Point Redevelopment Plan. The transfer of
property after environmental remediation by the U.S.
Navy to OCII, and in turn, the redevelopment of the
property, will occur in phases.
Phase 1 will include the establishment of 26 acres of open
space and construction of 1,600 homes, over half of which
will be completed in the next five years. Phase 2 involves
construction of an additional 10,500 new homes, with 32
percent meeting affordable housing guidelines, as well
as the rebuilding of the Alice Griffith Public Housing
development. Phase 2 also includes almost 3 million
square feet of research and development and office uses as
a hub for emerging technologies on the Shipyard, and over
300 acres of parks and open space including a complete
renovation of the Candlestick Point State Recreation
area. Phase 1 and Phase 2 will generate more than 12,000
permanent jobs; new community facilities; new transit
infrastructure; and will provide approximately $90
million in community benefits. The full build-out will
occur over 20 to 25 years.
Mission Bay
The Mission Bay North and South Redevelopment Project
Areas were established in 1998 to create a vibrant, transitoriented,
mixed-use community that will result in 6,000
residential units (30 percent of which will be affordable);
4.4 million square feet of office and biotechnology space;
400,000 square feet of retail uses; a new University of
California, San Francisco (UCSF) research campus and
medical center; a 500-room hotel; 41 acres of open space;
and a new public school, public library, and the new
public safety building. Completion of the Mission Bay
project is anticipated to occur over 25 to 30 years and
result in the construction of more than $700 million of
new infrastructure, the development of over $8 billion in
private vertical development, and the creation of 31,000
permanent jobs.
By early 2015, there will be many visible improvements
in the area including the completion of all market-rate
residential units and an additional 150 to 350 affordable
units, the first phase of the new UCSF medical center
that will provide 289 new hospital beds, the new Public
Safety Building that will provide additional security to the
neighborhood with a local fire and police station, as well
as the San Francisco Police Headquarters. In addition,
the 4th Street commercial corridor will be mostly
complete and filled with new, local-serving commercial
uses.
Transbay
The Transbay Redevelopment Project Area (Project
Area) was adopted in 2005 and consists of approximately
40 acres in downtown San Francisco surrounding the
new Transbay Transit Center (TTC). The Project Area
goals include the development of: 1) the new, multimodal
TTC and related public infrastructure; 2) a new,
transit-oriented neighborhood on approximately 10
acres of publicly-owned property, most of which was
formerly owned by the State; and 3) approximately 1,200
affordable housing units, which equals 35 percent of the
new residential units constructed in the Project Area.
OCII acts as the master developer for most of the formerly
State-owned parcels in the Project Area, issuing requests
for proposals and selecting developers to construct
the improvements, as specified in the Redevelopment
Plan for the Transbay Redevelopment Project Area
(Redevelopment Plan) and related documents.
The new, transit-oriented neighborhood that will be
developed on the 10-acres of formerly State-owned
property in the Project Area will consist of more than
3,000 new housing units, including affordable units,

commercial space, and new public open space. In
addition, the new Transbay Transit Center site will
include a 5.5-acre rooftop park and a 1.35-millionsquare-
foot office tower. The development program
for the Project Area embodies a balanced approach to
density, with office and residential towers spaced apart
to protect views and sunlight, and retail and townhouses
to maintain visual interest at the ground level. The
program includes significant widening and improvement
of sidewalks and reconfiguration of an Interstate 80
off-ramp to help create a safe and attractive pedestrian
environment.
Asset Management and Disposition of
Properties
In addition to the Major Approved Development Projects,
OCII has significant asset management responsibilities in
several active and expired redevelopment project areas.
These asset management responsibilities include: (1)
property management of physical land and buildings;
(2) lease management; (3) loan management and
administration; (4) oversight of public parking garages;
(5) landlord and creditor responsibilities in bankruptcies;
(6) managing and monitoring development agreements;
(7) managing the 700-berth South Beach Harbor; (8)
managing a community facilities district; (9) general asset
management and problem-solving; and (10) developing
and implementing a long-range property management
plan that is required under Redevelopment Dissolution
Law and that will be submitted to the Commission, the
Oversight Board, and the State Department of Finance
(DOF).
In the Property Management Plan, the OCII must
identify its real property for one of the following uses:
governmental use, future development, fulfillment
of an enforceable obligation, or sale of the property.
Redevelopment Dissolution Law requires the Oversight
Board and DOF to approve the Property Management
Plan and imposes other conditions on the assets if the
plan is approved. During FY 2013-14, OCII staff expect to
develop the Property Management Plan, the Plan guide
through the approvals process, and to develop specific
disposition plans for the South Beach Harbor and Yerba
Buena Center and Gardens.
Affordable Housing
OCII has retained three types of Affordable Housing
Obligations from SFRA. First are the affordable housing
projects that were under construction and were drawing
down funds from loan agreements that were entered
into prior to the Dissolution Law. The majority of these
projects are expected to have fully drawn down those
loan funds by the end of FY 2013-14. Second are the
Affordable Housing Obligations that are integrally related
to the three critical redevelopment legacy projects under
the Major Approved Development Projects that OCII, as
Successor Agency, must continue to implement under
enforceable obligations consistent with the Dissolution
Law. And third are OCII’s Affordable Housing
Obligations include the replacement of residential
units that were destroyed by SFRA in the early years of
redevelopment.
These obligations are referred to as OCII’s Retained
Housing Obligations. To implement these obligations,
OCII will work with the Mayor’s Office of Housing
and Community Development (MOHCD) to provide
staffing, policy direction, and technical expertise. Upon
completion of the project, the Dissolution Law requires
OCII to transfer the assets (land, loan agreements, ground
leases, etc.) to MOHCD, which is the designated Housing
Successor Agency under the Dissolution Law and Board
of Supervisors’ action. After this transfer, MOHCD
must ensure continuing compliance with the underlying
enforceable obligation, e.g. the Mission Bay Housing
Program, but otherwise has all rights and liabilities of the
asset.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $46.9
million for the District Attorney is $4.2 million, or 9.9
percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $42.7
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to the
annualization of a supplemental appropriation provided
in FY 2012-13, which added positions to the Department’s
budget.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $47.1 million for the
District Attorney is $0.2 million, or 0.4 percent, higher
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $46.9 million. A significant
amount of this increase is due to increases in salary and
fringe benefits costs.
Continued Decline of Non-General Fund
Sources
Of the FY 2013-14 proposed budget, 9.4 percent comes
from non-General Fund sources. The District Attorney
continues to face a decline in available non-General Fund
revenue due to a trend of dwindling outside funding to
support public safety and prosecution. In particular,
the FY 2013-14 and 2014-15 proposed budget includes
reductions in funding from the Reentry grant managed
by the Adult Probation Department and the STOP grant
managed by Police Department, both of which fund
key collaborations around public safety. In addition, the
Department is subject to reductions in grant funding
that support core prosecutorial efforts in mortgage fraud,
insurance fraud, and high-tech fraud.
Victim Services
Since 2009, the District Attorney’s Victim Services
Division has seen a 15 percent increase in victims seeking
assistance. A large part of the increase represents victims
of domestic violence, assaults, and robbery. In 2012, the
Department launched a pilot program to place Victim
Advocates in community based organizations. This pilot
provides a critical linkage in assisting victims of crime
who historically underreport crime. As a result, the
Department will continue implementing this program in
FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15.
Crime Prevention Programming
Given that 94 percent of homicide victims under the age
of 25 in San Francisco are high school dropouts, and
75 percent of the nation’s incarcerated individuals were
habitual truants, interventions to keep youth in school
remain critical in impacting the cycle of crime. In 2011,
the District Attorney began supporting a pilot program
at Burton High School to help incoming ninth graders
with histories of significant truancy and academic failure
to make a successful transition to high school. Each year,
20 students identified by Burton High School staff receive
on-site individual case management provided by San
Francisco’s Truancy Assessment and Resource Center. In
its first year, students in the Burton truancy pilot program
attended an average of 23 percent more school days than
in their previous year of school. The Department will
continue to support this program in the next two budget
years.
Dedicated Domestic Violence Unit
Domestic violence is a notoriously difficult crime to
prosecute. By definition, the victim is in a relationship
with the offender, which creates complications for
prosecutors. Over the last 10 years, San Francisco has
prided itself on taking a hard line against domestic
violence. From 2010 to 2012, the number of felony
and misdemeanor Domestic Violence plea agreements
dropped significantly, impacting attorneys’ caseloads and
sending the number of jury trials to an all-time high. As
a result, the District Attorney sought and was granted
supplemental funding in FY 2012-13. The FY 2013-14
and FY 2014-15 proposed budget continues to fund the
expansion of a dedicated Domestic Violence Unit that
enables the office to address all facets of each domestic
violence case.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of
$42.3 million for the Office of Economic & Workforce
Development is $4.0 million, or 8.6 percent, lower than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $46.2 million. A significant
amount of this decrease is due to the expiration of onetime
capital funds to the first phase of construction on the
James R. Herman Cruise Terminal.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $28.1 million for the
Office of Economic & Workforce Development is $14.2
million, or 33.6 percent, lower than the FY 2013-14 budget
of $42.3 million. A significant portion of this decrease is
due to the completion of the 34th America’s Cup project.
Strengthening Neighborhoods
Invest in Neighborhoods
In FY 2012-13, OEWD launched the Invest in
Neighborhoods initiative to improve the deployment
of City resources and services in order to better meet
the needs of 25 commercial districts around the city.
The commercial districts served through the initiative
received an initial assessment, a point person at City Hall,
the opportunity to apply for small project grants, and
access to a range of other services. In its first year, Invest
in Neighborhoods also successfully initiated a variety
of specific programs and outreach efforts, including
dispatching the Jobs Squad in West Portal, Ocean Avenue,
and the Mission to engage with residents on disaster
response and recovery efforts. As part of the Small Business
New Jobs Investment Fund, OEWD implemented an
ADA Program, which provides ADA assessments and
awards competitive grant funding for remediation; and
launched the new Emerging Business Loan Fund, which
provides loans between $50,000-$1.0 million to qualifying
businesses. Additionally, the initiative awarded a contract
for the development and management of a city-wide
storefront vacancy-tracking online database.
In FY 2013-14, OEWD will build upon the foundation
laid in FY 2012-13 by working with other City agencies to
deploy customized services in each commercial district;
build the capacity of community partners to implement

projects, develop organizational structures, and increase
neighborhood vitality and resilience. The Department
will continue to leverage the growing Small Business New
Jobs Investment Fund, the new vacancy tracking system,
and SF Shines Facade and Tenant Improvement Program.
Improve Blighted Areas
In FY 2012-13, OEWD launched the Improve Blighted
Areas initiative, which focuses on the Central Market and
6th Street areas. The program includes business attraction
and retention activities, arts revitalization, and on-going
economic development planning. Through these efforts,
OEWD facilitated the lease signings and/or openings of
eight new retail businesses and five new arts venues in
2012. The district has demonstrated a 20 percent increase
in sales tax revenue from 2010 to 2012, reflecting major
gains in the attraction of new employers and small
businesses.
In FY 2013-14, OEWD will build upon this success by
increasing focus on public safety initiatives, workforce
development, community capacity building, and business
retention in the Central Market and 6th Street areas.
Attracting and Growing Jobs
Over the next two fiscal years, OEWD will continue
the successful sector-based economic development
initiatives focused on identified as priorities in the San
Francisco Economic Strategy, including tech, biotech,
cleantech, manufacturing, and international sectors.
The Department will build upon its successful effort to
support local manufacturing with a focus on apparel,
consumer products and food sectors. Additionally, the
Department will continue its “start/stay/grow” effort
to support companies as they start, keep them as they
expand, and support their continued growth in the city.
The Department remains focused on preparing and
connecting San Franciscans to jobs in these key sectors.
The Department is also expanding business attraction
efforts both domestically and internationally. The City
has attracted more than 20 firms to the City with the

ChinaSF initiative, and the Mayor’s budget supports
expanding this model with new initiatives to cover Asia as
a whole, as well as Latin America.
Investing In Workforce Programs
In FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15, the Department will
continue to focus on responding to key industries that
drive San Francisco’s economy. OEWD bridges the gap
between educational and vocational training institutions
and industries, and provides San Francisco workers with
access to quality employment opportunities. Specific
programs include CityBuild, Hospitality Initiative,
TechSF, and the Health Care Academy. The Department
will also work to provide young adults and mid-career
workers with connections to growth areas in the local
labor market by leveraging public and private sector
apprenticeship and internship opportunities, coupled
with targeted skills training. Increased areas of focus
include providing more neighborhood-based access
points for entry into the city-wide, cross-department
workforce system.
The Mayor’s budget includes additional resources for
the City’s First Source Hiring program, improving
the infrastructure for job seekers interested in nonconstruction
jobs. The program also includes full General
Fund support for core workforce development activities,
and maintaining resources for community-based training
providers and the broad range of clients they serve. Over
the next two years, OEWD’s Workforce Division will also
develop, test, and rigorously evaluate technology and
training innovations focused on improving workforce
services for both job seekers and employers.
Supporting Small Businesses
In the next two budget years, the Office of Small Business
will provide additional outreach and education to assist
small businesses with the transition from the current
payroll tax system to the new gross receipts tax system.
In addition, the Office of Small Business, in collaboration
with the Mayor’s Office of Civic Innovation and the
Department of Technology, will start on the second
phase in the development of a comprehensive one-stop
online business portal. The first phase of the project
was completed in FY 2012-13 and has already served
approximately 1,000 unique businesses; continued
development of this project will make starting and
operating a business in San Francisco easier and more
efficient.
Implementing Local Hire
In its first year of implementation, the City’s Local
Hiring policy mandated a local hiring requirement of 20
percent by trade. On March 25, 2012, the policy began its
second year of implementation with an increase in hiring
requirements to 25 percent by trade. The preliminary
findings for the period between March 25, 2012 and
March 24, 2013 indicate that for the 40 active projects,
32 percent of the total craft hours and 56 percent of
the apprentice hours worked were performed by San
Francisco residents. On March 25, 2013, the policy entered
its third year with increased mandatory hire requirements
of 30 percent by trade. OEWD will work closely with City
departments and the public to ensure continued success
for Local Hire into the future.
Promoting Film
In FY 2013-14, the Department will continue its “Scene
in San Francisco” Rebate Program, which attracted two
feature films in 2012: Woody Allen’s Blue Jasmine, and
a small independent film by local film maker, Chris
Mason Johnson, Test. Both productions used mostly local
hires for their films. In FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15, the
Film Commission will continue to promote its Vendor
Discount Program, which offers discounts from local
merchants to visiting productions in an effort to lower the
costs of filming in San Francisco. In addition, the Film
Commission will continue to nurture the production
of local independent films through its Film Space Grant
and the continuation of the SF Film Collective, which
provides affordable office space to emerging filmmakers
and creative professionals with significant ties to San
Francisco.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $16.8
million for the Department of Elections is $4.4 million, or
35.7 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $12.4
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to the
two scheduled elections in FY 2013-14 (the November 5,
2013 Municipal Election and the June 3, 2014 Statewide
Primary Election) compared to the one election that took
place in FY 2012-13. For the November 5 election, the
Department will consolidate polling places to achieve
savings in poll worker stipends and polling place fees,
reduce costs for Parking and Traffic to retrieve ballots,
reduce Sheriff’s security costs, and reduce nonpersonnel
expenses such as vehicle rentals and supplies. In
accordance with California Elections Code Section 12241,
the consolidation of polling places is only allowed for
municipal elections, thus the Department will return to a
full allotment of voting precincts for the June 3 election.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $16.0 million for the
Department of Elections is $0.9 million, or 5.1 percent, lower
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $16.8 million. A significant
amount of this decrease is due to there being only one
scheduled election in FY 2014-15 compared to two elections
in FY 2013-14. The one scheduled election in FY 2014-15 is the
November 2014 Consolidated General Election. Because the
November 2014 General Election will likely result in higher
voter turnout, and it is anticipated that more candidates and
propositions will be on the ballot, the FY 2014-15 budget
includes a relatively higher level of temporary salaries,
overtime, professional services, printing, postage, and work
order expenses than an average municipal election or primary
election would require.
Data Driven Election Administration
The Department’s costs vary significantly based on the
time of year and the number of elections that the County
is required to conduct each fiscal year. The Department
collects historical statistics for each election, including
voter turnout, number of vote-by-mail ballots mailed and
returned, types of calls received from the public during
election cycle, and the number of voters who voted at the
polls and during the early voting period. By analyzing this
data, the Department can better prepare for high peaks of  

activity and more effectively allocate staffing resources.
Furthermore, the data indicating the voter turnout at each
voting site enables the Department to meet voter demand by
increasing or decreasing the number of assigned poll workers
and quantities of Election Day supplies and materials, as well
as ensure that the funds are spent judiciously.
After each election cycle, the Department administers
a survey to poll workers, the volunteers who administer
voting at the polls. The survey asks these volunteers for
input regarding their Election Day experience, their
training, and about any suggestions they might have for
future poll worker training. Consistent data gathering
allows the Department to measure successes of its training
program and identify areas that require additional focus.
Increasing Participation in the Electoral
Process
The Department maintains a database of the more than
500 community-based organizations it partners with to
schedule outreach events and presentations. Data kept on
all events includes communities served, languages spoken,
number of people in attendance, materials distributed, and
voter registrations collected. This data is used for evaluating
outreach success at meetings, tracking performance
measures for each election, and planning future elections.
To provide proper bilingual assistance on Election Day, the
Department assigns Chinese and Spanish-speaking poll
workers to many voting locations. To identify sites in which
voters may need language assistance, and to determine the
number of bilingual poll workers to assign to those sites,
the Department collects and uses a variety of data, such as
voter requests for election materials in Chinese or Spanish,
voter countries of origin, and voter surnames.
The Department’s website is an invaluable tool to inform
voters about registration, election procedures, polling place
locations, and to encourage informed participation. To
evaluate the effectiveness of the site, the Department uses
monitoring tools to identify and collect data on usage patterns,
including how long users spend on each page, how they
navigate the site, and what type of information they seek.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $17.4
million for the Department of the Environment is $0.9
million, or 4.9 percent, lower than the FY 2012-13 budget
of $18.3 million. A significant amount of this decrease is
due to changes in grant funding.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $17.6 million for
the Department of the Environment is $0.2 million, or
1.1 percent, higher than the FY 2013-14 budget of 17.4
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to
increased salary and fringe benefits costs.
The Department’s budget fluctuates depending on the
timing and size of external grants. The Department
received significant federal funding in prior years, both
through an earmark and through American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) funding that will end in
December 2013.
Green Jobs and Waste Division
With a citywide goal of zero waste by 2020, the
Department will continue to promote recycling,
composting, and other waste diversion practices in FY
2013-14 and FY 2014-15. The Department is pleased to
continue the Environment Now education and outreach
program, which hires local San Francisco residents for
extensive green jobs training. The program provides
leadership development and on-the-job training to
workers from the City’s most underserved neighborhoods.
Initiating Biodiversity Program
San Francisco’s iconic park lands and open natural areas
harbor remarkably diverse ecological communities
of native habitats, plants, and animals, including 10
federally-listed endangered species, 20 globally rare
plants, and hundreds of species of resident and migratory
birds. The Department is initiating a Biodiversity
Program to advance planning and policymaking for the
protection, conservation, and restoration of the City’s
natural lands and biodiversity.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $17.1
million for the Fine Arts Museums is $0.9 million, or
5.5 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $16.2
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to
increases in salary, fringe benefits costs, utility rates, and
operational costs. Additionally, the Fine Arts Museums
are receiving General Fund support to fund an additional
10 days of public operations during traditional holiday
closures.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $17.9 million for the
Fine Arts Museums is $0.8 million, or 4.4 percent, higher
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $17.1 million. A significant
amount of this increase is due to increases in capital
outlay and facilities maintenance and increased costs
associated with salary and fringe benefits costs.
Major Exhibitions
The Department will work over the next two fiscal
years to expand tourism and trade by mounting major
exhibitions and displaying artwork in collaboration with
SFMOMA during their closure. At the de Young, special
exhibitions include Richard Diebenkorn: The Berkeley
Years (June-October, 2013), David Hockney: A Bigger
Exhibition (October 2013-January 2014), Modern Nature:
Georgia O’Keeffe and Lake George (February-May 2013),
and the Meyerhoff Collection from the National Gallery
(June-October, 2014). Featured special exhibitions
at the Legion of Honor include Impressionists on the
Water (June-September, 2013), Anders Zorn: Sweden’s
Master Painter (November, 2013-February, 2014), and
19th-Century French Paintings from the National Gallery
(March-August, 2014).
Educational Programming
The Department works with local colleges and
universities on internship and fellowship programs
in digital media and conservation. Additionally, the
Department works with the San Francisco Unified School
District (SFUSD) on the Museum Ambassadors program,
which provides teens from under-resourced schools with
job training and experience, and on the Get Smart with
Art art-integrated curriculum for 1st-12th grade students.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $294.9
million for the City Administrator is $26.3 million, or
9.8 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $268.5
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
increases in capital project costs.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $292.7 million for
the City Administrator is $2.2 million, or 0.7 percent,
lower than the FY 2013-14 budget of $294.9 million. A
significant portion of this decrease is due to reductions in
overhead and capital project costs.
Fleet Management
Over the next two fiscal years, Fleet Management will
focus on minimizing the costs and environmental impacts of operating City vehicles by continuing to
reduce the City’s fleet size; spending approximately $3.0
million each year to replace 192 total older vehicles and
comply with the Healthy Air and Clean Transportation
Ordinance (HACTO); promoting car sharing enterprises
to flexibly expand transportation for City and public use;
and increasing the use of electric plug-in vehicles.
Earthquake Safety Implementation
Program
The Earthquake Safety Implementation Program
(ESIP) evolved out of the Community Action Plan for
Seismic Safety (CAPSS), a 10-year study of earthquake
impacts and recommendations contracted through the
Department of Building Inspection. ESIP began in FY 

2011-12 in the City Administrator’s Office as a 30-year
program to implement the CAPSS recommendations
to minimize the impacts of earthquakes through
information and education, and through the voluntary
and mandatory strengthening of San Francisco’s most
vulnerable building stock. In FY 2013-14, the City
committed $0.6 million to hire staff who will work with
seismic safety experts to continue the development of this
program.
Strengthening Language Access Services
In 2009, the Board of Supervisors amended the San
Francisco Language Access Ordinance (LAO), mandating
numerous new requirements under the Office of Civic
Engagement and Immigrant Affairs (OCEIA), including
responsibility for citywide implementation, monitoring,
annual compliance, and technical assistance.
As of the 2010 census, over 46 percent of the City’s
population speaks a language other than English at
home. Under the LAO, City departments that provide
information to the public must comply with the
law, including providing translated documents and
interpreters upon request. These language services are
especially critical during crisis, emergency and public
safety situations. Tagalog now qualifies as one of three
languages (including Chinese and Spanish) that meets the
language population threshold outlined in the LAO.
Starting in FY 2013-14, an increase of $0.6 million
is included in the OCEIA budget to fund one new
Tagalog interpreter and $0.4 million in grant funds to
the community to ensure that OCEIA can continue to
partner with community based, culturally competent
organizations for needed language services and
community interpreters.
Improving the Shelter Bed Reservation
System
The FY 2013-14 and 2014-15 proposed budget includes
funding to improve the shelter reservation system
through 311. Currently, homeless individuals seeking a
shelter bed reservation must apply in person at a homeless
resource center. This investment will increase access and
coordination of the emergency shelter system by allowing
homeless individuals to reserve shelter beds by calling 311.
This will especially help homeless disabled, seniors, and
employed individuals as they will not have to stand in line
for extended periods of time in order to access services.
Office of Chief Medical Examiner (OCME)
Facility
In the FY 2013-14 budget, the Chief Medical Examiner’s
Office (OCME) will receive $4.6 million in capital
funding to continue implementation of the replacement
of the Medical Examiner’s current facility.
The project will relocate the OCME to a 45,000 square
feet seismically-safe facility at 1 Newhall to house
administrative offices, an autopsy suite, toxicology lab,
support spaces, and off-street parking for department
vehicles.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $158.3
million for the Department of Public Works is $11.7
million, or 8.0 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget
of $146.6 million. A significant amount of this increase is
due to changes in capital project funding.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $202.6 million for
the Department of Public Works is $44.3 million, or 28.0
percent, higher than the FY 2013-14 budget of $158.3
million. A significant amount of this increase is also due
to changes in capital project funding. Specifically, the
budget includes $40.0 million in General Fund support
for street repaving once the Road Resurfacing and Street
Safety bond funding expires.
Cleaning and Greening San Francisco
DPW remains committed to maintaining clean streets
through a myriad of strategies that include partnering
with the community, augmenting grant resources,
enforcing the City’s litter laws and right-of-way codes, and
conducting community outreach on issues such as illegal
dumping and graffiti abatement. Starting in FY 2013-14,
DPW plans to augment outreach, education, and code
enforcement efforts to increase community awareness and
accountability around street and sidewalk cleanliness.
Improving City Streets and Buildings
DPW will continue managing a number of major bond
programs and capital projects including General Hospital,
the Earthquake Safety and Emergency Response bond
program, Moscone Expansion, Veteran’s Memorial, and
the Road Repair & Safe Streets Bond. When implementing
these projects and programs, DPW will ensure that
facilities and streets are designed and constructed in such
a way that they grant full and fair access to all users.
Tree Relinquishment
The Department’s FY 2013-14 budget includes the
appropriation of one-time funds in the amount of $0.7
million to hire four arborist technicians on an as-needed
basis for one year to prune 3,000 street trees, which will
then be relinquished to adjacent property owners. This
funding will ensure that the Department can move
forward with tree relinquishment as planned in prior year
budgets and that the trees will be in good condition and
recently pruned before being relinquished to property
owners.
Using Data to Advance Programmatic
Efficiency
For the past three years, DPW has used an internal
performance management system to analyze real-time
business intelligence data. At monthly DPW Stat meetings,
managers and staff monitor and analyze performance data
of key operational activities. These meetings have helped
shape strategic staffing assignments as well as awareness
of and response to the City’s most pressing needs. In FY
2012-13, DPW implemented DPW Stat for capital projects,
new monthly meeting where design and construction
managers emphasize performance of capital projects. The
goal of these meetings is to increase the accountability of
project managers and ensure that projects are delivered ontime
and on-budget. Through DPW Stat, the Department
continues to focus on making strategic service and project
improvements by relying upon empirical data.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $9.1
million for Health Service System is $2.6 million, or
39.1 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $6.6
million. A significant amount of this increase is due
to the addition of positions related to the continued
implementation of the eMerge system, improved vendor
contracts management, data analysis and benchmarking,
overall cost containment, wellness programming for city
employees, and benefit sustainability efforts.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $9.6 million for the
Health Service System is $0.5 million, or 5.7 percent,
higher than the FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $9.1
million. A significant amount of this increase is due
to increases in salary and fringe benefits costs and the
annualization of new positions added in FY 2013-14.
These increases are partially offset by having no Health
Service Board Election costs and no equipment purchases
in FY 2013-14.
Federal Healthcare Reform — Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act
Implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (PPACA) began in 2011 and will continue
through 2018. PPACA contains complex regulatory
requirements, potentially dramatic changes to cost
drivers, and core structural changes to healthcare benefits
delivery. HSS must have sufficient resources to ensure
regulatory compliance while also developing strategies
for minimizing the anticipated cost impact of PPACA on
taxes, fees, and premiums.
Cost Containment and Sustainability of
Benefits
During 2012 and 2013 rate negotiations, HSS
implemented a wide array of innovations reducing 2012
(6-month benefit period) and 2013 (calendar year)
rate renewals by a projected $46.8 million. Due to the
Department’s aggressive strategy, aggregate health
premium increases for HSS medical plans have been less
than half the local, state, and federal averages for the
past three cycles. Flex funding of the Blue Shield plan
accounted for $25.2 million of the estimated decrease.
Additional innovations included mitigating enrollment
migration to maintain cost competition between plans
and collaborating with Blue Shield, hospitals, and medical
groups to form two Accountable Care Organizations
(ACOs), which will lower health care spending and
improve patient care in San Francisco. Several of these
cost containment measures will reduce the City’s Other
Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) liability in future
years.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $77.9
million for the Department of Human Resources is $3.9
million, or 5.3 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget
of $73.9 million. A significant amount of this increase
is due to the Department’s Labor Project budget, which
will increase due to anticipated contract negotiations
for City employees’ wages and benefits. In addition, the
Department is adding new positions and professional
services for a new Citywide Leave Management Unit.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $78.5 million for the
Department is $0.6 million, or 0.8 percent, higher than
the FY 2013-14 budget of $77.9 million. A significant
amount of this increase is due to higher workers’
compensation claims costs as well as the annualization of
new positions budgeted in FY 2013-14.

In FY 2013-14, the Department will establish a Citywide
Leave Management Unit to advise and train human
resources personnel regarding the myriad of federal, state,
and local laws governing leaves and their overlap with the
City’s leave programs. The new unit will enable the City to
consistently apply and communicate leave entitlements to
employees, leading to overall decreased labor costs. As a
result of this project, the City will be implementing what is
considered a best practice for identifying, addressing, and
managing employees’ leave usage.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $735.4
million for the Human Services Agency is $31.9 million,
or 4.5 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of
$703.5 million. A significant amount of this increase is
due to increased revenue to support the expansion of
Medi-Cal as part of the implementation of the Affordable
Care Act (ACA), and increased state revenue related to
social service realignment and the administration of inhome
supportive services. New programs include grantfunded
administration of the Housing Opportunities for
Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) rental assistance program
and a state revenue supported refocusing of CalWORKs
services on connecting clients to work.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $749.1 million for the
Human Services Agency is $13.7 million, or 1.9 percent,
higher than the FY 2013-14 budget of $735.4 million. A
significant amount of this increase is due to increases in
salary and fringe benefits costs, along with a small increase
in the housing and homeless budget for new supportive
housing sites opening in FY 2014-15.
Medi-Cal Expansion
The implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
in California will lead to a dramatic expansion in the
Medi-Cal caseload. Projections indicate that there may
be as many as 40,000 new clients eligible for Medi-Cal
in San Francisco beginning in January 2014, and HSA is
responsible for enrolling the new clients. In addition, HSA
will have to begin providing information and services to
San Francisco residents who inquire about eligibility for
subsidized health insurance offered through the ACAauthorized
health exchange.
This influx of new clients requires new staffing and
business processes to improve efficiency. New records
management, reception, and eligibility staff included
in the FY 2013-14 and 2014-15 budget will allow HSA
to streamline services and provide seamless services to
clients whether they come to the Department’s office in
person or call in for service.
Service Center Technology
Multiple programs at HSA—including Medi-Cal,
CalFresh, and CalWORKs—have moved some or all of
their operations to a service center approach. In contrast
to past practices linking each client to one caseworker,
this approach allows clients to access their information
with any available caseworker in person, on the phone,
online, and through the mail. Client information is
available electronically, allowing caseworkers to respond
to clients’ questions and inquiries quickly and efficiently.
HSA continues to invest in the software and technology
necessary to enhance this approach, and also schedule
clients more effectively for appointments.
Connecting to Work
Governor Jerry Brown’s redesign of the CalWORKs
program for families calls on counties to refocus on
connecting clients to meaningful work and long-term selfsufficiency
beginning in FY 2013-14. This new approach
fits well with HSA’s existing Jobs Now program and
other employment-focused programs. To meet the State’s
demands, HSA is adding employment assistance staff as
funded by CalWORKs revenue, and updating program
rules in order to more fully engage all CalWORKs clients.
Improving Effectiveness
HSA’s commitment to data-driven accountability and
continuous improvement is rooted in the rigorous
analyses performed by its Planning Unit. The Planning
Unit works with the executives and program managers
of DHS and DAAS programs to develop and analyze
information to support Department decision-making
and to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Planning
analysts track program caseloads and trends on an ongoing
basis, providing managers with the reports needed
to monitor their programs. Planning analysts also
conduct needs assessments and program evaluations
that inform programmatic changes. Recently, the
Planning Unit spearheaded a systematic review of
the Department’s contracts to sharpen the contract
outcomes, align them with program goals, and hold
providers to the highest level of accountability. HSA
launched an online contracts management database in
FY 2012-13 that tracks contractor performance on these
outcomes over time.
HOPWA Subsidies
In Spring 2013, HSA assumed responsibility for local
administration of the Housing Opportunities for Persons
with AIDS (HOPWA) Rental Assistance Program from
the San Francisco Housing Authority. The HOPWA
Program provides rental subsidies to San Francisco
residents who are living with HIV/AIDS and who are very
low-income. The FY 2013-14 budget includes $3.1 million
from the Mayor’s Office of Housing for the program, $2.9
million of which is for rental assistance for clients. The
remaining funds support administration of the program.
The program’s transition to HSA follows a similar,
successful transition of the administration of the rental
assistance portion of the Shelter Plus Care Program to
HSA from the Housing Authority in 2011.

Over the next two fiscal years, HSA will continue to
strengthen the Social Security Income (SSI) Advocacy
program. This program serves single adults with disabilities
in the County Adult Assistance Programs (CAAP) by
helping them complete applications and appeals for federal
SSI benefits. If clients are successful in their application for
SSI, they receive increased income, sometimes as much as
$10,000 more a year in cash aid, as well as gain eligibility
for Medi-Cal benefits. A recent analysis shows that the
SSI Advocacy program benefits the City: a total of 717
clients were awarded SSI during FY 2011-12, resulting in
a net benefit of approximately $3.3 million for HSA alone
(additional reimbursement also comes to the City through
the Department of Public Health for medical services).
For every dollar HSA spent on the SSI Advocacy program,
it recouped $2.98 in the form of increased revenue, such
as reimbursements from SSA and forgone future aid
payments. For every dollar HSA spent on the program,
HSA estimates that it and the Department of Public Health
recouped a combined $4.07.
Broadband Technology Opportunities
Program
In 2010, the U.S. Department of Commerce awarded
$7.9 million to San Francisco for a Broadband
Technology Opportunities Program (BTOP). The
purpose of the award was to increase technology
accessibility in San Francisco with a focus on bridging
the digital divide of seniors and adults with disabilities.
Of the $7.9 million, HSA received approximately $3.0
million for DAAS Senior Programs. While the activities
have helped to enrich the lives of seniors and adults with
disabilities, this important work would not be continued
after September 2013 without new funding. The FY
2013-14 and 2014-15 budget contains over $1.4 million
in General Fund support to continue this program.
Over the next two fiscal years, DAAS will work with
each of the existing 54 BTOP sites to ensure program
effectiveness.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $37.0
million for the Department of Juvenile Probation is $1.3
million, or 3.6 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget
of $35.7 million. A significant amount of this increase is due
to increases in salary and fringe benefits costs; an increase
in cost associated with water treatment operations at Log
Cabin Ranch; and increases funds for other capital projects.
These costs are offset by federal sources.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $38.2 million for the
Department of Juvenile Probation is $1.2 million, or 3.3
percent, higher than the FY 2013-14 proposed budget of
$37.0 million. A significant amount of this increase is due
to increases in salary and fringe benefits costs as well as
funding for capital projects and facilities maintenance.
Collaborative Approach to Community-
Based Programming
Juvenile Probation, the Department of Children, Youth
and Their Families, and the Department of Public Health
will continue to fund community-based service providers
that offer a range of violence prevention programs to San
Francisco youth and their families. Strategies aimed at
case management, detention alternatives, gender-specific
programming, and after-care services continue to be a
priority for the Department and the City, as reflected
in the Local Action Plan adopted by the Juvenile Justice
Coordinating Council.
Juvenile Collaborative Reentry Team
(JCRU)
This year, the Department is expanding its reentry
programming for youth. Based on a successful threeyear
pilot, the Department has launched the Juvenile
Collaborative Reentry Team (JCRU). The model establishes
a collaborative team approach in the development and
implementation of reentry plans for youth. A dedicated
team of attorneys, social workers, social advocates,
probation officers, and clinical case coordinators work with
the children and their families to ensure that youth are
assisted in a comprehensive and monitored transition and
community reintegration process.
Addressing Capital Needs
In FY 2012-13, the Capital Planning Committee funded
multiple projects for JPD to improve the conditions of
two aging facilities: the Youth Guidance Center Courts
and Administration Building and the Log Cabin Ranch
facility. In FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15, the City will
invest over $3.5 million in maintaining and improving
JPD’s capital and facilities infrastructure. Furthermore,
the Department has established a close partnership with
the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission to assist
with the operations and improvements at the water and
wastewater treatment system. The Department will
expand that partnership in FY 2013-14 to make further
improvements.
Foster Care Revenue
For FY 2013-14 and continuing in FY 2014-15, the
Department will increase its revenue from federal foster
care sources (Title IV-E) by $900,000 due to improved
time studying for work that probation officers do with
foster youth.
Organizational and Staff Development
JPD will continue its efforts towards leadership
development and training, strengthened community
partnerships, and the continued implementation of
evidence-based practices. In the coming fiscal years, the
Department will continue to extend technical assistance
and training for its community partners, provide
leadership training for staff, and work to strengthen its
operations. In addition, the Department is finalizing
a comprehensive policy audit of all of its policies and
procedures to ensure consistency with state and federal
law, and national best practices.

The Municipal Transportation Agency is one of four
Enterprise departments that is entering the second year
of a fixed Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 budget.
The FY 2013-14 adopted budget of $853.0 million for the
Department is $22.4 million, or 2.7 percent, higher than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $830.6 million. This increase
reflects revenue increases from the Department’s General
Fund baseline, parking fees and fines, transit fare,
operating grants, and miscellaneous revenues, as well as
expenditure increases in salary and fringe benefits costs,
debt service work orders, and non-personnel services.
The amended budget of $849.9 million is the same as the
adopted budget, but reflects work order cost adjustments
and other citywide technical adjustments.
The MTA does not have a budget for FY 2014-15 because
it is operating on a fixed two-year budget cycle, which will
begin anew next year for FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16.
Investment in Maintenance
In recent years, the MTA has not sufficiently funded
Muni’s maintenance costs, which has adversely impacted
the system’s reliability. The MTA’s budget will focus on
reversing that trend by making a significant investment in
maintenance to improve service and address safety. At the
same time, the MTA is budgeting for the system’s future
by ensuring funding for key planning efforts to improve
service, such as all-door boarding. The budget also includes
efficiencies and revenue measures. Efficiencies include
management position elimination, labor savings from open
labor contracts, reduction in overtime expenditures, and
improved workers’ compensation performance. Revenue
measures include inflation-based indexing of most fares,
fees, and fines, as well as an additional pass-through of a
state-imposed parking ticket fee. Altogether, this budget
represents an important step towards implementation of
MTA’s FY 2013-2018 Strategic Plan.
Revenue Bonds
In Summer 2012, the MTA refunded $47.0 million
existing debt on garages and parking meters as well as
issued $28.0 million in revenue bonds to fund stateof-
good-repair transit and garage projects. Addressing
these long-standing capital needs will reduce MTA’s
maintenance expenses in their operating budget. The
revenue bonds will be obligations of the MTA, with the
principal and interest payable from MTA’s gross revenues,
excluding General Fund transfers. Annual debt service
is expected to be less than 2 percent of MTA’s annual
operating budget.
Free Muni for Low-Income Youth Pilot
On March 1, 2013, the MTA began providing free transit
service for low-income youth, ages 5-17, who use a
Clipper® card for a monthly pass. The MTA originally
secured a $1.6 million Metropolitan Transportation
Commission (MTC) grant in FY 2012-13. An additional
$2.2 million is expected for FY 2013-14 allowing for
a sixteen month pilot program. These grant funds
supplement $4.3 million in existing operating funds
approved by the MTA Board of Directors and $0.4 million
from the San Francisco County Transportation Authority
to use towards this program.
Central Subway
The Central Subway Project is Phase 2 of the Third
Street Light Rail Program that will link the Bayview and
Visitacion Valley with Mission Bay, South of Market
(SoMa), Yerba Buena/Moscone Center, Union Square, and
Chinatown. The Central Subway will improve regional
connections to Caltrain, BART, Muni rail lines, and bus
routes while reducing travel time and providing rapid
transit in this burgeoning and increasingly congested
corridor.
This year, the MTA commenced major construction in
SoMa and Union Square. Due to community concerns
about construction disruptions, the MTA has worked to
relocate the retrieval site of tunnel boring machines to
private property in North Beach. The extended light rail
line is slated to open to the public in 2019.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $527.6
million for the Police Department is $37.6 million, or 7.7
percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $489.9 million.
A significant amount of this increase is due to increases in
salary and fringe benefits costs. In addition, this proposed
budget includes one-time capital dollars to purchase
furniture, fixtures, and equipment (FF&E) for the new public
safety building scheduled to open in the fall of 2014.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $529.7 million for the
Police Department is $2.1 million, or 0.4 percent, higher
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $527.6 million. A significant
amount of this increase is due to increases in salary and
fringe benefits costs.
Comprehensive Hiring Plan
In recent years, the Police Department has experienced a large
number of retirements. With the expiration of the Deferred
Retirement Option Program (DROP), the Department is
certain that there will continue to be significant retirements
in FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15. To address attrition, the
Department is in the 2nd year of implementation of its sixyear
hiring plan. This plan allows the department to conduct
three General Fund-supported Police Academy classes of 50
recruits each year in order to backfill retirements and increase
the size of the force. The Department’s hiring plan also
includes a commitment to increase civilian hiring, which will
ensure that there is adequate staff in non-sworn functions.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget supports 32 of these hires,
which will allow the Department to move officers currently
performing these functions out into the field.
Public Safety Building Progress
Funded by the first Earthquake Safety and Emergency Response
General Obligation Bond, the new Public Safety Building
construction project broke ground in FY 2011-12. The Public
Safety Building will house Police headquarters as well as a
district police and fire station in the Mission Bay neighborhood.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget includes funding for the
purchase of FF&E to ensure that the constructed building will
be ready for use when it opens in 2014.
Technological Improvements
The Police Department strives to utilize new technology to
improve its policing efforts and will continue its effort to
move to a more stable and robust technology platform. The
Department’s four-point plan for technology improvements
includes creating a robust data warehouse, equipping officers
with proper technology tools, creating a technology help
desk, and building a strong technology team. The Crime Data
Warehouse, a year into development, will enable better crime
prevention and improve officer safety and effectiveness. The
Department will add to its recent technological advancements
with continued enhancements of its data warehouse, which
provides immediate access to crime data as crime occurs.
This will allow the Department members to instantly identify
suspects, locate similar crimes nationwide, and identify hot
spots and crime trends. This new technology-based platform
integrates over 24 criminal justice systems into one easy-touse
system for police access in vehicles, stations, or on their
smart devices deployed in the field.
Community Policing
Community Policing is a shared philosophy and
organizational strategy in which the police work
collaboratively with community and business members,
community-based organizations, and other City
agencies, in order to reduce violent crime, create safer
communities, and enhance the health and vibrancy
of neighborhoods in San Francisco. There are several
components to Community Policing, which include
genuine partnerships between the police and community,
problem solving, shared responsibility, mutual respect,
interaction with youth, and communication. Community
Policing requires that the police communicate regularly
and openly with the community in a language-accessible
manner, and provide information about crime and crime
prevention.
Youth Programs
In the next two fiscal years, the Police Department
will continue to prioritize partnerships and increase
communication with community-based organizations  

and educational institutions to provide San Francisco
youth with opportunities to participate in positive
learning activities. Although the Department continues
to participate in and sponsor numerous events and
programs, including the Wilderness and Fishing
programs and the Police Activities League (PAL), in FY
2013-14, the Department will emphasize promoting the
Chief ’s “finish high school” philosophy. To this end,
the Department will continue to implement the Future
Graduates Program in which members of the Police
Department, along with a diverse group of City employees
who began their jobs with only a high school diploma,
encourage students to stay in school for a healthy and
successful life.

The Port is one of four Enterprise departments that is
entering the second year of a fixed Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13
and FY 2013-14 budget. The FY 2013-14 adopted budget of
$87.8 million for the Port is $2.3 million, or 2.7 percent,
higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $85.5 million ,
reflecting capital improvements as well as increased fringe
benefits costs for existing employees. The Mayor’s Office
introduced a policy supplemental appropriation to further
increase the Port’s budget by $3.9 million to $91.7 million.
This supplemental appropriation reflects additional
spending on capital improvements to Pier 35, roofs, and
compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as
well as increased debt service payments. The amended
budget of $92.0 million reflects the policy supplemental
as well as work order cost adjustments and other citywide
technical adjustments .
The Port does not have a budget for FY 2014-15 because it
is operating on a fixed two-year budget cycle, which will
begin anew next year for FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16.
150th Anniversary
The Port observed its 150th Anniversary on April 24, 2013
and continues its celebration throughout FY 2013-14.
On April 24, 1863 , the State Legislature created the State
Harbor Commission, which oversaw the development of
the Port, including the seawall that continues to serve San
Francisco today. The Port’s heritage began just following
the Gold Rush era during Abraham Lincoln’s term as
President of the United States. The Port will hold events
and activities on the waterfront and throughout the city
that highlight the Port’s rich maritime and cultural history
and showcase the vibrant “people port” that it is today.
Completing the James R. Herman
Cruise Terminal and Preparing for the
America’s Cup
On December 31, 2010, San Francisco was selected by the
America’s Cup Event Authority to host the 34th America’s
Cup (AC34) in 2013. Since that time, the Port has delivered
the operational and capital improvements necessary for
AC34 (including completion of Phase 1 of the James R.
Herman Cruise Terminal to serve as the headquarters for
the event), invested $13.0 million on other infrastructure
improvements, and $12.2 million to meet project
permitting and mitigation requirements. The majority of
this work will leave a long-lasting legacy for cruises, the
local economy, and the public.
Following the sailing races in September 2013, the Port will
undergo Phase 2 of the James R. Herman Cruise Terminal
project. The new Cruise Terminal is sized to handle vessels
up to 1,200 feet long carrying 2,600 passengers, and has the
capacity at key areas to allow it to service vessels carrying as
many as 5,000 passengers. On non-cruise days, the facility
will be used as a special event facility. With its expansive
vistas and centralized waterfront location, the new Cruise
Terminal is the perfect picture frame for all that is both
iconic and exciting about San Francisco: the spires of the
Bay Bridge and Ferry Building; the Transamerica Building;
to Coit Tower; and the wonderful homes nestled into
Telegraph Hill.
The Exploratorium
On April 17, 2013 the Exploratorium, the internationally
acclaimed museum of science, art, and human perception,
re-opened to the public at the Port’s historic Pier 15 on
the Embarcadero. Located at the Palace of Fine Arts since
its founding in 1969, the Exploratorium launched the
$300 million capital campaign to build its new waterfront
home in the fall of 2010. The new campus provides twice
the space of the prior location, and annual attendance
is projected to at least double to one million. Guests are
encouraged to explore over 600 hands-on exhibits, both
indoors and outdoors, while enjoying breathtaking views of
the San Francisco Bay.
Parks and Open Space
In 2012, San Francisco voters approved Proposition B for
the $195 million Clean and Safe Neighborhood Parks Bond,
which includes $34.5 million for the Port to complete
repairs and renovations at Islais Creek, Warm Water Cove,
Agua Vista Park, Fisherman’s Wharf Plaza, Pier 70 Parks,
and the Northeast Wharf Plaza. The Northeast Wharf
Plaza will be completed along with the new James R.
Herman Cruise Terminal at Pier 27. The new 2.7 acre park
is expected to feature a large lawn for informal recreation
and many places to enjoy views of the San Francisco
Bay and cruise ships. There are a number of open spaces
planned for Pier 70, including Crane Cove Park, Slipways
Park, Machine Shop Courtyard, and Central Plaza. Each
site has an opportunity to provide significant benefit to
the Blue Greenway and allow the public to enjoy and learn
about the history of Pier 70, which is an eligible National
Register Historic District and home to the nation’s longest
continually operated civilian ship repair yard.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $28.9
million for the Public Defender is $2.0 million, or 7.8
percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $26.8
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to
increases in salary and fringe benefits costs.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $29.8 million for the
Public Defender is $0.9 million, or 3.1 percent, higher
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $28.9 million. A significant
amount of this increase is also due to increases in salary
and fringe benefits costs.
Community Justice Center
The Community Justice Center (CJC), established in
May 2009, offers a community-centered approach to
addressing crimes that directly affect neighborhoods in
a treatment-oriented collaborative setting. Beginning in
March 2012, with the agreement of the Superior Court,
the Public Defender resumed representing all eligible
clients at the CJC utilizing existing staff.
Parole Violation Court
Under the AB109 state realignment initiative, the
Department will begin providing legal representation
to parolees charged with violating their parole on July
1, 2013 . This responsibility was previously handled by
state contractors. Based on the most recent statistics, the
Department expects to handle at least 2,384 cases and 300
parole hearings each of the coming two fiscal years.
New Conflicts Policy
The Public Defender instituted a new conflicts policy
during FY 2012-13, which controls when the Department
must refer cases to the Indigent Defense Panel. Consistent
with new court decisions, the Department now utilizes
ethical firewalls and an updated definition of “currently
represented client” for the purposes of declaring conflicts.
Concurrently, the court system has seen a decline in the
number of cases referred to the Indigent Defense Panel.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $1.9
billion for the Department of Public Health is $231.5
million, or 13.8 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget
of $1.7 billion. A significant amount of this increase is
due to a correction of structural shortfalls in the budgets
for San Francisco General (SFGH) and Laguna Honda
Hospital, as well as the purchase of furniture, fixtures, and
equipment for the new San Francisco General Hospital
building and investments and program changes to meet the
requirements under healthcare reform.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $1.9 billion for
the Department of Public Health is $44.7 million,
or 2.3 percent, higher than the FY 2013-14 budget. A
significant amount of this increase is due to additional
purchases of furniture, fixtures, and equipment for the
new San Francisco General Hospital building, as well
as annualization of positions added in FY 2013-14 for
implementation of health care reform.
Realigning Services For Success
In anticipation of new programmatic responsibilities
expected with the implementation of the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) on January 1, 2014 and California’s 1115
Waiver – coupled with uncertainty regarding future
funding for healthcare – DPH has been examining its
service delivery system to better integrate its delivery
system, promote efficiency, minimize costs, and prioritize
services more consistently. Healthcare reform will
transition the healthcare industry from a volume-based
payment system to a value-based payment system. In
order to effectively manage costs, maintain revenues,
and provide quality care, DPH must make significant
investments and changes in its infrastructure to ensure
that it minimizes its exposure to financial risks.
Developing An Integrated Delivery
System
In FY 2010-11, DPH underwent an internal planning
process focused on strengthening and integrating its
delivery system in response to healthcare reform, with
the goal of creating a comprehensive system of care
that is clinically and financially capable of providing
coordinated health services. This process yielded over
40 recommendations in policy and strategic oversight,
system development and change management, and
operational and administrative infrastructure. Most of
these recommendations are being implemented within
existing resources, but the process identified critical
shortfalls in departmental capacity for case management
and utilization management, among others, which
require additional investment to implement effectively.
Community Programs Request For
Proposals (RFP)
In the next two fiscal years, the Department will release
a packet of RFP solicitations both to reduce costs and to
realign its contractual services to meet one or more of
the following objectives: essential services to meeting
the ACA milestones; services reimbursable under ACA;
services that directly help hospital discharge; and services
that support population health.
The Department will retain some contractual services that
do not meet these objectives, allowing the continuation
of a system of care where applicable. The implementation
of the RFPs will result in $8.8 million in partial-year
savings in FY 2014-15. The Departmental sections
that will be participating in the RFP process include:
Community Behavioral Health Services (CBHS), Housing
and Urban Health (HUH), HIV Health Services (HHS),
HIV Prevention Section (HPS), and Community Health
Promotion and Prevention (CHPP).
Reprogramming The Behavioral Health
Center (BHC)
Since its formation, the BHC has been a critical facility for
DPH and San Francisco, allowing the Department to provide
the appropriate level of care for its clients. The role of the BHC
within the DPH network will be more critical than ever after
the transition to a more managed care-focused model and the
implementation of healthcare reform, but some programming
changes are needed both to achieve budgetary savings and to
maximize the use of the facility. The program changes include:
• Creation of respite level beds for both Mental Health
and Medicine that do not currently exist but could
positively impact acuity at SFGH.
• Creation of Residential Care Facility for the Elderly
beds that would be available for non-ambulatory
residents. This is a level of care that is currently in
short supply in the City.
• Transition of SNF patients to appropriate care
elsewhere within the DPH system, including to less
restrictive settings where possible.
Implementation of these changes will improve patient
flow within the DPH network, resulting in better use of
resources, improved revenues, and an enhanced ability to
allow the City’s residents to pursue independence.
Strengthening Primary Care
Primary care plays a central role in healthcare reform,
ensuring that patients receive timely access to preventive 

care. To meet quality standards and to minimize risk and
costs, DPH plans to strengthen the infrastructure of and
expand access to its community-oriented primary clinics.
Over the next two fiscal years, DPH will provide additional
staffing to enable the Community Oriented Primary
Care (COPC) system to provide expanded evening and
weekend clinic hours for up to eight clinic sessions per
week. Additionally, for COPC to remain competitive and
to receive maximum revenue reimbursement, DPH is
developing a patient-centered package of services that will
attract patients to select or retain DPH as their healthcare
provider.
DPH will also create effective leadership at the clinics to
ensure that services are well coordinated, timely, accessible,
culturally competent, appropriate, and effective. While the
Department has reduced staffing at the clinics in the past
to achieve budget savings and efficiencies, this investment
is critical in light of the future expansion and pivotal role of
these services.
Reorganizing Population Health Division
In March 2013, DPH’s Population Health and Prevention
Division changed its name to the Population Health
Division (PHD), reflecting a reorganization effort
underway since November 2011. Broadly, reorganization
will allow PHD – and DPH more widely – to better respond
to emerging public health issues, changes in public health
practice, developments in public health financing, and
emerging public health leadership opportunities.
Creating A Sound Financial Foundation
Setting A Realistic Budget
The Mayor’s proposed budget includes an increase in
General Fund support of $51 million in FY 2013-14 and
$55 million in FY 2014-15 to correct a historical structural
shortfall in the Department’s budget. For each of the past
several years, the Department has required a mid-year
supplemental appropriation to realign its budget to its
actual costs. As the imbalance has grown, it has created
increasing financial uncertainty for the Department and
the City’s General Fund. The Mayor’s budget corrects this
imbalance, improving financial stability and transparency
for the Department’s budget. The correction includes the
addition of permanent clinical positions to support existing
services so the Department will rely less on temporary staff,
as well as adjustments to salary savings assumptions to
more accurately reflect the actual staffing patterns at San
Francisco General and Laguna Honda Hospitals. With this
correction, the Department will no longer require midyear
supplemental appropriations to continue its current
operations through the fiscal year and allow managers to
effectively manage their budgets. The cost of this expense is
partially offset by additional projected revenue growth.
Creating An Office of Managed Care
As healthcare regulations change, public healthcare providers
such as DPH will increasingly operate in a managed care
environment, where it receives a fixed per-member per-month
reimbursement rather than fee-for-service reimbursement.
To be successful, DPH must create an organizational
infrastructure to manage costs and business relationships
with other plans and providers. In anticipation of this change,
the Mayor’s FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15 proposed budget
includes a new Office of Managed Care (OMC), which will
be responsible for contracting strategy with health plans,
utilization management, marketing-branding, data reporting,
quality improvement, and provider services. The OMC will
be developed to (1) manage resources more effectively to
maximize benefits for clients and (2) reduce misuse, overuse,
and underuse of services.
Addressing Reductions In Federal Funding
In FY 2012-13, the Department experienced significant
federal Ryan White Act and Center for Disease Control
(CDC) funding reductions for HIV services. The Mayor’s
proposed FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15 budget backfills
this cut with a restoration of $4.0 million in HIV Health
Services and HIV Prevention programs. However, federal
funding formulas continue to shift dollars to counties
where incidence rates of disease are increasing, rather than
remaining stable as they are in San Francisco. Consequently,
the Department has recently received additional reductions
in HIV Prevention and Health Services of $2.2 million in FY
2013-14, growing to $3.1 million in FY 2014-15. In addition
to HIV funding reductions, the CDC also reduced its
support of tuberculosis control and public health prevention
programs.
Preparing For the New San Francisco
General Hospital
In late 2015, the new San Francisco General Hospital
(SFGH) will open. All acute care services will be relocated
to the new facility and all non-acute services not subject to
State requirements for seismic compliance will remain in
the current building. To plan for the transition of patients
and services and the day-to-day operations of this new
facility, DPH will invest $2.0 million for new facility and
transition planning over the next several years. In addition,
$49.0 million in FY 2013-14 and $56.0 million in FY 2014-
15 is budgeted to begin procurement of furniture, fixtures,
and equipment for this new facility.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $100.9
million for the Public Library is $8.5 million, or 9.2
percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $92.4
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to
increases in salary and fringe benefits costs, which are
driven by the addition of 56 hours per week of public
library operating hours, as well as the on-going financial
effects of the FY 2012-13 expanded hours. In addition, the
FY 2013-14 budget includes an additional $1.2 million for
the Main Library’s Teen Center construction phase. The
Library’s proposed budget also includes enhancements to
library collections and facilities maintenance.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $104.6 million for the
Public Library is $3.7 million, or 3.6 percent, higher than
the FY 2013-14 budget of $100.9 million. A significant
amount of this increase is also due to increases in
salary and fringe benefits costs. In addition, the Library
continues to increase funding to ensure that it maintains
a robust materials collection and invests in information
technology, infrastructure, and programs for the public
that meet evolving needs.
Facilities Investments
Following voter approval of $106.0 million in General
Obligation bonds in 2000, the City leveraged the approved
bond funds with State grants, gifts, and revenue bonds
supported by the Library Preservation Fund to finance
the $196.3 million Branch Library Improvement Program
(BLIP). BLIP calls for the renovation of 16 branches, the
replacement of four leased facilities with City-owned
buildings, the replacement of three branches with new
buildings, the construction of a new Mission Bay branch,
and the creation of a support services center. The Library
has completed 23 of the 24 BLIP projects. The most recent
branch opening was the Bayview Branch Library on
February 23, 2013. The Bayview project surpassed local
hire requirements: 68 percent of the subcontractors were
local business enterprises, and approximately half of all
construction workers were from San Francisco, including
residents from the Bayview-Hunters Point community.
The remaining and final BLIP project is the North Beach
branch library. It is approximately 15 percent complete
and is anticipated to open to the public mid-2014.
Post-occupancy evaluation of Library facilities has helped
identify the investments required to ensure that facilities
meet the service needs of public and staff, and achieve
operating efficiencies. Over the next several years, the
Library will make improvements to building control
systems, lighting, and acoustics; repair and replace public
furnishings and flooring; and improve exterior finishes.
Other facilities improvements include investments in
custodial and security services.
Expansion of Public Hours
Charter Section 16.109 requires that the Library
Commission assess and modify as appropriate the
hours of operation for the Main and branch libraries at
least once every five years. In the Fall 2012, the Library
Commission established a community input process,
which included surveys and public hearings in 11
supervisorial districts. The result was a recommendation
to expand hours by 56 hours per week systemwide,
including increasing hours at the Main Library’s Library
for the Blind and Print Disabled, Deaf Center, and
History Center. With the addition of these hours in FY
2013-14, the Library will be open to the public a total of
1,370 hours per week, or 159 (13 percent) more hours per
week than the 1,211 permanent weekly hours established
in Charter Section 16.109.
Strong Library Collections
The proposed FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15 budgets
continue to invest in strong library collections, which
represent approximately 11 percent of the operating
budget. Print books remain the primary material format,
but the library is expanding its investments in eResources,
including eBooks, eMusic, eVideo, databases, and
eLearning. Other investments include youth materials,
materials in international languages, and periodicals. The
FY 2013-14 collection budget increased approximately
7 percent over the FY 2012-13 budget; in FY 2014-15, it
will increase an additional 10 percent.
Embracing Innovation
Over the next two fiscal years, the Library will
further upgrade its servers, networks, bandwidth, and
infrastructure as well as improve the public’s access to
technology in order to help close the city’s digital divide.
For example, starting in FY 2013-14, the Library will pilot
laptop/eResource lending kiosks and invest in public
eReaders and tablets to help meet public technology
needs. Other technology enhancements include shifting
public computing software from OpenOffice to the
Microsoft Office Suite so that the patrons will have access
to standard workplace software.
Youth Engagement
In FY 2011-12, the Department received a $100,000 grant
from the Institute of Museum and Library Sciences
to build a Teen Center Learning Lab Program that
will support the attainment of multiple literacies in
technology, media, environment and health, reading,
and civic engagement. Youth who engage in the planning
process and Learning Lab programs will learn how  

to select and use resources in new ways as sources
for creative media projects, be better consumers and
evaluators of digital content, use technology and media
production tools, share and license work produced in
the Creative Commons, and tell stories that support and
celebrate local culture and diversity. Teen producers,
distributors, and curators of work in a digital world
will gain practical knowledge about distribution rights,
copyright, journalism ethics, and more to help them in
their current projects and future careers. The Library’s
FY 2013-14 budget includes $1.2 million for a new Teen
Center Learning Lab within the Main Library and related
tenant improvements for services and programs that will
be relocated in the building. The remaining estimated
project costs will be funded via private fundraising.
The new Teen Center will act as a hub for youth media
education and literacy development.

The Public Utilities Commission is one of four Enterprise
departments that is entering the second year of a fixed
Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 and 2013-14 budget. The
FY 2013-14 adopted budget of $889.4 million for the
Department is $83.8 million, or 10.4 percent, higher than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $805.6 million, largely reflecting
increases in debt service payments as the Department
funds critical infrastructure improvements, including the
Water System Improvement Project’s seismic upgrades
and wastewaster system improvements. In addition,
the adopted budget accounts for increases in salary and
fringe benefits costs. The amended budget of $878.0
million is the same as the adopted budget, but reflects
work order cost adjustments and other citywide technical
adjustments.
The FY 2012-13 and 2013-14 adopted budget supports
the PUC’s strategic goals to provide high quality services,
plan for the future, promote a green and sustainable
City, engage the public, and invest in our communities.
All PUC utilities operate 24/7 providing essential service
utilities to meet its customers’ water, power, and sewer
service needs.
The PUC does not have a budget for FY 2014-15 because it
is operating on a fixed two-year budget cycle, which will
occur next year for FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16.
Water Enterprise
The Water Enterprise’s top priority for the next two fiscal
years is to ensure the completion of the Water System
Improvement Program (WSIP) upgrades and to plan the
post-construction integration of critical infrastructure
improvements. Environmental mitigation and the
monitoring of prior commitments are key elements to
the plan. A continued focus on the 24/7 delivery of water
and the diversification of the water supply – including
water conservation programs and the development
of groundwater and recycled water sources – remain
important priorities.
Wastewater Enterprise
Capital improvements, along with the 24/7 operations
of the City’s sewer system, remains the Wastewater
Enterprise’s top priority. This includes the continued
planning and implementation of the Sewer System
Improvement Program (SSIP) through completion of
sewer condition assessments of mains, pipelines, and
treatment plants as well as pump stations and watersheds.
Funding is requested to comply with the new permit
requirements for separate storm and sanitary systems
and to develop standard operating procedures to comply
with these mandates. In addition, the PUC continues to
fund the expansion of green programs, including Fat, Oil,
and Grease (FOG) collections (in conjunction with the
Bio-diesel and digester food waste), and the rain barrels
and cistern incentive program; to develop standards for
future Low Impact Design (LID) projects; and to expand
the commitment to co-generation and other alternative
energy assets system.
Hetch Hetchy Water & Power and the
Power Enterprise
Hetch Hetchy priorities include: compliance with power
and water regulatory requirements, including the North
America Electric Corporation (NERC) and the Western
Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC); funding
fishery studies mandated by the Federal Regulatory
Commission (FERC) as part of the requirement under the
Districts’ FERC license to operate the Don Pedro Project;
and a water transfer with the Modesto Irrigation District
for a dry year supply. The Power Enterprise’s priorities
include the continued promotion of green and sustainable
power practices, the purchase of renewable energy, and
energy efficiency programs.
GoSolarSF
The FY 2013-14 budget includes $4.0 million for the
GoSolarSF program. To encourage more installations
of solar power in San Francisco, the PUC is offering
incentives to San Francisco residents and businesses to
install solar power on their properties. One solar incentive
is available per electric meter for business, residential
and non-profit non-residential incentive applications.
For non-profit residential incentive applicants, one solar
incentive is available per service site.
CleanPowerSF
CleanPowerSF is the PUC’s Community Choice
Aggregation (CCA) Program, which allows cities and
counties to pool their citizens’ purchasing power to buy
electricity. CleanPowerSF will provide San Franciscans
with an alternative, 100 percent renewable energy supply.
Advertising will take place to ensure that customers
are aware that they must opt-out if they are enrolled in
the program. The program will move forward after the
adoption of not-to-exceed power rates.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $160.3
million for the Recreation and Parks Department is $21.8
million, or 15.7 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13
budget of $138.5 million. A significant amount of this
increase is due to increased salary and fringe benefits
cost and an increase to recreation program staffing, work
order, and software licensing costs.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $151.1 million for
the Recreation and Park Department is $9.2 million, or
5.8 percent, lower than the FY 2013-14 budget of $160.3
million. A significant amount of this decrease is due to a
reduction in capital project spending.
Enhancing Recreation Programming
The Recreation and Park Department continues
to improve the breadth and scope of its recreation
programming. In FY 2012-13, the Department achieved
a 70 percent recreation program enrollment rate. In
FY 2013-14, RPD intends to use several different tools,
including enhanced employee training, online customer
evaluations, and a new quarterly recreation program
assessment process to increase that rate. The Department
will use feedback from these evaluation processes to guide
its decisions regarding what type and how many sessions
of programs to offer. Over the last year, the Department
has increased programming for adults, offering leagues
and classes ranging from dodgeball and volleyball to yoga,
video editing, and pilates. In FY 2013-14, the Department
will continue to increase adult recreation options and will
also expand recreation programming for adults between
the ages of 18 and 25.
Supporting the Mayor’s commitment to workforce
development, RPD will expand its Workreation program to
add school year employment slots for youth ages 14 to 17.
As RPD enhances its programs, it remains committed
to ensuring that ability to pay is never a barrier to
participation in recreation. The Department manages a
strong scholarship program, providing financial support
to low-income San Francisco residents. In FY 2011-12,
RPD gave $764,000 in scholarship assistance to recreation
program users, an increase of 54 percent from the
previous year. The Department expects to offer at least
$800,000 in scholarship assistance in FY 2012-13 and in
the coming two fiscal years.
Maintaining Beautiful Parks and
Facilities
RPD provides beautiful, clean, and safe parks and
open spaces to all San Francisco residents and visitors.
The Department’s commitment to this mission is
demonstrated by its Park Maintenance Standards score of
91.3 percent for the first six months of FY 2012-13. This
score is over a half percentage point higher than the score
from the same period in the prior fiscal year. To achieve
this level of park maintenance, RPD has standardized its
gardener work schedules and implemented a custodian
relief program, which deploys as-needed custodians to
ensure shift coverage in case of staff illness or vacation.
Improving Parks and Recreation Facilities
RPD is in the midst of a multi-year effort to renovate
facilities and parks across the city. The Department
has benefitted from a rich array of capital funding in
the last decade, including $110 million from the 2000
Neighborhood Parks Bond, $185 million from the 2008
Clean and Safe Neighborhood Parks Bond, two lease
revenue bonds for a total amount of $65 million, and
multiple grants and philanthropic gifts. FY 2012-13 was
also an active period of investment in RPD assets. In
FY 2012-13, the Department opened the Betty Ann Ong
Chinese Recreation Center, Mission Playground, Fulton
Playground, and Sunset Recreation Center. In November
2012, voters approved a new $195 million General
Obligation Bond to improve 15 neighborhood parks and
pools, playgrounds, irrigation infrastructure, forestry,
and regional parks, including Lake Merced and McLaren
and Golden Gate Parks. In 2013-14, RPD will start work
on the first of the 2012 bond projects, which include Glen
Park, Joe DiMaggio Playground, Balboa Swimming Pool,
and Mountain Lake Playground. This era of investment
will ensure that San Franciscans have great places to play,
relax, and enjoy nature in parks for decades to come.
Reducing Water Consumption
In partnership with the Public Utilities Commission
(PUC), RPD has reduced water usage, improved
landscapes, and reduced costs through the replacement
of outdated and decaying irrigation systems in three
parks: Alta Plaza, Balboa, and Jefferson Square. The
projects include installation of state-of-the-art irrigation
controllers and planting of “no mow” grass and drought
tolerant plants. In FY 2013-14, RPD and the PUC will
jointly fund another water conservation project, replacing
the irrigation system at Alamo Square.
Striving for Financial Sustainability
Understanding that financial sustainability supports
department stability, RPD continues to seek to increase
the revenue generated from its leases, concessions, and
other park amenities, and to pursue philanthropic  

support. In FY 2013-14, the Department’s new agreement
with the promoter of the Outside Lands concert in Golden
Gate Park will generate $300,000 in additional annual
revenue to support RPD operations. The Department’s
four parking garages will add nearly $2 million in
revenue, and park amenities and concessions will add
$250,000 in new revenue to RPD’s budget.
In addition, the Department has successfully cultivated
philanthropic support of its operations and capital
program. In FY 2012-13, RPD raised $20,000 to support a
summer day camp for autistic children; $95,000 to fund a
mobile program bringing activities such as rock climbing,
skate boarding, and kayaking to every San Francisco
neighborhood; and $100,000 to endow a gardener at the
Polo Fields in Golden Gate Park. In 2013-14, the Department
expects to receive a gift of $60,000 to fund learn-to-swim
classes for youth in low-income neighborhoods, and nearly
$2 million in funding to support renovations of playgrounds
at Huntington and Sue Bierman Parks.
Candlestick Park
This budget assumes that 2013 will be the 49ers last
football season at Candlestick Park and that Lennar Corp.
will take ownership of the site on January 1, 2015 as part
of the Bayview Hunters Point Area Plan. If the 49ers do
leave Candlestick Park after the 2013 season the team
will pay the Department $3.3 million in FY 2014-15 as
compensation and $0.5 million in FY 2014-15 and FY
2015-16 to support youth recreation programming.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $6.2
million for the Rent Arbitration Board is $0.2 million,
or 3.9 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $6.0
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to
increases in salary and fringe benefits costs.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $6.4 million for the
Rent Arbitration Board is $0.2 million, or 3.0 percent,
higher than the FY 2013-14 budget of $6.2 million. A
significant amount of this increase is also due to increases
in salary and fringe benefits costs.
Protecting Housing Affordability
The Department’s central function of regulating rents
during a tenant’s tenancy, and preventing evictions
without good cause, keeps rents affordable, and promotes
affordable housing. During the past fiscal year, the
Department answered over 27,000 counseling calls,
served over 10,000 counter visitors, adjudicated 1,368
tenant petitions, and investigated 570 Wrongful Eviction
Reports, providing substantially more service than the
previous fiscal year.
Using Data to Improve Department
Effectiveness
The Department uses a wide variety of data and reports
to monitor and increase the effectiveness of its operations,
including performance measures to track department
progress towards making information available in
multiple languages and average number of days to process
a petition. The Department reports on its operations on
an annual and monthly basis. These reports include the
Annual Statistical Report, the Annual Eviction Report,
and the Monthly Statistical Reports.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $22.6
million for the Retirement System is $2.0 million, or
9.9 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $21.0
million. A significant amount of this increase is due to
an increase in staff levels, including a new investment
risk manager position to meet the fiduciary needs of the
SFERS Trust, as well as the service needs of the members
and participants. The entirety of the Department’s
budget is funded from the SFERS Trust or through
reimbursement from the third-party administrator of the
City’s Deferred Compensation Plan.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $23.6 million for the
Retirement System is $1.0 million, or 4.2 percent, higher
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $22.6 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to the addition of two
new senior security analyst positions in the Investment
Division and increases in salary and fringe benefits costs.
Reducing City Costs
The SFERS Trust earned an annualized investment
return of over 11 percent in the last three fiscal years.
This investment return was significantly higher than
the Plan’s investment return assumption, and served to
reduce the expected increase in the employer contribution
requirements to SFERS resulting from the Plan’s use of
five-year smoothing.
The Department will continue to work to maintain
superior levels of investment returns on SFERS trust
fund assets. The Department’s performance target is to
achieve a return on trust investments that ranks in the
top 50th percentile or better. As of March 31, 2013, the
Department was just under this performance target on a
five-year average return basis, but it is in the top quartile
on a three-year average return basis. The Department
anticipates that it will meet or exceed this five-year
average return target as of June 30, 2013.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $180.8
million for the Sheriff’s Department is $6.1 million, or 3.5
percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $174.7 million.
A significant amount of this increase is due to debt service
costs related to the replacement of County Jails 3 and 4.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $187.6 million for
the Sheriff ’s Department is $6.8 million, or 3.8 percent,
higher than the FY 2013-14 budget. A significant amount
of this increase is due to increases in salary and fringe
benefits costs.
Custody Trends – Acute Mental Health
The Department has seen a flattening of the daily jail
population, coupled with an increase in the intensity of the
jail population’s psychiatric needs. This increased acuity is
reflected in the growth of the number of hours of psychiatric
care provided by the Department . According to Jail Psychiatric
Services, the number of hours of psychiatric care has increased
19 percent from 58,515 hours in 2009 to 69,347 hours in 2012.
The acute special needs of the mentally ill population require
intense staff resources to maintain prisoner and staff safety.
In response to this trend, the Department has increased its
emphasis on providing services for the mentally ill, including
specialized staff training for managing mentally ill patients,
increased focus on programming for the mentally ill, and
acquisition of grants such as Keys to Freedom that fund
services for the mentally ill population.
Program Trends
In FY 2013-14, the Department will continue to partner
with community-based organizations to provide new and
innovative in and out of custody programming to reduce
recidivism, decrease the number of crimes committed, and
increase public safety. These programs reflect an increased
emphasis on specialized programming targeted at violence
prevention, mental illness, substance abuse, and vocational
training. In FY 2013-14, the Sheriff’s Department will
be providing the most robust vocational training in the
Department’s history, including horticulture, culinary, and
bike repair training programs. Furthermore, keeping with
industry emphasis on evidence-based practice, the program
awards made for FY 2013-14 reflect an enhanced focus on
data collection and program evaluation.
Reentry Pod
In February 2013, the Department worked collaboratively with
the Adult Probation Department (ADP) to open a designated
reentry housing unit, known as the Reentry Pod. The Reentry
Pod is a pilot program to connect individuals who will soon
be released to the supervision of Adult Probation to ensure
they are better connected with community-based treatment,
benefits, housing, job training, and supportive services upon
their release. After being released, these individuals will
continue to access resources at ADP’s Community Assessment
and Services Center and other public or community-based
partner sites. Providing this continuum of services pre-release
and immediately upon release is expected to improve outcomes
for a high-risk, high-needs population.
Efficient Service Provision
In response to the current fiscal environment, which
requires all departments to provide high quality service
efficiently, the Sheriff’s Department plans to intensify the
specialization of its labor force, hiring and assigning staff to
the tasks best suited to each person’s skill set. In FY 2013-
14, the Sheriff’s Department will prioritize the allocation
of sworn staff to Custody and Field Support posts and will
hire civilian staff to perform critical, non-security related
tasks. In addition, the Department will work closely with the
Department of Human Resources to enhance management
of mandated leaves and workers’ compensation.
Staffing Needs
In the past four years, the Sheriff ’s Department has seen
a reduction of over 75 sworn staff positions due to the
consolidation of prisoners at five of the six jails, as well as
retirements and separations. As a result, the Department
has supplemented with overtime to perform its essential
functions. In FY 2013-14, for the first time since 2009, the
Department will hold a full Academy class of 20 deputies
and expects that these new staff will enter the system and
begin to reduce overtime expenditures in FY 2014-15.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $35.5
million for the Treasurer-Tax Collector is $6.1 million,
or 20.7 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of
$29.4 million. A significant amount of this increase is
due to the passage of the Gross Receipts Tax, which the
Department is accountable for implementing. In addition,
the Department is taking on new responsibilities related
to alarm licenses that were managed by the Department
of Emergency Management in the past.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $39.6 million for the
Treasurer-Tax Collector is $4.0 million, or 11.3 percent,
higher than the FY 2013-14 budget of $35.5 million.
A significant amount of this increase is due to the
implementation of the Gross Receipts Tax.
Implementing the Gross Receipts Tax
The Gross Receipts Tax and Business Registration
Fees Ordinance (2012 Proposition E) was approved by
San Francisco voters on November 6, 2012. The first
taxpayer filings affected by Prop. E will be the Business
Registration Fees due May 31, 2014. The changes to the
Gross Receipts Tax and Payroll Expense Tax commence
January 1, 2014. The Department is responsible for
implementing the new tax along with the other business
taxes.
The Department projects costs to increase as a result of
Gross Receipts Tax implementation by $5.7 million in FY
2013-14 and by an additional $3.3 million in FY 2014-15.
As implementation transitions to regular operations, costs
of the implementation project will decrease.
Kindergarten to College Savings
In FY 2010-11, in collaboration with the Mayor, the
Department launched the first program in the nation
to automatically open a college savings account for
all children entering kindergarten in the City’s public
schools. This Kindergarten to College program (K2C)
includes a matching component and incentives to boost
family savings, and puts San Francisco at the forefront
of national savings policy models. K2C now covers all
4,400 students entering into kindergarten each year.
Since its inception, K2C has opened 8,000 accounts for
San Francisco children. As the only program in North
America operating at this scale, K2C is a flagship for
ensuring students have the financial foundation for higher
education and financial “knowledge” for good decision
making related to money matters.
Reforming of Permit Renewals
The Treasurer, along with Mayor Lee and Board of
Supervisors President David Chiu, initiated legislation
to ease burdens on small businesses operating in San
Francisco. Businesses of all types are required to have
permits to operate, and the annual renewal of these
permits previously occurred sporadically throughout the
year depending on the type of permit and the location
of the business. The legislation passed in FY 2011-12
consolidates permit renewal billings by business owner on
one date, making it easier for the business to plan, track,
and pay. In FY 2013-14, the Department will expand its
efforts by working with other departments on License 1-2-3
as well as on developing models for improved ways for
businesses to register in San Francisco.
Making Government More Efficient &
Effective Through Technology
The Department has been actively utilizing technological
innovations in order to improve customer service,
increase efficiency, and grow collections. Over the
past few fiscal years, the Department has automated a
majority of its tax collection processes. In FY 2013-14, the
Department will have implemented two major projects:
the new cashier and remittance system and the new
business tax system.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 proposed budget of $11.9
million for the War Memorial is $0.2 million, or 1.5
percent, lower than the FY 2012-13 budget of $12.1
million. A significant amount of this decrease is due to
the planned closure of the Veterans Building on July 1,
2013 for a two-year construction period to implement
seismic and life safety renovations. The Veterans Building
closure is projected to reduce FY 2013-14 expenditures
by $1.3 million. This savings is partially offset by an
increase in salary and fringe benefits costs, an increase in
utility rates, and an increase in FY 2013-14 capital project
expenditures for the Opera House and Davies Symphony
Hall.
The FY 2014-15 proposed budget of $12.4 million for
the War Memorial is $0.4 million, or 3.7 percent, higher
than the FY 2013-14 budget of $11.9 million. A significant
amount of this increase is due to increases in salary
and fringe benefits costs, as well as the costs and debt
payments associated with the War Memorial Veterans
Building seismic upgrade.
Veterans Building Seismic Upgrade and
Improvements Project
As provided in the City’s Ten -Year Capital Plan, the twoyear
construction period of the Veterans Building Seismic
Upgrade and Improvements Project will commence on
July 1, 2013. This major project represents an investment
in one of San Francisco’s historic properties and has a
significant impact on the War Memorial’s budget for
the next two fiscal years, in terms of both revenues and
expenditures. Earned revenues from Herbst Theatre and
Green Room rentals, as well as other Veterans Building
occupancies, will decrease by $0.6 million in both FY
2013-14 and FY 2014-15. Veterans Building operating
expenditures will decrease by $1.2 million in FY 2013-
14, and by $1.0 million in FY 2014-15, largely due to the
reduction of positions and discontinuation of building
services and utilities during the two-year Veterans
Building closure. The Veterans Building Project will
create hundreds of construction jobs, and the Local Hire
Ordinance will insure new jobs for San Franciscans. Upon
completion of the Veterans Building Project, the War
Memorial will restore necessary staffing and building
services and utilities, and the building will re-open with
significantly improved and new facilities for veterans and
arts organizations that will generate additional earned
revenue.
Automated Booking System
Following extensive review of available venue and
room scheduling software products, the War Memorial
installed new booking software in late FY 2011-12.
Software customization and staff training is on-going,
and full conversion from manual booking processes to
online booking and scheduling is now targeted for June
2013. Automated booking will greatly improve efficiency
and effectiveness of booking and licensing performance
venues and will generate a wide variety of reports and
data that will assist in identifying trends, creating
marketing tools, and quantifying successes.