The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $5.2
million for Academy of Sciences is $0.7 million, or 15.1
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $4.5 million.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $5.4
million for the Academy of Sciences is $0.2 million, or
3.2 percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget
of $5.2 million. A large portion of this increase is due to
increased capital spending.
Diversity and Inclusion
The Academy of Sciences has a firm commitment to
embracing diversity and inclusion. Recent surveys

showed that both Academy visitors and employees
reflect the substantial diversity of San Francisco.
Inclusive hiring is another priority for the Academy.
To this end, the Academy’s productive partnership
with The ARC San Francisco has grown to include the
employment of four ARC clients. The ARC San Francisco
is a nonprofit service, education and career center for
adults with developmental disabilities and their families.
The Academy has also commenced an internship
program with The ARC, called Project Search, which
currently has six ARC clients. These individuals work at
the Academy four days a week and earn City College
credit as they prepare for a museum job. Clients develop

job readiness skills using Academy computers and
help with Academy needs through a quarterly rotation
program. This rotation, designed to ensure clients gain
a full museum experience, includes tasks from greeting
visitors to running the rainforest line to aquarium
water testing. The Academy is also a proud participant
in the Access SFUSD program for 18- to 22-year-old
transitional age youth with disabilities. The Academy
currently employs two individuals through this program
and intends to hire these individuals permanently.
Promoting Science Literacy
The Academy strives to be a global leader in enhancing
science literacy about nature, life, and sustainability
for people of all ages. To this end, the Academy works
to offer highly creative and effective programs that
amplify the guest experience, engage youth with
science in a personal and direct way, and inspire
students to take up careers in science. The Academy
hosts over 160,000 school group visitors annually,
46,000 of them from San Francisco, and continues
to provide free access through Neighborhood Free
Days. The Academy provides a pathway of youth STEM
programs for middle and high school-aged youth,
including paid jobs. The Academy proudly partners with
the Community Access Ticket Service and is the largest
donor of free tickets in the Bay Area with 7,000 tickets
contributed in FY 2014-15. This partnership, along with
participation in San Francisco Public Library’s free
Family Pass program, helps the Academy ensure yearround
access to people of all income levels.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $34.2
million for the Adult Probation Department is $3.4
million, or 11.1 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget
of $30.8 million. A large portion of this increase is due to
increases in staff at the Department.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $34.7
million for the Adult Probation Department is $0.5
million, or 1.4 percent, higher than the FY 2015-16
proposed budget of $34.2 million. A large portion of this
increase is due to annualization of positions added in
FY 2015-16.
In Fiscal Year 2015-16 there will be a continuing focus on
effective supervision of high risk individuals supervised
by the Adult Probation Department as well as evaluation
and quality assurance activities.
Effective Supervision of High Risk
Individuals
Several factors have increased the proportion of high risk
individuals in the Adult Probation Department’s client
population. For example, the Public Safety Realignment
(AB109) population supervised by the Adult Probation
Department is at higher risk of recidivism and has
greater needs than the general probation population.
AB109 clients tend to qualify as high risk with multiple
co-occurring criminogenic needs. Additionally, the
homeless and mental health populations supervised by
ADP have more needs than other probation populations.
This requires skilled community supervision and
culturally competent services to address challenges
around substance abuse, housing, employment, mental
health, education, anger management, parenting issues
and other destabilizers. The Department continues
to implement evidence-based supervision strategies
that are effective in reducing recidivism and improving
outcomes.
Quality Assurance
The Adult Probation Department will continue to collect,
report, and analyze data to improve the effectiveness
of its supervision and reentry services. The Department
reports monthly on reentry services, treatment, and
housing referrals. Performance measurements and
outcome analyses of reentry service providers, as well as
the validation of the COMPAS risk and needs assessment
tool, will allow the Department to identify gaps in
services, respond to reentering clients’ needs, and
ensure the programs offered are effective. Over the next
two fiscal years, the Department will improve service
evaluation, focusing on ensuring clients permanently
stay out of the criminal justice system, and will expand
these reports to inform decisions related to current and
projected service level needs.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $925.8
million for the Airport is $31.1 million, or 3.2 percent,
lower than the FY 2014-15 budget of $956.9 million. A
large portion of this decrease is due to decreased capital
expenditure.
The Airport is entering the second year of a fixed twoyear
budget, so the FY 2016-17 budget is not under
consideration at this time.
Supporting Tourism and Trade
The Airport forecasts that enplanements (the number of
passengers boarding a plane) will exceed 24.3 million in
FY 2015-16, a 2.7 percent increase from the FY 2014-15
projection. Air Traffic growth in the international sector
is expected to outpace domestic growth in upcoming
years, due to new and increased services. Recently added
international services include United to Chengdu, Etihad
to Abu Dhabi, China Southern to Wuhan with continuation
to Guangzhou, and added service to existing destinations
by current air carriers. Turkish Airways began service to
Istanbul in April 2015. By attracting new and expanded
airline service, the Airport supports tourism and
international trade, while promoting lower airfares. The
Airport projects that expanding international traffic will
be the source of its long-term growth.

Investing in Capital, Creating Jobs
The Airport’s $4.5 billion ten-year Capital Improvement
Plan (CIP) will support the local economy and businesses
by investing in Airport infrastructure. Highlights of
the CIP include $3.1 billion in investments in terminal
improvements, including the renovation of Boarding Area
B in Terminal 1 and Boarding Area F in Terminal 3; $519.8
million in groundside improvements, including an onairport
hotel, a second long-term parking garage; and an
extension of the AirTrain System to the long-term parking
garages; $429.8 million for airport support projects,
such as a consolidated administration campus, and other
airport support facilities; $285.2 million on the airfield for
runway and taxiway improvements; and $235.5 million for
utility infrastructure.
Providing Local Business
Opportunities and Revenue
The Airport’s concession program continues to perform
well. The concessions include high-end retailers,
numerous restaurants, and vendors offering a broad
range of services. With the terminal improvements and
focus on passenger experience, SFO continues to be
one of the top performing airports for retail, food, and
beverage concessions. Terminal 2, which opened in 2011,
sets a new standard for concessions quality. With nearly two thirds of concessionaires locally-owned, the new
terminal offers not only a unique experience, but also
provides valuable opportunities and exposure for local
businesses. The Airport plans to engage with more local
businesses when leasing up soon-to-be-renovated areas
of Terminal 1.
Guest Experience
The Airport strives to have the highest ratings of
customer satisfaction among international gateway
airports in the United States as measured by the
Airport Service Quality global survey and benchmarking
program. Satisfaction scores for the Airport’s key
performance indicators continue to rise each quarter.
Every key driver of satisfaction saw improvement in 2014.
Terminals 2 and Terminal 3 Boarding Area E have some
of the highest scores in North America for cleanliness,
ambiance, and comfort. Additionally, the Airport’s unique
“Travel Well” service training curriculum, developed for
Airport tenants, has contributed to higher staff courtesy
scores airport-wide. New and ongoing programs, such
as the Wag Brigade Therapy Dog Program and “You Are
Hear” live music initiative continue to set SFO apart from
other airports.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $14.5
million for the Art Commission is $0.4 million, or 2.8
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $14.1 million.
A large portion of this increase is due to increased funding
for Cultural Equity Grants.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $15.3
million for the Art Commission is $0.8 million, or 5.9
percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of
$14.5 million. A large portion of this increase is due to
increases in capital spending.
Arts Affordability and Cultural Equity
The Arts Commission is leveraging resources and a shared
prosperity model to ensure artists and arts and culture
organizations continue to thrive in San Francisco.
The Mayor has increased ongoing funding to the City’s
groundbreaking cultural equity endowment fund by 50
percent to $3.0 million annually. These funds will be
granted to the City’s Cultural Centers, arts organizations,
and individual artists to ensure that artists continue to
thrive in San Francisco.
Affordable Housing Alignment
The Arts Commission will work closely with the Mayor’s
Office of Housing and Community Development (MOHCD)
over the coming years to build the City’s first affordable
housing development solely dedicated to housing artists.
Cultural Centers
During FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17, the City’s Cultural
Centers will benefit from significant investment in capital
maintenance. Over these two years, the proposed budget
allocates over $2.7 million to fund a variety of capital
improvements intended to keep the facilities in good
working order and to ensure a safe environment for staff
and visitors. Projects include: an elevator retrofit at the
Mission Cultural Center for Latino Arts, HVAC replacement
at the African American Arts & Cultural Center, and an
upgrade of the fire panel, signage, and seating at the

Bayview Opera House. This proactive investment in
preventative maintenance will decrease future facilities
maintenance costs and thus represents a prudent
investment of City resources.
Investing In Arts Education
The FY 2015-16 and 2016-17 proposed budget restores
ongoing funding to support an Arts Education staff
position, which was cut from the agency’s budget during
the last economic downturn. The dedicated funding will
provide the opportunity to focus on the important work
of building strategic partnerships with the San Francisco
Unified School District and arts providers to identify
gaps in arts education service delivery, connect arts
education resources, and support development of the
next phase of an Arts Education Master Plan to ensure
all students in the City have access to robust, broad, and
high quality arts education.
Improving Access and
Responsiveness
The Arts Commission is committed to investing in
systems to improve data-based decision making,
and to ensure that the public is served as efficiently,
effectively, and equitably as possible. To this end, the
Department will redesign its web site, launch an online
grants management tool, and create a new database to
streamline operations.
Caring For Our Cultural Assets
The Arts Commission continues to care for our Civic Art
Collection, and will be increasing funding for conservation
and restoration of historic works. The Veteran’s War
Memorial Building, in addition to housing administrative
offices and a new, expanded arts exhibition and
programming space, will include secure storage for the
Civic Art collection.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $10.3
million for the Asian Art Museum is $0.8 million, or 8.8
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $9.5 million.
This increase is due to increased funding for capital needs
at the Asian Art Museum.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $10.3
million for the Asian Art Museum is roughly the same as
the FY 2015-16 proposed budget.
The Department’s budget represents a unique privatepublic
partnership: the Asian Art Museum receives funding
from the City’s General Fund to cover approximately
one-third of its budget, and the remaining two-thirds are
funded through the Asian Art Museum Foundation (the
Foundation), the museum’s non-profit supporting arm.
The City and County of San Francisco owns the majority
of the Asian Art Museum’s art collection as well as the
museum facility itself.
Featured Programming
Over the course of the next fiscal year, AAM will host a
number of notable exhibitions representing the diversity
and depth of Asian art and culture, including:
28 Chinese
June 5–August 16, 2015
28 Chinese offers a view of contemporary Chinese art
through a group of 28 artists, ranging from those grabbing
the spotlight today, including Liu Wei, He Xiangyu and Xu
Zhen to the internationally acclaimed Zhang Huan and Ai
Weiwei. These artists have made a significant impact on
the contemporary art world and have expanded definitions
of “Chinese contemporary art”.
Looking East: How Japan Inspired Monet,
van Gogh, and Other Western Artists
October 30, 2015–February 7, 2016
The opening of trade with Japan in the 1850s set off
a craze in the West for “all things Japanese”. Looking
East: How Japan Inspired Monet, van Gogh, and Other
Western Artists explores this sweeping phenomenon,
which the French intellectual Philippe Burty dubbed
“japonisme”. The exhibition includes over 170 works
drawn from the collection of the Museum of Fine Arts,
Boston, and traces the West’s growing interest in Japan,
the collecting of Japanese objects, and the exploration
of Japanese subject matter and styles. The works shown
represent most of the major artistic movements of the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, including
impressionism, postimpressionism, art nouveau, and the
aesthetic movement. Painting, printmaking, furniture, and
decorative arts — no field was immune from the effects of
japonisme.
Pearls on a String: Art in the Age of Great
Islamic Empires
February 26–May 8, 2016
An international loan exhibition of Islamic art organized in
collaboration with the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore,
Pearls on a String emphasizes the role of human
relationships in inspiring and sustaining artistic creativity
at imperial courts. Approximately ninety works of art on
view cover a range of mediums. They span a geographic
range from the Bay of Bengal to the Mediterranean Sea
and date from the sixteenth to the eighteenth century
— a period marked by the global movement of ideas and
technologies and increased interaction among various
cultural and religious communities.
China at the Center: Rare Ricci and Verbiest
World Maps
March 4–May 8, 2016
Global exploration in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries led to new interactions between Europe and
Asia. Jesuit priests were instrumental in spreading
knowledge of the world to China and information
about China to Europe. China at the Center focuses
on two masterpieces of seventeenth-century mapmaking
that illustrate this exchange of information (and
misinformation).
Hidden Gold
March 4–May 8, 2016
In 2016, the Asian Art Museum will celebrate its 50th
anniversary, a “golden” milestone. Hidden Gold: Mining
Meaning in Asian Art, is an exhibition of more than 35
artworks from across Asia, each chosen to reveal specific
aspects of gold production and usage. San Francisco and
the Bay Area have a long history of involvement with gold,
“the ore with an aura”. From the centrality of the fortyniners
— both the historical miners and today’s football
players — to California’s gold rush and San Francisco’s
mint, California’s current position on the world stage is
inconceivable without the quest for this precious metal.
But most importantly, the Asian’s collection contains
magnificent objects that capitalize on the physical and
symbolic aspects of gold — a story that Hidden Gold
reveals.

The Emperors’ Treasures
Chinese Art from the National Palace Museum, Taipei
June 17–September 18, 2016
The Emperors’ Treasures features nearly 150 artworks
from the renowned National Palace Museum, Taipei and
encompasses paintings, calligraphy, bronze vessels,
ceramics, lacquer ware, jades, textiles, and historical
documents. The works are examples of exemplary
craftsmanship and imperial taste. More than 100 pieces
will make their debut in the United States; among these,
seven painted and calligraphic works are extremely rare
masterpieces and highlights of the show.
Asian Art Museum Collection Galleries
Ongoing
More than 2,500 extraordinary works from the Museum’s
renowned collection are displayed in the second- and
third-floor galleries. Together, these works constitute
a comprehensive introduction to the major cultures of
Asia. Immense Indian stone sculptures, intricately carved
Chinese jades, vibrant Korean paintings, mystical Tibetan
thangkas (ritual paintings on cloth), serene Cambodian
Buddhas, richly decorated Islamic manuscripts, and
colorful Japanese kimonos are just a few of the treasures
on view. Every six months, the museum refreshes
dozens of artworks from each geographic region with
new selections from storage, providing visitors a unique
perspective on each visit.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $25.0
million for the Assessor-Recorder is $1.1 million, or 4.8
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $23.9
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to the
movement of project-based positions to address ongoing
departmental needs.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $25.1 million for the
Assessor-Recorder is $0.1 million, or 0.5 percent, higher
than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of $25.0 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to increases in
salary and fringe benefit costs.
Replacing the City’s Property Tax
Assessment System
ASR received initial funding in FY 2014-15 for critical
project development to replace the City’s property tax
assessment system. The City currently uses separate
legacy IT systems to track approximately $180 billion in
assessed value for real and business personal property
and to issue and collect property tax bills and audit
revenues. In FY 2015-16, the Office of the Assessor-
Recorder, the Office of the Treasurer-Tax Collector, and
the Office of the Controller are collaborating to define
their business and functional requirements and identify
IT solutions to manage all property assessment, tax
collection, and auditing functions in a fully integrated
manner.
The project is listed as one of three major IT initiatives in
the City’s Information & Communication Technology Plan
(ICT) for FY 2016-17 to FY 2019-20. As such, the proposed
budget includes funding to continue the project through
its critical development phase.
Digitizing Real Property Files for
Improved Efficiency and Disaster
Preparedness
The Assessor’s Office tracks more than 205,000 unique
real property parcels, each with historical property
ownership and assessment information. In FY 2015-16,
the Department will begin converting paper real property
files to digital format to meet several strategic objectives.
These objectives include safeguarding files against
disaster, theft, or other unforeseen circumstances;
ensuring disaster recovery of historic files; increasing
staff productivity by enabling multiple users to search
and view records simultaneously; better securing
confidential taxpayer information; and freeing up limited
office space at City Hall.
Restructuring Department to Expand
Assessment Enrollments
Over the last ten years, San Francisco’s real estate
market has seen significant shifts impacting the
Assessor-Recorder’s office core operations. Beginning
with the economic downturn in 2008, San Francisco
experienced a four-fold increase in the number of
assessment appeals filed compared to the prior ten-year
average of 1,500 annual filings. A high level of appeals

filings has persisted even with an improving real estate
market—in 2014, more than 4,200 appeals were filed. The
Department’s assessment workload continues to grow
due to a higher volume of new commercial and residential
construction activity and continued property sales. As
of May 2015, the Department had more than 15,000 new
construction and change-in-ownership cases pending
reassessment, without a foreseeable decline in incoming
new construction cases. The proposed budget expands
the Department’s real property assessment efforts to
enroll new or modified assessed values and pilots new
strategies to gather assessment-related information, such
as enhancing ASR’s collection of property characteristics
and in-progress construction data.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 and 2016-17 proposed
budgets of $0.9 million for the Board of Appeals are
roughly the same as the FY 2014-15 budget of $0.9 million.
Enhancing Access and Technology
In an effort to make its appeal-related materials more
accessible to the public, prior to each hearing the Board
of Appeals now posts on its web site all of the appeal
briefs, exhibits and written public comment submitted
to the Board for each case to be heard. These are the
documents reviewed by the Board members when they
evaluate each appeal. The Board also continues to
enhance its appeal management database to increase
efficiency in how appeals are filed and to improve the
Department’s ability to report on appeal trends and
outcomes.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $14.6
million for the Board of Supervisors is $1.1 million, or
7.9 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $13.5
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to an
increase in personnel costs, a new FY 2015-16 General
Fund appropriation to the Local Agency Formation
Commission (LAFCo), and funding of an IT project.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $14.2 million for
the Board of Supervisors is $0.4 million, or 1.9 percent,
lower than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of $14.6
million. A significant portion of this decrease is due to the
expiration of one-time project funding.
Continuance of Mandated Services
The City Charter requires the Board of Supervisors
provide specified support services that facilitate and
foster an open and participatory government. Mandated
positions and programs include board members,
legislative aides, the Clerk of the Board, the Assessment
Appeals Board, the Sunshine Ordinance Task Force, the
Youth Commission, committee clerks, a consultant to
prepare the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
(CAFR), official/legal advertising, and budget and
legislative analysis. The Board will continue to strive to
provide these mandated services in the most efficient
and effective manner possible.
Enhancing the Legislative Research
Center and Pursuing Open
Government Initiatives
Over the next two fiscal years, the Department will
continue to make the Legislative Research Center
the City’s definitive access point for all legislative
information. The Department will improve the quality and
completeness of the legislative files currently attached to
the system and ensure that all new records uploaded to
the system are as robust and comprehensive as possible.
Since going live in 2013, the Legislative Research
Center has increased the availability and accessibility
of legislative content online for members of the public.
This has improved the efficiency and productivity of
individuals engaged in legislative research.
Additionally, the Department will move forward with
more tangibly exploring new and innovative opportunities
to better comply with Charter Section 2.108—the Public’s
Right to Know and the Sunshine Ordinance—including
making legislative data available to the public in machine
readable formats, in accordance with the tenants of Open
Government.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $71.3
million for the Department of Building Inspection is $21.1
million, or 22.9 percent, lower than the FY 2014-15 budget
of $92.4 million. This decrease is primarily due to the
expiration of one-time project funding and a reduction in
fees for services.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $69.2 million for the
Department of Building Inspection is $1.1 million, or 1.6
percent, lower than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget.
This decrease is primarily due to projected reductions in
demand for the Department’s services.
Fee Reduction and Restructuring
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16, the Department will implement
a number of changes to its fees. The temporary seven
percent overall reduction in fees for staff services
introduced in FY 2014-15 will be made permanent. In
addition, three new valuation tiers will be added to the
Department’s fee table to reflect the increase in valuation
of construction projects. The existing fee schedule
assessed the same fees on any projects assessed above
$5.0 million. The new fee schedule includes the following
valuation tiers: $50.0 million to $100.0 million, $100.0
million to $200.0 million, and $200.0 million and above.
Customer Service Improvements
Over the next two fiscal years, DBI will continue
to focus on customer service improvement as it
implements a variety of technology and building
upgrades. In coordination with the Planning Department,
implementation and rollout of the Permit and Project
Tracking System (PPTS) will continue, which will
consolidate multiple existing systems into one citywide
permitting system, allowing for greater data sharing.
PPTS will allow for real-time permit tracking while
improving public transparency and access to DBI services.
In addition, DBI will continue to complete digitization of
department records which will reduce time to process
records request.
The Department is implementing a multi-year tenant
improvement program at 1660 Mission, which serves as
the City’s permit center. Major components of the program
include a heating and air conditioning retrofit, a backup
generator to provide power in an emergency, and a
remodel of the public-facing first floor.
As in FY 2014-15, DBI will continue to hire new staff to
assist the Department to continue to provide service
to residents. The Department will conduct several
recruitments to hire both inspection and permit staff.
In addition, to adequately address needed technology
improvements, the Department will hire additional IT staff.
Continued Implementation of Seismic
Safety and Housing Initiatives
DBI will continue to make progress on the soft story
program, secondary unit legalization, and prioritized
review for affordable housing projects.
With the completion of the soft story notification and
screening process, DBI staff will focus on the compliance
aspects of the Mandatory Soft Story program. Tier
1 Compliance Buildings plans are due in FY 2015-16.
The Department established a Soft-Story Unit and has
developed a guide to obtaining a permit for program
participants.
The Department will continue to provide assistance
to property owners legalizing secondary units while
working to increase participation in the program, which
is voluntary. The Department is also partnering with the
Mayor’s Office of Housing and Community Development
to provide priority processing for the rehabilitation of
the San Francisco Housing Authority’s portfolio through
the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s
Rental Assistance Demonstration Program. DBI will
provide permit and inspection services for approximately
3,500 units that are scheduled to be rehabilitated over
the next several years.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $12.9
million for Child Support Services is $0.4 million, or 3.3
percent, lower than the FY 2014-15 budget of $13.4 million.
A significant portion of this decrease is due to changes in
state funding and one-time funding to support IT system
replacement equipment. CSS is entering the second year
of a fixed two-year budget, so the FY 2016-17 budget is not
under consideration at this time.
Reentry Services for Parents
Child Support Services (CSS) partners with the Adult
Probation Department (APD) to incorporate child
support assessment and plans as part of the probation
plan for post-release parents with open child support
cases. Strategies include: the gradual re-introduction
of realistic child support orders that are mindful of the
instability many parents experience as they transition
from incarceration; consolidation of out-of-county cases;
paternity establishment; and timely modification of orders.
Child support staff are also on site at the APD offices two
days per week to provide case management services to
probationers. This initiative reduces the negative impact
that full child support enforcement may have on the
successful reintegration of post-release parents.

Moving to a Virtual Server System
In an effort to improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of its data management systems, CSS, in consultation
with the California Department of Child Support Services
(CA DCSS) Technology Services Division, has moved
from a physical server system to a virtual server system
using VMware. The Department has consolidated 16
physical servers to three virtual host servers, and over
the next fiscal year, will continue to make further digital
improvements
Screen Scrape
Screen scrape is a visual studio program which pulls
data from screens within the California Child Support
Automation System (CSE) and transfers the data to a
one page form in a matter of seconds. This program has
improved efficiencies at CSS because it quickly pulls data
from multiple screens and accurately presents that data
on a court preparation sheet, reducing errors. Screen
scrape affords CSS staff more time for customer contact,
case analysis, and court order review. In further pursuit
of efficiencies, CSS will move to a virtual legal file process
eliminating the need for cumbersome paper legal files in
court and allow for a more streamlined process for CSS
staff, court staff, and customers.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $51.7
million for First 5 is $6.9 million, or 11.8 percent, lower
than FY 2014-15 actual expenditures of $58.6 million. A
significant portion of this decrease is due to a cut in the
Child Signature Program grant from First 5 California.
Proposition C, which was approved by voters in 2014 shifts
Preschool for All funds to the Office of Early Care and
Education (OECE); First 5 will operate the program over
the course of FY 2015-16 while the program transitions to
OECE.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $18.4 million for First
5 is $33.3 million, or 64.4 percent, lower than the FY
2015-16 proposed budget of $51.7 million. This budget
assumes that the Preschool for All program will be fully
administered by OECE in FY 2016-17.
Preschool for All
For over a decade First 5 has worked to make high quality
preschool more affordable for all of San Francisco’s fouryear
olds through its implementation of Preschool for
All (PFA) utilizing the Public Education Enrichment Fund
(PEEF) allocation. In November 2014, with the passage
of Proposition C (Prop C) voters reauthorized PEEF for
another 26 years. Prop C also transferred administrative
authority of the PFA program from First 5 to the Office of
Early Care and Education (OECE). Over the course of FY
2015-16 First 5 will work with OECE to ensure a smooth
transition of the administration of the PFA program.
During FY 2015-16 First 5 will work collaboratively with
OECE to accelerate access to universal Pre-Kindergarten
for all four-year olds that live in San Francisco, regardless
of income level. This goal exceeds the highest standards in
the nation and will help an additional 860 families access
high quality Pre-K annually, for a total of 4,660 families
enrolled in the Preschool for All program.
Family Support
CFC’s vision to ensure the optimal health and development
of every child in San Francisco necessitates strong
partnership with the community and other City
departments. Approximately 30 percent of First 5
funds are committed to joint funding of child and family
wellbeing initiatives with other City departments.
The proposed FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 budget continues
to jointly fund the neighborhood-based and populationfocused
Family Resource Center (FRC) Initiative with the
Human Services Agency (HSA) and the Department of
Children, Youth, & Their Families (DCYF).
Technical Assistance, Training, and
Evaluation
The proposed budget will support preschools preparing
to meet the standards of the PFA program through the
technical assistance “pipeline.” First 5 has allocated
$6.3 million in FY 2015-16 to ongoing training, technical
assistance, and professional development so that all Cityfunded
programs are positioned to meet the expectations
of Quality Rating and Improvement Systems rolling out
locally, regionally, and throughout the State.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $166.3
million for DCYF is $4.3 million, or 2.7 percent, higher
than the FY 2014-15 budget of $162.0 million. This
increase is due to growing Children and Youth Fund
revenues, including growth in the pass through amount
to the San Francisco Unified School District. This increase
is partially offset by reduced use of fund balances and
the School District’s Rainy Day Reserve no longer being
included in the Department’s budget.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $174.1 million for
DCYF is $7.8 million, or 4.6 percent, higher than the FY
2015-16 budget of $166.3 million. The increase is due to
projected increases in Children and Youth Fund revenue.
Expanding Summer Programs
The proposed FY 2015-16 budget allocates an additional
$1.8 million in funding to support programming to keep
children and youth engaged and learning over the
summer months, using Children and Youth Fund dollars.
By eliminating summer programming wait lists, the
City is responding to important service demands from
the community. The increased funding will help ensure
that all children and youth have access to high quality
summer programs at school and community-based sites
throughout San Francisco.
High-quality and engaging summer programs prevent
summer learning loss, close the income-based
achievement gap among youth, and strengthen students’
social skills, work habits, attitudes, and readiness to
learn. Youth who participate in summer programs increase
literacy and mathematics skills by a third over youth who
do not attend summer programming, and 84 percent of
summer program participants report increased motivation
and ability to complete school work.
Youth Workforce Opportunities
The Department’s Summer Jobs+ initiative places youth
age 16-24 in public, non-profit, and private sector jobs
and paid internships during the summer. The FY 2015-16
and 2016-17 proposed budget makes ongoing additional
funding in each year to allow the Department to provide
over 7,000 paid positions. The program primarily serves
youth from low-income families and provides them with
their first job experience, allowing them to acquire the
skills and experience needed to successfully enter the
workforce. DCYF’s workforce programs help ensure that
all of San Francisco’s young people can benefit from the
City’s economic prosperity.

DCYF’s proposed FY 2015-16 budget invests an additional
$700,000 to create pathways to success through
supportive employment and training opportunities
coupled with educational support for the Transitional
Aged Youth (TAY) population. This investment will
focus on both immediate and long term approaches.
For summer 2015, the City will increase available
employment and training opportunities for disconnected
young people in programs with a proven track record in
providing high quality services to TAY youth. For the long
term, the City will create and strengthen pathways for
disconnected TAY to reengage with their education and
employment.
Expanding After-School Programs
The proposed FY 2015-16 budget includes $2.5 million
of additional funding for after-school programs which
will allow the Department and SFUSD to provide access
to and cut waitlists for school and community-based
programs. After-school programs provide meaningful
and relevant learning opportunities that foster children’s
curiosity, build their social skills, and creatively reinforce
and expand on what they learn during the school day.
Currently, approximately 26,000 K-5 youth are enrolled
in SFUSD. The latest data available indicates that 62
percent or approximately 16,000 elementary school
students have access to an after-school program. The
additional funding will increase the program capacity
of school and community-based organizations, creating
approximately 820 new slots for families Citywide.
Implementing Requirements of
Reauthorization
DCYF has been working with the Mayor’s Office and
the Board of Supervisors to seat a new Oversight and
Advisory Committee (OAC) to review the governance
and policies of DCYF, monitor and participate in the
Department’s administration, and to ensure that the
Children and Youth Fund is administered in a manner
accountable to the community. The OAC will have eleven
members and be seated by July 1, 2015.
The Department will enter a new five-year grantmaking
planning cycle in FY 2015-16. DCYF will put a plan in place
to conduct a required Community Needs Assessment
(CNA) in FY 2015-16 and a Service Allocation Plan in FY
2016-17. The CNA will be developed through extensive
engagement in every supervisorial district and will include
qualitative and quantitative data collected through
interviews, focus groups, surveys, and other outreach
mechanisms. The process will include an equity analysis of
services and resources for parents, children, and youth.
Promoting Affordability and Access to
Quality Services
The Department strategically targets Children and Youth
Fund investments to support its goal of making it possible
for every San Francisco family to thrive. Over the past
four years, the Department has increased accountability
and service quality improvements. DCYF will continue to
partner with community-based organizations to improve
children, family, and youth services.
The FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 budget includes over
$1.0 million for capacity building, technical assistance,
and program evaluations. The budgets fund workshops,
coaching, and small cohort trainings for Out of School
Time (OST), Teen, Violence Prevention and Intervention
(VPI), and Workforce Development for community-based
organization partners.
Continued Partnership with Public
Schools
The DCYF budget includes the transfer of the Public
Education Enrichment Fund (PEEF) allocation to the San
Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD). In FY 2015-16
the City will allocate $68.9 million to SFUSD, a 17 percent
increase over the FY 2014-15 contribution, and another
$71.1 million in FY 2016-17. Through the new structure
of the school district Rainy Day Reserve, which was
established as part of Proposition C, there is an additional
$36.5 million available for the school district to draw upon.
DCYF works closely with SFUSD to meet the shared goals
of supporting children and youth so that they are prepared
to learn and succeed. The Department partners with
SFUSD in a variety of programs including afterschool,
summer, arts, athletics, wellness, truancy prevention, and
work-based learning.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $76.5
million for the City Attorney is $0.8 million, or 1.0
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $75.7
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to an
increase in salaries and benefits.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $78.1 million for
the City Attorney is $1.6 million, or 2.1 percent, higher
than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of $76.5 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to an increase in
salaries and benefits.
Affirmative Litigation Program
Since 1998, the Department’s Affirmative Litigation
Program has successfully advanced important
public policy initiatives in San Francisco and across
the United States, protecting the health, social, and
financial interests of San Francisco and its citizens. In
collaboration with Yale University, the Department’s
Affirmative Litigation Working Group researches
potential litigation and explores innovative public policy
litigation strategies.
Protecting San Francisco’s
Neighborhoods and Residents
The Department’s Neighborhood and Resident Protection
team is responsible for the enforcement of municipal and
State laws governing public nuisance. Over the course of
the next two fiscal years, through a coordinated effort
with relevant City agencies, the team will investigate
complaints of public nuisance and, when appropriate,
enforce the law to abate that nuisance through all
necessary means, including litigation. Public nuisance
actions usually result in substantial penalties and
generate the recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $40.9
million for City Planning is $2.5 million, or 6.6 percent,
higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $38.4 million. This
increase is primarily due to the addition of new staff and
one-time projects.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $40.6 million for City
Planning is $0.3 million, or 0.7 percent, lower than the FY
2015-16 proposed budget. This decrease is primarily due
to expiration of one-time project funding.
Increasing Permit & Case Volume
Trends
Key economic indicators and recent planning case and
building permit volume trends suggest that overall
application volume growth is projected to remain at
the same high level in FY 2015-16 as FY 2014-15. The
Department continues to review and improve various
plan review processes and procedures to increase
efficiencies and reduce processing time delays.
Go-Live of Permit & Project Tracking
System
In coordination with the Department of Building
Inspection (DBI), the Planning Department is currently
implementing the new Permit and Project Tracking
System (PPTS), which will consolidate multiple existing
systems into one citywide permitting system, allowing
City departments to share data. Benefits of the new
system include increased transparency, assurance of
data and financial accountability, reduction of processing
times, and consolidated reporting across department
boundaries. From the user perspective, PPTS will allow
the public to search for general property information,
file some planning and building permit applications and
complaints, and track planning applications and building
permits online. This system is in use internally and
scheduled to go live to the public by the end of FY 2014-
15, with continued enhancements anticipated through FY
2015-16.
Long-Range Policy Initiatives
The Citywide Planning Division is implementing a fiveyear
work program centered on addressing the following
challenges; improved access and mobility, enhanced
resiliency and long-term sustainability, and improved
quality of place and livability, all while retaining the
equity and inclusiveness that make San Francisco unique.
Bridging the Bay will form a common agenda for the
core of the region, focusing on collaboration with
geographic neighbors to develop a shared vision and
strategic approach to ensure the long term economic,
social, and environmental vitality of both San Francisco
and the greater region. City of Neighborhoods will
take a new approach to neighborhood planning and
development by and encouraging residents of all of
the City’s neighborhoods to participate in the planning
process, with a focus on improvements to livability and
community-building.

Similar to the San Francisco Redevelopment Agency
(SFRA), OCII is a separate legal entity from the City
and County of San Francisco, while remaining under
the legislative authority of the Board of Supervisors.
Accordingly, the OCII budget is considered separately
from the City and County budget. OCII operates with an
annual budget, so only the FY 2015-16 proposed budget
is presented here.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $494.2
million is $116.7 million higher than the FY 2014-15
budget. The change is primarily due to the anticipated
sale of $257.2 million of publicly-owned parcels in
the Transbay project area, with the proceeds passed
through to the Transbay Joint Powers Authority to help
fund the Transbay Transit Center.
OCII participates in redevelopment activities carried
out by the former SFRA and related to enforceable
obligations, including major approved development
projects, property and asset management, and housing
obligations that include ensuring the development of
affordable housing.
With respect to its current operations, OCII anticipates
funding $98 million of its budget for Affordable
Housing, $11 million for infrastructure, $20 million for
property management (including Yerba Buena Gardens
programming and maintenance), and $12 million for
project management and administration.
Affordable Housing
Since the State’s dissolution of redevelopment agencies,
San Francisco has lacked the authority to issue
bonds secured by property tax increment related to
redevelopment project areas. Pending approval by the
State legislature expected in June 2015, OCII anticipates
additional investments towards the construction of
1,800 units of affordable housing by 2020 in Mission
Bay, Transbay and Hunters Point Shipyard/Candlestick
Point. In addition to affordable housing development,
OCII anticipates the State approval will allow financing
of Transbay parks, open space and other infrastructure
needs.
In support of accelerated affordable housing production
and other development, OCII’s budget includes a net
addition of four project management and development
specialist staff, reflecting the anticipated timing of
affordable housing projects.
Community Benefit Districts
In addition, OCII administers six Community Facilities
Districts (“CFDs”) created under California’s Mello-
Roos Act that support infrastructure and maintenance
activities in project areas with funds from dedicated
parcel taxes. The six CFDs fund park maintenance and
infrastructure expenditures at South Beach Harbor,
Mission Bay North and South, and Hunter’s Point
Shipyard

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $62.8
million for the Controller’s Office is $9.2 million, or 17.1
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $53.6
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
project costs associated with the replacement of the
City’s financial management system.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $73.1 for the
Controller’s Office is $10.4 million, or 16.5 percent, higher
than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of $62.8 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to project costs
associated with the replacement of the City’s financial
management system.
Financial System Replacement
Project
A major milestone was met in late FY 2014-15 with
the selection of the City’s new financial management
system. The schedule for completion has been reduced
from the original projected three years to two. Work will
begin on system implementation and integration in FY
2015-16, with expected completion in FY 2016-17.
eMerge – Human Resources, Benefits
Administration, and Payroll System
The PeopleSoft 9.2 upgrade was initiated in late FY 2014-
15. This upgrade ensures the City remains on a vendorsupported
version of PeopleSoft, which provides for
ongoing maintenance and system updates. The upgrade
version provides further innovative efficiencies related to
leave tracking, benefits eligibility and enrollment, company
directory, time reporting, and payroll processing.
In FY 2015-16, work on other initiatives includes
deployment of a new streamlined Request to Hire
(Appointment Processing) workflow, creation of a new
Self-Service Portal for access by employees citywide,
deployment of the Enterprise Learning Management
(ELM) to house more department and citywide training,
and piloting of the Performance Management module.
Financial Systems Disaster Recovery
and Cost Recovery
Work will continue in FY 2015-16 on strengthening the
City’s capabilities to quickly restore and resume vital
financial operations after a major disaster event occurs.
The work on the establishing the financial systems
disaster recovery site at Rancho Cordova will continue
with the new financial system becoming available and
citywide needs are addressed. Additionally, building
upon last fiscal year’s success in developing technology
to better support the City’s cost recovery capabilities,
the Controller’s Office will work to automate emergency

personnel timekeeping in PeopleSoft and other cost
recovery capabilities.
Automation of Citywide Accounting
Workflows
In FY 2015-16, contributing to citywide operational
efficiency, the Controller’s Office will streamline and
automate high-volume citywide accounting-related
transactions and paper forms such as: Travel Advance,
Employee Reimbursement, Budget Reallocation, and
Financial System Security. This project will greatly
enhance the City’s ability to manage and provide timely
response to a growing number of finance and accounting
related requests.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $51.3
million for the District Attorney is $2.7 million, or 5.6
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $48.6
million. A large portion of this increase is due to increases
in salaries and benefits costs.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $52.3
million for the District Attorney is $1.0 million, or 1.9
percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of
$51.3 million. A large portion of this increase is due to
increases in salaries and benefits costs.
Victim Services
The Department has made two organizational changes in
an effort to provide increased services to victims and to
create better avenues for victims to access services. First,
advocates have been re-organized by victim’s needs into
7 specialty teams: Intake, Preliminary/General Litigation,
Sexual Assault/Human Trafficking, Homicides/Gangs,
Elder Abuse, Domestic Violence, and Juvenile. This change
will allow for the development of specialization among
staff who are then better able to serve the specialized
populations. Second, the Department is instituting a
targeted initiative to engage the most vulnerable, difficult
to serve victims including those involved in human
trafficking, with limited English language proficient, LGBT,
and the elderly.
Strategies for targeted engagement of these vulnerable
victims include an internal study to understand the
barriers and challenges to accessing support and services
from the Department, outreach in the community and to
partner agencies, extending office hours at key locations
in the community, and special events and trainings in the
community. The Department anticipates that these efforts
will yield continued growth in the number of victims
served each year.
Laura’s Law Implementation
The District attorney is a member of the Assisted
Outpatient Treatment (AOT, or Laura’s Law)
implementation team, and will represent the City in
legal proceedings related to AOT. The Department of
Public Health has estimated that up to 100 individuals
annually will meet the criteria for AOT and these
individuals will each have multiple hearings. In addition,
the law obligates the the Department to provide
service of hearing notices to anyone identified by the
individual under AOT, which will require significant nonattorney
resources. And on top of normal operational
responsibility, the first year of AOT will require the
Department to dedicate additional time to program
implementation. In order to support these new
responsibilities, the Department will receive funding in
the 2015-16 budget for an additional attorney.
Information Technology
The proposed budget provides significant new funding
to increase the Department’s Information Technology
capacity. Specifically, the Department will receive
funding for additional information technology staff to
ensure that the department is able to effectively utilize
the growth in video evidence, especially as a result
of the SFPD’s new body camera program. This new
staff will also ensure that day to day technology needs
are addressed in a prompt manner, preventing work
disruptions and increasing efficiency.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $40.6
million for the Office of Economic and Workforce
Development is $3.8 million, or 10.2 percent, higher than
the FY 2014-15 budget of $36.8 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to investments in programs
to strengthen small businesses, neighborhoods and job
seekers.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $39.0
million for the Office of Economic and Workforce
Development is $1.6 million, or 4.0 percent, lower than
the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of $40.6 million. A
significant portion of this decrease is due to expected
reductions in funding from federal grants.
Supporting Small Businesses
Building on the Business Portal launched in 2014 and
acting on feedback from small business’ experience
with existing processes, OEWD, CPC, DBI and DPH are
collaborating to launch the small business acceleration
pilot facilitating small business formation through
simplification of the existing permit process. These
departments co-locate at DBI’s one-stop permit center
at 1660 Mission and dedicate one Client Service Manager
to optimize the process to start a business and make
all relevant City resources available to small business
owners. This effort complements comprehensive online
resources for information necessary to start, manage,
and grow a business in the City.
In addition, SF Biz Connect, with an initial launch in
May 2015, is set up to shift 10 percent of San Francisco
business spending to local businesses. SF Biz Connect
supports local small businesses by providing a platform
that connects them to larger businesses and expands
their network of customers. Through SF Biz Connect,
large businesses can meet their small business and
diversity supplier goals. The program also leverages a
private sector match.
Strengthening & Investing in
Neighborhoods
The Department promotes the vitality of local
neighborhoods through its Invest in Neighborhoods
programs: Small Business New Jobs Investment Fund,
StorefrontSF, a vacancy tracking system, the SF Shines
Facade and Tenant Improvement Program, the ADA
Program, HealthyRetailSF, BizFitSF, and new business and
business expansion consulting services through the Small
Business Development Center.
The City, through OEWD, will launch its “Disaster
Recovery Fund” with $0.3 million in capital addressing a
gap in services available to businesses immediately after
a disaster, complementing $0.4 million in enhancements
to its commercial corridor program. While insurance
proceeds and loan products are inadequate and
untimely in providing financing, a grant through the
Disaster Recovery Fund assists in restarting operations 

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $19.0
million for the Department of Elections is $2.7 million, or
16.5 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $16.3
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to the
costs related to the additional scheduled election in June
2016 for the Presidential primary.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $14.1
million for the Department of Elections is $5.0 million, or
26.0 percent, lower than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget
of $19.0 million. A significant portion of this decrease
is due to the reduction in the number of scheduled
elections in the fiscal year.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $82.9
million for the Department of Emergency Management
is $6.8 million, or 8.9 percent, higher than the FY
2014-15 budget of $76.1 million. A significant portion
of this increase is due to investments in 911 emergency
dispatcher classes and the continuation of the 800Mhz
Public Safety Radio Replacement project.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $90.1
million for the Department of Emergency Management
is $7.2 million, or 8.7 percent, higher than the FY 2015-16
proposed budget of $82.9 million. A significant portion of
this increase is due to increases in salaries and benefits
costs and costs related to the 800Mhz Public Safety Radio
Replacement project.
Implement Public Safety Hiring Plan
and Related Initiatives to Improve
Performance of 9-1-1 Operations
The Department’s dispatch personnel ensure rapid 9-1-1
call times and dispatches. Over the last several years,
9-1-1 and non-emergency calls have grown sharply. Over
the course of the next two fiscal years, DEM will hire
36 dispatchers to help the Department transition and
implement its succession plan.
The Department’s Hiring Plan and related initiatives
combine to ensure the Department is able to address
increased call volume and immediately address call
volume changes as they occur. In addition to new hires, the
Department will increase the availability of existing staff
through leave management practices and encouraging

participation in City-sponsored Wellness Programs.
The Department’s data and other management initiatives
focus on quality assurance and quality control to analyze
911 call data and other emergency services metrics.
Through a data driven approach, the Department will
develop policy and process improvements to address
changes in call volume over time. Lastly, the Department
will implement a cloud based workforce scheduling system
to schedule all 24/7 dispatcher staff.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $17.3
million for the Department of the Environment is $1.3
million, or 8.2 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget
of $16.0 million. A significant portion of this increase is
due to changes in grant funding.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $17.5 million for
the Department of the Environment is $0.22 million, or
1.0 percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 budget of $17.3
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
changes in salary and fringe benefits costs.
On an annual basis, the Department of Environment’s
budget fluctuates depending on the timing and size
of external grants appropriated outside of the City’s
budget process.
Green Jobs and Waste Division
With a citywide goal of zero waste by 2020, the
Department will continue to promote recycling,
composting, and other waste diversion practices.
The Department is pleased to continue and refine
the Environment Now education and outreach
program, which hires local San Francisco residents
for extensive green jobs training. Environment Now
provides leadership development and on-the-job
training to workers from the City’s most underserved
neighborhoods.
Environmental Justice and Toxics
Reduction
The Department’s Healthy Homes program aims to
reduce unnecessary exposure to harmful household
chemicals such as flame retardants, cleaning supplies,
and personal care products. The Department will expand
the program through collaborations with community
based organizations, other City agencies, and faith-based
organizations.
Green Building
The San Francisco Existing Commercial Building
Energy Performance Ordinance ensures that owners of
non- residential buildings annually benchmark energy
use and conduct an energy audit every five years.
The Department will continue implementation of this
initiative. Through the use of benchmark and audit
data, Environment staff assist program participants in
developing cost-effective energy efficiency solutions.



The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $3.9
million for the Ethics Commission is $0.6 million, or 14.1
percent, lower than the FY 2014-15 budget of $4.6
million. A significant portion of this decrease is due
to a lower required deposit to the Election Campaign
Fund, which fund is approaching the $7.0 million
maximum deposit.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $4.7
million for the Ethics Commission is $0.8 million, or
19.9 percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 budget of $3.9
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
additional deposits required to the Election Campaign
Fund following anticipated withdrawals from the fund
in connection with Mayoral and Board of Supervisor
elections.
ELECTION CAMPAIGN FUND
By statute, $7.50 per resident plus 15 percent for
administrative expenses must be deposited in the
Election Campaign Fund three months before a Mayoral
election, up to a cap of $7.0 million. The proposed FY
2015-16 deposit to the Election Campaign Fund will be
$1.3 million, which will allow the fund to reach its cap. In
November 2015, there may be publicly-financed races for
Mayor and the special Supervisorial race in District 3. The
FY 2016-17 proposed allocation to the Election Campaign
Fund is $2.0 million.
INCREASED USE OF DATA
Each unit at Ethics utilizes data for different purposes.
The late filing fees unit uses data to identify late filers
and assess late fees. The campaign filings unit uses data
to identify filers that may need additional customer
support to help them to file on time. The Statement of
Economic Interests (SEI) unit uses data to identify filers
who must file with Ethics and designated employees who
have failed to file their SEIs with their departments. The
audit unit uses data to project the amount public funds
disbursements in each election. The legal unit uses data
to determine whether changes to laws and regulations
are needed.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $18.3
million for the Fine Arts Museums is $0.7 million, or
4.0 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of
$17.6 million. A large portion of this increase is due to
increases in capital spending.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $18.1
million for the Fine Arts Museums is $0.2 million, or 1.4
percent, lower than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of
$18.3 million. A large portion of this decrease is due to
decreased capital spending.
Major Exhibitions
As in the past, special exhibitions will continue to be
FAM’s principal tool for fulfilling its commitment to
serve residents of and visitors to the City. The exhibition
schedule at the de Young will include J.M.W. Turner:
Painting Set Free (June-September 2015), Royal Hawaiian
Featherwork: Na Hulu Ali’i (August 2015-February 2016),
Jewel City: Art from the Panama Pacific International
Exposition (October 2015-January 2016), a major Oscar
de la Renta retrospective (February-May 2016), Ed
Ruscha and the Great American West (July-October
2016), Danny Lyon: Message to the Future (October
2016-February 2017), and surveys of work by Frank
Stella (November 2016-February 2017), and Stuart Davis
(March-July 2017).
Exhibitions at the Legion will include Breguet: Art &
Innovation in Watchmaking and Ancient Luxury and the
Roman Silver Treasure from Berthouville (September
2015-January 2016), Pierre Bonnard: Painting Arcadia
(February-May 2016), Masterpieces from the National
Museum of Sweden: The Collection of Count Tessin
(June-September 2016), The Brothers Le Nain: Painters
of 17th Century France (October 2016-January 2017),
and a collection of Etruscan treasures from the Louvre
(March-May 2017).
Educational Programming
FAM’s Education Department will continue to offer a
wide range of programs that foster connections, expand
knowledge, and stimulate curiosity among broad and
diverse audiences. A key program is Friday Nights at the
de Young; a recent survey conducted among program
participants found that 86 percent agreed that the  

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $356.4
million for the Fire Department is $12.5 million, or 3.6
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $344.0
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
investments in firefighter and paramedic academies,
emergency medical service improvements, apparatus,
capital, and information technology.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $359.9
million for the Fire Department is $3.4 million, or 1.0
percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of
$356.4 million. A significant portion of this increase is
due to increases in salaries and benefits costs and costs
related to firefighter and paramedic academies.
Public Safety Hiring
The Department is planning to recruit four firefighter
training academies over the next two fiscal years,
with the first graduates expected to be in the field
by December 2015. These H-2 Firefighter academies
deliver reliable fire safety services and implement the
department’s Hiring Plan and firefighter succession plan.
The Firefighter academies also ensure reliable fire safety
at the San Francisco International Airport, the Port, and
robust prevention services.
Two paramedic training academies over the next
two fiscal years are expected to result in the first 40
graduates in the field by June 2015 and the second
class graduating in August 2016. Paramedic academies
implement recommendations of the EMS Working
Group convened, including improved coordination with
private ambulance providers, working with hospitals and
improvements in technology.
Included in the Department’s Hiring Plan is a dedicated
recruitment initiative that provides the diverse residents
of San Francisco opportunities to serve within the Fire
Department. The Fire Department’s recruitment initiative
proactively outreaches to local neighborhoods to find
the most talented and diverse firefighter and paramedic
candidates reflecting the diversity of San Francisco.
Improving Emergency Medical
Services
In implementing the recommendations of the EMS
Working Group, the Department expects to implement
a robust supervision model and a civilian logistics team
for the Ambulance Deployment Center at Station 49.
This initiative increases H-20 lieutenants supervision
over 200 paramedics. Enhanced operations at Station
49 provides for more efficient emergency medical
operations and greater responsiveness of ambulance
resources, reducing out-of-field time for apparatus.
The Department will also implement its Mobile Integrated
Healthcare Practice (MIHP). The implementation of this
new team significantly improves care for patients that
rely on the 911 system for their healthcare and intends
to reduce their use of the emergency medical system.
The integrated model adds targeted interventions
including both a paramedic and an outreach specialist to
help connect patients with appropriate non-emergency
resources. 

Investment in Information
Technology and Infrastructure
The Department’s budget includes over $12 million in
investments for capital, IT and equipment including
emergency medical and fire apparatus (ambulances,
engines and trucks); fire station furnishings, fixtures
and equipment; computer aided dispatch (CAD) and
mobile data terminals (MDTs) and electronic patient care
reporting upgrades.
In addition, improvements in information technology over
two years deepens connectivity of neighborhood fire
stations citywide that serve the diverse neighborhoods
of the City. Likewise, information technology investments
in electronic patient care records for emergency medical
services, applications, infrastructure, network, and
communications bring upgraded and current technology
to improve the delivery of Fire and emergency medical
services.
Capital Funding
As part of the City’s Capital Planning Program, the Fire
Department has secured General Obligation (G.O.) bond
funding to address some of its deferred and outstanding
facility issues. The Department is currently completing
projects on the 2010 Earthquake Safety and Emergency
Response (ESER) bond program, providing funding to
improve the conditions in some of the Department’s
approximately 50 facilities. With the passage of the
2014 ESER bond, an additional $85.0 million has been
allocated to further address the Department’s facility
needs. The 2014 ESER projects are currently in the
planning stages, and will range from focused scope
projects (such as windows, showers, and apparatus
doors) to complete tear down and replacement of
Department facilities.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $367.6
million for the City Administrator is $58.4 million, or 18.9
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $309.2
million. The increase is primarily due to real estate costs,
capital planning, and additional staff and resources to
support new programs and initiatives.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $350.8 million for
the City Administrator is $16.8 million, or 4.6 percent,
lower than the FY 2015-16 budget of $367.6 million. The
decrease is largely due to the expiration of one-time
capital funding.
Improved Animal Welfare
Over FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17, renewed enhancements
for Animal Care and Control (ACC) will improve safety,
public health, and animal welfare in San Francisco.
ACC will have increased field response capabilities for
stray, abused, and vicious animals as well as increasing
officer and public safety. ACC is also planning for capital
investments for a new facility in order to improve animal
welfare, customer service, and disaster preparedness.
Using Technology to Improve Fleet
Management
Fleet Management will invest in technologies such as
telematics and car sharing systems to minimize the costs
and environmental impacts of operating City vehicles and
equipment while maximizing vehicle utilization, enabling
fleet reductions, and promoting safe vehicle operation.
Modernizing the Office of the Medical
Examiner
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) is
investing in technology and resources that will help
the Department meet national performance standards
and achieve state-mandated certification. Investments
in OCME’s toxicology lab and data systems will help
modernize and increase efficiencies to support criminal
investigations and serve San Francisco families.
Additional medical examiner technicians will be hired
to meet industry standard best practices and improve
service to residents.
Increasing Worker Protections
The Office of Labor Standards Enforcement (OLSE)
will reach out to businesses and workers to implement
the City’s new laws which incrementally increase the
minimum wage to $15.00 by July 2018. In addition,
OLSE will implement the Formula Retail Labor
Protections Ordinances and focus on enforcement of
the City’s new Fair Chance Ordinance. The program will
also prioritize the roll-out of a new centralized case
management system designed to increase the efficiency
of investigations and reporting. In order to execute
these initiatives OLSE will receive additional staff and
resources for community education and outreach.
Growing Local Small Businesses
The Contract Monitoring Division will begin
implementation of the revised Chapter 14B Local
Business Enterprise Ordinance. The proposed FY 2015-16
budget includes additional resources to aid the Division in
executing the implementation of the revised law. Revisions
to this law will expand opportunities for local businesses to
compete on City contracts, helping to grow San Francisco’s
small businesses, stimulate local economic development,
and circulate more money locally.
Expanded Immigrant and Language
Services
In FY 2015-16, the proposed budget includes additional
staff positions to assist the Office of Civic Engagement
and Immigrant Affairs (OCEIA) with immigrant rights
and language access work, and continued work on the
Pathways to Citizenship program. In FY 2014-15, OCEIA
was tasked with implementing the Administrative Relief
efforts enacted by President Obama, which will range
from proposals to repair outdated visa provisions to
temporary protections for unauthorized parents of U.S.
Citizens. In support of this effort, additional funding has
been directed to OCEIA in the FY 2015-16 and 2016-17
budget.
In support of the City’s Language Access Ordinance,
three additional staff have been added to augment
translation services for City departments, the Mayor’s
Office, and the Board of Supervisors.
Office of Short-Term Rentals
The proposed budget includes staff at the City Planning
Department and the City Administrator’s Office to
together implement registration, enforcement, and
outreach about the City’s new Short-Term Rental
Ordinance.

Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $254.8
million for the Department of Public Works is $34.6
million, or 15.7 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15
budget of $220.2 million. This increase is primarily due to
increased spending on capital projects and a number of
street cleanliness and maintenance initiatives.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $258.9 million for the
Department of Public Works is $4.1 million, or 1.6 percent,
higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget. This
increase is primarily due to the annualization of positions
proposed in the FY 2015-16 budget.
Cleaning and Greening San Francisco
Public Works remains committed to maintaining clean
streets through myriad strategies that include more
community clean team events; continuing the Giants
Sweep campaign; augmenting social media presence;
and openly communicating with the public on issues such
as illegal dumping, graffiti abatement, new and ongoing
construction, and homeless encampments.
The proposed budget includes significant new funding
for initiatives related to clean streets. An additional
18 positions and associated equipment to provide
enhanced overnight and early morning cleaning service
in residential neighborhoods and alleys across the City.
The successful Pit Stop Program, which provides staffed,
mobile restrooms at strategic locations in the Tenderloin,
is being annualized. In addition to the four locations
included in the pilot program, an additional three will be
introduced to other neighborhoods, as well as staff for
existing JC Decaux bathrooms. The initial pilot program
was highly successful, leading to cleaner, more sanitary
sidewalks, reduced steam-cleaning requests in the
immediate vicinity from an average of 27 per day to 15,
and provided job training to local residents.
Major Corridor Landscaping
Initiative
The proposed budget includes funding for a specialized
DPW crew to perform deferred maintenance on some of
the City’s major landscaped boulevards. Public Works
will restore corridors to a lush, diverse, healthy, safe,
functional, and sustainable state for years to come. The
work will include installation of bio-retention rain gardens
and other stormwater management features.
Proactive Street Tree Maintenance
As of FY 2014-15, DPW’s resources only allow its urban
forestry crews to respond to emergencies and requests
for services. The proposed budget includes staff and
equipment for a third crew, which will provide for the
pro-active maintenance of approximately 2,000 trees
per year and reduce the numbers of emergency calls
received by the existing crews. In addition, nearly $4.6
million in FY 2015-16 and $6.0 million in FY 2016-17 will
be invested in sidewalk safety repairs and street tree
trimming and maintenance.

Improving Streets and Rights-of-Way
The proposed budget for the Department of Public Works
includes $47.0 million in FY 2015-16 and $51.0 million in
FY 2016-17 for street resurfacing. This historic investment
in street quality will keep the City on target to reach a
Pavement Condition Index (PCI) score of 70 by 2025.
Implementing Capital Improvements
Public Works will continue managing and supporting a
number of major bond projects and capital programs
including the Earthquake Safety and Emergency Response
Bond program, Moscone Expansion, Veterans Building,
the Road Repaving and Street Safety Bond, and Vision
Zero Safety Improvements. Prior budget cycles have
increased the number of direct staff who design, build, and
manage these projects, while keeping administration staff
steady. The proposed budget increases indirect support
staff and capacity to bid and advertise construction
and professional services contracts, pay vendors and
contractors, and ensures that information technology
systems perform adequately.
Using Strategic Planning and Data to
Enhance Government Responsiveness
In 2014, DPW refreshed and renewed its three-year
Strategic Plan, a living document that guides the
Department. The proposed budget is a policy commitment
that aligns Public Works programs and operations to
the Strategic Plan. Part of that plan includes broadening
the scope of DPW’s performance management system,
DPWSTAT, and developing ways to further enhance
innovation and efficiency. These efforts will ensure that
DPW is well resourced to respond to requests from the
public and policymakers.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $97.3
million for the Department of Technology (DT) is $3.8
million, or 4.1 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget
of $93.5 million. A significant portion of this increase is
due to project funding of foundational IT infrastructure
investments.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $96.2 million for DT
is $1.1 million, or 1.1 percent, lower than the FY 2015-16
proposed budget of $97.3 million. A significant portion of
this decrease is due to the expiration of one-time project
funding included as part of the FY 2015-16 budget.
In accordance with the Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) Plan, DT continues to focus on
supporting citywide enterprise technology to create
efficiencies and better serve its customers. Over the
next two fiscal years, the Department will focus on
implementing the following foundational IT infrastructure
projects:
Fixing the Network & Infrastructure
Services
Fixing the City’s core network continues to be a top
priority of the Department. The proposed budget
includes continued investments to upgrade hardware
and software, simplify the network configuration,
eliminate single points of failure, and optimize the routing
and security of the network. These efforts support
the strategy to deliver infrastructure services to City
agencies and departments in a secure and cost effective
manner.
Completing Fiber to City Buildings
DT currently manages 170 miles of fiber-optic cable which
provides communication services to departments and
City partners. The fiber network serves as the City’s
network backbone and ensures reliable and cost-effective
connectivity for City buildings. As outlined in the
Connectivity Plan, DT will focus on connecting remaining
City buildings, as appropriate, prioritizing the connection
of public safety facilities.
Implementing Dig Once
In 2014, the Mayor and Board of Supervisors approved
“Dig Once” legislation which requires the installation
of conduit during construction projects involving
excavations of streets in the public right of way, when
both financially feasible and consistent with City’s longterm
goals. DT is leading of the criteria which will guide
the City’s Dig Once investments. The proposed budget
includes $3.0 million for implementation over the next
two fiscal years.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $10.8
million for the Health Service System (HSS) is $0.9
million, or 8.8 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15
budget of $10.0 million. The increase is primarily due to
annualization of positions added in FY 2014-15, increases
in salaries and fringe benefit costs, and the Enterprise
Content Management (ECM) project.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $10.9 million is
$0.1 million, or 0.0 percent, higher than the FY 2015-
16 proposed budget of $10.8 million. The increase is
primarily due increases in salaries and fringe benefit
costs.
Implementing eBenefits
HSS anticipates delivering Open Enrollment for the 2017
plan year as an online event through eBenefits. This
paperless self-service enrollment solution will allow
HSS members to enter their enrollment information at
their convenience prior to October 31st and automate
the processing of members’ elections. Substantial cost
savings will be realized when the process for benefits
enrollment is automated. Bottom-line benefits include
reduced transaction costs, shorter cycle times for
processing Open Enrollment elections, reduced HSS call
volume, elimination of duplicate data entry, reduction
of enrollment packet preparation, and reduction in the
monitoring and tracking effort required for a paperbased
system. Additionally, once eBenefits has been
launched, HSS members will be able to view their
elections online and enter qualifying events at their
convenience.
Improving Operational Efficiency and
Responsiveness
An Enterprise Content Management (ECM) system
provides document management, records management,
image processing, and content workflow, which will
facilitate redirecting staff time to high-value tasks.
Additionally, the ECM solution will allow HSS to boost
productivity, encourage collaboration, meet compliance
initiatives, enable better processes, and make information
easier to share. As the City moves to eBenefits,
implementation of an ECM will provide a central repository
for managing documentation, a necessary component not
available in the current system.
Bringing Well-being to the Workplace
Over the next two years, HSS will focus on working
through the wellness champions to bring wellness into
the workplace in the areas of prevention, movement,
peace of mind, and nutrition. These activities include
programs that encourage healthy behaviors such as
consistent physical activity. Other programs address
the work environment; one example is the Non-Violent
Crisis Intervention training, which teaches front line
customer service employees to deescalate situations.
The Well-being Assessment will be administered for a
second time in order to provide data for a year-over-year
trend analysis and to assist HSS in prioritizing future
programming.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $88.1
million for the Department of Human Resources is $6.7
million, or 8.2 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget
of $81.4 million. A significant portion of this increase is
due to increases in salaries and benefits costs; increases
to Workers’ Compensation costs; and additional funding
for public safety promotional exams, citywide implicit
bias training, one dedicated parental leave coordinator,
and continued investments to accelerate the hiring
process. In addition, the Department is continuing
and expanding three citywide programs to recruit and
retain talent: City Hall Fellows, Senior Fellows, and the
Personnel Analyst Development Program.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $91.6 million for
Department of Human Resources is $3.5 million, or 4.0
percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 budget of $88.1
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
increases in salaries and benefits costs.
Focusing on Inclusion
Dedicated Parental Leave Coordinator
The Department’s proposed budget includes one
new position to support City employees who are
navigating local, State, and federal parental leave
laws. In addition, this new position will work to ensure
consistent implementation of parental leave across City
departments and strive to improve the parental leave
process. The resulting simplifications will foster an
inclusive and family-friendly working environment.
Implicit Bias Training Pilot
Implicit biases are unconscious attitudes or stereotypes
that lead people to favor groups to which they belong.
The Department of Human Resources, in collaboration
with the Human Rights Commission, will develop and
pilot a training program for City employees to recognize
and address these biases. The intention of the training
is to ensure that critical City services are delivered to
residents in an inclusive culturally competent manner.
Recruiting and Retaining Top Talent
City Hall & Senior Fellows Program
Since it launched in 2008, the City Hall Fellows program
has trained 90 urban change makers (selected from 1,700
applicants) across three cities (San Francisco, Houston,
and Baton Rouge). By design, the corps members are
racially and socio-economically diverse and more than
half are female. They hold undergraduate degrees in
fields ranging from political science to economics to
aerospace engineering. This year, the Department of
Human Resources budget includes an additional City Hall
Fellow, to bring the citywide total to 15.
Additionally, the Department’s budget expands the
successful Senior Fellows pilot program—
which brings
mid-career professionals into local government—from
three to seven positions. The program is based on
a partnership between the Department of Human
Resources (DHR), sponsoring City departments, and
the Mayor’s Office, and modeled after the Presidential
Innovation Fellowship program. These mid-career fellows
will be employed by the City for one year to complete a
set project as determined by the following implementing
departments: General Services Agency, Airport,
Department of Emergency Management, Department of
Public Health, Human Services Agency, Mayor’s Office,
and Office of Economic & Workforce Development.
These programs provide City leadership with top talent to
address long-standing challenges; provide opportunities
for individuals from the private sector to make a positive
impact to the City; create and build stronger privatepublic
relationships; and help the City recruit talented
individuals.
Continuing the Personnel Analyst
Development Program
The Department’s budget supports the Personnel
Analyst Development Program’s second year. This
program features a structured curriculum that includes
technical training, hands-on experiences, and real life
exposure to the multitude of human resources issues
facing City departments. The curriculum was developed
by DHR and HR representatives from participating
departments to ensure that program participants receive
both technical proficiency training and a practicum with
DHR and participating departments.
Increasing Government Efficiency
Continued Improvements to Hiring Process
As mentioned above, DHR has implemented a
comprehensive project, Project HIR2E, (Hiring Innovation
through Redesign and Resource Efficiencies) to identify,
update, and implement a full range of innovative human
resources processes and programs to ensure effective
and efficient hiring of City employees. In the next phase
of this project, the Department will design and develop an
electronic processing tool that enables hiring managers
to track candidates through all stages of the hiring process. This tool will eliminate the need for redundant
data entry on multiple systems and produce meaningful
data to analyze, understand, and identify key bottlenecks
in the City’s hiring process. Furthermore, the initiative
includes additional staff to train City employees to fully
incorporate the new tool into existing hiring processes.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $2.4 million
for the Human Rights Commission is $0.3 million, or 10.1
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $2.1 million. A
large portion of this increase is due to increases in funding
for grants.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $2.4 million
for the Human Rights Commission is roughly the same as
the FY 2015-16 proposed budget.
Over the next two fiscal years, the HRC will build on current
initiatives and continue to work with community partners on
a wide range of human rights and social justice issues.
Increasing Public Awareness
The HRC will increase public awareness about the Fair
Chance Ordinance through partnerships with communitybased
organizations. The HRC will deepen its partnership
with El/La Para Translatinas and ensure that the
transgender Latina community continues to have access
to critical case management, community building, and
education/advocacy services. And the HRC will continue
to work with LGBT stakeholders around identifying
and addressing service gaps related to LGBT violence
prevention.
Implicit Bias
In 2015, the HRC will commemorate the 50th Anniversary
of the 1965 Voting Rights Act. In order to ensure equitable
access to City services, the HRC will partner with the
Department of Human Resources on implicit bias training
for City departments. This training program will assist
departments in identifying and addressing unconscious
bias in personnel and policy decisions, and ensure that the
City government continues to address the needs of San
Francisco’s diverse communities.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $932.4
million for the Human Services Agency (HSA) is $61.5
million, or 7.1 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of
$870.9 million. A significant portion of this increase is due
to increased revenue to support the expansion of Medi-Cal
and CalFresh enrollment and investments in housing and
homelessness programming.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $944.0
million for the Human Services Agency (HSA) is $11.6
million, or 1.2 percent, higher than the FY 2015-16
proposed budget of $932.4 million. A significant portion of
this increase is due to the annualization of positions added
in FY 2015-16.
SF BenefitsNet Merger and Expansion
To reflect the integration of CalFresh and Medi-Cal staff,
the proposed budget for FY 2015-16 merges the two
programs into a single entity, SF BenefitsNet. HSA has
also reorganized staff from the Administrative Division
and the CalFresh and Medi-Cal programs into a new SF
BenefitsNet Operations and Program Support group to
better support the service center environment of the
merged programs.
In response to the 77 percent increase in the individuals
receiving Medi-Cal since implementation of the
Affordable Care Act, the proposed budget adds 40
new eligibility workers and five supervisors as well as
clerical and program support staff. The number of SF
BenefitsNet eligibility workers will increase from 281
before implementation of the ACA in FY 2012-13 to 365,
or 30 percent. The costs of the new positions are backed
by anticipated increases in State revenue.
Department of Aging and Adult
Services SPD Hub
DAAS’s Senior and People with Disabilities (SPD) Hub is a
public-facing service site where all providers are able to
refer clients, identify options for counseling clients aging
out of MAGI MediCal, and provide a “No Wrong Door”
approach to services.
Expanded Support for Vulnerable
Children and Young Adults
Title IV-E is the federal funding source for child welfare
services, parts of the juvenile probation system, and
foster care. In the fall 2014, the City joined the Title IV-E
waiver program which gives counties greater flexibility
in the use of federal funds in exchange for a capped
allocation.
To support the goals of the IV-E Waiver, Family and
Children’s Services (FCS) will expand intensive homebased
wraparound—supportive/preventative services
to families prior to child entry into foster care. FCS
will also implement the use of the Safety Organized
Practice model for its child welfare workers by
providing field-based coaching to standardize practices.
Other Waiver-related investments will include a Peer
Parent Program that helps foster parents navigate
the foster care system and an ongoing data analysis
of provider performance to support a performancebased
contracting system. Overall, FCS will add 22
new positions, and all but one position are intended to
manage the Waiver-related initiatives during the 5-year
project. Finally, HSA will soon be operating the new
Child Protection Center (CPC) on the Edgewood campus.
The new CPC will ensure a child-friendly environment
that provides high quality assessments for mental
health, medical, and behavioral services, and secures
the most appropriate placement. To serve youth with
specialized mental health needs, FCS is establishing two
short-term treatment beds that will provide a 45-day
assessment period until an appropriate, longer-term
arrangement can be made.
Protective Services Enhancements
DAAS’s Adult Protective Services’ (APS) proposed
budget includes funding to contract emergency
placement beds through a local Residential Care Facility
for the Elderly (RCFE), expand staffing to address the
increase in the abuse and self-neglect reports and
confirmed cases, and launch a Veterans Financial Abuse
Outreach and Prevention Program to protect older
veterans from scams and exploitation.
Increased Investments in Seniors and
Adults with Disabilities
Recognizing the key role of senior centers in the social
and health well-being of seniors, the proposed budget
includes funding to expand staffing and programmatic
capabilities at centers throughout the City. The
proposed budget includes new funding for dementia
care services, an investment informed by the work of
the LGBT Senior taskforce.
The proposed budget also includes a 33 percent
increased investment in the Community Living Fund  

(CLF). The CLF helps support San Franciscans in
transitioning from care facilities to living safely in their
homes.
Child Care Investments
In accordance with Proposition C, passed by San
Francisco voters in November 2014, the proposed
budget reflects a shift of administration of PEEF Early
Education funding from First 5 to OECE. In consultation
with the Mayor’s Office and First 5, OECE will proceed
into FY 2015-16 as a transition year and will continue
funding commitments until a broader planning process
for these funds has been completed for FY 2016-17.
The FY 2015-16 OECE budget reflects increased
enrollments in Preschool for All, increasing the
percentage of 4-year olds served, making the City more
affordable, and increasing educational opportunity for
children and families. OECE’s FY 2015-16 budget reflects
increased provider supports to bolster Quality Rating
and Improvement System scores by expanding health
screening and increasing capacity in family child care.
In FY 2015-16 OECE will work with the newly-seated
OECE Community Advisory Committee to streamline
processes and accountability, improve strategies for
investment, and prioritize data integration to support
planning and outcome monitoring.
In the next fiscal year the State will increase its regional
market rate for subsidized childcare. The OECE budget
includes funding to match this rate increase in Citysupported
vouchers to ensure that subsidy recipients
continue to have access to childcare services.
Supportive Housing Enhancements
In response to the Controller’s Office recent study of
supportive housing, the proposed budget includes
funding to enhance supportive services at sites in its
portfolio. The increased investment will support a case
management ratio of 1 case manager to every 35 units
in the portfolio of single-room occupancy hotels.
The proposed budget also includes funding for
additional sites, including the Baldwin Hotel,Civic
Center Hotel, and Henry Hotel, as part of the Mayor’s
commitment to adding 500 units of supportive housing.
These sites will also provide exits from homelessness
for clients being served by the Navigation Center pilot
project-the City’s pioneering approach to connecting
chronically homeless individuals with services, benefits,
and access to supportive housing. The proposed budget
includes funding to continue the successful pilot of the
Navigation Center.
Expansion of Homeless Services
The proposed budget includes funding for a major
expansion in the City’s Homeward Bound program.
Homeward Bound supports homeless individuals in
returning home and reconnecting with loved ones. The
increased investment will allow for increased outreach
and hours of operation.
The proposed budget also includes new funding for
rental subsidies and supportive services specifically
targeted at homeless families and transitional
aged youth, building off of past public and private
investments in rapid rehousing and eviction prevention.
The proposed budget provides funds to support a
comprehensive planning effort addressing family
homelessness in San Francisco in FY 2015-16.
Addressing Intergenerational Poverty
The proposed budget includes staff positions and
funding for the first phase of the Project 500 initiative.
Project 500 is citywide effort, led by the Human
Services Agency, to focus intensive resources, wraparound
services, and case management across City
departments and nonprofit providers for the most atrisk
families. The objective of the project is to support
families in identifying meaningful pathways up and
out of poverty and disrupting the intergenerational
transfer by leveraging existing resources and utilizing a
collective impact approach to service provision.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $42.3
million for the Juvenile Probation Department is $3.7
million, or 9.6 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget
of $38.6 million. A large portion of this increase is due to
increases in salaries and benefits costs.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $43.2
million for the Juvenile Probation Department is $0.9
million, or 2.2 percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed
budget of $42.3 million. A large portion of this increase is
due to increased capital spending.
Collaborative Approach to
Community-Based Programming
The Juvenile Probation Department (JPD), Department
of Children, Youth, and their Families (DCYF), and
Department of Public Health (DPH) continue to fund
community-based service providers that offer a range
of violence prevention programs to San Francisco youth
and their families. Strategies aimed at coordinated case
management, detention alternatives, gender-specific
programming, and after-care services continue to be a
priority for the Department and the City, as adopted by
the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council.
Additionally, JPD’s partnership with the Human Services
Agency surrounding youth in foster care or at risk of
entering the juvenile justice system will include expanded
community-based services for youth. Interventions
are designed to keep youth in their homes and avoid
removal to group homes or other residential settings. In
those instances where a youth is removed from his or
her home, the Department pursues parallel intervention
strategies to engage parents in programs and services
designed to aid in the youth’s successful return to the
family and community.
JPD is a partner in the City’s Street Violence Response
Team (SVRT), and an active contributor to the
implementation of the citywide violence prevention
strategy, “Interrupt, Predict, and Organize”. JPD will
be participating in the Project 500 initiative to provide
a coordinated response to the needs of the city’s
most vulnerable and in-need families. Additionally, the
Department will help contribute to a local implementation
of the National My Brother’s Keeper strategy which,
when launched, will provide young boys and girls of color
with opportunities to complete their education, develop
healthy and supportive relationships with responsible
adults, and thrive within the neighborhoods and
communities in which they live.
Capital Needs and Facility
Infrastructure
JPD’s FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 proposed budget
includes over $5.4 million in capital funding for a number
of projects designed to improve the infrastructure of
the Department’s facilities. Health, safety, security,
and regulatory compliance are the primary drivers
in all of the Department’s proposed capital projects.
For example, JPD will augment Juvenile Hall’s camera
system to improve video surveillance of the institution.
JPD will also receive funding for other critical projects
including elevator repairs, pump replacement, and roof
maintenance.
Organizational and Staff Development
JPD will continue its efforts in leadership development
and training, strengthened community partnerships,
and the continued implementation of evidence-based
practices. The Department recognizes the important role
of data in the review of programs and outcomes as it
seeks to make more data-driven decisions. In this budget,
the Department will focus on data and research initiatives
and provide detailed analytical insights regarding youth
outcomes, performance measures, and program design.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $106.4
million for the Mayor’s Office is $16.2 million, or 18.0
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $90.2
million. This increase is primarily due to planned growth of
the Housing Trust Fund, as well as additional resources for
affordable housing development.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $73.5 million for the
Mayor’s Office is $32.9 million, or 30.9 percent, lower
than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget. This decrease is
primarily due to the expiration of one-time expenditures
for affordable housing, offset by planned growth of the
Housing Trust Fund.
Over the next two years, the Mayor’s Office will continue
to focus its resources on implementing the Mayor’s vision
and priorities for the City, including: the Mayor’s 7-Point
Housing Plan to build and rehabilitate 30,000 units by
2020; advocacy for funding and policy changes at the
state and federal levels; and implementation of sound
long-term fiscal policies to improve City government.
Affordable Housing
As part of his 2014 State of the City address, the Mayor
announced a plan to build or rehabilitate 30,000
housing units by 2020. MOHCD, in partnership with
the Department of City Planning (CPC), Department
of Building Inspection (DBI), the Office of Economic
and Workforce Development (OEWD), and the Office of
Community Investment and Infrastructure (OCII) will
support this goal, while ensuring that a majority of the
units are within reach of working, middle-income San
Francisco residents, with at least a third permanently
affordable to low- and moderate-income families.
The FY 2015-16 proposed budget includes an additional
$2.8 million in Housing Trust Fund Growth; as in FY 2014-
15, the majority of this growth will be used to leverage
$25.0 million in borrowing to provide MOHCD with upfront
funds for affordable housing development. An additional
$5 million over two years will seed a new housing
accelerator program, which will leverage approximately
$20 million in additional private investment to create 

a highly-flexible, fast-acting funding source that can
take advantage of opportunities for land acquisition,
preservation, and middle-income housing as they arise.
HOPE SF and San Francisco Housing
Authority Portfolio
The FY 2015-16 proposed budget includes resources
dedicated to HOPE SF, the City’s signature initiative to
revitalize the City’s most distressed public housing sites
as mixed-income developments. The proposed budget
includes an infusion of funding targeted toward residents
of the Housing Authority to complement the significant
capital investments being made.
Preserving Services to Communities
and Vulnerable Residents
In response to federal funding reductions to the City’s
(HUD) entitlement programs, which support vital services
to vulnerable populations throughout the City, the
proposed budget uses General Fund support to sustain
FY 2014-15 funding levels for non-profit community-based
grantees through FY 2016-17.
MOHCD’s community development grants, consisting of
federal, General Fund, and Housing Trust Fund sources,
will assist more than 4,500 individuals with counseling
to help prevent eviction or loss of housing; provide more
than 4,000 individuals with free legal counseling and
representation to protect victims of domestic violence,
employment discrimination, and housing discrimination;
provide emergency shelter to more than 2,000 homeless
individuals and family members; provide over 700
transitional age youth and adults with academic and
employment related foundational competencies; provide
increased services to increase access to housing to over
2,000 individuals; and assist more than 3,000 individuals
with financial literacy and homeownership counseling
to build assets and become economically self-sufficient.
Grants will also fund critical capital improvements at 13
community facilities and provide services to over 500
individuals living with HIV/ AIDS. Through the Housing
Trust Fund, MOHCD will also launch its Complete
Neighborhood Infrastructure Program, which will support
vital infrastructure needs in those neighborhoods most
impacted by increased housing density.
State and Federal Advocacy
In FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17, the Mayor’s Office will
continue to advocate for the City’s interests as the state
and federal governments look to implement significant
policy changes, including Health Care Reform, the
continued realignment of public safety and human
services functions, Ellis Act reform, and potential changes
to federal formulas that adversely impact the City.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $1.0
billion for the Municipal Transportation Agency is $72.3
million, or 7.6 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15
budget of $947.9 million. This increase is primarily due
to the addition of a new baseline and planned service
increases. The Department is entering the second year
of a fixed two-year budget, so the FY 2016-17 budget is
not under consideration at this time.
Proposition A: Improved Transit &
Safer Streets
On November 4, 2014, San Franciscans voted to
invest in the City’s transportation network when
they approved Proposition A, a $500 million bond
dedicated to improving Muni and making city streets
safer without increasing taxes. It is a first step in
meeting the $10 billion in crucial infrastructure
projects identified by the Mayor’s Transportation Task
Force, which in 2013 investigated what San Francisco
needs to do to fix the transportation network and
prepare it for the future. Investment in Prop A-funded
projects is beginning in mid-2015. Learn more at
sftransportation2030.com.
Vision Zero: Eliminating Traffic
Fatalities
Every year hundreds of people are seriously injured or
killed in traffic collisions in San Francisco. To reverse
this trend, in 2014 the City adopted the Vision Zero
policy with the goal of eliminating traffic fatalities
by 2024. As part of the two-year Vision Zero Action
Strategy, the MTA is implementing 24 engineering
projects in 24 months to immediately improve safety
on City streets; as of the end of FY 2014-15, 12 of these
projects are complete or nearing completion. The MTA’s
work to achieve Vision Zero also includes enforcement
of traffic laws, advocacy for public policy changes,
evaluation and monitoring, and a new public education
and outreach campaign. Learn more at visionzerosf.org.
Moving Muni Forward
Muni Forward brings together multiple projects and
planning efforts underway to create a faster, safer,
and more comfortable experience for Muni customers.
The initiative incorporates service changes that better
reflect today’s travel patterns as well as capital projects
that improve reliability and reduce travel times. The
FY 2015-16 budget funds a number of Muni Forward
infrastructure projects and a 10 percent increase in
Muni service. The multi-year Transit Effectiveness
Project, which received environmental approval
in spring 2014, is the foundation of Muni Forward
improvements. Learn more at muniforward.com.
Central Subway: On Time, Within
Budget
The Central Subway is the largest single investment in
San Francisco’s transportation system in decades. It
will extend the Muni Metro T Third Line 1.7 miles, mostly
underground, through some of the City’s busiest and
most densely populated neighborhoods connecting
SoMa, Union Square, and Chinatown via rapid transit,
while improving access to Visitacion Valley, the Bayview,
the Dogpatch, and other communities in eastern San
Francisco. Tunneling was completed in 2014 and station
construction is underway. The project remains on time,
within budget, and is scheduled to open to the public by
2019. Learn more at centralsubwaysf.com.

Van Ness Bus Rapid Transit
The Van Ness Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) project will create
rail-like bus service along Van Ness Avenue between
Mission and Lombard streets. Van Ness Avenue will be
the city’s first bus rapid transit route, serving customers
of Muni’s 47 Van Ness and 49 Van Ness-Mission lines, and
nine Golden Gate Transit routes. Transit travel times are
expected to decrease by more than 30 percent, improving
Muni service for 60,000 projected customers daily.
Construction is on track to start in FY 2015-16.
Keeping Muni Affordable
An affordable Muni is essential to the mobility and
economic vitality of the city, especially for the 60
percent of Muni customers who live in households
making less than the Bay Area’s median income. Thanks
to a $6.8 million donation from Google, in 2014 the MTA
reauthorized the Free Muni for Youth Program, which
provides free Muni service to low- and moderate-income
5- to 18-year-olds. In March 2015, the program expanded
to include low- and moderate-income seniors and
people with disabilities.
Prioritizing Equity
Working with social justice advocates and the disability
community, the MTA adopted an equity policy to
improve Muni service in the areas of San Francisco
most in need. This neighborhood-based approach
focuses on areas with high concentrations of lowincome
households, minority residents, residents with
disabilities, and households without access to personal
automobiles.
Muni Fleet of the Future
The MTA purchased more than 100 new hybrid buses
and is on track to replace the entire bus and electric
trolleybus fleet by calendar year 2019. The Agency also
approved a $648.0 million contract to replace Muni’s
light rail fleet and expand it to as many as 260 cars over
the next 15 years, with the first batch arriving in 2016.
Capital Improvement Program
The MTA’s FY 2015-2019 Capital Improvement Program
(CIP) includes 370 projects for a total investment of
$3.3 billion. These projects include infrastructure
investments as well as various procurements and other
one-time initiatives such as plans and educational
programs that improve the safety, reliability, and
efficiency of the transportation system.
Sharing Cars, Bikes, and Rides
Vehicle sharing reduces emissions and parking demand
and makes it easier to get around without owning a
car. The MTA helped Bay Area Bike Share, a regional
program, launch in San Francisco with 350 bikes at 35
stations. A new pilot program will dedicate up to 900
on-street parking spaces to car share companies like
Zipcar, City CarShare, and Getaround. And a first-of-itskind
pilot program will formalize and regulate privately
operated commuter shuttles and bring about safer
operations and less confusion on City streets.
Improving Project Delivery
The MTA has hundreds of projects in the works to
improve San Francisco’s transportation network.
Agency staff are working to deliver these projects
more collaboratively, efficiently, and effectively. Led
by an internal project delivery task force, the MTA has
upgraded project management technology, improved
coordination with other City agencies, assessed and
planned for long-term staffing needs, and enhanced
public outreach efforts. These changes support
projects of all sizes and guide efforts from planning to
construction.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $548.5
million for the Police Department is $19.7 million, or 3.7
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $528.8
million. A large portion of this increase is due to salaries
and benefits costs associated with the Police Sworn
Hiring Plan.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $566.3
million for the Police Department is $17.8 million, or 3.2
percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of
$548.5 million. A large portion of this increase is due
to salaries and benefits costs associated with the Police
Sworn Hiring Plan.
Continuation of the Public Safety
Hiring Plan
In recent years, the Police Department has experienced
a large number of retirements. With the expiration of
the Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP) in
2014, the Department is projecting a significant number
of annual retirements over the next two to three years.
To address attrition, the Mayor developed a multi-year
hiring plan to gradually increase the number of new
officers on the force. The plan, now in its third year, will
be accelerated to allow the Department to conduct five
General Fund-supported Police Academy classes of 50
recruits in FY 2015-16 and 3 classes in FY 2016-17. This
will result in a total of 400 new police officers being
hired over the course of the FY 2015-16 and 2016-17
budget. This aggressive hiring will backfill retirements
and bring the number of full-duty sworn staff to the
charter mandated level of 1,971 by June 2017, a full year
ahead of the originally scheduled date.
Body Cameras
A major new initiative that the Police Department will
implement in FY 2015-16 is its comprehensive body
camera program. The Department will receive $6.0
million in funding over the next two years to acquire
1,800 body cameras and pay for ongoing costs such as
software, video storage, and staffing. This technology
will ensure maximum accountability for both officers
and members of the public who interact with officers.
Over the coming year, a Body Camera Working Group
that will include the Police Officers Association, the
OCC, and others will report to the Police Commission to
develop appropriate policies and protocol for the use of
technology and body cameras by the Department.
Cadet Program
The recently relaunched Cadet Academy is designed to
prepare young adults for a career in law enforcement
and continue to provide positive interactions between
the Department and the community. These young men
and women work alongside sworn officers in a variety
of assignments, while they continue their studies and
prepare to apply to the Police Academy. The FY 2015-16
Cadet Academy class will include 27 students between
ages 18-21 and is funded through a combination of the
City’s General Fund and private philanthropy.

Although the program is open to all young adults, the goal of
the Cadet Academy is to focus on those young people living
in San Francisco’s low income neighborhoods. By engaging
the City’s hardest-to-serve young people, the Department
can play a critical role in interrupting and stopping the cycle
of violence to develop a police force that mirrors the diversity
of San Francisco.
OCC investment
Additionally, the proposed budget will fund four new
staff members at the Office of Citizens Complaint
(OCC) to fully fund OCC’s budget request which
includes a new investigator, a senior investigator, an
attorney and information technology assistant. This
significant increase in personnel for OCC will enable the
Department to continue to engage in comprehensive,
high quality investigation of citizen complaints into
SFPD misconduct.
Investing in Technology and
Efficient Vehicles
The Police Department strives to utilize new technology
to improve its policing efforts and will continue its
transition to a more stable and robust technology
platform. The FY 2015-16 and 2016-17 proposed budget
includes funding for: additional smart phones for new
officers coming on duty, expansion of the Shotspotter
system, improvements to the Crime Data Warehouse,
and the development of both an eCitation program and
a Laboratory Information Management System.
During the next two years, the City continues to invest
in the police fleet, and will spend approximately $5.0
million to purchase 40 marked patrol cars, 33 unmarked
cars, 23 motorcycles, and 21 other vehicles over the next
two years. These upgrades will decrease vehicle downtime
due to maintenance and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, as the fleet moves from older V8 engines to
newer, more efficient V6 and hybrid engine technology.
Youth Programs
The Police Department seeks to provide San Francisco
youth with a variety of opportunities aimed at building
a strong foundation for the future. Police partnerships
with community-based organizations, including
educational institutions, can assist in establishing and/
or augmenting programs that encourage children to
participate in positive learning activities.
The Department continues to participate and
sponsor numerous events and programs, including
the Wilderness and Fishing programs and the Police
Activities League (PAL). In FY 2014-15, the Department
will also continue promoting its “finish high school”
philosophy. One component of this strategy is the
Future Graduates Program, in which members of the
Police Department, along with a diverse group of City
employees who began their jobs with only a high school
diploma, encourage students to stay in school for a
healthy and successful life.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $109.7
million for the Port is $0.2 million, or 0.1 percent, lower
than the FY 2014-15 budget of $109.9 million. The decrease
is due to lower project expenditures and lower professional
and contractual service costs. The Port is entering the
second year of a fixed two-year budget, and the FY 2016-17
budget is not under consideration at this time.
The review of the Waterfront Land Use Plan (WLUP)
highlighted emerging needs for managing the Waterfront
that the Port will continue to address over the coming two
fiscal years.
Transportation
Transportation improvements must be programmed in
concert with planned new development projected along the
waterfront and eastern side of the City. The Port is working
with the City on the Waterfront Transportation Assessment
(WTA) led by SFMTA and SF County Transportation
Authority. For example, one of the WTA strategies—to
increase travel by bicycle—gave rise to the Embarcadero
Enhancement Project, which will improve the pedestrian
and bicycle experience along the Embarcadero.
Environmental Protection and
Sustainability
The Port has implemented numerous projects to improve
environmental quality and waterfront stewardship,
including zero-emissions electric shoreside power for deep
sea vessels at Piers 27 and 70; photovoltaic systems at
Piers 1, 3, 5, 15 and Pier 96; rainwater harvesting at Pier
27; and natural storm water management. The Port will
continue to work with its development partners to plan new
sustainable infrastructure systems at a district scale as
part of planning for new waterfront neighborhoods at Pier
70 and Seawall Lot 337.
Sea Level Rise & Seismic Activity
The Port is vulnerable to rising waters and seismic activity.
With sea level rise projections ranging from 5 to 24 inches
by 2050 and 17 to 66 inches by 2100, a mid-range of 36
inches by 2100 would flood low lying areas downtown, in
Mission Bay, and other areas beyond the Port. The Port is
accounting for sea level rise in its infrastructure projects,
such as at the new Brannan Street Wharf Park where
sloping the wharf up from the promenade and raising the
edge gained 2-3 feet of additional protection against sea
level rise. The Port and City must work with State and
Federal agencies to determine how best to plan for a line of
defense again sea level rise and climate change.
Maintenance of the Port’s Seawall is essential for
preparing for sea level rise and seismic events because it
provides critical flood protection and structural support
to the eastern portion of the City, including the Port
Waterfront and Promenade, Financial District, and BART
& Muni systems. The Port will continue to evaluate the
condition of its seawall and participate in a technical
advisory committee that is evaluating various strategies
for addressing infrastructure requirements, including the
construction of a new seawall.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $31.6
million for the Public Defender is $1.1 million, or 3.7
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $30.4
million. A large portion of this increase is due to increases
in salaries and benefits costs.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $32.0
million for the Public Defender is $0.4 million, or 1.4
percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of
$31.6 million. A large portion of this increase is due to
annualization of positions added in FY 2015-16.
Byrne Anti Drug Grant
In February 2015, the Board of State and Community
Corrections (BSCC) awarded $16.6 million in federal
grant funds for a range of public safety projects. San
Francisco County was one of the award recipients for a
three-year Prevention and Intervention Strategy project
that will focus on reducing recidivism for disconnected
Transitional Age Youth (TAY). This project will provide a
framework for preventing the school-to-prison pipeline
and will be led by San Francisco’s law enforcement,
criminal justice, and substance abuse treatment
agencies, including the Public Defender.
Laura’s Law
A major new initiative in FY 2015-16 is the Public
Defender’s role in the implementation of the Assisted
Outpatient Treatment Program (AOTP), also known as
Laura’s Law. This State law, which will be rolled out in
San Francisco in the coming year, allow the courts to
mandate that a mentally ill person receive psychiatric
care. The Public Defender will play a critical part in the
processes that determine if a client will receive assisted
outpatient treatment, and in support of this role, the
Public Defender will receive funding for a new, Laura’s
Law-focused attorney in the 2015-16 budget.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $2,029.6
million for the Department of Public Health (DPH) is $45.3
million, or 2.3 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget
of $1,984.3 million. A significant portion of this increase
is due to increases in salaries and fringe benefits costs,
the opening of the new San Francisco General Hospital,
and investments in IT infrastructure and an enterprise
Electronic Health Record system.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $2,069.9 million for
the Department of Public Health is $40.3 million, or 2.0
percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of
$2,029.6 million. A significant portion of this increase is
due to additional increases in salaries and fringe benefits
costs, annualization of costs related to the opening of
the new San Francisco General Hospital, and continued
investments in IT infrastructure and an enterprise
Electronic Health Record system.
Over a year into implementing the Affordable Care
Act (ACA), DPH will shift its focus from preparation to
continued execution and refinement of previous initiatives
related to access. In addition, it will expand its focus to two
other areas. The first is to support City’s most vulnerable
populations by strengthening the Population Health
Division and critical safety net services. Second, the
Department will strengthen its information technology and
electronic health records (EHR) infrastructure, allowing
high-quality, coordinated, and cost-effective care in the
modern healthcare environment.
Restoring Funding for Community
Based Organizations
The proposed budget restores the remaining $8.8 million
per year in planned reductions from a previous budget
cycle to contracts with community-based behavioral
health programs. This restoration ensures stable funding
levels for the City’s critical community partners.
Strengthening the Population Health
Division and the Black African
American Health Initiative
Central to strengthening both population health and the
Department’s workforce is the Black African American
Health Initiative (BAAHI) to address the disparities in
health status and health outcomes that disproportionately
affect the African American community. A departmentwide
collaboration spanning the SFHN and PHD, the BAAHI
will focus on four high-priority health areas: heart health;
behavioral health; women’s health; and sexual health. The
BAAHI initiative will also focus internally to ensure the
Department’s workforce is culturally competent with the
populations it serves.
The Department of Public Health is also investing in its
Population Health Division. The recent Ebola outbreak
and the two earthquakes in Nepal underscore the need
to strengthen the Department’s Public Health Emergency
Response, Emergency Medical Services and the Disease
Prevention and Control Branches. DPH will increase
staffing in these units to ensure more effective emergency
response, adding 9 employees and $2.2 million of annual
costs to implement these initiatives.
Investing in DPH’s Information
Technology Infrastructure and
Preparing for an Electronic Health
Record (EHR)
In the modern healthcare environment, information
technology is deeply connected to high-quality patient
care. The newly-formed San Francisco Health Network
is designed to improve coordination of care, patient
experience, and quality outcomes across all of its
formerly-separate services. Over the next five years, DPH
will begin preparing, building, and implementing a new
enterprise health record (EHR) system, which will affect
every division of the San Francisco Health Network. To
begin to address Information Technology (IT) risks and
opportunities, DPH engaged in two consultant studies: the
first to review the Department’s current IT infrastructure
and staffing; and a second to estimate the requirements
for implementing and maintaining a new EHR. Both studies
found that the Department must make significant strides
to increase IT staffing levels and strengthen technology
infrastructure.
The initial estimate for the full cost of implementing an
EHR is approximately $225 million over five years for
all costs, including additional staff, licensing, training,
and facility needs. Approximately $20 million of these
costs each year will be ongoing costs; about $125 million
will be for one-time implementation. While a modern
EHR requires a large financial investment, it is critical to
ensure patients have access to services and information,
providers can access records to improve patient care, and
the Department can maximize its reimbursement from the
State and Federal governments and commercial insurance.
The proposed budget includes $12.8 million in FY 2015-
16, increasing to $29.2 million in FY 2016-17 to begin to
address this need. The budget includes 88 positions for
the EHR.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $117.0
million for the Public Library is $7.5 million, or 6.9 percent,
higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $109.5 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to an expansion
in operating hours at the Main Library and branch libraries.
The Public Library is entering the second year of a fixed
two-year budget, and the FY 2016-17 budget is not under
consideration at this time.
The Mix at SFPL
The San Francisco Public Library will usher in a new era in
youth engagement with the opening of The Mix at SFPL — a
new, 5,000 square feet teen digital media center equipped
with state of the art technology, learning and maker spaces,
video and audio production, plus books and media, all to
capture the imagination of San Francisco’s teenagers. In
partnership with the California Academy of Sciences, the
Bay Area Video Coalition, KQED, and other youth advocacy
groups, The Mix will provide an ideal setting for learning
and digital literacy. The Friends of the Library and the tech
community will be key partners in equipping the center with
learning tools and expert resources.
Service Excellence
The Library’s proposed budget reflects its commitment
to providing welcoming facilities by continuing to invest in
post-occupancy facility improvements, and enhancing the
capacity of the Library’s custodial unit. Other investments
include the Library’s partnership with the Department of
Public Health, which connects Main Library patrons with
social services and housing resources.
Strong Library Collections
The proposed budget continues to invest in strong library
collections, which represent approximately 11 percent of the
operating budget. Print books remain the primary material
format, but the library is expanding its investments in
eResources, including eBooks, eMusic, eVideo, databases,
and eLearning. Other investments include youth materials,
materials in international languages, and periodicals. In FY
2015-16 the collection budget will increase an additional 7.4
percent over the FY 2014-15 budget.
Equity and Shared Prosperity
In addition to its strong collection in multiple formats
and languages, the Library provides free educational and
recreational programming to residents of all ages. Every
month, the Library hosts more than 400 story-times
and events for children and their caregivers; specialized
programming and events for teens; and more than 100
literary, workforce development, and recreational classes
and programs for adults. The Library also offers a Family
Pass, enabling families to visit 24 local museums and
attractions for free.
The proposed budget will continue to offer scholarships
for patrons 18 years-old and older to earn an accredited
high-school diploma and a career certificate through Career
On-line High School, the only program of its kind. Diploma
completion requirements are combined with coursework
for a career track for each student. This program bolsters
the library’s Family and Education Zone goals while also
expanding its role to include workforce development
and helping to reach people who have not succeeded in
traditional educational settings.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $973.3
million is $33.7 million or 3.6 percent higher than the FY
2014-15 budget of $939.6 million. A significant portion of
the increase is due to increases in debt service as a result
of more spending on capital projects, increases in salaries
and fringe benefits costs, and higher investment in capital
projects. The PUC is entering the second year of a ?xed
two-year budget, so the FY 2016-17 budget is not under
consideration at this time.
Water Revenues
Retail and wholesale water customers have responded
to the request for a 10 percent voluntary reduction in
their water use due to the ongoing California drought.
This has resulted in lower water sales in the current year
and projected for FY 2015-16. The water enterprise has
sufficient fund balances to effectively manage operations
through this period.
Responding to Customer Needs
The PUC’s FY 2015-16 proposed budget includes new
equipment and staffing for a water connection team to
help meet the needs for new developments in the City.
The increased staffing levels will help new developments
receive more timely service and connect to the water
system.
Water and Wastewater Rates
To continue delivering reliable, high quality service, the
PUC adopted four years of water and wastewater service
rate increases beginning July 1, 2014. Ratepayer dollars
have funded seismic improvement projects for Bay Area
and San Francisco reservoirs, treatment plants, regional
water pipelines, and in-City water and sewer pipelines. Rate
increases are necessary to complete these major projects
as well as to pay off the bonds secured to fund them. The
rate schedule represents an average annual increase of $7
to $10 per month for a single family residential household
in San Francisco (about 8 to 9 percent per year). The PUC
Community Assistance Program (CAP) offers a 15 percent
discount on water bills and a 35 percent discount on sewer
bills for qualified customers.
Investments in Capital
The Department continues to make large investments
in capital, totaling $1.5 billion over the two fiscal years
of the fixed FY 2014-15 and 2015-16 budget. These
investments include funding for water, wastewater, and
power system improvements. Water projects include
improvements to the local and regional water system
such as pipeline replacement and repairs, structural and
seismic upgrades, and facility improvements. Wastewater
projects include treatment facility, sewer, and collection
system improvements as well as storm water and flood
control projects. Hetch Hetchy projects include funding
for streetlight improvements and power reliability and
replacement projects.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $177.0
million for the Recreation and Park Department is $13.8
million, or 8.5 percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget
of $163.2 million. The majority of this increase is due to
an increase in capital spending, recreation and aquatic
program staffing, and maintenance and supplies.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $167.6 million for the
Department is $9.4 million, or 5.3 percent, lower than
the FY 2015-16 proposed budget. A significant portion of
this decrease is due to the expiration of one-time capital
funding.
Budgeting for Strategic Priorities
Last year the Recreation and Park Department and
its Commission identified four strategic priorities;
park safety, environmental sustainability, active living,
and customer service. These priorities guide the
Department’s proposed FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17
budget.
Focusing on Park Safety
Park safety is a core value for the Recreation and Park
Department. The Department uses a variety of tools to
support park safety, including park activation, educating
park users, enforcing the Park Code, and maintaining
parks to the highest possible standards. The proposed
budget for FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 includes funding to
hire thirteen additional Park Patrol staff, including eleven
new Park Patrol Officers, to increase patrols in Golden
Gate Park and each Park Service Area. The officers act as
park ambassadors, curb bad behavior, and enforce park
hours, making parks safer for all users.
Maintaining Environmentally
Sustainable and Beautiful Parks
RPD is committed to providing excellent parks for San
Francisco’s residents and visitors. RPD continues to
manage its park maintenance resources as efficiently
as possible, developing knowledgeable and experienced
gardeners through its gardener apprentice program,
allocating custodians through a dynamic workforce
model, and training its workforce in best practices for
sustainable horticulture. As it strives for sustainable
park maintenance, the Department has worked diligently
to reduce water consumption. In the last year, RPD
has replaced inefficient plumbing fixtures, reduced
the duration of programmed irrigation, turned off all
recreational and ornamental water features, stopped
power washing hardscapes. As a result, water usage
has decreased by 22.6 percent. In light of the current
drought, the proposed FY 2015-16 budget includes
additional funding to further improve the Department’s
irrigation infrastructure to promote conservation.
The proposed budget increases funding for plant
material, sand, sod, and small equipment in both
neighborhood parks and Golden Gate Park allowing park
managers to replant perennial beds, better maintain
athletic fields, and replace broken sprinkler heads more
quickly. These investments will help RPD continue to
meet the City’s Park Maintenance Standards.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $6.9
million for the Rent Arbitration Board is $0.3 million, or 4.8
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $6.6 million.
This increase is primarily due to increased staffing to meet
service demand as well as one-time project funding.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $7.0 million for the
Department of Public Works is $0.1 million, or 1.3 percent,
higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget. This increase
is primarily due to the annualization of positions proposed
in the FY 2015-16 budget.
Growing Caseloads and Increased
Translation Needs
The Department is increasing its translation and
interpretation resources in order to address its growing
caseload, which contains an increasing rate of translation
and interpretation requests. In the FY 2015-16 proposed
budget, the Department will be adding Tagalog translation
services.
Legislative Changes
A significant number of legislative changes to the law the
Department regulates and other related laws have also
resulted in an increase the Department’s workload. These
changes include mandatory seismic upgrades to certain
buildings, for which a portion of the cost can be passed
through to tenants, new requirements for filing buyout
agreements with the Department, and significant changes
to hardship regulations regarding capital improvement
pass throughs. The proposed budget adds a position
to develop interpretive documents for the public, to be
posted online.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $26.7
million for the Retirement System is $0.8 million, or
3.1 percent, lower than the FY 2014-15 budget of $27.5
million. A significant portion of this decrease is due to
a large reduction in services of other departments. The
Retirement System is entering the second year of a fixed
two-year budget, so the FY 2016-17 budget is not under
consideration at this time.
As the San Francisco Employee Retirement System
(SFERS) Trust grows, the Retirement Board continues
to seek new investment strategies that will enhance
its ability to maintain superior investment returns. The
Retirement System’s proposed budget includes new
investment staff to accommodate expansion into new
investment strategies. The entirety of the Department’s
budget is funded from the SFERS Trust or through
reimbursement from the third-party administrator of the
City’s Deferred Compensation Plan.
The Retirement System’s initiatives to improve service
and to grow and protect the SFERS Trust assets are
ongoing and reflected in its budget. The increase in
FTE’s in the Investment Division will allow the Retirement
System to bring more investment expertise in-house,
rather than using consultants. The Retirement System
believes this will enable it to diversify assets, increase
earnings, and better prepare the SFERS Trust assets for
future changes in the economic cycle. In turn, the City’s
costs for employer contributions can be reduced, and
directed to other priority uses.
Moving forward, the Retirement System will evaluate
the impact of the increase in customer visits as well as
the demand for counseling services. The SFERS web
site will continue to be enhanced to allow members to
access information relevant to their retirement 24/7 and
to conduct some retirement transactions remotely. A
portion of SFERS’ customer population strongly prefers
face-to-face contact when seeking retirement services.
Web site improvements may reduce the increased
number of customer visits over time, while enhancing
the overall customer experience.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $203.5
million for the Sheriff Department is $10.9 million, or 5.7
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $192.6
million. A large portion of this increase is due to increases
in salaries and benefits costs.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $211.5
million for the Sheriff Department is $8.0 million, or 3.9
percent, higher than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of
$203.5 million. A large portion of this increase is due to
increases in salaries and benefits costs.
Planning for the Future
The Sheriff’s Department will continue to work closely with
the Department of Public Works and the Capital Planning
Committee to plan a replacement facility for the seismically
unsafe jails located at the Hall of Justice. The proposed
facility will be specially designed to meet the needs of the
mentally ill and to deliver services such as group counseling,
individual therapy, and transition planning that will ease
the re-entry of inmates into the community and reduce the
likelihood they will return to jail.
Efficient Service Provision
In an attempt to streamline services and create
efficiencies, the Sheriff’s Department plans to intensify
the specialization of its labor force, hiring and assigning
staff to the tasks best suited to each person’s skill
set. In addition, the Department will work closely with
the Department of Human Resources to continue to
enhance management of mandated leaves and workers’
compensation.

The Fiscal Years (FY) 2015-16 and 2016-17 proposed
budgets of $6.6 million for the Department on the Status
of Women are $0.73 million, or 12.5 percent, higher than
the FY 2014-15 budget of $5.8 million. This increase is
due to a ten percent increase in Violence Against Women
(VAW) grants.
Violence Against Women (VAW)
Approximately 80 percent of the Department’s budget
is allocated directly to nonprofit agencies that provide
violence prevention and intervention services to
women, girls, and families in San Francisco. These
services include crisis counseling, emergency shelter,
transitional housing, education, and outreach to
survivors of domestic violence. The Department’s VAW
grant allocation for FY 2015-18 will fund additional legal
services, employment services, and innovative violence
prevention strategies that seek to reach underserved and
vulnerable populations, including survivors of child sex
trafficking, sex workers, and women who are prostituted.
The proposed FY 2015-16 budget includes a 10 percent
increase to the Department’s current VAW grantees.
Combatting Human Trafficking
The Department collaborates with City agencies and
community partners to develop an effective citywide
response to human trafficking in San Francisco under
the auspices of the Mayor’s Task Force on Anti-Human
Trafficking (Task Force). The Department will continue
to focus on advancing the City’s training, anti-trafficking
policies, and coordination of support for trafficking
victims in the next two fiscal years. The proposed budget
funds after-hours emergency response services and case
management to support commercially, sexually exploited
youth and children. Additionally, funding is provided to
coordinate a public outreach campaign against human
trafficking.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $34.8
million for the Superior Court is $0.3 million, or 0.8 percent,
lower than the FY 2014-15 budget of $35.1 million. A large
portion of this decrease is due to a decrease in professional
services costs.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 proposed budget of $34.3
million for the Superior Court is $0.5 million, or 1.4 percent,
lower than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget of $34.8 million.
A large portion of this decrease is due to a decrease in
professional services costs.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $39.4
million for the Treasurer-Tax Collector is $0.8 million, or
2.0 percent, lower than the FY 2014-15 budget of $40.2
million. A significant portion of this decrease is due to
the expiration of limited duration positions related to the
implementation of the Gross Receipts Tax.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $38.7 is $0.7
million, or 1.9 percent, lower than they FY 2015-16
proposed budget of $39.4 million. A significant portion
of this decrease is due to the expiration of onetime IT
expenditures.
Effective Tax Collection
TTX takes seriously its Charter authority and obligation
to collect all property and business taxes in San
Francisco, and recognizes that the revenue brought in by
the Department funds critical programs and services for
all San Franciscans. The Department is on an aggressive
schedule to implement online business registration to
facilitate increased complexity of the voter-approved rate
schedules and improve customer service.
Gross Receipts
The first annual filing of the Gross Receipts and Payroll
Tax was successfully launched in January 2015. FY 2015-
16 will bring additional changes to business registration
and a major overhaul to the audit division as well as
procedures to align more strategically to the new law.
The Department will continue outreach to the business
community while further simplifying and clarifying filing
and payment procedures to facilitate compliance.
Customer Service
The Department will focus on a number of customer
service improvements in FY 2015-16. Since the
Department’s customer service function was integrated
into 311 in FY 2013-14, TTX-related call volume has grown
each year, with noticeable spikes around tax deadline
periods. The Taxpayer Assistance Unit will continue
to work to ensure that 311 is equipped to handle most
calls immediately while minimizing the number of calls
referred to the Department.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 proposed budget of $25.7
million for the War Memorial is $12.2 million, or 89.9
percent, higher than the FY 2014-15 budget of $13.5
million. This increase is primarily due to new debt service
included in the Department’s budget following renovation
of the War Memorial Veterans Building.
The FY 2016-17 proposed budget of $26.7 million for
the War Memorial is $1.0 million, or 3.9 percent, higher
than the FY 2015-16 proposed budget. This increase is
primarily driven by annualization of operating costs.
Veterans Building Reopening
The Veterans Building will reopen in September 2015,
following a 26-month closure for seismic and lifesafety
improvements and other renovations. The
War Memorial’s FY 2015-16 proposed budget includes
restoration of earned revenue from Veterans Building
rental facilities as well as restoration of staff and services
temporarily suspended during the construction period.
Upon reopening, Veterans Building utilization will
increase dramatically, including a daily staff occupancy
increase of 110 percent, which includes staffs of the War
Memorial, San Francisco Arts Commission, Grants for
the Arts, Veterans organizations, and the San Francisco
Opera. Additionally, two new event venues on the fourth
floor are expected to be rented daily for a variety of
rehearsal, performance, exhibit, and other activities.
During FY 2015-16, the War Memorial will evaluate
and implement various operational and programmatic
changes necessary as a result of new building systems,
occupants, and activities.
Partnering with Veterans
Organizations
The War Memorial is committed to working with Veterans
Building veterans organizations in FY 2015-16 to assist
with and insure their successful use of improved and upto-
date Veterans Building office and meeting room space
as well as display, exhibit, and service areas assigned for
veterans’ use.
Capital and IT Projects
In FY 2015-16 and 2016-17, a number of additional capital
and information technology projects are scheduled for
implementation by War Memorial. These include wireless
internet upgrades, lower level lighting and balcony seat
replacements at the Opera House, and carpet replacement
and elevator upgrades at Davies Symphony Hall.