The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 proposed
budget of $4.0 million each year for the Steinhart
Aquarium is roughly equal to the FY 2011-12 budget.
There are no significant changes to the Academy’s budget.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $3.9 million for the
Steinhart Aquarium is $0.1 million, or 1.5 percent, less
than the FY 2012-13 budget of $4.0 million. This decrease
is primarily due to a slight reduction in equipment and
engineering services.
INCR EASING TOURI SM
The Academy is committed to raising revenue in order
to protect programs and exhibits. In an effort to increase
attendance, the Academy continues to engage larger
markets to make the institution and the City an premier
travel destination. This includes partnering with the
U.S. Travel Association, the California Travel & Tourism
Commission, and the San Francisco Travel Association.
The goal is to encourage out-of-town visitors to San
Francisco to extend their stay one extra day for a Golden
Gate Park excursion, providing economic benefits to
the Academy and businesses throughout the City. The
Academy also strives to keep the public experience fresh
to ensure repeat visits, and opened a major exhibit titled
Earthquake on May 26th, 2012.
EDUCATION
The Academy’s objective is to be a global leader in
enhancing science literacy about nature, life, and its
sustainability. To this end, the Academy strives to offer
highly creative, effective, and well-funded education
programs that amplify the guest experience, engage
students with science in a personal and direct way,
and inspire students to take up careers in science. The
Academy hosts over 40,000 school group visitors annually
from San Francisco, and intends to increase school-aged
visitation through the creation of more after school
programming options. The Academy is also exploring
new free access options in addition to its existing
programs such as Family Appreciation Day, Quarterly
Free Sundays, and Neighborhood Free Days. In addition,
children under three enter for free. This amounts to
over 200,000 guests – approximately 15 percent of total
attendance – admitted at no cost.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $849.9
million for the Airport is $93.8 million, or 12.4 percent,
higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $756.1 million.
This budget increase is due to the annualized cost of
positions added in prior years; proposed new positions;
additional services and cost increases for shuttle bus,
parking management, and the Airline Liaison Office; a
proposed parking tax on the ballot in San Mateo county;
and reimbursement for 30 Police Academy trainees to
replace officers assigned to SFO. In addition, debt service
expenses are higher as the result of scheduled increases
for previously issued bonds. The budget includes a $34.9
million annual service payment to the City, $10.5 million
to maintain facilities and infrastructure, and $85.7
million for grant- and operating-funded capital projects.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $873.3 million for
the Airport is $23.4 million, or 2.7 percent, higher than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $849.9 million. This budget
increase is due to the additional cost of positions added
in prior years; proposed new positions; additional
services and cost increases for information technology
services, parking management services, and equipment
maintenance. Debt service expenses will increase again
as the result of scheduled increases for previously issued
bonds. The budget includes a $35.7 million annual service
payment to the City, $9.3 million to maintain facilities and
infrastructure, and $75.4 million for grant- and operatingfunded
capital projects.
AIR LIN E SERVIC E SUPPORT S
TOURI SM AN D TRA DE
SFO forecasts that enplanements (the number of
passengers boarding a plane) will reach 21.6 million in
FY 2012-13, a 2.3 percent increase, and 22.0 million in
FY 2013-14, a 1.8 percent increase. Recent increases in
service primarily reflect domestic growth, with new or
more frequent flights by United Airlines following its
merger with Continental Airlines, and the continued
expansion of Virgin America. For international service,
SFO has added new seasonal service from XL Airways
to Paris and additional flights to Europe and Mexico by
current air carriers. By attracting new and expanding
existing airline service, the Airport supports tourism and
international trade, promotes lower airfares, and improves
SFO’s competitive position. While domestic air traffic
has dramatically increased over the last few years, SFO
projects that expanding international traffic will be the
source of its long-term growth.
AIRPORT CONC ESSION S
PROVI DE LOCA L BUSIN ESS
OPPORTUNITI ES AN D
Ge nerate Re venue?The Airport’s concessions compare favorably to other
airports across the nation, ranking third with $11.64 in
sales per enplaned passenger in 2010. SFO’s concessions
include high-end retailers, many restaurants, and other
vendors that offer a broad range of services. Terminal 2,
which opened in April 2011, has the highest spend rate per
passenger for retail, food, and beverage concessions in the
Airport and has set a new standard for SFO concession
development. With wholesome food grown and prepared
in a healthful manner, the food concessionaires in
Terminal 2 are distinctly San Francisco. As the economy
strengthens and business travel returns, concession
sales are projected to exceed budget by 9.3 percent in FY
2011-12, which will increase the Airport’s annual service
payment to the City’s General Fund.
In recognition of its innovative program, SFO concessions
won six major awards from Airport Revenue News
in 2012, including “Airport with the Best Concession
Program Design,” “Airport with the Most Unique
Services,” and “Airport with Best Overall Concession
Program” for Large Airports. Terminal 2 also received
awards for “Terminal with the Best Program Design,”
“Terminal with the Best Customer Service,” and
“Terminal with the Best Concession Management Team.”
CAPITA L INV ESTMENT
CR EAT ES JOBS AN D
SUPPORT S LOCA L
BUSIN ESSES
The Airport’s $763.7 million Five-Year Capital Plan
and $1.9 billion Ten-Year Capital Plan will support the
local economy and businesses by investing in Airport
infrastructure. The Airport Capital Plan will create
about 4,000 jobs in the first five years and 11,900 jobs
over the ten-year period. The Five-Year Plan includes
$279.1 million in investments in terminal upgrades and
renovations; $250.2 million in spending on the airfield
for runway safety areas and other improvements; $150.8
million on support projects, such as a new air traffic
control tower, access control system upgrades, public
safety facilities and equipment, and cargo and hangar
facilities; $49.0 million for utility infrastructure; $32.8
million on roadways, AirTrain, and parking facilities; and
$1.8 million on West of Bayshore protection. The Ten-Year
Plan includes a preliminary estimate of $840.0 million for
the renovation of Boarding Area B in Terminal 1.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $25.4
million for ADP is $10.8 million, or 73.7 percent, greater
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $14.6 million. This increase
is due to funding for the Public Safety Realignment
initiative implemented on October 1, 2011. The FY 2012-
13 proposed budget also includes funding for Client
Supportive Services and the continued implementation
and improvement of evidence-based supervision to
enhance public safety, and maximize offender restitution,
reconciliation, and restorative services to victims of crime.
The newly implemented risk and needs assessment tool
and training will allow the Department to accurately
classify an offender’s risk for recidivism and direct staff
and resources away from the offenders who are more
likely to reoffend.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $25.4 million for ADP
is roughly equal to the FY 2012-13 budget.
STATE REALIGN MENT AB109
Assembly Bill (AB) 109 State Public Safety Realignment
was implemented in October 2011 as a state budget
initiative to reduce prison costs by releasing non-serious,
non-violent, non-sex offenders back to their county of
origin and allocating resources directly to the county
responsible for public safety. The ADP has experienced
an incremental increase in caseload from the addition
of the post release community supervision population.
The Department has established a Post Release
Community Supervision Division and a Pre-Release
Team that provides intensive supervision of the post
release community supervision population. The Pre-
Release Team is responsible for coordinating the release
of inmates from the county jail or state prison to County
Community Supervision, administering a risk needs
assessment, and reviewing special conditions with clients
prior to their release to community supervision in order
to address individual needs and improve outcomes.
 
CLIENT SUPPORTIV E
SERVIC ES
ADP provides a seamless continuum of care and support
to clients in order to increase successful outcomes, and
to reduce recidivism and victimization. The Department
works collaboratively with the Department of Public
Health, the Human Services Agency, and the Office of
Workforce Development to provide a continuum of care
and services to ADP clients. In addition, the Department
is in the process of establishing a Community Assessment
Center to coordinate benefits and services for ADP clients.
LEVERAGING FEDERA L AN D
STATE FUN DING
The ADP has aggressively applied for state and federal
grants to increase resources without relying entirely
on the City’s General Fund. The Department has been
extremely successful in these efforts. ADP was awarded
the following new or continuing federal and state grants:
SB678 Community Corrections
Performance Incentive Fund
Senate Bill (SB) 678 established the Community
Corrections Incentive Fund for the implementation of
evidence based supervision practices with the goal of
reducing recidivism of felony probationers by improving
probation services. Accomplishing this goal produces
savings at the state level, reduces prison overcrowding,
and enhances public safety. Funding is awarded based
on counties showing improved probation outcomes as
measured by a reduction in probation failures committed
to prison. The ADP has been successful in reducing
recidivism through the implementation of evidence based
supervision practices and improved case management
and, as a result, has received an allocation of $2.2 million
from the State through the Community Corrections
Performance Incentive Fund for FY 2012-13.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $11.4
million for the Arts Commission is $1.1 million, or
10.0 percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of
$10.3 million. A significant portion of this increase
is due to increases in salary and fringe benefits costs.
The Department achieved ongoing budget savings by
eliminating temporary positions and identifying non-
General Fund sources to support the WritersCorps
program.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $11.9 million for
the Department is $0.5 million, or 4.0 percent, higher
than the FY 2012-13 budget of $11.4 million. Again, a
significant portion of this increase is due to increases in
salary and fringe benefit costs.
Ch ange in Leade rsh ip
In January of 2012, the Department appointed a new
Director of Cultural Affairs to lead the agency, as well
as elected a new President to head the Arts Commission
that governs the Department. With this transition comes
a reinvigorated effort to reflect upon the Department’s
strengths and strategize ways to make the Arts
Commission more efficient and have a greater impact in
our communities.
Pl anning for the Future
The Strategic Planning Process
The Arts Commission is leveraging private foundation
funding to embark on a strategic assessment and planning
process, which will identify key needs and opportunities
within the San Francisco arts ecology, enable the
Department to better connect information and resources
from citywide initiatives to the arts community, improve
the City’s responsiveness to community need, and
improve the Department’s effectiveness and operations.
Capital Planning
The FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 budget includes capital
funding for the Veterans War Memorial renovation
project, in anticipation of the Department’s move
to the building in 2015. The Department anticipates
occupying space on three floors, including offices on
the third floor, a gallery and public programming space
on the first floor, and basement storage space for the
collection. Additionally, the FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14
budget includes capital funding for a number of critical
restoration and conservation projects that support the
Department’s Charter mandate to oversee and care for the
City’s civic art collection.
 
Improving Sys tems
and Accountability
Responding to the Controller’s
Administrative and Financial Review
In November 2011, the Controller’s Office, City Services
Auditor Division, released a report on the financial
management of the Arts Commission. The report evaluated
the organizational structure of the Arts Commission
finance personnel, assessed their financial practices, and
evaluated their grants-making process. The review spelled
out operational and financial improvements that the
Department needed to implement to improve its financial
and operational practices. The implementation of the
report’s recommendations includes a budget reorganization
to improve accuracy and transparency. The budget includes
several position reclassifications in order to ensure that
roles and responsibilities match job descriptions, which will
create promotive lines within programs, and equity and
parity among staff.
A New Website
In conjunction with the strategic planning process, the
Department’s FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 budget includes
funding for a website redesign. The new website will
strengthen community interaction; provide equal access
to programs, services and opportunities; and allow the
Department to use current, available technology to serve
the public more efficiently and effectively.
Build ing Comm unity
and a Stronger Arts
Ecosys tem
Central Market Partnership
The partnership between the Arts Commission and
the Office of Economic and Workforce Development in
Central Market is an example of how the Department
utilizes the arts to support neighborhood economic
initiatives in substantive and meaningful ways. Building
on The ARTery Project with funding from the National
Endowment for the Arts (NEA), the Department will
support short term arts activation between UN Plaza
and 6th Street for performing and visual arts. Ongoing
partnership efforts include use of the Decaux Kiosks
for a poster series that celebrates the neighborhood; a
monthly newsletter; support of permitting processes;
coordinated press and media outreach; and communitywide
events. Legislation pertaining to section 429 of the
planning code that was recently signed by the Mayor
will establish a Public Art Trust Fund to assist with the
development of cultural facility capital projects as well
as short and long term street arts activation, such as
temporary art and performances.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $8.3
million for the Asian Art Museum is $0.6 million, or 8.0
percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $7.7 million.
This increase is primarily due to increases in salary and
fringe benefits costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $8.6 million for the
AAM is $0.3 million, or 4.0 percent, higher than the FY
2012-13 budget of $8.3 million. This is primarily due to
increases in salary and fringe benefits costs.
Strengthe ning the City?As a Michelin rated “must-see” destination for San
Francisco bound tourists, a provider of education
curriculum and school tours, and a cultural cornerstone
of the Civic Center neighborhood, the AAM will continue
to strive to expand tourism, facilitate strong partnerships
with our public schools, and improve the mid-Market/
Tenderloin area.
Featured Programm ing
Over the course of the next two fiscal years, the AAM
will host a number of notable exhibitions representing the
diversity and depth of Asian art and culture, including
these two in the coming fiscal year:
 
Phantoms of Asia:
Contemporary Awakens the Past
Phantoms of Asia will feature paintings, sculptures,
photographs, installations, videos, and site-specific
commissions by Hiroshi Sugimoto (Japan), Apichatpong
Weerasethakul (Thailand), Adeela Suleman (Pakistan),
and Choi Jeong Hwa (Korea), among others. The
exhibition will also include more than 90 artworks from
the AAM’s renowned collection. The exhibition is guest
curated by Mami Kataoka, chief curator of the Mori
Art Museum in Tokyo, in collaboration with Allison
Harding, the Asian Art Museum’s assistant curator of
contemporary art, and other museum curatorial staff.
Out of Character:
Decoding Chinese Calligraphy
What defines a masterwork? This exhibition, focusing
on 15 masterpieces supported by 25 additional works
of the highest quality, explores the roles of tradition,
creativity, and self-expression in the art of Chinese
calligraphy. Through the centuries, a complex set of
rules and traditions evolved impacting every aspect of
the calligrapher’s practice. Within these constraints,
creativity and self-expression have remained the goals of
the Chinese calligrapher. Global artistic phenomenon, Xu
Bing, has proposed a new multi-media piece specifically
for the exhibition. Out of Character also includes paintings
— borrowed from a collection of the San Francisco
Museum of Modern Art — by modern American masters
Brice Marden, Franz Kline, and Mark Tobey, whose works
have been linked with calligraphy.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $21.9
million for the Assessor-Recorder is $1.2 million, or
5.7 percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $20.7
million. This increase is due to the addition of limited
tenure staff that will work on an assessment appeals
backlog, as well as $1.0 million that the Department is
investing in technology projects.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $21.0 million for the
Assessor-Recorder is $0.8 million, or 3.8 percent, lower
than the FY 2012-13 budget of $21.9 million. This decrease
is due to the one-time increase for technology projects in
the FY 2012-13 budget.
 
INCR EASED CIT Y REVENU E
Property taxes comprise 35 percent of the City’s General
Fund and are its largest single revenue source. The ASR’s
efforts in maintaining the assessment roll, reassessing
properties as necessary, and collecting transfer tax
revenue have been critical to the increase in the City’s
General Fund property tax revenue. The Department’s
efforts to flag, review, and audit under-reported and
un-recorded transactions result in millions of dollars of
additional transfer tax revenue for the City.
Recording fee revenue is budgeted to increase by 26.5
percent in FY 2012-13. This increase, from $3.1 million
to $3.9 million, is due to (1) a projected increase in
the number of recorded documents, (2) the projected
enactment of a new eRecording Fee, and (3) a $6 increase
in the recording page fee effective in November 2011.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $0.9
million for the BOA is roughly equal to the FY 2011-12
budget. The Department increased expected revenue, and
decreased expenses to offset increased costs for labor and
technology support.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $11.4
million for the BOS is $0.6 million, or 5.5 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $10.8 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to increases in salary and
fringe benefits costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget for the BOS is roughly
equal to the FY 2012-13 budget of $11.4 million.
budget constraints
The City Charter requires the BOS to provide direct
services that support open and participatory government.
The BOS is unable to reduce Charter-mandated programs
or positions. Mandated positions and services include
board members, board aides, the clerk of the Board, the
Assessment Appeals Board, the Sunshine Ordinance Task
Force, the Youth Commission, committee clerks, the
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR), official
advertising, and budget and legislative analysis.
 
More res ponsive and
effe ctive governme nt
In FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14, the Department will
implement two projects that will result in a more
responsive and effective government. The first project
will be to update outdated and unsupported information
technology systems, such as the Assessment Appeals
Board appeals tracking system. This will be the first step
in moving towards online appeals filing for customers. As
part of this project, the BOS plans to work with other City
departments to consolidate technological systems when
possible, and to leverage existing programs and expertise.
The second project will be to digitize and digitally archive
the BOS’s legislative record. Once digitized and archived,
the Department will post San Francisco’s legislative
record online, providing the public access to the record
both during and outside of regular business hours. This
archiving will also safeguard the legislative record from
loss in a disaster.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $50.2
million for DBI is $2.3 million, or 4.6 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $47.9 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to increased labor and
overhead costs associated with increasing permit volumes
and complexity. In addition, an increase in travel,
training, and materials and supplies is included in the
budget in order to provide staff trainings on new state
laws regarding accessibility and updated building codes.
A vehicle replacement program averaging 10 vehicles per
year is also reinstated so that DBI can replace its vehicles
on a 10-year cycle.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $52.2 million for DBI
is $2.0 million, or 3.8 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13
budget of $50.2 million. This increase is due to increased
labor and overhead costs associated with increasing
permit volumes and complexity.
Increased dem and for
DBI Services
The Department’s financial picture has improved
significantly since the major downturn in the construction
industry, which began in FY 2008-09. The FY 2011-12
year-end projection is 4.0 percent greater than the original
budget due to the continued economic recovery. DBI is
projecting a 4.0 percent growth in charges for services
between the FY 2011-12 projected amounts and the FY
2012-13 estimates, as well as an additional 3.0 percent
increase between FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14. DBI needs
to increase its staffing levels in order to meet this demand.
increased Staff ing
Needs
DBI is proposing an additional 27 positions in FY
2012-13 and six in FY 2013-14 to address the increased
permit volume and complexities; to facilitate the timely
processing of requests so that the City can continue to
attract and retain jobs in the new “Innovation Corridor”;
to enable the Department to adequately address the
Ten-Year Capital Plan; and to make government more
responsive and effective.
 
The new positions in FY 2012-13 include nine in
Inspection Services, eight in Permit Services, and two
in Administrative Services to address plan check and
inspection needs. The new positions in FY 2013-14 include
four in Inspection Services and two in Permit Services.
custome r se rvice
through Conversion of
records
DBI is moving forward with its conversion of records
project to digitalize its current and historical records. This
will shorten the time required to reproduce documents
and satisfy records requests to City customers. DBI
currently process 10,000 to 12,000 pages per month and
has 1,200 rolls of 16mm microfilm and 3,500 rolls of
35mm microfilm dating back to the 1930s. Seven new
positions are proposed for this project for indexing and
quality control of the scanned documents produced by a
vendor.
Ne w Re gulations and
Code Updates
State Law requires that certain DBI inspectors and
engineers receive Certified Access Specialist Program
(CASp) training. The International and State Building
Codes are updated on a three-year cycle and training on
the new codes is required in FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14.
The budget accounts for an increase in travel and training
costs to accommodate the new training requirements.
There is also a one-time $148,000 increase in materials
and supplies to cover the purchase of new code books.
New books must be purchased with each code cycle.
outreach Programs
The budget includes a $149,000 increase to communitybased
organizations for the Single Room Occupancy
(SRO) Collaboratives and Code Enforcement Outreach
Program (CEOP). non-profit contractors that was received
during the RFP process in November 2011. The RFPs
equalized the units of service, and respondents were asked
to include the current cost of providing the service.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $13.2
million for CSS is $0.1 million, or 0.8 percent, higher than
the FY 2011-12 budget of $13.1 million. This increase is
due to increased labor costs, which are partially offset by
Department savings in materials and supplies.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $13.3 million for
CSS is roughly the same as the FY 2012-13 budget.
The Department is absorbing increased labor costs by
implementing a more efficient organizational structure in
its case management division.
IMPROVING
ORGANIZATIONA L
EFFICI ENC Y
In FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14, CSS will continue to
reduce program overhead costs while maintaining direct
services. In the past three years, CSS’s caseload declined
by 24 percent. In response, the Department has been
steadily decreasing its workforce through management
restructuring and the reduction of vacant positions. CSS
has realized additional cost savings by renegotiating
pricing of professional services, rental leases, materials
and supplies, and discretionary work orders, as well as by
leveraging grant opportunities, which increases anticipated
revenue. The Department is committed to keeping
administrative, salary, and fringe benefits costs under 7.0
percent of overall child support program expenses.
REDUCING BARRI ERS TO
EMPLOYMENT
In collaboration with the San Francisco Office of
Economic and Workforce Development, the San Francisco
Human Services Agency, and Goodwill, CSS won an
Enhanced Job Training Demonstration grant from the
Department of Labor for Transitions SF. Transitions SF
recruits and refers non-custodial parents who have been
identified by CSS as either delinquent in child support
payments or non-job ready to Goodwill for employment
services. CSS anticipates that successful graduates of
Transitions SF will move from subsidized employment to
permanent employment, ultimately increasing their child
support payments. CSS is also providing specialized,
intensive services to Transitions SF participants to assist
them in modifying child support orders, repaying arrears,
and getting child support obligations in line with their
income and ability to pay.
 
BRINGING SERVIC ES TO
INCARC ERAT ED PAR ENT S
CSS has established a formal relationship with the
Sheriff ’s Department to provide onsite child support
services to incarcerated parents. Between 2007 and 2011,
the jail outreach initiative has identified 2,837 noncustodial
parents whose whereabouts were previously
unknown and whose overall debt owed is in excess of
$17.0 million. Reducing these arrears has been achieved by
modifying current support obligations, enrolling eligible
inmates in Department program opportunities upon
their release, and addressing current balances through the
Department’s Compromise of Arrears Program.
REENTR Y SERVIC ES FOR
PAR ENT S
CSS has partnered with the Adult Probation Department
to incorporate child support assessment and plans as
part of the “probation plan” for post-release parents with
open child support cases. Strategies include: the gradual
re-introduction of realistic orders that are mindful of the
instability many parents experience as they transition
from incarceration; consolidation of out-of-county cases;
paternity establishment; and timely modification of
orders. This initiative reduces the negative impact that
full child support enforcement may have on the successful
reintegration of post-release parents.
In addition, the Custodial and Noncustodial Parent
Employment and Training Program (C-NET) supports
parents who, after release from incarceration, struggle
to pay child support and face considerable barriers
to employment. C-NET requires parents to work
cooperatively with employment readiness organizations
affiliated with CSS, and to report regularly to CSS for
review and consideration of child support. Service
providers report weekly to CSS on parent progress as they
move toward social stability and employment training.
Through a partnership with Goodwill and Florence
Crittenton, C-NET participants also receive peer support
and counseling services, education on parenting skills
and anger management, substance recovery support,
employment assessment and training, and other needed
stabilizing resources.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $38.7
million for First 5 is $6.6 million, or 20.6 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $32.1 million. This increase
is primarily due to an increase in work order transfers
from the Department of Children, Youth, and Their
Families (DCYF) and the Human Services Agency (HSA)
for a new joint RFP that First 5 is helping to administer,
as well as increases to community-based organization
services.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $38.7 million for First
5 is roughly the same as the FY 2012-13 budget.
In FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14, First 5 continues to face
declining revenue from their primary source: statewide
tobacco tax revenue (Proposition 10). This decline is
not unexpected, and the Department has created a
sustainability plan and fund reserves to guide its funding
decisions. To partially offset these declining revenues,
First 5 will draw down its sustainability fund over time.
PART ENERING FOR
SUSTAIN ED EFFECTIV ENESS
First 5’s 2012-2015 Strategic Plan is focused on promoting
school readiness and school success, and engages many
community and City partners to achieve these goals.
Approximately 30 percent of First 5 funds are committed
to joint funding child and family wellbeing initiatives with
other City departments.
 
FY 2011-12 marked the third year of a three-year $10.0
million initiative by First 5, HSA and DCYF to support
neighborhood-based and population-focused family
resource centers. These centers are in neighborhoods
throughout the City with varying levels of service based
on the needs of local families. Population-based family
resource centers have a citywide focus on children and
families who are homeless and under housed, recent
immigrants, populations with special needs, Lesbian
Gay Bisexual Transgender Queer Questioning and teen
families, and families with children exposed to violence.
In FY 2012-13, First 5 will continue to contribute
approximately $18.2 million to jointly fund Early Care and
Education Initiatives with DCYF and HSA. These efforts
include funding for health screening and early childhood
mental health consultation; childcare subsidies for lowincome
families with infants and toddlers; a variety of
professional development and education attainment
activities for teachers; and inclusion strategies for children
with special needs.
PR ESCHOO L FOR ALL (PFA)
In addition to overseeing Proposition 10 dollars, First 5
is also responsible for implementing the City’s Universal
Preschool for All Program (PFA), which is funded by
local General Fund revenues as part of Proposition H.
The Department began the implementation of PFA in FY
2005-06 and expanded the program in FY 2008-09 to
serve all neighborhoods. In FY 2012-13, the allocation for
PFA will be $15.5 million. The Department anticipates
funding a half-day of free preschool for approximately
3,300 four-year-olds, and will continue to target children
from low income families.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $122.1
million for DCYF is $1.9 million, or 1.5 percent, lower
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $123.9 million. This
decrease is due to the Department moving all early
childcare and education funding and activities to the new
Office on Early Care and Education.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $130.9 million for DCYF
is $2.8 million, or 2.2 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13
budget of $128.1 million. This increase is due to an increase
in Children’s Fund revenues and SFUSD transfer funds. The
revenue increase will be allocated to children, youth and
family service providers, in addition to funding evaluation,
technical assistance, and capacity building for communitybased
organizations.
CO MPLETE CHILDREN’S
SERVIC ES ALLOCATION
PLAN (CSAP ) CYCLE
FY 2012-13 is the final year of DCYF’s 2010-2013
Children’s Services Allocation Plan (CSAP). The CSAP
targets resources to programs that meet the Department’s
primary goal of ensuring children and youth are ready to
learn and are succeeding in school. In FY 2012-13, DCYF
will fund the following services:
• Out of School Time (OST) – $16.0 million will be
allocated to academic enrichment, summer and
recreation programs;
• Youth, Leadership and Development (Y-LEAD) –
$18.0 million will be allocated to youth workforce
development, teen, transitional aged youth and health
and wellness programs;
• Family Support (FS) – $4.5 million will be allocated to
family support services including family resource centers;
• Violence Prevention and Intervention (VPI) – $11.0
million will be allocated to various programs including
alternative education and case management;
• Citywide Systems Support (SS) – $8.0 million will be
allocated to citywide programs such as Healthy Kids San
Francisco, SFKID.Org and Kindergarten to College.
IMPLEMENT NEW FUN DING
CYCLE
FY 2013-14 marks the first year of a new three-year
CSAP funding cycle. Funding levels for core services are
currently being developed. DCYF’s proposed 2013-2016
CSAP include the following funding priorities:
• Out of School Time (OST) – The Department proposes
to increase funding for comprehensive afterschool and
summer programming. These core services provide
benefits to both youth and their working parents;
• Youth, Leadership and Development (Y-LEAD) – To
 
support the development of work readiness and 21st
Century Skills, Career Awareness and School success,
the Department proposes to increase resources to
youth workforce development to meet the high demand
for youth employment services.
NEW OFFIC E ON EAR LY
CAR E AN D EDUCATION
The FY 2012-13 budget centralizes the administration of
San Francisco’s early care and education programs under
a new, independent Office of Early Care and Education
(OECE). Under the direction of the Mayor and with
the joint leadership of the Department of Children,
Youth and Their Families, First Five San Francisco, the
Human Services Agency, and the San Francisco Unified
School District, this new office will improve access
to early care and education, improve early care and
education workforce and build early care and education
system capacity. This independent Office will rely on
the Human Services Agency for back office functions
such as accounting and human resources management.
By consolidating services and using existing resources,
the Office of Early Care and Education will maximize
resources, improve policy coordination, and provide a
single line of authority for the City’s investments. This
new independent office will build upon the successes of
San Francisco’s model programs to further streamline a
high quality early care and education system.
CONTINU E IMPROVING
ACCOUNTA BILIT Y AND
SERVIC E QUA LIT Y
In FY 2011-12, DCYF began implementation of new quality
assessment standards. Over the next two budget years, DCYF
will continue to implement these standards. Additionally,
the proposed FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 budget proposal
includes approximately $1.0 million in increased evaluation
and technical assistance funding to work with our
community based partners in improving service quality.
CONTINU E PARTN ERING
WIT H PU BLIC SCHOO LS
DCYF will continue to partner with SFUSD through a
variety of programs. The Department’s FY 2012-13 and
FY 2013-14 budget proposal includes funds to continue
to leverage OST programs with SFUSD state-funded
afterschool programs in order to increase the number of
afterschool slots. In addition, the Department will continue
to fund work-based learning experiences to support high
school completion. Finally, the budget includes funding
for truancy prevention high-school wellness programs,
elementary arts programs, and athletic programs.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $67.8
million for the City Attorney’s Office is $2.9 million, or
4.5 percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $65.0
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to an
increase in salary and fringe benefits costs. In addition,
the Department will conduct legal work previously done
by the former Redevelopment Agency.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $70.9 million for the
CAT is $3.1 million, or 4.6 percent, higher than the FY
2012-13 budget of $67.8 million. A significant portion
of this increase is due to an increase in salary and fringe
benefits costs.
Aff irmative
Litigation Program
Since 1998, the Department’s Affirmative Litigation
Program has successfully advanced important public
policy initiatives in San Francisco and across the United
States, and has proven to be of critical importance to the
protection of the health, social, and financial interests of
San Francisco and its citizens. In collaboration with Yale
University and the University of California at Berkeley
Boalt Hall School of Law, the Department’s Affirmative
Litigation Working Group researches potential litigation
and explores innovative public policy litigation strategies.
For FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14, the program will continue
to focus on:
• The investigation and prosecution of public integrity
cases to ensure the probity and transparency of the
City’s contracting and decision-making processes,
and to seek damages where public funds have been
misappropriated;
• The exposure and elimination of unscrupulous
business practices, and the pursuit of restitution on
behalf of consumers;
• The filing of anti-trust cases on behalf of the City to
recover overcharges due to price fixing and other antitrust
violations;
• The filing of cases on behalf of the City to require
federal and state agencies to fulfill their legal duties to
protect the citizens of San Francisco.
Protecting San
Francisco’s Res idents
and Ne ighb orhoods
The Department’s Neighborhood and Resident Protection
team is responsible for the enforcement of municipal and
state laws governing public nuisance. Over the course of
the next two fiscal years, through a coordinated effort
with relevant City agencies, the team will investigate
complaints of public nuisance and, when appropriate,
enforce the law to abate that nuisance through all
necessary means, including litigation. Public nuisance
actions usually result in substantial penalties and generate
the recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs. In light of the
economic downturn, the team will continue to focus on
the collection of outstanding judgments owed to the City.
The Neighborhood and Resident Protection team will
also continue to abate gang-related problems through
the civil gang injunction. The Department now has
four permanent and active injunctions in Bayview
Hunters Point, the Mission, Visitacion Valley, and the
Western Addition. The team cooperates with local,
state and federal law enforcement to minimize gangrelated
violence in San Francisco. Neighborhoods in San
Francisco that experience isolated instances of criminal
activity may benefit from other legal options, such as
drug abatement actions and unfair competition actions.
The team works closely with the San Francisco Police
Department to implement the most effective solutions to
crimes and other undesirable activities throughout the
City.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $30.7
million for the Department is $6.1 million, or 19.9
percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $24.6
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
expected increases in the number of permits, case volume,
and the automatic indexing of the Department’s fees,
which generates more revenue. This revenue will cover
the Department’s additional expenses associated with
rising salary and fringe benefits costs. In addition, the
Department anticipates grant revenue will increase by
1.7 percent in FY 2012-13 to $1.5 million. Furthermore,
the General Fund is providing additional funds for
priority projects in FY 2012-13, such as the Transportation
Sustainability Program environmental review.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $28.2 million for the
Department is $2.4 million, or 7.8 percent, lower than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $30.7 million. The Department
expects continued increases due to the number of
permits, case volume, and the automatic indexing of the
Department’s fees, similar to the expected increases in FY
2012-13; however, the overall budget decreases compared
to FY 2012-13, the result of completing various one-time
projects.
PERMIT AN D CA SE VO LUME
TR ENDS
The Department’s volume of applications, which includes
building permits requiring planning review and all
other planning cases (i.e. conditional use, variance, and
other applications), has stabilized over the past four
fiscal years. In FY 2008-09, the Department experienced
a significant decline in permit and application volume
of approximately 18 percent from FY 2007-08 during
the economic recession. This represented the most
significant decline in volume over the prior eight
fiscal years. In FY 2011-12, permit and case volume is
anticipated to be slightly higher compared to the prior
year with the ramping up of some cases, particularly large
Environmental Review cases. The Department anticipates
building permit and case volume to increase by 3 percent
in FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14. In addition, in FY 2013-14
the Department plans to implement the recommendations
of a Comprehensive Fee Study, an effort to reevaluate the
Department’s fees to ensure appropriate cost recovery and
the equitable setting of fees across all fee types.
One significant change in the Department’s budget is
an increase in staffing to ensure the timely review of
projects requiring departmental approvals. Two new
planners, funded by project fees, will focus on supporting
the proposed Golden State Warriors move to Pier 30-32.
Additionally, two new planners will help ensure that
both public and private projects requiring environmental
review do not encounter delays.
 
NEIG HBOR HOOD
INITIATIV ES
The Department will invest resources in neighborhood
initiatives including (1) the Better Neighborhoods
Program, which will initiate a dialogue with
neighborhoods that are seeking to strengthen their
communities through policy, public realm, and economic
development; (2) the Central Subway Downtown Corridor
Plan, which will propose changes to the allowed land
uses and building heights, and will include a strategy
for improving the pedestrian experience in this area in
association with the coming Central Subway; and (3) the
Civic Center Sustainable Resource District, which the
Department hopes to expand into a full public realm
plan that enhances the pedestrian realm, creates a unique
sense of place, and demonstrates how a sustainable city
can meet ambitious water efficiency and renewable energy
goals.
To support the City’s new Invest in Neighborhoods
initiative, which is being led by the Office of Economic
and Workforce Development, the Planning Department
will direct existing resources, as well as a new 0.6 FTE
of staff time, toward this key initiative. The Department
will be involved in assessing neighborhood commercial
corridors on different socioeconomic criteria, as well
as participating in targeted interventions to support
these corridors’ economic success. Specifically, the
Department’s role will include providing zoning changes,
development feasibility analyses, and offering urban
design recommendations along many corridors. The
Department may do more comprehensive planning
in a few key corridors requiring particular attention.
Furthermore, the Department will provide additional
support to the Central Market area through its
participation as part of the City’s Better Market Street
team.
TRAN SPORTATION
INITIATIV ES
The Department will also invest resources in reliable
public transit and transportation initiatives, including
(1) completing the Environmental Impact Report (EIR)
for the Transit Effectiveness Project (TEP), and (2) in
collaboration with the Municipal Transportation Agency,
Transportation Authority, and the Office of Economic and
Workforce Development, the Department will continue
work on the EIR for the Transportation Sustainability
Program, which will enable new development and
alleviate its burden on citywide transit performance by
funding categories of transportation projects shown
to directly offset the impacts of growth from new
development.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $38.9
million for the Controller’s Office is $0.7 million, or 1.5
percent, higher than FY 2011-12 budget of $38.1 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to an increase in
salary and fringe benefits.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $40.1 million for the
Department is $1.2 million, or 7.5 percent, higher than the
FY 2012-13 budget of $38.9 million. A significant portion
of this increase is also due to an increase in salary and
fringe benefits costs. However, the Department was able
to reduce its need for General Fund support in FY 2013-14
through staffing efficiencies and work order recoveries.
Two-Year Budget Cy cle
and Financial Pl an
Im pleme ntation
In FY 2011-12, the budget system was adapted to support
the City’s two-year budget process and financial planning
processes. Consistent with the Charter approved budget
reform measure, all City departments are required to
submit a two-year budget for FY 2012-13 and 2013-14.
In addition to running the City’s budget system, the
Budget and Analysis staff provides training, analysis,
and technical assistance to departments, the Mayor’s
Office, and the Board of Supervisors on the revenue and
expenditures for prior, current, and future budgets.
eMerge – Ne w Human
Res ources , Benefits
Adm inistration and
Payroll System
This consolidated citywide system will provide web-based,
standardized functions for recruitment, hiring, position
management, workforce and personnel administration,
benefits administration, time and attendance reporting,
payroll, project and labor distribution, credentialing of the
workforce, and management of the disaster service worker
program. Phase one implementation of eMerge will begin
in early FY 2012-13 for the core components, including
all human resource processing, payroll and benefits
administration. Phase 2 will begin mid FY 2012-13, with
roll-out of the City’s new employee time reporting system,
as well as significant reporting and self service functions,
credentialing and disaster service worker implementation.
Financial Sys tem
Re placeme nt Proje ct
In FY 2012-13, the Department will complete the initial
scoping and analysis for a new financial system for the
City. The current financial system was developed in the
 
mid-1970s as a mainframe-based legacy system that has
been improved over the years with upgraded versions of
the software. However, the core system cannot support
additional enhancements and functionality that are
needed to meet various financial requirements and
financial reporting demands. After the scoping project is
complete, the replacement of the City’s financial system
will be a multi-year project led by the Department and
will include systems evaluation and selection, design,
development, training, and implementation.
Citywide Financial
Sys tems Re covery
Proje ct
In FY 2012-13, the Department, in partnership with
the Department of Technology, will establish an offsite
Disaster Recovery location for the City’s core financial
systems that will help enable continuity of operations.
This site will provide secure, reliable, and redundant
in-time disaster systems recovery for the City’s financial,
human resources, benefits administration, and payroll
information.
Business Tax Analys is
and Study and Re view
of the City’s Economic
Devel opme nt Plan
In FY 2011-12, the Department’s Budget and Analysis staff
began research and analysis of the City’s payroll tax, and
other potential alternatives to the current business tax
structure. The proposed budget for FY 2012-13 includes
the continuation of one economic analyst who will assist
the City’s Chief Economist to complete the analysis and
study, and provide options and recommendations to the
Mayor and the Board of Supervisors for possible inclusion
in the November 2012 ballot.
Savings in Expenditures
in City Services Auditor
Due to the increased number of vacancies and slower
than expected hiring, the City Services Auditor has
incurred a cost savings in FY 2011-12 that will allow
the division to budget a beginning fund balance, thus
reducing the General Fund transfer to the Department in
FY 2012-13. This savings has allowed the Department to
meet its General Fund reduction target, without severely
impacting the performance of other core services within
the accounting, financial systems operations, budget and
analysis, and payroll functions.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $42.8 million
for the District Attorney is $2.1 million, or 5.2 percent,
higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $40.7 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to the annualization
of positions, and increases in staff salary and fringe
benefits costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $43.0 million for the
District Attorney is $0.2 million, or roughly equal to the
FY 2012-13 budget of $42.8 million. This slight increase is
due to higher salary and fringe costs offset by expenditure
reductions.
Declining Outside
Funding Supporting
Publ ic Safe ty and
Prosecution
Of the proposed budget for FY 2012-13, only 14.0 percent
is from non-General Fund sources. This low percentage
represents a continual decline in available Non-General
Fund revenue due to a trend of dwindling outside funding
to support public safety/prosecution. In particular, this
budget proposal reflects the reduction of the State Vertical
Prosecution grant, the American Recovery Act Zone
grant, and the Office of Violence Against Women Language
Access grant. The District Attorney remains committed
to seeking outside funding by working closely with
various funders to identify opportunities for partnership.
Just this year, the Dpeartment was awarded a federal Intellectual
Properties grant, an Attorney General Mortgage
Fraud Prosecution grant, and a Privacy and Piracy grant,
also from the Office of the Attorney General. These grants
represent the Department’s continuous attempts to be
responsive to new areas of crime.
Homicide Backl og
The District Attorney dedicated more staff to help move
along the oldest homicides and clear the homicide backlog.
Over the past year, the Department moved numerous
cases to trial or plea, clearing out over 53.0 percent of the
homicide backlog. The Department will continue to work
on clearing the backlog of these cases in FY 2012-13.
 
Victim Services	Over the past year, the Victim Services Division took
critical steps toward improving accessibility for victims in
San Francisco. Specifically, the Department began holding
Victim Advocate office hours in community settings
in Bayview, Chinatown, and the Mission district. By
redeploying existing staff, the Department brings much
needed outreach and assistance to victims who may not
otherwise venture to the Hall of Justice for assistance.
Mortgage and
Inves tme nt Fraud
Mortgage and foreclosure fraud targets the City’s most
vulnerable homeowners, including the elderly and
individuals with limited-English proficiency. Pursuing
cases against these criminals requires intensive and
detailed investigations, which take months to investigate
and often twice as long to prosecute to completion. To
handle these cases, the Department has leveraged U.S.
Department of Justice funds to establish a Mortgage
and Investment Unit. In FY 2012-13, the Department
will augment this work with a grant from the California
Attorney General’s Office.
High-Te chnology Crimes
With computers, digital networks, and smartphones
becoming more prevalent aspects of everyday life, the
ways crimes are committed, and the ways they are
investigated, have significantly changed in recent years.
Last year, the Department successfully secured national
and state funds to expand its capacity to investigate and
prosecute cases involving high-technology evidence. In FY
2012-13, the High-Technology Unit will investigate hightech
crimes and act as a resource for all cases involving
high-tech evidence.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $12.6
million for the Department is $2.6 million, or 17.3 percent,
lower than the FY 2011-12 budget of $15.2 million. A
significant portion of this decrease is due to there being
only one scheduled election in FY 2012-13 compared to the
two elections that took place in FY 2011-12.
The one scheduled election in FY 2012-13 is a Presidential
election. This high turnout election carries higher
material costs due to an increase in the number of cards
per ballot, and a resulting increase in the size of the Voter
Information Pamphlet. This, coupled with the need to
reprint many Department materials after repricincting,
means the per-election cost to the Department is higher
than previously projected.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $16.3 million for
the Department is $3.7 million, or 29.5 percent, higher
than the proposed FY 2012-13 budget of $12.6 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to there being
two scheduled elections in FY 2013-14 compared to the
one scheduled election in FY 2012-13.
INCR EASING PARTICIPATION
IN THE ELECTORA L PROC ESS
To meet the requirements associated with the Help
America Vote Act (HAVA), the Department maintains
an ongoing program to review new and existing polling
places to ensure they comply with state, federal, and local
accessibility guidelines. To date, approximately 95 percent
of all polling places in the City are accessible each election.
New polling places scheduled for use next fiscal year will
need to be assessed in order to determine their level of
accessibility and to note any necessary modifications if the
site is not up to code.
In accordance with state and federal mandates, the
Department conducts voter education and outreach to
promote understanding and participation in the electoral
process as well as poll worker recruitment and training for
Election Day. Voter and poll worker education is necessary
to meet the requirements of HAVA. This education
 
focuses on the general election processes, vote-by-mail
voting, polling place locations, provisional voting, voting
technology associated with the ranked-choice voting
system, voting accessibility issues, language proficiency
and cultural competency.
The Department works year-round to register and educate
voters at various locations and events, such as local
organizations, street fairs, and US Bureau of Citizenship
and Immigration Services ceremonies. In preparation
for an election, the Department gives approximately 20
presentations per week. The Department’s Outreach
Division includes bilingual coordinators that assist in the
translation of election materials, provide multilingual
services, assist in the recruitment of bilingual poll
workers, and provide interviews to foreign language
media outlets.
citywide INITATIV ES
In order to make government more responsive and
effective, the Department has enhanced its website to offer
more election information to San Francisco voters. The
Department has developed online applications that allow
voters to check their voter registration, track the status
of their vote-by-mail ballots, and look up their sample
ballots and the location of their polling places.
To support financial stability and security for San
Francisco, the Department has introduced automation
to many of its critical election processes, with the aim
of creating long-term labor savings. Labor-intensive
processes, like the scanning of returned vote-by-mail
ballots, are now aided with technological solutions.
Committed to a strong partnership with public schools,
the Department maintains a nationally recognized high
school poll worker program. Every year, the Elections
Department recruits public high school students to staff
polling places on Election Day. This innovative program
provides the City with talented poll workers and gives
students a living civics lesson that fosters community
involvement.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $47.7
million for the DEM is $4.1 million, or 8.7 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $43.5 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to the higher retention of
Public Safety Communications Dispatchers who staff
the City’s 9-1-1 Center. According to the Association of
Public-Safety Communications Officials (APCO), the
turnover trends for Communication Centers over the past
three years reflect that 56.0 percent of these centers have
witnessed a decrease in employee retention. Contrary to
these findings, DEM implemented recruitment strategies
to improve retention rates from its hiring academies.
Thus, the budget increase in salary expenses reflects
DEM’s proactive approach to solidifying staffing levels.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $47.1 million for the
Department is $0.6 million, or 1.2 percent, lower than the
FY 2012-13 budget of $47.7 million. A significant portion
of this decrease is due to reductions in contract costs,
overhead costs, and the completion of capital projects.
EMERG ENC Y PR EPAR EDNESS
AN D PLANNING EFFORT S
Seismologists cite a 99 percent probability that a
6.7-magnitude or greater earthquake will occur along
one of the Bay Area faults within the next 30 years.
Beginning in 2008, DEM initiated a collaborative process
 
to build the foundation for a “Culture of Preparedness”
in the City. The process resulted in a focused, holistic,
and comprehensive communications strategy based
upon research and in-depth analysis of local, national
and international preparedness trends, social scientific
data, and social/cultural drivers within San Francisco.
The completed strategy provides vision, core messages,
strategic direction, and identifies target audiences. As a
result, the Department was able to craft communications
outreach tactics tailored to a specific audience with a high
level of confidence that it will motivate them to become
better prepared.
RESILIENT CIT Y INITIATIV E
Over the next two fiscal years , DEM is continuing the
implementation of a citywide emergency preparedness
initiative called ResilientSF. This program highlights the
partnerships between City departments, stakeholders, and
the public that will result in a stronger, more prepared
city. DEM functions as the facilitator to connect all
of these efforts. Once completed, this comprehensive
program will become the basis for the updated All
Hazards Strategic Plan, and it will guide investments and
efforts on an ongoing basis.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $2.3
million for the Ethics Commission is roughly equal to the
FY 2011-12 budget.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $2.4 million for
the Ethics Commission is $0.1 million, or 4.3 percent,
higher than FY 2012-13 budget of $2.3 million. This slight
increase is due to increases in salary and fringe benefits
costs.
Ele ction Campaign Fund
The proposed FY 2012-13 deposit to the Election
Campaign Fund is $1.9 million. This deposit is offset
by a use of $4.0 million in fund balance. This results
in a net savings to the General Fund of $2.1 million. If
matching fund disbursements mirror past disbursements
in previous Board elections, the Election Campaign Fund
balance should remain well over $4 million at the end of
FY 2012-13.
The FY 2013-14 proposed allocation to the Election
Campaign Fund is $1.9 million. If matching fund
disbursements mirror past disbursements in previous
Board elections, the Election Campaign Fund balance
should remain well over $5.5 million at the end of FY
2013-14.
 
CA MPAIGN FINANC E REFOR M
ORDINANC E
In April 2012, the Board of Supervisors approved
amendments to the San Francisco Campaign Finance
Reform Ordinance. As of May 2012, the dollar amount
and number of contributors needed to qualify for public
financing increased. Additionally, incumbents must raise
more than non-incumbents to qualify for matching funds.
To ensure that recipients can assess the entire field prior
to receiving funds, the filing deadline has been moved up
and funds will not be distributed until June of an election
year. In response to a United States Supreme Court ruling
that outlawed automatic increases in matching funds, the
total amount of matching funds candidates can receive
also increased. Finally, the cap on the Election Campaign
Fund has decreased to $7.0 million.

The FY 2012-13 proposed budget of $16.2 million for the
Fine Arts Museums is $0.6 million, or 5.0 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $15.6 million. Most of this
increase is due to increases in salary and fringe benefits
costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $17.0 million for the
Fine Arts Museums is $0.4 million, or 3.0 percent, higher
than the FY 2012-13 budget of $16.2 million. A significant
portion of this increase is also due to increases in salary,
fringe benefits, rates and operational costs.

The Department will work over the next two fiscal
years to expand tourism and trade by mounting major
exhibitions such as The Girl with the Pearl Earring: Dutch
Paintings from the Mauritshuis from January to June 2013,
and Impressionist Sailors (coincident with the America’s
Cup) from June to September 2013.
Educational
programm ing
The Fine Arts Museums works with local colleges and
universities on internship and fellowship programs in
digital media and conservation. Additionally, FAM works
with the San Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD)
on the Museum Ambassadors program, which provides
teens from under-resourced schools with job training and
experience, and the Get Smart with Art art-integrated
curriculum for 1st-12th grade students.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $326.9
million for the Fire Department is $25.6 million, or 8.5
percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $301.3
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
increases in salary and fringe benefits costs. In addition,
as a result of the State’s ruling on the Exclusive Operating
Area rights for ambulance providers in the City and County,
the Department is proposing the hiring of additional
ambulance personnel as well as equipment funding requests
for Emergency Medical Services (EMS) equipment. These
cost increases are countered by an increase in revenue
to the Department for Medi-Cal reimbursements. The
Department is also proposing the staffing of Engine 35 in
FY 2012-13, which has been deactivated over the previous
three fiscal years.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $332.9 million for the
Fire Department is $6.0 million, or 1.8 percent, higher
than the FY 2012-13 budget of $326.9 million. This
increase is due to an increase in fringe benefits costs. The
Department is not proposing changes in staffing from FY
2012-13 to FY 2013-14.
In order to minimize service impacts, the Department
sought opportunities to address budget shortfalls through
administrative efficiencies and revenues. Identifying these
types of measures has become increasingly difficult for
the Department as one-time savings and efficiencies have
already been implemented in prior years. The Department
will maintain the minimum staffing standards required
in Proposition F to preserve its core services of Fire
Suppression, Emergency Medical Services, and Fire
Prevention and Investigation.
Hiring Pl an
The Department plans to conduct one class of Emergency
Medical Technicians (EMTs) in Fiscal Year 2012-13, slated
to begin in July. This class results in a net increase of
20 EMTs to the Fire Department. This is an important
increase because a requirement of the Fire Department’s
ambulance system Exclusive Operating Area Rights,
recently restored by the State, is that the Department
provide 80-90 percent of 911 emergency transports in SF.
Additionally, there will be an academy class for 42 entry
level firefighters in both years to increase the uniform
staffing numbers. This is particularly important because
the department needs to replace a large number of retired
employees, and the current uniform FTE count is lower
than it has been for the last decade. The influx of new
recruits will reduce the Department’s reliance on overtime
staffing to fulfill its fixed staffing model, and entry level
 
firefighters paid at first step are less costly than veteran
firefighters, helping to offset the cost of their academy
training. The Department is continuing to work on
identifying additional savings opportunities that may
allow it to conduct additional classes sooner if possible.
Inves tme nt in
Infrastructure
In June of 2010, voters passed Proposition B, the
Earthquake Safety and Emergency Response Bond,
proposed as part of the City’s Ten-Year Capital Plan. This
bond provides funding for much needed infrastructure
improvements, including the repair and seismic
retrofitting of a number of the Department’s firehouses,
repair and upgrade of the Auxiliary Water Supply System,
and construction of the new Public Safety Building
in Mission Bay, which will house a new fire station.
Construction work has begun on the initial bond projects
and will continue through the next two fiscal years.
More Res ponsive and
Effective Governme nt
The Department is continually exploring ways to
improve efficiencies and become more effective in both
its operational and administrative practices. To this end,
the Department regularly reviews trends in medical call
supply and demand, and uses historical data to improve
the effectiveness of deployment of the Department’s
ambulances, both from a scheduling perspective as
well as a posting location perspective. Additionally. the
Department works in conjunction with the Department
of Emergency Management’s 9-1-1 dispatch center to
improve response times for it deployed units.
The Department is continuing its efforts to create
administrative efficiencies through the conversion of
more hard-copy forms to an electronic format, enhancing
internal computer networks, and improving time and labor
systems as well as payroll through the City’s new Project
eMerge.
Financial Stability and
Long Te rm Pl anning
The Department is undergoing an internal staffing analysis
to explore the impacts of changes to the Department’s
staffing model in the coming years. The Department is
also working closely with the Department of Emergency
Management on the design and structure of the City’s
ambulance system as a result of the recent State ruling on
the Exclusive Operating Area agreement for San Francisco.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $409.0
million for the City Administrator is $157.5 million, or
62.6 percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $251.5
million. This significant increase is due to the Department
absorbing the former Redevelopment Agency.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $399.9 million for
the City Administrator is $9.1 million, or 2.2 percent,
lower than the FY 2012-13 budget of $409.0 million. This
decrease is mainly due to reductions in contract costs,
overhead costs and capital project costs.
SUCC ESSOR AG ENC Y TO THE
FORMER REDEVELOP MENT
AG ENC Y
Under California State Assembly Bill No. X1 26 (AB 26),
all redevelopment agencies in the State of California
were dissolved on February 1, 2012. The City became the
Successor Agency of the San Francisco Redevelopment
Agency (Agency), acquiring its housing and non-housing
assets, funds and enforceable obligations. All housing
assets and obligations were transferred to the Mayor’s
 
Office of Housing. All other Agency assets and obligations
were transferred under the jurisdiction of the Director
of the Department of Administrative Services, with the
exception of property that falls under the jurisdiction of
the Port of San Francisco. Staff from the Department of
Administrative Services, including former Agency staff,
has worked closely with the Mayor’s Office, the Port,
and the City’s Controller’s Office through this transition
process to ensure that all AB 26 requirements have been
met.
A required Oversight Board has been created to oversee
certain actions of the Successor Agency. The Oversight
Board oversees fiscal management of certain former
Agency assets other than affordable housing assets,
consistent with AB 26. It also exercises land use,
development and design approval authority under the
enforceable obligations for the Mission Bay North and
South Redevelopment Project Areas, the Hunters Point
Shipyard Project Area and Zone 1 of the Bayview Hunters
Point Redevelopment Project Area, and part of the
Transbay Redevelopment Project Area. These projects are
expected to move seamlessly forward with development

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $146.5
million for the DPW is $17.5 million, or 13.6 percent,
higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $128.9 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due the addition
of new limited tenure staff in the capital bureaus. These
proposed staff will assist in the delivery of various capital
and bond programs, including Proposition B, the Road
Repaving and Street Safety Bond.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $141.0 million for
DPW is $5.4 million, or 3.7 percent, lower than the FY
2012-13 budget of $146.5 million. This budget decrease is
primarily due to decreases in capital project costs.
Inves ting in
Infrastructure
In November 2011, San Francisco voters approved
Proposition B (Prop B), a $248.0 million Road Repaving
and Street Safety General Obligation Bond measure.
Through this bond measure, San Francisco will invest
$148.4 million in street resurfacing, $50.0 million in
streetscape improvements, $22.0 million in sidewalk
accessibility improvements, and $7.3 million in the
rehabilitation of bridges and other street structures over
the next three years. Prop B is anticipated to create, or
retain, approximately 1,600 local infrastructure related
jobs and put San Franciscans back to work.
Keeping the City Cle an
DPW remains committed to maintaining clean streets
through a myriad of strategies that include partnering
with the community, augmenting grant resources,
enforcing the City’s litter laws and right-of-way codes, and
conducting community outreach on issues such as illegal
dumping and graffiti abatement. To counter balance a
25 percent reduction to street cleaning staff over the past
five years, DPW’s proposed budget continues its flagship
jobs program, the Community Corridors Apprenticeship.
 
This program provides full-time employment paired with
hands-on and classroom training. The program prioritizes
enrolling low-income San Franciscans and also assists with
job placement after graduation.
The Department will also continue to participate in the
Jobs Now program, run through the Human Services
Agency. Jobs Now enables DPW to have 100 more people
cleaning streets at any given time over the next two fiscal
years.
Providing Access ible
Rights-of-Way
DPW will continue to provide full access to the City’s
street and right-of-way network through implementation
of the City’s Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
Transition Plan for Curb Ramps and Sidewalks. The
Department is also is actively installing curb ramps, fixing
sidewalks, removing barriers, and improving paths of
travel within the pedestrian network.
Ad vancing Programm atic
Eff iciency
In FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 , the Department
will continue to implement DPW Stat, an internal
performance management system that analyzes real time
business intelligence data. Each month, DPW managers
and staff meet to monitor and analyze the DPW Stat data
that shows key departmental activities and performance.
As a result, managers and staff are now using data-driven
decision processes to effectively deploy resources and
improve the quality and efficiency of service delivery. The
budget environment over the past two years has forced
the Department to focus more intently on improving
efficiencies in order to lessen the impact of budget
reductions to the public. To enhance DPW Stat in the
future, the Department will move to include capital
projects data into the business intelligence environment.
The integration of capital project data will improve
accountability of project managers and staff charged with
delivering DPW’s bond programs.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $75.9
million for DT is $1.7 million, or 2.2 percent, higher than
the FY 2011-12 budget of $74.2 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to increases in salary and
fringe benefits costs, contract costs, and other changes to
the Departments overhead costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $73.1 million for DT
is $2.8 million, or 3.7 percent, lower than the FY 2012-
13 budget of $75.9 million. This decrease is due to the
reduction of Department expenditures and the use of
fund balance.
STRAT EGIC INITIATIV ES
Long-Term Planning
The Committee on Information Technology
(COIT) approved the City’s first Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) Plan, as required by
the San Francisco Administrative Code. The ICT Plan
outlines 10 foundational initiatives for the City to address
over the Plan’s five-year timeframe and highlights DT’s
role in coordinating these initiatives. DT is responsible
for maintaining technological infrastructure and
implementing innovative applications needed to enhance
core operations and improve services to residents.
Recognizing the fiscal challenges faced by the City, the
plan includes a strategy to align the cost of new initiatives
with available resources over the next five years.
Data Center Consolidation
The Department is leading the Citywide Data Center
Consolidation Project. Working collaboratively with other
City department IT leaders, DT will merge the numerous
department-specific data centers and equipment into the
Department of Technology’s data center at 200 Paul Avenue
and into a new facility at the San Francisco Airport. This
project will optimize resources citywide by reducing the
square footage needed to house equipment, reducing new
equipment purchases through virtualization of servers, and
allowing for staffing efficiencies. Upgraded facilities will
also improve the City’s preparation for and resilience in the
case of a disaster.
 
Citywide Initiatives
In accordance with the ICT Plan, the Department
continues to focus on supporting citywide enterprise
technology that will create operational and budgetary
efficiencies while better serving its customers. These
investments include a new consolidated citywide
email system, an expanded and more redundant fiber
network, increased network security enhancements, and
collaborative tools.
The Department also continues to expand broadband
adoption in San Francisco through implementation of the
federally funded Broadband Technology Opportunities
Program (BTOP), and develop new revenue generating
initiatives using the Department’s fiber assets.
In particular, DT will focus on the following initiatives
over the next two fiscal years:
• Mobile Services – implement new mobile phone and
tablet solutions with the goal of improving access to
City services and information online;
• Social Media – increase online engagement of residents
with the goal of improving service online;
• City Free Wi-fi – provide free accessible wireless
connectivity for SF citizens and visitors at various
popular and populated areas across the City.
Sponsorship from City business partners will keep the
City’s cost for these services extremely low;
• Security – invest in the City’s IT security to safeguard
its networks and infrastructure from ongoing security
risks and threats;
• Fiber Services – continue efforts to build a
comprehensive City fiber network;
• Cloud Email – consolidate various email platforms
onto a cloud based solution.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $6.6
million for HSS is $0.1 million , or 2.1 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $6.5 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to HSS experiencing an
increase in salaries, benefits, and workers’ compensation
costs, which are partially offset by a reduction in
Department consulting and legal services.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $6.8 million for HSS
is $0.2 million, or 2.5 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13
budget of $6.6 million. To offset rising salary and fringe
benefits costs, HSS has reduced consulting services by 4.3
percent, and increased revenue from forfeitures by 29.2
percent.
Accountable Care
Organizations
HSS is continuing to develop and implement innovative
strategies to provide quality health care benefits and
identify cost drivers in order to contain costs for both the
 
City, and its employees and retirees. The use of Accountable
Care Organizations (ACOs) is one innovative strategy the
Department is employing. ACOs are designed to lower
health care spending and growth, improve care for patients,
and preserve the financial viability for physicians and
hospitals.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $74.0
million for DHR is $1.1 million, or 1.5 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $72.9 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to higher workers’
compensation claims costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $76.3 million for
DHR is $2.3 million, or 3.1 percent, higher than the FY
2012-13 budget of $74.0 million. A significant portion of
this increase is also due to higher workers’ compensation
claims costs. In addition, the Department’s Labor
Project budget will increase due to anticipated contract
negotiations for City employees’ wages and benefits.
 
labor negotiations
During FY 2011-12, the Department undertook a large
negotiation with 27 of the City’s open contracts. In FY
2012-13, all contracts will remain closed, therefore the
Department reduced costs from FY 2011-12 to FY 2012-13
by $0.4 million. However, in FY 2013-14, some contracts
are anticipated to be open, and the Department’s costs are
increasing as a result.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $1.5
million for the HRC is $4.3 million, or 74.0 percent, less
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $5.8 million. The HRC
reduced contract costs and other non-personnel costs due
to the transfer of certain departmental functions to the
City Administrator’s Office (for more details, see below).
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $1.6 million for the
HRC is $0.1 million, or 6.6 percent, higher than the FY
2012-13 budget of $1.5 million. This increase is due to
changes in salary and fringe benefit costs.
Better Al igning City
Functions to Increase
Eff iciency
In FY 2012-13, the Department will transfer the
functions of the Equal Benefits Division, Local Business
Enterprise Division, and the Surety Bond Program
 
to the City Administrator’s Office. This transfer will
allow the Department to continue to focus on its core
mission of developing important social policies, fostering
conflict resolution, and addressing and responding to
discrimination complaints. The Department will continue
to partner with the City Administrator and other city
departments to ensure full compliance of ordinances that
the HRC helped develop over the last 48 years.
Due to this transfer of responsibilities, the Department’s
FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 budget is smaller than the FY
2011-12 budget. This transfer of function will have a net
neutral impact on both the HRC’s budget and the City
Administrator’s Office budget over the next two fiscal
years.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $699.6
million for HSA is $6.1 million, or less than one percent,
higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $693.6 million. A
significant portion of the increase is due to increased
federal revenue for health-related services, including
services to support seniors and adults with disabilities
living in their own homes. New programs include grantfunded
outreach and nutrition education specifically for
clients receiving CalFresh benefits, and grant funds to
 
support subsidized employment opportunities for lowincome
individuals and families. Also, the consolidation
of citywide childcare services under HSA have increased
the Department’s budget by almost $5.0 million.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $703.3 million for
HSA is $3.7 million, or less than one percent, higher than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $699.6 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to an increase in salary and
fringe benefits costs.

ENGAG EMENT IN THE
BUDGET PROC ESS
In an effort to increase transparency and promote
community involvement, HSA has increased efforts
to engage community members in the annual budget
development process. During the development of the FY
2012-13 and FY 2013-14 proposed budget, HSA convened
six major meetings with community-based organizations
to discuss distinct budget and program areas, including
the Housing and Homeless Program, Family and
Children’s Services, Child Care, Economic Support and
Self Sufficiency programs, and programs within the
Department of Aging and Adult Services. HSA leadership
also attended all six of the Mayor’s Budget Town Hall
meetings with Supervisors, and regularly convenes
stakeholder meetings across multiple program areas.
This year’s efforts to increase communication with and
engagement by local stakeholders have resulted in positive
responses from community-based organizations, client
advocates, and contractors.
CR EATING JOBS
In the next two years, HSA will continue to support and
expand Jobs Now, its innovative and successful subsidized
employment program for low-income families. HSA
has found that subsidized employment can be a critical
tool–along with job training, educational advancement,
English language development and other strategies
–to help individuals and families work towards selfsufficiency.
With subsidized employment, clients can gain
valuable work experience, learn critical new skills, and
make important connections as they earn a paycheck. The
subsidy often enables small business owners to invest in
training and expand their businesses, which can have a
powerful effect on local economic development.
Initial outcomes appear extremely robust for this
program, even in a down economy. Of the HSA clients
who completed a subsidized employment experience with
a private sector employer in FY 2010-11, internal research
revealed that more than half remained employed with that
same employer after the subsidy ended.
Over the next two fiscal years, increased funding will
allow HSA to serve a wider population of City residents
within Jobs Now and also link more individuals and
families to subsidized employment opportunities in the
private sector. Program opportunities will also increase
for transitional-aged youth from 18-24. In addition,
HSA will work to provide a more thorough evaluation of
program outcomes.
SSI ADVOCAC Y
During FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14, HSA will continue
to expand the Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
Advocacy program. This program serves single adults
with disabilities in the County Adult Assistance Programs
(CAAP) by helping them complete applications and
appeals for federal SSI benefits. If clients are successful in
their application for SSI, they receive increased income,
sometimes as much as $10,000 a year more in cash aid.
They also gain eligibility for Medi-Cal benefits. A recent
analysis shows that the SSI Advocacy program benefits
the City in addition to benefitting clients . A total of 810
clients were awarded SSI during FY 2010-11, resulting
in a net benefit of around $4.0 million for HSA alone
(additional reimbursement also comes to the City through
the Department of Public Health for medical services).
For every dollar HSA spent on the SSI Advocacy program,
it recouped $3.76 in the form of increased revenue, such
as reimbursements from SSA and forgone future aid
payments. For every dollar HSA spent on the program, the
Department estimates that it recouped a combined $5.16.
LEVERAGING STATE AN D
FEDERA L FUN DS
HSA is continuing an ongoing focus on strategies that
increase state and federal revenue for agency operations.
Efforts to increase revenue include billing staff time for
health-related services to state and federal funding when
appropriate, and actively pursuing new funding from
government and foundation sources. New revenue sources
that are supporting HSA activities in FY 2012-13 include
a Department of Labor grant awarded to the Office of
Economic and Workforce Development that will support
subsidized employment for non-custodial parents, and
funding for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program Innovative Ideas Project, which will provide San
Francisco with funding awarded on a competitive basis
to improve nutrition education offerings for children and
families.
INCR EASING EFFICENC Y
HSA continues to identify efficiencies and cost savings to
help the City close budget deficits each year. In FY 2012-
13, HSA determined that it would benefit the Department
and the City if annual contract under-spending could
be captured up front in the budget process. By better
forecasting contract spending, and building in a budget
amount for expected under-spending on contractor
personnel, HSA can offer these savings to the City now
and spare reductions to needed services. HSA also projects
to achieve significant savings through staffing efficiencies.
Over the past several years, HSA has been able to achieve
about $400,000 in annual savings through a realignment
of job classifications to more appropriate classes.

Off ice of Early Care and
Education
The FY 2012-13 budget centralizes the administration of
San Francisco’s early care and education programs under
a new, independent Office of Early Care and Education
(OECE). Under the direction of the Mayor and with
the joint leadership of the Department of Children,
Youth and Their Families, First Five San Francisco, the
Human Services Agency, and the San Francisco Unified
School District, this new office will improve access
to early care and education, improve early care and
education workforce and build early care and education
system capacity. This independent Office will rely on
the Human Services Agency for back office functions
such as accounting and human resources management.
By consolidating services and using existing resources,
the Office of Early Care and Education will maximize
resources, improve policy coordination, and provide a
single line of authority for the City’s investments. This
new independent office will build upon the successes of
San Francisco’s model programs to further streamline a
high quality early care and education system.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget for Juvenile
Probation of $35.7 million is $2.0 million, or 5.9 percent,
higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $33.7 million.
The increase is the result of increased revenue from the
State, which funds increases in salary, fringe benefits,
and workers’ compensation claims costs. In addition, the
Department proposes to add a social worker to assist with
AB 12 eligible foster care youth.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget for the Department of
$36.7 million is $0.9 million, or 2.6 percent, higher than
the FY 2012-13 proposed budget of $35.7 million. This
increase is largely due to increases in salary and fringe
benefits costs.
Continuing the
Coll aborative Approach
to Comm unity-Based
Programm ing
Juvenile Probation, DCYF and DPH will continue to fund
community-based service providers that offer a range
of violence prevention programs to San Francisco youth
and their families. Strategies aimed at case management,
detention alternatives, gender-specific programming,
and after-care services continue to be a priority for
the Department and the City, as reflected in the Local
Action Plan adopted by the Juvenile Justice Coordinating
Council. This prioritization will remain, despite the
potential for continued reductions to violence prevention
funding from the state.
Log Cabin Ranch
In FY 2009-10, the Department initiated the first phase
of a new program model at Log Cabin Ranch (LCR).
The Missouri Model shifts the focus from rule-based
compliance to one of self-reflection and group process for
residents. This model has been replicated across the country
 
and has demonstrated success at reducing recidivism for
participants by up to 25 percent. With the new model,
JPD has created a series of new program options centered
on strengthened therapeutic programming, vocational
training, and transition planning, and aftercare. FY 2012-
13 will mark the fourth year since the implementation of
the Missouri Model at LCR. The Department expects to
continue its programming for two cohorts of youth.
JUVe nile probation and
camps funding
As a result of the Governor’s efforts to fund various public
safety efforts at the local level, JUV anticipates receiving
approximately $1.3 million in additional Juvenile Probation
and Camps Funding (JPCF) in FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14.
This revenue increase is being absorbed by costs associated
with salaries, fringe benefits, and workers’ compensation
claims. The Department is working with the Department of
Human Resources (DHR) to reduce workers’ compensation
costs by analyzing what types of injuries are occurring
and determining if additional preventive measures can be
taken.
Organizational and
Staff Devel opme nt
JPD will continue its efforts towards leadership
development and training, strengthened community
partnerships, and the introduction and implementation
of evidence-based practices. In the coming year, the
Department will continue to extend technical assistance
and training for its community partners, provide
leadership training for staff, and work to strengthen its
operations. In addition, JPD is finalizing a comprehensive
policy audit of all of its policies and procedures to ensure
consistency with state and federal law, and national
best practices. The Department has begun work with
the Controller’s Office to conduct a comprehensive cost
benefit analysis comparing various dispositional options
for youth.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 proposed
budget of $0.7 million in each year for the LLB is roughly
equal to the FY 2011-12 budget. There are no significant
budgetary changes in either year.
The LLB operates at two locations including the main Law
Library in the Civic Center and a courthouse branch. The
City contributes funds for rent to the main Law Library,
utilities, and three management positions; however, the
majority of the LLB’s operating expenses are funded by
a portion of Civil Court filing fees. Operating expenses
include all legal publications, electronic database licenses,
staff salaries, benefits, taxes, insurance, and other
expenses. Although periodic filing fee rate increases are
necessary to fund operations, there have not been rate
increases since 2007, resulting in declining revenues.
 
Filing fee revenues have declined the past several years,
placing an increased burden on the LLB. The LLB
anticipates continued decreases to filing fee revenues due
to reductions implemented by the State in October of
2011. This will result in changes to staffing levels and a
continued effort by the LLB to find efficiencies rather than
service cuts to cover reduced revenue receipts.
NEW FACI LITI ES
The City and the LLB remain committed to ensuring that
the LLB can provide comprehensive legal information and
services for San Franciscans. Due to the closure of the War
Memorial for seismic retrofit in the coming year, the LLB
must move to new quarters that can accommodate the
Library’s ability to meet its patrons’ needs. The City and
the LLB are currently reviewing options for this transition
period and will likely solidify a plan during the coming
fiscal year.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $30.1
million for the Mayor’s Office is $15.4 million higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $14.7 million. A significant
portion of this increase is due to increases in salary and
fringe benefits costs. The Mayor’s Office budget continues
to support core programs and initiatives that serve San
Francisco. In FY 2012-13, the Mayor’s Office will focus
its resources on implementing the Mayor’s vision and
priorities for the City, including the Mayor’s 17-Point
Jobs Plan, advocating for funding and policy changes at
the state and federal levels, and implementing long-term
reforms to improve City government.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $33.6 million for the
Mayor’s Office is $3.4 million higher than the FY 2012-
13 budget of $30.1 million. A significant portion of this
increase is due to increases in salary and fringe benefits
costs.
In both years, the Mayor’s Office budget grows due
to the addition of former Redevelopment funds and
responsibilities to the Mayor’s Office of Housing. In FY
2012-13, for example, this increase in responsibilities
represents $12.9 million in funding and 10 FTE that
would largely have otherwise been reflected in the
Redevelopment Agency’s budget.
STATE AN D FEDERA L
ADVOCAC Y
In FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14, the Mayor’s Office will
continue to advocate for the City’s interests as the State
implements significant policy changes to address its
budget shortfall, including the realignment of public safety
and human services functions, and the elimination of
redevelopment agencies. Another important priority for
the City is the implementation of High Speed Rail and its
northern terminus at Transbay Transit Center. In addition,
the Mayor’s Office will seek to take advantage of federal
funding opportunities for capital projects and will work with
the Department of Public Health to begin implementing
changes to comply with federal health care reform.
LONG -TERM FINANCIA L
PLANNING
The Mayor’s Office is taking the lead in implementing
reforms to provide for more comprehensive long-term
financial planning in accordance with Proposition A,
which was approved by voters in November 2009. In
May of 2011, the Mayor’s Office proposed the City’s
first Five-Year Financial Plan that forecast expenditures
and revenues for the next five fiscal years, and provided
strategies to address the structural imbalance in the
 
City’s finances. For FY 2012-13, the Mayor’s Office is
proposing the City’s first two-year budget for General
Fund departments for FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14. This
two year budget will include growing financial reserves,
as required by the City’s adopted financial policies. In FY
2013-14, the Mayor’s Office will release the second Five-
Year Financial Plan for the City. These efforts help the
City work towards better fiscal stability and prepare the
City for future economic downturns.
CONTINUNG
REDEVELOP MENT WOR K
As of February 1, 2012, all former Redevelopment
Agency Housing assets (e.g. funds, loans, property) were
transferred to the Mayor’s Office of Housing (MOH)
as a result of the State’s budgetary action to dissolve
redevelopment agencies throughout California. MOH
will oversee the management of these assets and ensure
the completion of enforceable obligations, which includes
affordable housing obligations in the three Major
Approved Development Projects (Mission Bay, Hunters
Point Shipyard, and Transbay), as well as fulfilling
commitments made to citywide affordable housing.
BREAKING NEW GROUN D IN
AFFOR DABLE HOU SING
The proposed budget for FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14
includes funding for HOPE SF, the City’s signature
initiative to revitalize the most distressed public housing
sites as mixed income developments. During FY 2012-13,
the first phase of the Hunters View development will be
completed, and the City will move toward construction of
the second phase now that the project has secured financing
for that phase. The second HOPE SF project, Alice Griffith,
will start construction on its first phase of a 1,200 unit
development as part of the Hunters Point Shipyard Major
Approved Development Project. In addition, the Sunnydale
and Potrero HOPE SF sites will complete environmental
and land use approvals to build more than 3,000 homes,
and make significant public space improvements.
The Mayor’s Office of Housing (MOH) and its partner
agencies continue to fund additional supportive housing
development, making significant progress towards
the housing goals of the City’s Ten-Year Plan to End
Homelessness. The key projects under construction in
FY 2012-13 include: (1) Rene Cazenave Apartments, a
120-unit supportive housing development and the first
affordable housing development in the Transbay Major
Approved Development Project; (2) St. Anthony’s Senior
Housing, 90-units of senior housing to be built above a
rebuilt St. Anthony’s Dining Room in the Tenderloin; (3)

1076 LeConte, supportive housing for homeless families
and transition-age youth on the former blighted Franciscan
Motel in the Bayview; and (4) 1180 4th Street, the first
affordable housing development in Mission Bay South.
To foster homeownership, MOH plans to assist more
than 170 first-time homebuyers through a combination of
down-payment assistance and mortgage credit certificates.
In addition, MOH anticipates completing 50 belowmarket
rate (BMR) ownership units, and 120 BMR rental
units through the City’s inclusionary housing ordinance.
In FY 2012-13, MOH will complete energy efficiency
improvements for over 1,200 units of existing affordable
housing units through its Green Retrofit Initiative.
SUPPORTING CO MMUNITI ES
AND VU LNERA BLE
RESIDENT S
Through its community development division, MOH
grants will assist more than 3,000 individuals with
counseling to help prevent eviction or loss of housing;
provide more than 3,500 individuals with free legal
counseling and representation to protect victims of
domestic violence, employment discrimination, and
housing discrimination; and assist more than 1,000
individuals with financial literacy and homeownership
counseling to build assets and become economically selfsufficient.
Grants will fund critical capital improvements
at 13 community facilities, and support tree-planting and
other landscaping improvements at 135 locations in the
Bayview/Hunters Point and the Excelsior neighborhoods.
In FY 2012-13, MOH will implement the first year of
a three-year grant cycle, which aims to provide more
stability to its non-profit providers and communities.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $492.1
million for the Police Department is $30.3 million, or
6.6 percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $461.8
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
increases in salary and fringe benefits costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $513.1 million for
the Police Department is $20.9 million, or 4.2 percent,
higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $492.1 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to increases in
salary and fringe benefits costs.
Comprehe nsive Hiring Pl an
The Police Department has experienced a large number
of retirements in recent years. With the expiration of
the Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP), the
Department is certain that there will continue to be
significant retirements in FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14. To
address attrition, the Department has developed a 6-year
hiring plan to gradually increase the number of new
officers in its force. The plan is to conduct three General
Fund supported Police Academy classes of 50 recruits
each year, in order to backfill retirements and increase
the size of the force, which has been shrinking in recent
years. In FY 2012-13, the Airport will also fund a class
of 30 recruits to address its increased needs. The hiring
plan also includes a solid commitment to increase civilian
hiring, which will ensure that there is adequate staff in
non-sworn functions. Over the next two fiscal years, 50
of these hires will allow the Department to move officers
currently performing these functions out into the field.
 
Publ ic Safe ty Build ing
Progress
Funded by the first Earthquake Safety and Emergency
Response General Obligation Bond, the new Public
Safety Building construction project broke ground in
FY 2011-12. The Public Safety Building will contain the
new Police headquarters and house new police and fire
stations in the Mission Bay neighborhood. In FY 2012-
13, the Department will work closely with other City
departments to finalize a plan for purchasing furniture,
fixtures, and equipment (FF&E), with a particular
focus on determining what technology is needed for the
building. In FY 2013-14, the procurement process for
FF&E will move forward to ensure that the constructed
building will be ready for use when it opens in 2014.
Te chnological
Im proveme nts
The Police Department strives to utilize new technology
to improve its policing efforts. The Department will
expand its pilot Cameras on Officers program in FY
2012-13. This program has the potential to protect both
officers and the public with stronger documentation.
Additionally, the Department will continue its effort to
move to a more stable and robust technology platform.
The Department’s four-point plan for technology
improvements includes creating a robust data warehouse,
equipping officers with proper technology tools, creating
a technology help desk, and building a strong technology
team. The data warehouse, a year into development,

will enable better crime prevention and improve officer
safety and effectiveness. The Department will add to its
recent technological advancements with a staged rollout
of its data warehouse, which will provide immediate
access to crime data as crime occurs. This will allow the
Department members to instantly identify suspects, locate
similar crimes nationwide, and identify hot spots and
crime trends. This new technology based platform will
integrate over 24 criminal justice systems into one easy
to use system for police access in vehicles, stations, or on
their smart devices deployed in the field.
Comm unity Policing
Community Policing is a shared philosophy and
organizational strategy in which the police work
collaboratively with community and business members,
community-based organizations, and other City agencies,
in order to reduce violent crime, create safer communities,
and enhance the health and vibrancy of neighborhoods
in San Francisco. There are several components to
Community Policing, which include genuine partnerships
between the police and community, problem solving,
shared responsibility, mutual respect, interaction with
youth, and communication. Community Policing requires
that the police communicate regularly and openly with
the community (in a language-accessible manner in
accordance with policy), and provide information about
crime, and crime prevention.
Youth Programs
A high priority for the Department is to partner with
the community in order to provide San Francisco youth
with a variety of opportunities aimed at building a strong
foundation for the future. A specific goal is to increase
the lines of communication between the Department and
community-based organizations, including educational
institutions, to form partnerships that assist in
establishing and/or augmenting programs that encourage
children to participate in positive learning activities.
Although the Department continues to participate and
sponsor numerous events and programs, including the
Wilderness and Fishing programs and the Police Activities
League (PAL), a major emphasis for the upcoming year is
to promote the Chief ’s “finish high school” philosophy.
One example is the Future Graduates Program in which
members of the Police Department, along with a diverse
group of City employees who began their jobs with only a
high school diploma, encourage students to stay in school
for a healthy and successful life.
OCC Add ition of Two
Inves tigators
In FY 2011-12, the Public Defender added a temporary
Justice Accountability Unit. In order to continue the
work of this unit in a more permanent way, the Police
Department’s proposed budget includes two additional
investigators for the OCC beginning in FY 2012-13.
The staffing at OCC has been lean for years, and these
additional resources will help the OCC be more effective
at investigating police misconduct allegations.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $26.8
million for the Public Defender is $0.9 million, or 3.4
percent, higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $25.9
million. A significant portion of this increase is due to
increases in salary and fringe benefits costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $28.0 million for the
Public Defender is $1.1 million, or 4.1 percent, higher
than the FY 2012-13 budget of $26.8 million. A significant
portion of this increase is also due to increases in salary
and fringe benefits costs.
COMMUNIT Y JUSTIC E
CENT ER
The Community Justice Center (CJC), created in May
2009, offers a more community-centered approach to
addressing crimes that directly affect neighborhoods in
a treatment-oriented collaborative setting. Beginning in
March of 2012, with the agreement of the Superior Court,
the Public Defender resumed representing all eligible
clients at the CJC utilizing existing staff.
REENTR Y PLANNING
FOR YOUT H WHO AR E
RETURNING FRO M OUT -OFHOME
PLAC EMENT	From the time the Court removes a child from the home,
the Juvenile Unit begins working with the youth, family,
community and stakeholders (such as the Juvenile
Probation Department, community based organizations,
San Francisco Unified School District, the Superior
Court, and the Department of Public Health) to craft a
resolution that best serves the interest of the child while
also taking into consideration public safety. For the past
three years, the Department has been a partner in the
Juvenile Collaborative Reentry Team Court (JCRT), which
provides extensive reentry planning for youth who are
returning from out-of-home placements. 88.0 percent
of the youth participating in the JCRT program do not
reoffend. JCRT has been funded by a grant, which will
expire in the fall of 2012; however, the Collaborative is
actively seeking continued grant funds for this program.
 
JUSTIC E ACCOUNTA BILIT Y
UNIT
The Department created a temporary Justice
Accountability Unit in 2011. Since then, this unit has
investigated nearly 7,000 cases impacted by misconduct.
In total, the Department was able to obtain over one
hundred dismissals and moved to set aside guilty pleas in
affected cases.
In order to continue the work of the temporary Justice
Accountability Unit, the FY 2012-13 budget proposes
adding two new Investigators to the Office of Citizen
Complaints.
OBTAINING GRANT FUN DING
Many federal grants are available through entities such as
the Bureau of Justice Assistance and the Department of
Justice. Awarded directly to state and local governments,
these grants are designed to supplement criminal justice
programs around the nation. The FY 2012-13 budget
proposes adding one Grant Writer to support the
Department’s efforts to compete for these federal and
state resources.
EXPAN DING EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITI ES FOR ALL
SAN FRANCI SCAN S
The Department obtained a private grant from the Metta
Fund Foundation to implement a Supported Employment
program that assists clients with mental illness in
securing competitive employment. The Supported
Employment social worker expedites the process of
obtaining employment for the mentally ill offender
population, expands the network of job possibilities, and
reaches a wider range of people with mental illness. The
social worker is responsible for conducting custodial
interviews and assessments of the adult mental health
offender population in order to assist these individuals in
obtaining and maintaining employment that is consistent
with their vocational goals and recovery.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $1.7
billion for DPH is $98.4 million, or 6.2 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $1.6 million. The FY
2013-14 proposed budget of $1.7 billion for DPH is $72.9
million, or 4.4 percent, higher than the FY 2012-13
budget. A significant portion of this increase over both
years is due to investments required to meet new state
and federal mandates, including adoption of electronic
medical records and meeting new performance
milestones in preparation for federal healthcare reform.
In addition, as a result of a recent state policy change, the
Department will incur a net $7.9 million in additional
costs for SF PATH (San Francisco Provides Access to
Health Care) for pharmaceutical costs for patients
formerly enrolled in Ryan White, and for out-of-network
costs for its participants.
Preparing for Health
Care Ref orm
DPH receives federal reimbursement through California’s
1115 Medicaid Waiver to help prepare health care delivery
systems for the implementation of major components of
federal Health Care Reform. In FY 2012-13 , the waiver
will provide $42.5 million in funding contingent on
the Department meeting several specific performance
milestones such as increased timely access to care, and
improved health outcomes. These dollars will allow the
Department to expand clinic hours, increase access to
specialty care and continue the integration of Primary
Care and Behavioral Health, among other system
improvements, through $5.0 million in investments in FY
2012-13, which increase to $10.2 million in FY 2013-14.
Waiver funding supported the launch of SF PATH, a
health access program for low income patients, in July
2011. The waiver is transitioning 10,000 Healthy San
Francisco participants into this program in preparation
for federal health reform implementation. As of February
2012, there were 11,000 uninsured San Francisco adults
enrolled in SF PATH. In FY 2012-13, the Department will
continue provision of care to this population.
During FY 2011-12, the Department launched planning
efforts to strengthen its Integrated Delivery System
(IDS). The IDS will help the Department prepare for
health reform by focusing on better health outcomes,
improved patient satisfaction and efficiency. During
FY 2012-13, the Department will move toward
implementation of key aspects of this plan and work to
ensure that it is a provider of choice.
 
Strengthe ning Care for
the Uninsured – Healthy
San Francisco
The Mayor’s proposed budget fully funds the City’s
landmark universal health care program, Healthy San
Francisco (HSF). Launched in 2007, HSF provides
comprehensive, affordable health care to uninsured
adults. In FY 2011-12, the Department added the Teen
& Youth Adult Health Center to the provider network
and completed an independent two-year evaluation.
The evaluation found that Healthy San Francisco
provided access to timely and coordinated primary care
services, alleviated financial and nonfinancial barriers to
medical care, and that participants used fewer hospital
emergency department services over time. In addition,
during FY 2011-12, Healthy San Francisco was named as
one of six finalists in the 2011 Innovations in American
Government Award competition by the Ash Center for
Democratic Governance and Innovation at the John F.
Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University. As
of February 2012, 46,000 uninsured San Francisco adults
were enrolled in HSF. In FY 2012-13, the Department will
continue to see program growth.
Im proving Patient Flow
Th roughout Our Sys tem
of Care
As part of delivery system integration, the Department
will improve patient flow at its hospitals by reviewing
the utilization of beds at SFGH, LLH, and the Behavioral
Health Center (BHC) to ensure that patients are
receiving the most appropriate level of care and that the
Department is maximizing state and federal revenues.
The Mayor’s budget proposal includes funding for the
strengthening of the utilization management team at
SFGH as well as adds $1.6 million towards non-acute
community placement beds to ensure more timely
discharges of stable patients who no longer need to be
in an acute care setting. In addition, LHH will create
a short stay program using existing beds to promote
more rapid and efficient community reintegration for
residents who have a strong potential for early recovery
and rehabilitation from their disabling illness or
sickness, including those from SFGH. This new program
will include direct utilization management, discharge
planning, and intensive community re-entry activities to
ensure timely discharge from LHH. Finally, DPH will also
review the utilization of the BHC to determine ways this
facility can be used more effectively to meet the needs of
clients being discharged from the hospitals.

Timely discharges benefit patients by ensuring they are in
the appropriate level of care, and that new patients have
increased access to SFGH’s critical services as rapid bed
turnover will reduce the amount of time SFGH’s Emergency
Department is on diversion. In addition, these initiatives are
expected to generate a net increase in revenue of $5.3 million
in FY 2012-13 and $8.2 million in FY 2013-14 by increasing
the number of acute patients in the Department’s care.
Red ucing Existing Costs
While there are many regulatory changes that require
new and significant investments, DPH is also finding
ways to provide efficiencies within its system to reduce
General Fund support. Starting in FY 2012-13, SFGH
will improve patient flow in the Emergency Department
(ED) by changing the way it conducts patient triage and
cohorting patients based on acuity instead of when they
arrive. Approximately 10 percent of 65,000 annual visits
in the ED have patients who leave without being seen by
a physician. Through cohorting patients and maximizing
exam room space in the ED, SFGH will improve patient
flow by doing rapid assessments for patient who meet the
criteria, so they can be seen and discharged more quickly,
and reduce the amount of time the ED is on diversion.
SFGH will also reduce same day cancelations in the
Operating Rooms by adding a nurse to do a pre-operation
clinic to evaluate and prepare patients for surgery. These
two efficiencies at SFGH will generate a net $2.6 million
in revenues in FY 2012-13 and $3.2 million in FY 2013-14.
In addition, DPH will consolidate its outpatient
rehabilitation programming at LHH and SFGH into one
program. As part of this consolidation, DPH will reduce
management costs and review program utilization, and
reconfigure the program to more efficiently provide
patients with the rehabilitation services they need.
Transitioning to Ele ctronic
Med ical Re cords
Federal Stimulus funding will also allow the Department
to begin to transition to using electronic medical records.
An additional $4.9 million in primarily one-time costs
is budgeted for this project in FY 2012-13. Federal
funding is tied to achieving meaningful use of electronic
medical records over the next several years to improve
the quality of care and health outcomes. In FY 2013-14,
the Department will make improvements in technology
and service delivery in light of this shift towards
electronic medical records. This investment will assist the
Department in improving the quality of its services as it
works towards fully implementing Health Care Reform.
Housing – A Health Ne cess ity
San Francisco continues to be a leader in the development
of supportive housing for persons with complex health
conditions. As DPH strives to become a truly integrated
delivery system, access to community-based residential
facilities for homeless people and people exiting hospital
care remains an important priority.
During FY 2012-13, the Department will open 282 new
Direct Access to Housing units, including the City’s
largest supportive housing site of 174 units located at 220
Golden Gate Ave (the former Central City YMCA). In
the following two fiscal years, the Department will assist
in bringing on an additional 158 units of high quality
housing units for people who have been homeless as well
as people exiting higher levels of care.
Pl anning for the Ne w
San Francisco Ge neral
Hospital
In the 2015, the new SFGH will open with 284 beds, 32
more than the current hospital. All acute care services
will be relocated to the new facility and all non-acute
services not subject to state requirements for seismic
compliance will remain in the current building. To plan
for the transition of patients and services to this new
facility, DPH will invest $40.0 million for new facility and
transition planning over the next several years.
CO MMUNIT Y
TRAN SFOR MATION GRANT
DPH has been awarded a grant of $815,358 annually
for five years to implement the citywide “San Francisco
Health in All Policies: Transforming Places, Empowering
People” (SF-HiAP) initiative. This grant will support
public health efforts to reduce chronic diseases, promote
healthier lifestyles, reduce health disparities, and control
health care spending. DPH will partner with designated
community-based organizations, academic institutions,
and other City agencies to realize the goals of the
Community Transformation Grant.
HIV Health and
Prevention Funding
As a result of federal budget cuts, DPH’s proposed
budget includes a loss of federal funds in HIV/AIDS care,
treatment, and prevention services of $6.6 million in
FY 2012-13 and $8.0 million in FY 2013-14. The Mayor’s
proposed budget for DPH fully backfills the $6.6 million
loss in FY 2012-13, and backfills $4.0 million of the loss
in FY 2013-14. The Mayor has asked program Planning
Councils, community leaders, and DPH staff to work
together in the next year to help find efficiencies to fill the
remaining FY 2013-14 gap.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $92.4
million for the Library is $5.9 million, or 6.8 percent,
higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $86.5 million. A
significant portion of this increase is due to increases in
salary and fringe benefits costs. In addition, starting in
FY 2012-13, branch library hours will be expanded from
six to seven days a week at two additional branch libraries
(bringing the total number of library facilities open seven
days a week to 15 out of 28 locations). The Library’s
budget also includes enhancements to library materials
collections and facilities maintenance.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $97.0 million for
the Library is $4.6 million, or 5.0 percent, higher than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $92.4 million. A significant
portion of this increase is also due to increases in salary
and fringe benefits costs. In addition, the Department
continues to increase funding to ensure that it maintains
robust materials collections, information technology,
infrastructure, and programs for the public.
Branch Library
Im proveme nt Program
(BLIP )
Following voter approval of a $106.0 million General
Obligation bonds in 2000, the City leveraged the approved
bond funds with State grants, gifts and revenue bonds
supported by the Library Preservation Fund to finance
the $196.3 million Branch Library Improvement Program
(BLIP). BLIP calls for the renovation of 16 branches, the
replacement of four leased facilities with City-owned
buildings, the replacement of three branches with new
buildings, the construction of the Mission Bay branch, the
construction of a new branch library (the first in 40 years),
and the creation of a support services center. The Library
has completed 22 of the 24 BLIP projects, as well as the
support services facility, and has spent approximately 86
percent of its program budget as of the end of April 2012.
The two remaining BLIP projects are the Bayview and the
North Beach branch libraries. The Bayview branch library
is approximately 50 percent complete. The North Beach
branch library project is anticipated to begin construction
in the summer of 2012.
In addition, beginning in FY 2012-13, the Library
will expand the hours of operation at the Portola and
Visitacion Valley branch libraries to seven days a week, in
order to provide additional access to services that enhance
literacy and learning efforts for the public.
 
Emb racing Innovation
Over the next two fiscal years, the Library will focus
on upgrading its servers, networks, bandwidth and
improving its catalog search capabilities to ensure
equitable access to public technology to help close the
City’s digital divide.
Enhancements in the priority service area over the next
two fiscal years includes funding for assistive technology
equipment and software upgrades; additional interpreter
services for the hearing impaired; converting three
bookmobiles into mobile technology labs to allow for
content creation, access to digital resources, and enhance
outreach and marketing opportunities; expansion of the
Library’s laptop lending program; and an investment
in an eLearning management system for staff to track
continuing education achievements and trainings.
Youth Engageme nt
The Library’s budget proposal reinforces the Department’s
strong commitment to children and youth services
through its early literacy initiative, summer reading
programs, teen services and school outreach and
training programs. The proposed budget also includes
enhancements to the Writers’ Corps and YouthWorks
programs that develop essential skills in writing,
communication, and basic job readiness for teens.
In FY 2011-12, the Department received a $100,000 grant
from the Institute of Museum and Library Sciences
to build a Teen Center Learning Lab Program that
will support the attainment of multiple literacies in
technology, media, environment and health, reading and
civic engagement. Youth who engage in the planning
process and Learning Lab programs will learn how
to select and use resources in new ways as sources
for creative media projects; be better consumers and
evaluators of digital content; use technology and media
production tools; share and license work produced in
the Creative Commons; and tell stories that support and
celebrate local culture and diversity. Teen producers,
distributors and curators of work in a digital world will
gain practical knowledge about such topics as distribution
rights, copyright, journalism ethics and more to help
them in their current projects and future careers. The
Library’s budget includes $450,000 over the next two
fiscal years to fund the completion of the full architectural
design and bid estimates for the new Teen Center
Learning Lab within the Main Library. The new Teen
Center will act as a City hub for youth media education
and literacy development.The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $137.3
million for RPD is $9.5 million, or 7.4 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $127.8 million. The
majority of this increase is due to increased labor costs, a
slight increase of staff members primarily in custodial and
gardening services, and an increase in funding for capital
projects. In addition, the Department is experiencing
increased costs in their Overhead division due primarily
to an increase in legal services and workers compensation
claims, and experiencing a decrease in revenues in their
Golf division.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $139.2 million for
RPD is $1.9 million, or 1.4 percent, higher than the FY
2012-13 budget. A significant portion of this increase
is due to an increase in salary and fringe benefits costs.
In addition, the return of the Professional Golfer’s
Association of America (PGA) tour to Harding Golf
Course results in an increase of revenue and expenditures
in the amount of $350,000.
ENHANCING RECR EATION
PROGRA MMING
As RPD expands its new recreation model, the
Department is partnering with other city agencies to
enhance programming and reach greater numbers of San
Franciscans. RPD will continue its successful partnership
with the San Francisco Public Library to weave literacy
and reading appreciation into RPD’s day camps and after
school programs. RPD has enhanced its partnership with
the Department of Children Youth and their Families
(DCYF), whereby DCYF funds arts programming
at the Harvey Milk Recreation Center and supports
Workreation, RPD’s summer youth employment program.
During FY 2012-13, the Department will hire nearly 150
youth workers to work in day camps, recreation centers,
and parks. Finally, RPD will continue to partner with the
Housing Authority to subsidize its residents’ participation
in RPD summer programming. Over the past two years,
this partnership jointly funded over 2,200 sessions of day
camps, learn-to-swim lessons, and other RPD summer
programs for Housing Authority residents.
The Recreation and Parks Department provides
recreational programming access to low income San
Francisco residents through a robust and growing
scholarship program. In FY 2010-11, RPD gave $497,000
in scholarship assistance to recreation program users. The
Department expects to increase that amount to $715,000
in FY 2011-12 – a jump of nearly 44 percent. In FY 2012-
13 and FY 2013-14, RPD will work to further increase
scholarship subsidies with the goal of ensuring that
ability to pay is never a barrier to participation in RPD
programming.
 
MAINTAINING BEAUTI FUL
PAR KS AN D FACI LITI ES
RPD is committed to providing beautiful, clean and
safe parks and open spaces. The Department’s park
maintenance scores demonstrate this commitment with
an overall score of 90.6 percent for the first six months
of FY 2011-12. In FY 2011-12, the Department also
performed a comprehensive analysis of all custodian
tasks within its system, examining budgeted and actual
custodian positions, park acreage, number and type
of park amenities, and the square footage and type of
facilities. Using this analysis, the Department created
consistent standards for facility cleanliness, increased
overall hours of facility operation and reallocated its
custodian resources to implement standard operating
hours for its public restrooms.
In its ongoing effort to find efficiencies and to improve
park maintenance, the Department will also continue to
enhance its gardener apprentice program. The FY 2012-
13 proposed budget includes 10 additional apprentice
positions, bringing the total number of apprentices up
to 25. RPD expects the first apprentice class to graduate
in early FY 2013-14, providing the Department with an
experienced and highly skilled pool of gardeners to hire
as positions become vacant. In addition to the apprentice
program, RPD has maximized gardener efficiency and
accountability with daily check-in and check-out meetings
for gardener crews in the park service areas and Golden
Gate Park.
Additionally, RPD is continuing to partner with the
Human Services Agency on the Jobs Now program. Over
the next two fiscal years, Jobs Now ensures an additional
100 staff will be cleaning and maintaining our parks at all
times.
IMPROVING PAR KS AN D
RECR EATION FACI LITI ES
FY 2011-12 has been a banner year for implementation
of the 2008 Clean and Safe Neighborhood Parks Bond.
Over the past year, the Department has completed
renovations of McCoppin Square and Chinese Recreation
Center, and opened the new Helen Diller Playground at
Mission Dolores Park. RPD has also begun construction
at Cabrillo, Mission and Cayuga Playgrounds, and at
Lafayette Park and Palega and Sunset Recreation Centers.
In addition, Mission Dolores Park and Glen Canyon
have both entered the detailed design phase of project
development.
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $20.7
million for the Department is $1.4 million, or 7.3 percent,
higher than the FY 2011-12 budget of $19.3 million. The
Department is proposing a small increase in staffing
levels (including two new positions in the Deferred
Compensation Division) to meet the service needs of
the members and participants. The Department was
able to partially absorb increases in salary and fringe
benefits costs through other reductions. The entirety
of the Department’s budget is funded from the SFERS
Trust or through reimbursement from the Third-party
Administrator of the City’s Deferred Compensation Plan.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $21.2 million for the
Department is $0.6 million, or 2.7 percent, higher than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $20.7 million. This increase is
due to increases in fringe benefits costs.
 
REDUCING CIT Y CO STS
The SFERS Trust earned an investment return of 22.2
percent for FY 2010-11. This investment return was
nearly triple the Plan’s investment return assumption and
served to reduce the expected increase in the employer
contribution requirements to SFERS resulting from the
Plan’s use of five-year smoothed recognition.
The Department will continue to work to maintain
superior levels of investment returns on SFERS trust fund
assets. The Department’s performance target is to achieve
a return on trust investments that ranks in the top 50th
percentile or better. As of March 31, 2012, the Department
is just under this performance target on a five-year average
return basis. The Department anticipates that it will meet
or exceed this five-year average return target as of June 30,
2012.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $174.6
million for the Sheriff ’s Department is $2.0 million, or
1.1 percent, lower than the FY 2011-12 budget of $176.6
million. A significant portion of this decrease is due to
a change in funding for Sheriff ’s Department capital
projects. The Department was also able to achieve savings
by restructuring and aligning staff to more appropriately
and efficiently provide services.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $178.7 million for
the Sheriff ’s Department is $4.2 million, or 2.3 percent,
higher than the FY 2012-13 budget of $174.6 million. This
increase is due to increases in salary and fringe benefits
costs.
STATE REALIGN MENT AB109
On October 1, 2012, Assembly Bill (AB) 109, or
Public Safety Realignment, took effect in California.
Realignment represents a major policy change at the state
level, which effectively shifts a portion of the state prison
population to county jails by sentencing non-violent, nonserious,
and non-sex offenders to serve their sentences in
county jail, rather than state prison, for many offenses.
This population now serving longer sentences in county
jails is more complex and difficult than the population
previously serving sentences in the county jail system.
While the Department did experience increases in state
parole prisoners and others through Realignment, the
overall count was stable for much of FY 2011-12.
The Sheriff ’s Department continues to cautiously monitor
the Realignment situation and how it affects Department
operations. For FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14, the Sheriff ’s
Department will receive $8.5 million in each year in state
funds to offset a large portion of costs associated with the
Realignment population. Overall, the City is receiving
$17.3 million, which is a significant increase from the $5.7
million that San Francisco received in FY 2011-12.
CU STODY TR ENDS
The Department has seen a flattening of its daily
population with a slight rise in the percentage of
incarcerated prisoners who are rated as Maximum
Security. Gang members, and those that “drop out”
of gangs (a growing trend throughout the State that
seems to be taking on characteristics of a newly formed
gang), are strategically housed to ensure the safety of all
inmates by keeping prisoners separate from rival factions.
Additionally, the Department created a Psychologically
Sheltered Living Unit at County Jail 5 specifically for those
male prisoners with serious psychological needs as well
as substance abuse issues. The program offers individual
 
therapy, medication management, informal socialization,
and conflict management to some of the most difficult
prisoners in our custody.
REENTR Y PO D
In FY 2012-13, the Department plans to open one
designated reentry housing unit within the county jail
system as a pilot program for prisoners serving the
last 30 to 60 days of their jail time. The Department
hopes this will provide more direct, focused services
to prisoners as they prepare to leave jail, to enter
alternatives to incarceration, or to be released directly
into the community. This initiative is expected to bring
in $400,000 in state revenue in FY 2012-13, and $800,000
in FY 2013-14. The planned reentry pod is the product
of close collaboration between the Sheriff ’s Department
and the Adult Probation Department, and is designed
to prevent state prisoners who are deemed eligible for
mandatory release, Post Release Community Supervision,
or probation, from being released directly to the streets
without first designing and implementing an individual
program plan consistent with each released person’s
needs.
ALTERNATIV ES TO
INCARC ERATION
While incarcerated, prisoners are provided services and
programs administered through jail facilities, such as
education, drug treatment, and anti-violence programs.
The goals of these programs are to lower recidivism rates
and to enable prisoners to better transition back into the
community after leaving the county jail system, thereby
reducing costs to the public. The FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-
14 budget maintains the FY 2011-12 level of funding for
alternative programs including the No Violence Alliance
(NoVA) Project and Resolve to Stop the Violence (RSVP).
EDUCATION AN D
VOCATIONA L TRAINING
Five Keys Charter School provides comprehensive incustody
and out-of-custody education to prisoners and
ex-offenders. The Department, in collaboration with the
Five Keys Charter High School, is increasing its vocational
training with prisoners to provide them with job skills
they will need when released into the community. The
Department also works with a food contractor that
provides a culinary training class for inmates called
In2work.
EMerGING STA FFING NEEDS
Over the past three years, the Sheriff ’s Department has
seen a reduction of over 75 sworn staff positions due
to the consolidation of prisoners at five of the six jails,
retirements, and other separations. And to date, the
Department has not hired to replace these sworn staff.
This reduction did not adversely affect services because
the jail population has remained relatively low over the
last couple of years and the Department was able to
supplement with overtime. However, the Department
is now at a tipping point where it needs to hire in order
to keep overtime costs manageable and to maintain
appropriate levels of service. Over the next two fiscal
years, the Department will need to hire staff to ensure
sufficient support for all its mandated jail activities and
programs; while keeping overtime in check. The FY 2012-
13 budget proposes to realign existing positions to enable
the Department to immediately hire a limited number
of sworn staff to support all its jails, programs and
functions, while managing overtime more efficiently.

The FY 2012-13 and the FY 2013-14 proposed budget of
$3.6 million in each year for the Department is roughly
equal to the FY 2011-12 budget. There are no significant
budgetary changes in either year.
PR ESERVING VITA L
COMMUNIT Y SERVIC ES
In addition to providing grants to organizations that
provide vital services to women, the Department convenes
community meetings with partner agencies to identify
the needs of the community, and works with the Mayor’s
Office to identify and establish ongoing funding for these
important services.
LEVERAGING RESOURC ES
THROUG H CO LLABORATION S
The Department’s policy and organizing work in the field
of anti-human trafficking relies heavily on partnerships
with community groups and other government agencies,
locally and federally. These partnerships include:
Family Violence Council
Through the coordinated efforts of Family Violence
Council members, domestic violence incidences in San
Francisco have decreased by approximately 80 percent in
recent years.
Justice Tracking System (JUSTI S)
Implementation
The Department continues to work with the
Mayor’s Office, the Board of Supervisors, and the
City Administrator’s Office to ensure that the
implementation of JUSTIS remains a priority issue at
all levels of government and within the community.
The implementation of JUSTIS will permit the sharing
of information among emergency responders for more
efficiency in solving cases.
 
Safe Housing for Domestic Violence
Survivors
The Department will convene a workgroup of Justice and
Courage Oversight Panel members, representatives from
the Housing Authority, the Mayor’s Office of Housing,
the Human Services Agency’s Housing and Homelessness
Division, and housing and domestic violence advocates
from the community to determine an appropriate and
effective protocol for responding to domestic violence
incidents at housing sites.
San Francisco Collaborative Against
Human Trafficking (SFCA HT)
The Department, through SFCAHT, works with
the Mayor’s Office to convene a Human Trafficking
Awareness Day event to raise public awareness around this
issue.
ADVANCING WO MEN’S ISSUES
The leadership of the United Nations has shown interest
in convening a Global Conference on Woman in 2015. The
Department will continue its effort to have San Francisco
chosen as the host city of this week-long international
conference. If successful, San Francisco will garner
international publicity and thousands of global leaders
will convene in the City for the event.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $29.6
million for the TTX is $1.1 million, or 3.9 percent, higher
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $28.5 million. This increase
is predominantly due to increases in salary and fringe
benefits costs.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $27.0 million for the
TTX is $2.6 million, or 8.9 percent, lower than the FY
2012-13 budget of $29.6 million. A significant portion of
this decrease is due to the end of a $1.4 million work order
with the Superior Court.
KIN DERGART EN TO CO LLEGE
SAVING S
In FY 2010-11, in collaboration with the Mayor, the
Department launched the first program in the nation
to automatically open a college savings account for
all children entering kindergarten in the City’s public
schools. This Kindergarten to College program (K2C)
includes a matching component and incentives to boost
family savings, and puts San Francisco at the forefront
of national savings policy models. K2C covered 2,270
students in the current year and will ramp up to full
coverage of all Kindergarten enrollees by expanding to
4,400 students in FY 2012-13.
reform of permit
renewals
The Treasurer, along with Mayor Lee and Board of
Supervisors President David Chiu, initiated legislation
to ease burdens on small businesses operating in San
Francisco. Businesses of all types are required to have
permits to operate, and the annual renewal of these
permits previously occurred sporadically throughout the
year depending on the type of permit and the location
of the business. The legislation passed in FY 2011-12
consolidates permit renewal billings by business owner on
 
one date, making it easier for the business to plan, track,
and pay. The Department will implement this new system
in FY 2012-13.
EXPAN D TOURI SM &

TTX has a unique partnership with the Tourism
Improvement District to collect the self-assessed fee
that raises funds for the renovation of Moscone Center
and tourism promotion. Through this partnership, the
Department has collected approximately $52.0 million
since 2009 for renovation and tourism promotion.
Utilizing Te chnology
for improved processes
The Treasurer/Tax Collector’s Office has been actively
investigating and utilizing technological innovations
in order to improve customer service and increase
collections. Within one year of procuring a software
application that enables online tax filing and related
business process management of the tax submissions, the
Department has reduced manual operations for Payroll,
Hotel, Prepayment, Business Registration and Property
Tax. In addition to providing online submission and
online payment processing, the Department immediately
scans and archives incoming checks, decreasing the
need for archival services and enhancing our research
capabilities. Simultaneously, the Department is increasing
its online payment options. The adoption to online
payments has been significant with some taxes having a
50.0 percent remittance rate online.
REFOR M THE PA YRO LL TA X
The Treasurer is working in collaboration with Mayor
Lee, President Chiu, and Controller Ben Rosenfield to
ensure that the new solution is financially sound and
operationally manageable.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $12.1
million for the Department is roughly equal to the FY
2011-12 budget.
The FY 2013-14 proposed budget of $11.5 million for the
Department is $0.6 million, or 5.0 percent, lower than
the FY 2012-13 budget of $12.1 million. A significant
portion of this decrease is due to the planned closure
of the Veterans Building on July 1, 2013 for a two-year
construction period to implement seismic and life safety
renovations. The Veterans Building closure effective July
1, 2013 is projected to reduce FY 2013-14 expenditures by
$1.1 million. This savings is partially offset by an increase
in salary and fringe benefits costs, an increase in the San
Francisco Public Utilities Commission’s Hetch Hetchy
electric power rates, and an increase in FY 2013-14 capital
project expenditures.
Ve terans Build ing
Seism ic Upgrade and
Im proveme nt Proje ct
As provided in the City’s 10-Year Capital Plan, the twoyear
design/development phase of the $130.0 million
Veterans Building Seismic Upgrade and Improvement
Project commenced in July 2011. This major project,
construction of which is scheduled to commence July 1,
2013, represents an investment in one of San Francisco’s
most historic properties and has significant impact on
the War Memorial’s budget for the next two fiscal years,
both in terms of revenues and expenditures. Earned
 
revenues from Herbst Theatre and Green Room rentals,
as well as other Veterans Building occupancies, will
decrease by $237,000 in FY 2012-13 and an additional
$655,189 in FY 2013-14. Veterans Building expenditures
will decrease by $46,566 in FY 2012-13 and an additional
$1.1 million in FY 2013-14. The Veterans Building Project
will create hundreds of construction jobs, and the Local
Hire Ordinance will ensure new jobs for San Franciscans.
The Veterans Building renovations, once completed,
will significantly improve facilities rented and used by
over 150 small arts and cultural organizations each year,
and will allow the War Memorial to attract national and
international events, performers and patrons. New and
upgraded Veterans Building facilities will also create
operating efficiencies and allow the War Memorial to
generate additional earned revenue.
Civic Ce nter Comm unity
Benefit District
The Civic Center Community Benefit District allows the
War Memorial to invest in its neighborhood and work
together with Civic Center businesses and residents on
improving the safety, services, and appeal of the Civic
Center for residents and visitors. The War Memorial has
budgeted expenditures in FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 for
Civic Center Community Benefit District tax assessments.

The Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 proposed budget of $25.4
million for ADP is $10.8 million, or 73.7 percent, greater
than the FY 2011-12 budget of $14.6 million. This increase
is due to funding for the Public Safety Realignment
initiative implemented on October 1, 2011. The FY 2012-
13 proposed budget also includes funding for Client
Supportive Services and the continued implementation
and improvement of evidence-based supervision to
enhance public safety, and maximize offender restitution,
reconciliation, and restorative services to victims of crime.
The newly implemented risk and needs assessment tool
and training will allow the Department to accurately
classify an offender’s risk for recidivism and direct staff
and resources away from the offenders who are more
likely to reoffend.
