Enrolling as many patients as possible into the new insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act.
With the implementation of the insurance coverage expansion under the Affordable Care Act set to start on January
1, 2014, the Health System will be working on getting as many of our uninsured and underinsured patients into
the new coverage as possible. Our success will depend largely on how easy the State’s enrollment process for
insurance coverage will be, and on the success of the State’s media and outreach campaign. If we are successful,
then about ? of the uninsured people in our ACE program will gain insurance coverage.
2. Driving quality ever higher and costs lower. Since a minimum of 22,000 residents who currently receive services
from the Health System will not be eligible for insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act and thus will
remain the County’s responsibility, the Health System must simultaneously drive quality higher and costs lower to
be able to continue to provide care to these residents within our budget constraints. To that end, we will continue
the efforts at the San Mateo Medical Center to improve the quality and reduce the cost of patient care using the
LEAN process improvement method. The Health System also will spread the LEAN process improvement program
to other divisions. The success of these efforts will be measured by whether the Health System meets both its budget
and the quality of care milestones for the federal Delivery System Reform Incentive Program.
3. Managing the uncertainty of our finances. While the next two years are full of promise for those who are uninsured
or underinsured, they are full of financial uncertainty for the Health System, particularly for the San Mateo
Medical Center. How many uninsured patients will enroll in the newly available coverage? Where will they choose
to go for care? How much will the supplemental payments the Health System receives from the state/federal governments
for serving a disproportionately high number of uninsured and Medi-Cal patients decrease? How much
of the state funding that comes to the Health System to care for the uninsured will be retained by the State
instead? Managing the complexities of the new funding mechanisms for care will be a significant challenge for the
Health System. If we are successful, we will be able to continue to provide our current level of service without additional
county financial assistance.
4. Using evidence-based drug and alcohol treatment to improve our patient’s overall health outcomes and
reduce medical costs. The compelling business case for using effective drug and alcohol treatment to reduce

inappropriate and costly use of medical services has led to reforms that will allow Medi-Cal beneficiaries to have
access to broader and more evidence-based drug and alcohol benefits under the Affordable Care Act. Behavioral
Health and Recovery Services has been nurturing the shift to evidence-based practice among our alcohol and
other drug treatment providers through a multi-year training initiative, working with providers to enhance their infrastructure
to participate through introduction of the electronic health record, and partnering with the Health Plan of
San Mateo to introduce more medication- assisted therapies. Fully capitalizing on the opportunity will require a
much greater integration of the processes used by primary care, behavioral health, and the Health Plan to target
high risk beneficiaries. If we are successful, we will be able to engage our most complicated patients in treatment
that will reduce the cost of their health care and improve their health and ability to live productively.
5. Continuing to advocate for improvements to make the healthiest choice the easiest choice. Eating right and
getting enough exercise are among the most important things we can do to maintain and improve our health. But
our world has been engineered to reduce physical activity and provide us with boundless enticements to eat lownutrient,
high calorie foods. The Health System will continue to advocate for regional/county/city investments in
active transportation such as convenient and reliable public transit, and improvements in the streetscapes to
encourage biking and walking for every day travel, not merely for recreation, so that we make getting exercise as
easy as walking to school or to the store. In addition, we will work on reducing access to tobacco, sugar-loaded
drinks, and other harmful products. If successful, the physical fitness levels of our children will increase and our
levels of obesity will decrease.
6. Responding to criminal justice realignment. A major initiative of the Health System will be to continue to work
with the Courts, the Sheriff's Office, the Human Services Agency, and the Probation Department to connect clients
leaving the criminal justice system with supportive services to ensure successful re-entry into the community.
Behavioral Health and Recovery Services will collaborate with these partners on the end of the Achieve 180 grant
in March 2014 and will staff Service Connect to be responsible for the post-release case management and triage
of treatment for high risk people with behavioral health problems discharged from the jail. Most people can be
transferred to contracted community based agencies, but those with complex addictions and mental illness served
by Correctional Health inside the jail will be linked to Service Connect and managed closely by Behavioral Health
and Recovery Services staff in the community. Successful collaboration by the Health System and other partner
agencies will result in the establishment of a re-entry process that successfully engages people with addictions
and mental illness in the treatment they need to eventually recover and live productive lives.
7. Implementing the Duals Pilot in partnership with the Health Plan of San Mateo. The Health System will be
working closely with the Health Plan of San Mateo (HPSM), the State, and the other pilot counties to address the
many questions that will have to be answered in order to implement the Duals Pilot program, now called Cal Medi-
Connect, by January 2014. Some of the other counties face even greater implementation challenges because they
have less experience working with their health plans and would like to delay the start of the program. In addition,
other counties have concerns about how the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Program will be impacted by
closer association with health plans and the transfer of responsibility for bargaining wages and benefits to a new
statewide public authority. The Health System and HPSM believe the long term sustainability of IHSS and the other
home and community based services will be enhanced by this pilot which will demonstrate their utility in reducing
more expensive institutional care such as hospital and nursing home stays. The Health System will be working
energetically at the State level to prevent delay. A successful launch of the Duals Pilot and IHSS sustainability
project will be measured by whether the Health System and program partners are fully prepared to implement by
the date the State starts the program (currently set for January 1, 2014).

Ensuring the appropriate administration of all Public Administrator estates. Hundreds of Public Administrator
estates that were transferred from the District Attorney's Office to the Aging and Adult Services division of the
Health System will be reviewed and resolved. There are numerous challenges in bringing these cases to resolution
including that they require a case-by-case review of back tax liability. By the end of FY 2014-15, the Health System
will appropriately administer and resolve a majority of the transferred estates.


For FY 2013-14, the main challenge facing HSA is the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and providing health
insurance enrollment to an estimated 13,000 individuals through the expansion of the Medi-Cal program and an
estimated 34,000 individuals through the state’s health benefit exchange, Covered California. HSA will continue to
implement and complete a series of new initiatives to enhance customer engagement such as the Code for America
Project, which uses technology to connect residents to all available food resources and other social services available
throughout the county; and the modernization of all the regional HSA offices to improve efficiencies and to increase
accessibility. SMC Works will continue to implement new strategies to engage CalWORKs clients in welfare-to-work
activities. Children and Family Services is collaborating with the Youth Commission to develop the Hands Program,
which will bridge and cultivate a relationship between local businesses and foster youth under our care. As a multiaccredited
agency (COA and CARF), HSA will continue to explore and pursue best practices to maintain excellent
programming and administrative standards. Emerging trends for HSA is the increasing use of automation in customer
engagement and HSA has incorporated self service technologies in the new lobbies and will explore other
technologies such as robo-calling and the use of tablets for field staff.

The Department will continue the Accela Automation Technology Upgrade project in 2013-14, resulting in an enhanced
permit processing and tracking system which will make more information and mapping layers available to both public
and staff.
The Department will also complete the amendments to the Zoning Regulations required to implement the North Fair
Oaks Community Plan. These changes will, among other things, allow for a greater mix of land uses in the opportunity
areas identified by the Community Plan, and create incentives for new development to provide public amenities.
In addition, the Department will process amendments to the County’s zoning and subdivision regulations necessary to
carry out the recently updated Housing Element. This will include revisions intended to facilitate the development of
affordable housing units, and that carry out state law regarding the development of emergency shelters and second
dwelling units.
Finally, the multiyear Princeton Land Use Update project will conclude in FY 2014-15 and will result in the submittal of
a Local Coastal Program (LCP) amendment to the California Coastal Commission. Anticipated benefits of this Update
include improved LCP Policies and Zoning Regulations regarding: airport safety and compatibility; allowable land uses
and development intensities; coastal access and recreation; sensitive habitat and water quality protection; and,
shoreline erosion and other natural hazards. 

San Mateo County faces several regulatory stormwater quality requirements and unfunded mandates. These include
County specific requirements outlined in the Municipal Regional Stormwater NPDES Permit, Fitzgerald ASBS and
Total Daily Maximum Loads for defined creeks in the County. Water quality requirements continue to escalate and
increase in complexity. As an example, San Pedro Creek and Pacifica State Beach Bacteria TMDLs were adopted by
the Regional Water Quality Control Board in November 2012 requiring the County to conduct water quality monitoring,
implement best management practices, and prepare an Implementation Plan, Water Quality Monitoring Plan and
annual reports. Over the next two years, the Department will continue to work with its partners to seek dedicated
funding to support the growing cross-departmental efforts occurring to meet the County’s regulatory requirements.
In addition, the Department will continue to evaluate long-term funding options for work funded by the diminishing Solid
Waste Fund. Currently, the Fund subsidizes Pescadero Transfer Station operations and the monitoring and
maintenance of three closed county-owned landfills.

The Department intends to maintain current level of service for daily agricultural inspections. State funding
reductions that occurred in FY 2012-13 in the High Risk Pest Exclusion program will again be partially offset by an
increase in other state revenue. The additional revenue and expenditure reductions balance and will allow the
Department to maintain the current level of services.
• To improve efficiency, the department worked with ISD to develop a new web-based daily activity reporting system
to be launched in July 2013.

Success will be measured by tracking performance measures, reviewing Customer Surveys, successful
interceptions, exclusion and prevention of the introduction of exotic pests from the County and positive performance
evaluation reports from our State oversight agencies, California’s Department of Food and Agriculture and
Department of Pesticide Regulation.
Key Initiatives
• Implementation of new upgraded Device Registration and Point of Sale System database for improved efficiency,
facilitate invoice generation, tracking, accounting and documentation of business devices and price scanners.
• Improved efficiencies, record keeping, and elimination of paper maps and records thru the initiation of electronic
mapping and recordkeeping in the Pest Detection insect trapping program

Objectives for the upcoming two years are many. In an effort to continuously look for ways to serve our public safety
partners, the department’s Systems Supervisor developed an application or “app” that loads the CAD system onto an idevice.
This innovation sparked development of a new laptop replacement program in the Fire Service, which will save
up to $8,000 per mobile device in each first response vehicle. We anticipate sharing this success with AMR and our
law enforcement partners so they can evaluate effectiveness and cost savings for their agencies.
By the end of 2013, the County and the City of Daly City should have completed processes to determine whether
consolidating law enforcement communications is a benefit to both agencies. Should the County decide to move
forward, full integration of the Daly City dispatch operation should be completed by the end of the fiscal year.
Additionally, PSC space plans continue, as such, the Director has worked closely with an architectural firm that
developed a comprehensive space plan for the proposed new facility. This plan is the first step in refining requirements
and sets the stage for the next steps to include a detailed schematic of the proposed facility. In the meantime, research
and development of industry standards, best practices, and experiences from new dispatch centers will be conducted.
During this period, a Request for Information (RFI) will be completed and distributed for the advent of starting our
research for a CAD replacement.
In FY 2012-13 seven full-time employees separated from the Department. Although two of seven remained as Extra-
Help Dispatchers, the dramatic decrease in staffing in such a short time has placed high demands on existing staff to
backfill required positions. This has severely impacted PSC’s ability to accomplish department initiatives. The
recruitment, selection, training and qualification process for new hires is close to one year, and relief for the staffing
deficit won’t be realized until early 2014. The Department is preparing for continuous recruitment, and is researching
for ways to minimize down staffing in the future.
In FY 2014-15, PSC targets accreditation in applying law enforcement protocols. This will be PSC’s second large step
in the three step process of achieving tri-service accreditation in internationally accepted call-taking standards. PSC
anticipate constant staffing in the Dispatch Center, which will allow staff to fully focus on this goal and progress towards
satisfying all requirements to apply for this status. PSC also anticipates being fully involved in the construction phase of
the new facility and development of a comprehensive project plan for the CAD replacement. Two other major projects
include implementing the fire protocol system and partnering with the Department of Justice to integrate real time crime
analytic software into the Dispatch Center.

The Department of Housing faces ongoing challenges as a result of Federal funding reductions. Program
Administration funds from U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development have been reduced by $520,000 for

Housing Rental Programs, Community Development Block Grant, and HOME Funds. The Department continues to
identify solutions and streamline operational efficiency to maintain core services to the community.
Other Department Initiatives
• The Department of Housing is converting to an electronic content management system that will not only eliminate
most paper from its operation, but also enable the department to implement automated work-flow processes that
will also enable clients to accomplish many of their housing program needs on-line if they choose.
• Housing Authority will implement expansion of 5-year self-sufficiency program from its current 200 vouchers to 700
vouchers.
• The Department of Housing is implementing the investment of $13,4 million in former RDA affordable housing setaside
funds into new affordable housing units (75%) as well as new and/or renovated shelter facilities (25%).

Significant initiatives and challenges for next two years include: implementing new HR/Payroll system, in partnership
with HR and ISD, to improve processing efficiency and effectiveness by integrating systems and utilizing workflow;
transferring Property Tax system to hosted environment, evaluating replacement options, and implementing new
system; and migrating our current version of the IFAS accounting system, which will become unsupported at end of
2013, to the latest software version to take advantage of new reporting capabilities and additional functionality, and to
continue receiving software support from vendor.
Implementing a new HR/Payroll system will come with challenges. This 2-year project will require re-assigning Payroll
program staff to the implementation project team and hiring temporary staff to help back-fill for those working on the
project. The ePayables and Accounts Payable (AP) Automation projects are two other significant initiatives that the
Controller’s Office will lead to implement. The ePayables project will enable the County to issue electronic payments to
vendors using merchant credit card accounts, and receive rebates from the bank who administers the ePayables
program. These rebates will grow as additional County vendors enroll in this program and more payments are
processed via the program. In conjunction with ISD and Public Works, we (the three departments) will conduct a pilot
AP Automation project to scan vendor invoices upon receipt, route them electronically to users for approval, and
automate the transfer of accounts payable information to our accounting system. If the pilot is successful we will
implement this automated solution Countywide. We will measure the increase in discounts received from efficient
processing and reduced processing time.
The Audit program’s increasing focus on fraud prevention will include designing and implementing new capabilities
using ACL (an audit data analysis tool) to automate the identification of unusual, higher-risk financial transactions that
may require additional review. In FY 13-14 the Controller’s Office will initiate a study to determine the best use of audit
resources using a risk based approach and best practices to strengthen internal controls. Audit staff has begun and will
continue to assist with the implementation of complex, high-value recommendations and develop ways to measure
results, which will include actual budget savings and improved customer service efficiencies.
To increase County employees’ awareness and understanding regarding the importance of having and following
proper internal control procedures, the Controller’s Office will be incorporate internal controls training within all IFAS
training courses. To this end, for example, all County fiscal personnel who review, approve and/or process invoice
payments will receive internal controls training (i.e., segregation of duties) when participating in mandatory accounts
payable courses.
During the next two years we will continue to work on the County’s Open Data initiative whose goal is to provide the
public, the County’s constituents, with access to financial and other information to improve transparency and
accountability. In early FY 13-14, we will implement and begin to publish the County’s disbursements (accounts
payable transactions) via the Open Checkbook project.

A new organizational structure will be introduced to better align services to the Department and County’s goals,
enhance succession planning, and streamline services. The Department will also participate in the Agile Organization
pilot. Three rotational Human Resources Technicians will be recruited to fill fixed-term positions where they will work in
various Human Resources’ divisions. Information gathered from the pilot will be reported to the Board as well as
recommendations to refine the work delivery models.
Another major initiative in the upcoming fiscal year is the implementation of Health Care Reform. The new law requires
large employers (with 50+ employees) to offer minimum essential and affordable coverage to all employees who work
an average of 30 hours a week. This change will primarily impact extra help. The County currently has over 100 extra
help employees that would qualify for coverage.
Other initiatives in the next two fiscal years include: collaborating with the Controller’s Office, Information Services
Department, to implement a new personnel/payroll system; complete negotiations with two of the largest labor
organizations in the County; and continue to expand Succession Planning and Employee Engagement initiatives
through such programs as CPMS, Essential Supervisory Skills, Management Talent Exchange Program, Internships,
Management Development Program, and introduce a Job Shadowing Program.
These initiatives will contribute to the key performance indicators including: excellent customer survey ratings;
increased number of employees with performance plans; high employee retention rates; resolving claims prior to
formal process; high promotion rates; and high satisfaction with new hires; and increased employee engagement
results.

In FY 2013-15, ISD is focused on delivering projects that include:
• Network system upgrade
• Data center relocation planning
• Voice system replacement planning
• Replacement of email
• Expanded mobile access

Implementing a project/resource management system
• Implementing a new customer service process
• Implementing a new asset management system
• Updating the Information Technology Strategic Plan
•
Additionally, ISD is committed to supporting Major Projects which include:
• Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS) replacement
• Human Resources/Payroll system replacement
• Property Tax System replacement
• Countywide website migration
• Radio System Upgrade
• Open Government / Open Data Program
• ATKS advanced scheduler implementation
• Card Key system improvements