Jail Capacity and Reentry Programming
Responding to AB 109, the County created an effective,
restorative, and rehabilitative Reentry Network which is
cultivating a county-wide collaboration effort. Reentry
efforts have been funded and evaluated to assist with
individuals leaving State Prison and exiting the County's
local correctional facilities. However, racial and ethnic
over-representation in the public safety and justice
system continues to be a concern.
The number of inmates requiring special mental health
management has recently swelled to 25% of the jail
population, further frustrating efforts to minimize risk
of inmates harming themselves and others. Alarmingly,
25% to 30% of inmates take daily mental illness
medication and 10% of inmates suffer serious mental
illnesses. Sadly, 39% of the homeless are mentally ill and
many are recently released from jail and struggle with
their illness alone.
Additionally, County jails are at 95% of inmate capacity
with a pretrial population of 75%. The national average
is 62%, which many argue is too high. The current
length of stay for all inmates is 207 days and growing.
Despite efforts of proactive, evidence-based pretrial
services, the County relies to a great degree, on charge
and resource-based bail schemas. Opportunities exist to
increase the number of individuals eligible for citation
or summons vs. arrest, pretrial screening and pretrial
release. Assessments of jail inmates reveal significant
numbers presenting low and moderate risk for
community supervision. The County plans to seek
assistance to make measurable, sustainable, systemwide
improvements and overcome the above
challenges to benefit the community in the following
ways:
¦ Effectively manage the dynamic demands of
cultures, socio-economy, physical and mental illness,
addictions, gender and age by enhancing evidencebased
and needsspecific
practices (eliminating ineffective
entanglement and ensuring effective inclusion
in optimal practices).Reduce unnecessarily high jail populations by
shifting from reliance on a charge and resourcebased
pretrial model to a high-performance, individualized,
evidence and risk-based model. Ideally, 80%
of jail populations will be assessed high-risk and
total pretrial jail populations will drop below the
national level of 62%.
The County completed a comprehensive needs
assessment/facilities study of the County correctional
system highlighting the need to adopt and use a
risk/need assessment tool within the housing
classification process, expand program space and
ensure programs target high risk/high need, and build
upon successful Reentry Resource Center
programming. It is critical to identify programs
designed to divert offenders away from jail and
programs designed to correct the behavior and
thought-processes that lead them to jail will be better
equipped to fulfill their respective purposes. Current
program/classroom space and facilities at the Elmwood
Jail facility is insufficient to meet the needs of the
increase in inmate population which resulted from the
implementation of AB 109. Current inmate program
activities are conducted in housing unit day rooms
which precludes adequate support and is also
disruptive to operations. The Administration will
continue to work with Reentry partners to assess the
feasibility of adding a program/classroom building at
Elmwood, leveraging AB 109 appropriations from the
available AB 109 Trust Fund.
Transition and Discharge Planning
A transition plan is an individualized program plan
which is designed to ensure the offender will
receive necessary services in the community, postrelease.
A transition plan:
¦ Provides a linkage to appropriate next step
resources based on offenders' needs;
¦ Invests in an outcome that every life has some
human potential to be productive member of
society;
¦ Maintains gains achieved during the course of incarceration.
To achieve better coordination with reentry partners at
the Reentry Resource Center and reduce recidivism,
transition planning will be conducted with high risk or
high need offenders 30 days prior to release from
County's Main Jail or Elmwood beginning on July 1,
2015. A transition plan will be completed for identified
offenders to ensure he/she will receive a continuum of
services and care upon release. Specifically, an
individualized transition plan will be prioritized for
inmates who are at the highest risk of re-offending as
demonstrated by the Correctional Assessment and
Intervention System (CAIS) risk assessment and/or by
past criminal history including individuals who are
recovering from substance abuse issues, mentally ill,
homeless or any combination. The Administration will
return to the Board of Supervisors in early FY 2016
requesting AB 109 appropriations.
Referral Tracking System
The RRC requires a tracking system to provide
information regarding service referrals and delivery
provided to re-entry clients within Santa Clara
County. Currently, each agency or department,
whether County or Non-County, provides services
to these clients, then stores service and case data in
their own departmental systems. There is a need to
more clearly understand the referrals that are made
between agencies, so that service and outcome
data can be effectively measured and assessed.
Additionally, there is a need to ensure the client is
placed in a treatment slot immediately upon
assessment, and to track the client's entry and exit
dates. A centralized referral tracking system,
managed by the RRC, will enhance the County's
ability to coordinate services between agencies,
measure outcomes, accurately track service
delivery, and more effectively allocate resources to
support the success of Re-Entry initiatives
Information Systems Department (ISD) understands
the critical nature of this system and the reporting
needs related to referrals and services provided to
Public Safety Realignment and Reentry clients
accessing the RRC. ISD has been working closely with
Office of Reentry Services, other stakeholders at the
RRC and other County agencies to develop
requirements for an interim tracking referral system
that can used by internal County departments. Because
of technical challenges, this solution will not be

available to service providers. There are two longerterm
technical solutions available to meet the referral
tracking needs to include service providers, however,
either of these solutions will require a significant
amount of time and funding to implement, and further
analysis needs to be performed before a selection can be
made. Initial one-time cost estimates for a longer-term
solution range between $1.3 million to $1.65 million and
ongoing cost estimates depend on the staffing required
to implement and support this technology.
ISD and the partners at the RRC will continue to
evaluate the various systems being created in other
counties to assess the options available. The
Administration will return to the Board of Supervisors
in early FY 2016 requesting AB 109 appropriations.
Reentry Housing
In FY 2014 the Board of Supervisors approved
$4 million in one-time AB 109 funds to develop a
housing plan that includes one-time emergency
assistance and rental subsidies or housing funds for
permanent supportive and/or long-term
transitional housing with supportive services.
These supportive services include intensive case
management and much needed treatment
programming. Based on initial housing data,
individuals who received some level of housing
support were able to focus on seeking employment,
accessing treatment services and meeting their
community supervision conditions. In FY 2016, the
Office of Reentry Services will continue to
implement the housing plan with the existing fund
balance and work with reentry stakeholders to
develop strategies for permanent supportive
housing and identify new housing slots. The
Administration will return to the Board of
Supervisors in late FY 2016 requesting AB 109
appropriations. Assessment Appeals
A current challenge for the Department is to investigate
and determine the best strategy moving forward with
the Assessment Appeals Automation Project. The
project began in 2010, but has not yet been completed.
After a series of delays and problems, the vendor
selected to develop both the Assessor's new property
assessment automation system and the Clerk of the
Board's module for management of assessment appeals
opted to terminate its contracts with the County,
leaving both the Assessor and Clerk of the Board
projects on hold pending determination of appropriate
options and course of action. Since the Clerk of the
Board's small appeal system is overlapping and linked
with the Assessor's larger property assessment system,
until a determination regarding a course of action for
the system is made, no decision on strategy for
automating the appeals process will be made. At the
beginning of 2015, both the Clerk of the Board and the
Assessor learned and explored a potential vendor who
would be able to support both departments with an
automated appeals system. The Clerk of the Board and
Assessor consulted with Information Services
Department and the Procurement Department to
determine the best strategies moving forward. One
vendor currently has a California-compliant appeals
system, and it is possible that both departments will
assess and evaluate the system to ensure that will
support both departments. Learning Organization
Building upon the County Executive's introduction of
Just Culture to the organization in FY 2014, the Office, in
collaboration with the Learning and Employee
Development Division, implemented a number of
offerings to bring the concepts of Just Culture to more
employees in FY 2015. Just Culture is intended to
complement the County's Mission, Core Values, and
Vision Elements, along with departmental strategic
plans, to sustain an environment where staff at all levels
of the organization feel comfortable disclosing errors
and finding ways to prevent them from occurring again.
The elements of Just Culture involve the interactions
between Systems & Procedures, Leadership Behavior,
and Individual Behavior.
In alignment with these intersecting pieces of Just
Culture, the offerings launched in FY 2015 include a
train-the-trainer component, a course targeted for
Executives, Managers, and Supervisors, and courses
focused on systems and procedures. In addition, there
are a number of both instructor-led and web-based
trainings that go into greater depth on many of the core
components of Just Culture, including accountability,
trust, and enhancing communication. Executive
Leaders are expected to identify ways to continue to
embed and sustain these concepts in their operations as
part of their FY 2016 performance plans.
Homelessness
The Office of the County Executive is playing a critical
leadership role in developing regional solutions to deal
with housing and homelessness issues within Santa
Clara County. From a policy perspective, the Office has
supported the Board of Supervisors in establishing the
County's role in affordable housing. In December 2014,
the Board of Supervisors established that housing
special needs populations is a County service and
therefore the County must take an active role in
developing, financing and supporting various types of
affordable housing for the populations that we serve.
The County's priorities are to increase the supply of
housing that is affordable to extremely low income
populations, increase the scope and breadth of
supportive housing for special needs populations, and
to improve coordination and collaboration among the
County, the cities, other governmental agencies and the

affordable housing community. To support these
priorities, the Office maintains its participation with the
Destination: Home Leadership Board and the local
Continuum of Care and the Office of Supportive
Housing. In FY 2015, the Office also took steps to
improve regional cooperation in the development of
affordable and supportive housing. The Office
established a Supportive Housing Partnership with the
Housing Authority of the County of Santa Clara and the
Housing Trust of Silicon Valley. The Office will continue
expanding this partnership through the inclusion of
cities and government agencies. Over time, the
partnership may form the foundation for a joint powers
authority dedicated to addressing affordable housing
issues.
Unaccompanied Immigrant Children
The Board of Supervisors has recognized the
humanitarian crisis currently on our nation's border.
The Board directed administration to partner with local
non-profits to provide legal services and housing for this
vulnerable population. To that end the Office has
implemented programs through the Law Foundation of
Silicon Valley, Catholic Charities, and the Bill Wilson
Center. The purpose of the programs are to assist in
addressing the local needs of the Central American
women and children who have crossed the United
States border into the United States beginning in 2014.
This surge of children has resulted in an increasingly
overburdened immigration court system with children
of all ages appearing in the immigration courts with no
legal representation.
Disaster Preparedness Executive Committee
The Disaster Preparedness Executive Committee was
created to improve communication and coordination
amongst all County departments to better establish
priorities and address gaps in our emergency
preparedness and emergency management planning
efforts. Planning for response to, and recovery from, a
natural disaster or other emergency has long required a
collaborative effort involving all County Departments to
ensure that essential services and critical infrastructure
vital to the entire Operational Area are systematically
discussed and considered at all levels. Recently reinvigorated,
initial topics will include designated
staffing levels in the Emergency Operations Center
(EOC) for multiple operational periods, minimum
training standards and an assessment of current
Departmental Emergency Operations Plans that
support the response and recovery efforts during
disasters and emergencies. Better integration of the
various Departmental Operations Centers to effectively
communicate and coordinate with the EOC during
activations outside of the day to day operational needs.
Efforts are also underway to better integrate support of
the various Departments to help insure that we jointly
conduct training and exercises to ensure key leaders
and staff know each other and have developed a shared
basis of knowledge before it was put to the test in a
major emergency.
Immigrant Relations
Santa Clara County has a large immigrant population
and the County has found it necessary to take an active
role in the development and implementation of
immigration policy as a result of the President's
Executive Orders on immigration. In response to this
need, the County Executive has established a new Office
of Immigrant Relations. The mission of the Office is to:
¦ Provide ongoing analysis of local impacts and effective
planning in response to legislative actions and
Executive Orders reforming the immigration
process;
¦ Promote effective coordination of services to facilitate
full integration of immigrants and immigrant
communities;
¦ Identification, application and promotion of best
practices leading to effective local immigrant integration;
¦ Advise the County administration and Board of
Supervisors regarding policy matters impacting the
needs and contributions of local immigrants; and
¦ Ongoing research and analysis of emerging and
established immigrant community needs and
contributions.
Asset and Economic Development
During FY 2016 Asset and Economic Development
(AED) Office will continue its efforts to support
business, workforce development, and conduct
strategic planning and development of County assets.
The Office supports the Board in its efforts to create
policy and programs that support a prosperous regional
economy and augment basic revenues to support the
County's delivery of essential services.
Over the last six years AED has closed transactions
gross valued at $92 million. Over the term of the various
leases, this represents $27.2 million in lease revenue, in
84
Section 1: Finance and Government County of Santa Clara
Office of the County Executive FY 2016 Recommended Budget
nominal dollars, and $39.2 million of one-time revenues.
This includes FY 2015 activity which alone, represents
transactions generating:
¦ $10,446,000 of one time funding for capital improvement
projects through sale of the Rosanna Street,
Gilroy, Social Services facility and sale of the vacant
former Los Gatos Clinic property, and
¦ Lease to Acadia Behavioral Health of the longtime
vacant former Starlight, 80 bed acute psychiatric
hospital which represents $20,884,500 of nominal
lease revenue over the first 20 year term.
As a result of recent AED leasing activity, the County
now receives a total of approximately $3,648,000 each
year, the bulk of which will continue, with market rate
adjustments, through at least 2060 if tenants fully
exercise their options for lease renewal. In FY 2016, AED
will seek tenants for the Elmwood auto dealership
vacant parcel located in Milpitas,
In the area of business development, the Office led a
cooperative effort with the City of Morgan Hill and the
City of Gilroy that resulted in creation of a 29-mile Santa
Clara Wine Trail in South County, in support of Agribusiness
and the wine industry. This effort will continue
in FY 2016 with the Santa Cruz Mountains
Winegrowers Association and cities located in North
County.
In FY 2016 the County will continue the third year of
providing critical matching funds to its partner, the
Enterprise Foundation/Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce of Silicon Valley, to operate the twin
programs of the Hispanic Satellite and the Silicon Valley
Small Business Development Programs, the only twin
program model existing in northern California. In Fiscal
Year 2014 these programs led to the creation or
retention of 427 jobs, an increase of $14.2 million in
business sales, and the infusion of $11.7 million of new
business investment. The County's return on
investment can be measured as an expenditure of $527
per job, which exceeds the Small Business
Administration's standard and represents one of the
most fiscally effective federal job creation programs.
The Office of Asset and Economic Development in the
Office of the County Executive and the Facilities and
Fleet Department are also collaborating to tackle
strategic asset planning regarding two major facility
master planning and reuse efforts involving the County
Civic Center and the County Fairgrounds:
County Civic Center Master Planning and
Development
With the County's acquisition of the former San Jose
City Hall site and the no-cost Public Benefit Conveyance
of the former Private George L. Richey U. S. Army
Reserve site from the Federal Department of Defense,
the County has begun a master planning process to reevaluate
the Civic Center Campus and its relationship
to the communities it serves.
The Civic Center encompasses 55 acres and includes
County operations, administration, judicial and
correctional uses. Over half the building stock is more
than 40 years old, and many of those buildings are in
need of significant upgrades. Despite some of the Civic
Center site's constraints, the size of the site and its
proximity to downtown San Jose, shopping, and access
to transit provides a good opportunity for the County to
create a sustainable, mixed-use, transit-oriented
development that will reshape the function and feel of
the Civic Center as well as benefit the surrounding
neighborhoods.
During FY 2016 the County will, with the support of
Lowe Enterprises and its partner, M. Arthur Gensler Jr.
& Associates, Inc. Architects, complete an assessment
of the County's space needs founded on principals of
improving efficiency and reducing the cost of delivering
County services. During this period, the County will also
be exclusively negotiating potential terms of a master
development agreement with the Lowe Enterprises,
successful winner of the County's FY 2014 Civic Center
Developer Request for Qualifications process. FY 2016
should see Board discussion and selection of a preferred
conceptual plan for the Civic Center Campus.
Fairgrounds Master Planning
During FY 2016, the Administration and the Board will
continue the process of master planning the future of
the County Fairgrounds. The County will evaluate
strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities that currently
exist at the Fairgrounds, as well as future development
potential. The Fairgrounds will be assessed against
current and best practices of fairgrounds management,
as well as promoting a discussion of benefits and
tradeoffs of alternative uses of its underutilized areas.
The process will continue the County's extensive
community and stakeholders engagement process. The
process continues to be oriented toward answering
many of the questions posed by Board members and the public about the best balance and timing of
community uses and income generation for the benefit
of all Santa Clara County residents.

State-County Assessor Partnership Program
(SCAPP Grant)
Governor Jerry Brown signed SCAPP into law last year.
The County Assessor worked closely with the California
Assessors’ Association and the California Department
of Finance. The Office was awarded $785,000 in annual
matching grant funds for a three-year pilot period.
The program will enable the department to eliminate
the backlog of new commercial and industrial
construction, property transfers, and assessment
appeals. Additionally, the grant will help the
department initiate a discovery program intended to
increase compliance by identifying businesses that fail
to file business property statements. And, the
department is working with the Procurement
Department on a Request for Proposals (RFP) to secure
a vendor to perform a flyover capturing detail aerial
photographic images of properties within Santa Clara
County. This visual information (orthographic
photography) will allow real property appraisers to
discover previously unreported and unpermitted
construction. Grant funds will also be used for nine new
positions, in addition to the purchase and development
of associated program services and software. The
department expect all three programs to be operational
by the beginning of FY 2016 which is critical for meeting
the performance objectives required by the grant.
Backlog
As of June 30, 2014, the backlog of incomplete
assessment activities stood at 3,253 – a 72.3% decrease
from 11,741 activities in FY 2012.
For the first time in six years, property sales and new
construction accounted for 54 percent of the 2014
increase in the assessment roll. The backlog of
commercial and industrial (C&I) new construction and
change in ownership comprised 622 units of the
department’s 3,253 incomplete activities as of June 30,
2014. C&I assessments require significantly more staff
resources than residential activities. Each C&I new
construction assessment requires an average of 24
hours to complete, adding an average of $2.8 million to
the assessment roll, compared to 5.3 hours for a new
residential property that adds just $155,000. Silicon
Valley’s robust economic growth from new construction
of major apartment complexes and massive high-tech
campuses including Apple, Google, and Linked In does
not show signs of slowing. The new state SCAPP grant
will also assist in completing the assessment of complex
commercial, industrial and multi-family projects. The
department has commenced a new discovery program
to identify and accurately assess unpermitted
construction activities, and businesses that fail to file
annual business property statements. Additional nonmandatory
audits and increased use of technology and
data-sharing with other municipal agencies will also aid
in improving assessment accuracy and compliance.
Strategic Planning & Process Improvement
In alignment with the County Executive’s strategic goals
including a Just Culture, the Assessor’s Office has
embarked upon a comprehensive, department-wide
strategic planning process improvement initiative
including the following:
¦ Completed several employee focus groups followed
by a comprehensive employee engagement survey to
assess staff morale and identify areas for improvement
(over 80% employee participation);
¦ Conducted comprehensive project management,
process improvement, and communication training
for managers and key staff;
¦ Performed process mapping for the entire department; Commenced process improvement efforts in each
division, by first identifying the pain points for stakeholders
throughout the organization;
¦ Conducted two town hall meetings discussing
process and communication issues identified in the
employee engagement survey;
¦ Amended the flex-time policy to enable greater
scheduling flexibility in response to concerns raised
in the employee engagement survey;
¦ Improved coordination with the Clerk of the Board
through regular monthly meetings designed to identify
areas of concern and opportunities for improvement;
¦ Increased coordination with the Tax Collector
including staff training sessions for both departments;
¦ Created a department-wide vision statement
including comprehensive strategic goals and initiatives.
The Assessor’s Office is committed to continuing these
efforts in FY 2016.
AIMS Replacement Project/Stromasys
In November of 2012, Harris-True Automation, the
vendor developing the new computer system to replace
the antiquated AIMS legacy system, terminated its $6
million contract without cause. The Department
negotiated the full return of the $2.25 million already
paid to Harris-True Automation.
In May 2013, the Assessor’s Office retained the Gartner
Group to conduct an independent risk assessment of
options for the replacement project. Gartner
recommended an interim solution: Re-hosting AIMS
onto a modern platform, thus mitigating the failure and
data security risks of having the entire assessment roll
system on an antiquated, unsupported platform. The
Department is currently in the process of retaining
Stromasys to re-host their existing system onto a
modern, Windows-based platform. The Department
has conducted two department-wide stress tests, and
anticipate re-hosting the entire system by the end of
calendar 2015. Upon completion, the Department will
have a stable environment for day-to-day business
functions, enabling them to begin its Surround and
Evaporate strategy for FY 2016. However, re-hosting
does not eliminate the Department’s need to develop an
entirely new modern system in the future.
Policy Changes
As a member of the California Assessors' Association
(CAA) Executive and Legislative committees, the
Department’s executive team spends considerable time
advocating for legislation that will benefit the office and
public agencies that depend on property tax revenue,
and opposing changes in statutes and rules that are
contrary to the principles of fair and equitable property
tax administration.
Current policy issues are summarized below:
¦ Commercial Aircraft - Maintaining the Centralized
Lead County Program: The current process for
assessing and valuing commercial aircraft was codified
by an agreement between assessors and the
airline industry in 2005. The agreement has been
essential in maintaining a uniform valuation and
audit process of commercial aircraft. It provided a
valuation methodology that recognized the serious
financial hit the airline industry experienced
following the terror attacks in 2001. The agreement
includes a centralized audit process designed to
reduce the cost of compliance by both airlines and
assessors.
? The CAA is recommending the extension of the
code sections and modifying current language in
order to attain a fair and equitable valuation
process for assessing commercial aircraft. The
airline industry is introducing legislation that
would transfer assessment of commercial
aircraft to the State Board of Equalization (BOE).
The airlines' objective is to reduce their property
taxes even greater than contained in the 2005
agreement. The CAA opposes this proposal
because it will lead to a reduction of fair and
equitable valuation of commercial aircraft. In
Santa Clara County there are 20 airlines in which
the assessed value was just under $329 million
last year.
¦ Certification of Assessor Staff who make Change in
Ownership and Exemption Decisions: The proposal
specifies that all staff who make change in ownership
and exemption decisions, other than for homeowners'
exemptions, must be certified by the BOE.
Current law requires appraisers and auditors to be 

certified, but does not require certification or
training for staff who make decisions regarding
property reappraisability.
? The decision as to what constitutes a reassessable
change in ownership or whether a property
is eligible for exemption has grown increasingly
complex. Since 1978, hundreds of court cases
have been filed, with attorneys and judges
arguing and interpreting codes, rules, handbooks,
court cases, and board letters. Certification
of staff will increase the overall quality and
reliability of change of ownership determinations.
Embedded Software
Embedded software continues to be at the forefront of
the California Assessors' Association's policy efforts. The
debate over property tax exclusions for certain types of
software embedded in sophisticated equipment and
machinery now threatens to cost California billions of
dollars in property tax revenue.
Current state law requires the assessment and taxation
of essential, basic operational software, but excludes the
taxation of application software. Unfortunately, the
statutes were enacted 40 years ago, and do not consider
the complexities of modern high-tech machinery and
equipment used by businesses where the line between
essential (operational) and non-essential (application)
software is often unclear. This is a growing multi-billiondollar
dispute.
The County Assessor currently serves as Chair of the
CAA Ad-hoc Committee on Embedded Software. The
CAA retained Dr. Marilyn Wolf, a leading expert on
embedded software at Georgia Tech University, to
publish a position white paper on whether it is possible
to separate and cost-account for application software
that is embedded in sophisticated high-tech machinery
and equipment. The CAA is hopeful that Dr. Wolf 's
analysis will assist assessors and taxpayers in clarifying
this controversial issue.
California assessors have experienced a 500% increase
in assessment appeals in which embedded software is a
critical issue in the dispute. The CAA anticipates
significant erosion of revenue far beyond the original
legislative intent. It is critical that this law be
modernized to clarify the original intent of the 40-yearold
statute. 

eProcurement Automation
Best practice in the procurement field is to provide
assistance to the business owner from identification of
need through implementation, or even termination, of
the contract. Despite efforts over the past decade to
adopt strategic sourcing principles and implement a
centralized/decentralized model to provide procurement
services, the County can only achieve so much
utilizing manual systems.
The primary opportunities for savings and efficiency are
in the areas of price reduction, spend compliance,
process improvement, and cash management. As an
example, the County aims to maximize its purchasing
power by aggregating purchase volume to establish
large Countywide contracts and negotiate greater price
discounts.
Though Departments are able to purchase off the
contracts without going through Procurement, most
procurement processes are manual, and the County is
challenged in utilizing two ERP (Enterprise Resource
Planning) systems that are not integrated. Departmental
staff are challenged in accessing the contracts
with negotiated pricing to buy the desired items, and
they utilize numerous “shadow systems” such as unique
spreadsheets to manage their respective contractingrelated
activities.
Determining the latest pricing for the desired goods is
critical to the Department’s ability to take advantage of
negotiated contracts and related cost savings. To
improve staff ’s ability to order goods with confidence
and also to do so efficiently is only one of the reasons
that the need for automation of the procurement functions
has become a high priority.
Based on the experience with jurisdictions that have
implemented a procure-to-pay solution, anticipated
outcomes of such automation are expected to include
the following:
¦ Leveraged buying power, due to cooperative
contracts.
¦ Increased administrative efficiency through
reducing the costs of each purchasing transaction.
Manual processes that are part of the solicitation
process are reduced, speeding up processes and
using a standard format that reduces errors.
¦ Reduced cost of goods and services due to increased
supplier access to business opportunities.
¦ Increased competition due to an increase in number
of suppliers submitting bids.
¦ Faster delivery times.
¦ Reduction of duplicate systems used to maintain
contract-related data.
¦ Enhanced reporting capabilities, including spend
analytics and improved contract management.
Management of the Delegated Authority for Small
Dollar Purchases and Minor Construction
Within the authority granted to the Director of Procurement
by the Board of Supervisors and State law, the
Director of Procurement has delegated authority to
agencies and departments to procure small dollar
goods and services via the Procurement Card Program
and Field Purchase Order methods for goods and
services that are not on contract. Although this delegation
provides a means for departments to purchase
goods efficiently for their operations, a recent audit
found a need for training staff Countywide on the use of
competitive purchasing methods and documentation of
purchases. The Procurement Department must focus
its attention in this area and will be working closely with
County Counsel and the Controller’s Office to revise
existing policies and procedures and to ensure program
compliance by agencies and departments.
Additionally, the audit identified a need for data mining
of Field Purchase Orders to identify contracting opportunities
for cost savings and improved efficiencies,
which would be facilitated by the eProcurement automation.
Therefore, the eProcurement automation is
crucial to address current issues of compliance and
operational efficiencies in small dollar purchases.
The Minor Construction authority was delegated to the
Director of Facilities and Fleet in October 2010.
Pursuant to Board Policy, the Director of Procurement
retains authority and is ultimately accountable to the
Board for purchases made under this delegation. Ther

fore, it is prudent for the Procurement Department to
audit the delegated function to ensure compliance and
operational efficiencies via this delegation.
Contracting Support to County Departments
The County’s contracting structure could be characterized
as a hybrid model, with the centralized
Procurement Department handling procurement and
contracting activities for goods and services, while
agencies and departments have the flexibility to
perform professional services contracting activities
independently. Both the Board of Supervisors and the
Purchasing Agent have authority to execute agreements
that meet certain dollar thresholds unless a specific
delegation has been provided to the department.
The Procurement Department has begun shifting
resources to assist agencies and departments who
conduct their own decentralized contracting activities
for professional services and other specialized
contracting activities. Training, consulting, help desk
support, and the development of tools and templates
for department staff who are engaged in such
contracting activities are a few examples of this shift.
This shift is in response to two identified issues:
¦ A significant portion of the County’s contracting
volume includes acquisitions that are handled by
staff whose primary functions in their respective
departments may be other than contracting.
Although training has been provided, the results
have not been optimal because of the complex
nature of procurement processes and the inconsistent
handling of the contracting function due to the
infrequent participation of these staff in contracting
activities.
¦ Early involvement by the Procurement Department
in large and/or complex solicitations has proven to
be an efficient and effective means of procuring the
goods and services desired by County Departments.
When Procurement is a late entrant to a complex
departmental request, meeting appropriate deadlines
and quality requirements is difficult. To
improve on this situation, the Procurement Department
is experimenting with project liaisons for solicitation
activities in County Departments.

Health and Hospital System
With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act in
January 2014, numerous issues related to the Health and
Hospital system continue to consume a significant
amount of staff time and resources. Matters include the
operation of the HealthLink system, Medicaid
expansion with the inclusion of all lower income
individuals under the Affordable Care Act, and other
challenges in a rapidly changing environment.
California Redevelopment Agency (RDA) Dissolution
The Office of the County Counsel provides legal advice
and support to the Finance Agency in carrying out legal
responsibilities associated with the dissolution of each
of the nine Redevelopment Agencies in Santa Clara
County. Additionally, the Office provides legal counsel
and representation on several related cases currently in
litigation, including appellate matters. The Office
anticipates that Redevelopment dissolution will
continue to require a substantial amount of attorney
and support-staff time for the foreseeable future to
ensure that the interests of local taxing entities,
including the County, are fairly addressed. The Board of
Supervisors has taken actions to authorize necessary
resources to vigorously pursue pending litigation.
California Public Records Act Requests
The County continues to experience a significant
number of public records requests under the California
Public Records Act (CPRA), California Government
Code sections 6250 – 6270. The CPRA requires that
copies of most County records must be provided to the
requestor promptly. In addition, the law requires public
agencies to assist members of the public “make a
focused and effective request that reasonably describes
an identifiable record or records.” Complex CPRA
requests have been made by legal counsel involving
current and potential litigation, bargaining units in
negotiations, political campaigns and advisors, media
outlets, vendors in competitive situations, as well as the
general public. A significant amount of attorney and
support-staff time and resources are devoted to
compiling and reviewing records and redacting information
that is not disclosable under a variety of CPRA
exceptions.
In FY 2014 a new Senior Paralegal position was
authorized and recently hired in February 2014 to assist
with CPRA requests. This work volume will be
monitored to ensure that the Office retains sufficient
capacity to address the workload.
Public Safety Realignment
Since the adoption of AB 109 and AB 117 in 2011, the
Office of the County Counsel has provided legal advice
and services regarding the implementation of changes
to the State’s criminal justice system resulting from
these laws. Primary clients include the Offices of the
County Executive, Sheriff, District Attorney, Public
Defender, Department of Correction, Probation
Department, and Social Services Agency.
Whistleblower Program
In April 2010, the County launched the 24/7
Whistleblower Program to provide the public and
County employees the ability to submit a confidential
report regarding suspected fraud, misuse or waste of
County resources or funds, or any perceived improper
activities by County officials, employees, and
contractors.
The Office of the County Counsel administers this
program and manages the receipt, acceptance,
investigation, documentation, and monitoring of
reported complaints. The Whistleblower Program
accepts reports 24 hours per day, 7 days a week, and 365
days per year. Many complaints are also investigated by
attorneys in the Office. If a complaint is sustained, the
Office may provide legal advice regarding actions
required to address issues identified in the investigation
of the complaint, including any changes that are designed to prevent a recurrence of the event. In
addition, the Office submits semiannual status reports
to the Board of Supervisors.
Since the inception of the program through February 26,
2015, the Whistleblower program had received 506
complaints. For the period of October 15, 2013 through
February 26, 2015, the County Counsel received 110 new
complaints. Administration of the Whistleblower
Program requires allocation of a substantial amount of
departmental resources to receive, process, and
respond to the complaints.
Impact Litigation And Social Justice
The Office of the County Counsel has been leading the
appellate team defending the $1.15 billion dollar
judgment awarded by the trial court in December 2013
against three lead paint manufacturers. Substantial staff
time and resources have been devoted to the appellate
briefing - which should be completed by April 2015 and
the Office anticipates that oral argument will be
scheduled later this year. The Office has also been
working closely with the Administration and various
County departments to implement its groundbreaking
Pay for Success programs. Considerable staff time will
continue to be devoted to those programs which should
be launched in FY 2016. 


New Language Mandates
In December 2013, the Secretary of State's Office (SOS)
issued new targeted precincts for the Registrar of Voters
(ROV) to provide translated ballots and language
assistance at the polls as required by state law. These
new targets substantially increased the number of
precincts covered under the four federally-mandated
languages of Chinese, Spanish, Tagalog, and
Vietnamese. It also added precincts for coverage in
Hindi, Japanese, Khmer, and Korean. These new
mandates significantly increased costs for translating
and proofreading ballot materials as well as recruiting
bilingual poll workers. Further, in 2014 ROV increased
outreach and advertising in the community, hired
additional bilingual extra help, translated polling place
signage and materials and staffed polling locations at
higher levels to meet these new mandates.
Vote by Mail and Early Voting
The Vote by Mail (VBM) program continues to expand
as ROV strives to offer more convenient and accessible
options for voters to cast their ballots. In 2012, weekend
drive-thru ballot drop-off sites were established at
shopping centers, parks, and other convenient locations
within voters' communities, while ballot drop-boxes
were also placed on college campuses, making it easier
for the next generation of voters to participate in the
democratic process. In 2013, ROV conducted a pilot
project for a satellite Early Voting Center at the
Sunnyvale Public Library, which utilized ballot-ondemand
technology. This program was expanded in
2014 with Early Voting Centers at four Santa Clara
County and one City of San Jose Library locations, one
in each Supervisorial District. Larger than normal vote
by mail voters dropping off ballots on election day have
greatly contributed to delayed processing and tallies on
election night. Additionally, with the passage of SB29
last year, VBM voters will now have up to 3 days
following the election for their ballots to be received if
postmarked on or before election day.
Same-Day Voter Registration
State law provides for conditional voter registration
(CVR), commonly known as same-day registration, to
take effect after the Secretary of State certifies that the
VoteCal statewide voter registration database is online.
The current project timelines for VoteCal have
deployment and training scheduled in 2015/2016,
county elections officials and their vendors have already
begun preparing for CVR. ROV staff is staying closely
involved with these statewide discussions and serving
on state association committees, as these decisions will
have an impact on ROV operations. CVR will lead to an
increase in the number of provisional ballots cast, which
will in turn impact the post-election canvass. This likely
will result in increased staffing and technological
process innovations in order to certify election results
within the statutory 30-day period.
Voting System
Santa Clara County's voting system, purchased in 2003,
is now over ten years old and is approaching its end of
life cycle. The system is only minimally supported by the
vendor, who is no longer pursuing State certification for
updates and new builds. In fact, the vendor has received
certification for the first new system in California in
years. The central count design, in which all ballots cast
at the polls must be tallied in the Registrar's office,
contributes on an ongoing basis to later results
reporting on election night compared to counties with
precinct count systems. The County is in the planning
stages of releasing an RFP for the acquisition of a new
system.
Public Communications, Legislative Affairs and
Outreach
Communication and outreach has become a challenge
as county residents turn to digital media sites for
information and news. With shifting expectations and
new technologies, the Office has focused on increased
visibility, consistency of message and improved relations in order to enhance public communication
and more effectively utilize online and social media to
keep the public informed.
Just Culture/Process Improvement Program
In 2015, the Registrar of Voters (ROV) began a process
improvement program designed to empower
employees at all levels to find ways to improve the dayto-
day performance of their jobs.
Every division was asked to meet at least once per
month to discuss ideas for improving division
operations. Employees were asked to identify process
improvements that might make their jobs easier, allow
them to work faster, help them reduce errors, or
improve the service they provide to customers. This
monthly forum allowed employees to freely discuss
opportunities for improvement and/or acknowledge
previous errors or system inefficiencies.
From this list of ideas, each division was asked to
prioritize one or more items to become action items for
the next month. Action items were selected based on
available division staff and existing resources not
requiring major budget adjustments. Members of the
division then volunteered to take ownership of these
action items, working individually or in teams. Many
divisions chose to meet more frequently, opting for
weekly meetings instead of monthly, to help them make
faster progress on their action items.
Several divisions focused on improving the
documentation of their activities to make sure that all
employees, including the temporary extra help workers
recruited for elections, were following consistent
procedures to reduce errors and provide better
customer service. Other divisions identified specific
training that would help them perform their duties, as
well as opportunities for cross-training, so that staff
members could support each other during peak
workload times. One division identified training classes
that they could attend together, making the project as
much about teambuilding within the division as it was
about enhancing their skill sets to help with their dayto-
day activities. Other teams looked at ways to reimagine
their workflows. One team designed a
technological solution for volunteer check-in to help
streamline the training and management of the
thousands of volunteers who serve at the polls. Another
division re-designed the physical layout of their work
floor to help speed up processing and create space for
additional extra help workers when needed.
Division managers monitored the projects and tracked
their teams' progress and results. The ROV leadership
team recognized employees for their hard work and
creativity by spotlighting specific accomplishments at
Department-wide staff meetings, mentioning the
successful projects in the Registrar's monthly e-mail to
staff, and attending division staff meetings to directly
acknowledge the progress being made. Privacy and Information Security
In late 2013, County Administration began exploring
best practices regarding privacy and security. An
increasing number of laws and regulations require the
establishment of policies and procedures that govern
how personal information is managed with the
expectation that staff will be trained and educated
about these policies. In late 2014, the Board took steps
toward the establishment of a Countywide Privacy and
Security Program.
Santa Clara County has increased its web presence and
digitization of sensitive information through the
deployment of EPIC at the Valley Medical Center,
contract engagements with cloud service providers, and
expansion of use of web sites and social networking
sites. The demands from the public, other government
entities and business partners to have access to digital
information is increasing. Mobile device usage has
increased exponentially over the past 5 years as has
electronic data creation. ISD's ability to secure sensitive
data and maintain privacy is paramount.
At midyear, the Board approved additional resources to
help implement a comprehensive information security
program. These resources will work to develop protocols
for incorporating necessary information security
standards into the business requirements for implementation
of various complex information systems and
advanced equipment that utilize new technologies to
store and access information. While the need to provide
information and access to the public and business partners
continues to increase, the County's responsibility to
protect and manage personally identifiable information
also increases.
Risk Associated with Single Points of Failure
The retirements and transitions of many experienced IT
Managers has revealed an urgent need for continuity
planning. Without a coordinated effort to implement
County standards and commonly accepted best
practices, provide backup support through cross
training, and ensure departmental applications keeps
pace with County and industry technology demands,
the ability of individual departments to meet their
primary business objectives is at risk. The historical
practice of a single IT Expert is outdated and risky, as:
¦ Growth in technology usage for everyday business
functions means the workload is typically too great
for a single position
¦ Technology disciplines have grown in number and
complexity. The notion of an IT Generalist has been
replaced by specialists with specific areas of expertise
such as software developers, IT project
managers, Enterprise contracting and software
licensing specialists, systems administrators, etc.
¦ Use of shared resources gives individual departments
access to expertise they would not be able to
justify on a full time basis
Onsite Application and Business Process Support
Services: The Information Services Department is
planning to implement a site-based service delivery
model that will provide departments with:
¦ Increased coordination, communication and access
to resources and talent
¦ More flexibility to meet immediate needs
¦ A broader knowledge base to solve problems and
provide backup support
Service Management Model
The Customer Service Division (CSD) of ISD has been
heavily involved in the IT Transformation Initiative
currently underway in Santa Clara County. In 2014, the
number of contacts handled by the CSD Service Desk
grew by 19%, while at the same time CSD was
challenged to provide manpower and expertise to many
departments during the Office 365 implementation
project. To meet this challenge, CSD has replaced the
siloed support model of the past (where separate groups
did similar work using different methods) with a flexible
IT support staffing model which utilizes a unified team
to adjust quickly to demand shifts. This approach builds
bench strength through cross training and improves
productivity by tapping latent talent. This team has
increased first contact resolution to 65% of calls.
IT Asset Management
IT Asset Management (ITAM) continues to be a high
priority. Since software vendors now routinely conduct
compliance audits, the County must be able to respond
proactively with accurate inventories and internal compliance measures to reduce financial risk. Hardware
lifecycle management is also critical as County citizens
and employees depend increasingly on technology to
perform everyday tasks and business functions. Better
long-range financial planning will help to ensure
funding is in place when equipment reaches
obsolescence. In FY 2015, four positions were added to
begin implementation of formal IT Asset Management
processes. Several staff members attended ITAM
training in September 2014 and a consulting
engagement will soon begin to help staff develop an IT
Asset Management roadmap.
Public Safety and Justice
Legacy Technology Modernization and Replacement: The
Adult and Juvenile Criminal systems are the last two
critical applications running on the mainframe
environment at ISD. The IT staff providing support for
these systems, much like the hardware they maintain,
are retiring and replacements who are skilled in
preserving this specialized technology are increasingly
difficult to find. Meanwhile, the Superior Court has
completed their Request for Proposals to replace six of
their systems, with the Criminal Administration
(currently hosted on the ISD mainframe) being one of
the six. Coordination efforts are critical to prevent any
negative impacts to the regional Law and Justice
Business processes with the changes and
implementations of new systems.
The CIO and ISD are working with the County Executive's
Office, Law and Justice Agency Heads and the
Court to collaborate on the implementation of systems,
and to replace the County's legacy CJIC system while
maintaining or enhancing existing levels of interdepartmental
process integration. In addition, this
team is working to improve technology that supports
business operations in County criminal justice agencies,
provide better access to existing information, and
continue to develop technology to meet new business
needs. This effort is critical and has been discussed with
Executive Steering committees as part of the ongoing
Public Safety and Justice Systems Program efforts.
Funding was committed for FY2015 and is recommended
to resource the second year of this effort, to
procure and begin to implement new information
systems and develop a new architecture for crossagency
information sharing and collaboration. These
efforts have the potential to significantly streamline
operations in many of the County justice agencies.
Public Safety Realignment: Data solutions are critical to
the efficiency and effectiveness of the County's Public
Safety Realignment (AB109) and Re-Entry services. Key
are the needs to improve access to information
consolidating and sharing data across all safety net
agencies, including Criminal Justice, Health, Human
Services and partner organization in the community.
The success of re-entry programs depends upon the
ability to measure and track outcomes across the
spectrum of service for realignment individuals and
other clients, and finally, to improve technology to
enhance analysis and presentation of data in different
formats and contexts to better support operational
decision-making. ISD is working closely with the Office
of Re-Entry Services and the Realignment Leadership
Group to provide technical solutions to support these
emerging needs.
Emergency Management Technology: There is a need to
implement new technology that streamlines emergency
management business processes, provides better access
to emergency event information, and offers multiple
channels to communicate timely and accurate
emergency information to both first responders and the
public. ISD supports several County and regional
initiatives to improve information sharing between first
responder agencies and enhance the technology
available to support Emergency Operations in the event
of a major disaster. These efforts are critical to ensure
public and private organizations and individuals are
informed and prepared to respond to emergency events.
Technology Business Management
Managing the business of technology is of increasing
importance as the financial commitment grows in
proportion to other operational expenses. Work
continues to provide transparency to the cost of IT in
the County. ISD is currently involved in an RFP process
to procure a software tool that will automate many of
the complex data collection, cost allocation and Order
to Cash processes; and provide insight to consumers of
technology to allow for better planning and more
informed decision making. Operational data will also be
more accessible allowing IT managers to track key
metrics and identify problem areas in order to improve
efficiency and quality of service delivery.
IT Career Compass
To ensure the County has the best IT resources, efforts
are underway to refresh Job Series and Job
Classifications to align better with industry standards with appropriate compensation. As part of this effort
areas pertaining recruitment, retention and recognition
will be examined and recommendations to improve or
enhance them will be made. In addition, training and
mentoring plans and options will be developed. The
goal is to establish clear definitions of job
duties/responsibilities, performance requirements,
career paths, and training options to help performance
on the job and to prepare for upward mobility. Central
IT Services will be determined and reflected in a refined
IT organization to best provide IT as a Service that is
customer-focused, operationally exceptional, and
innovative.
Data Research, Analytics, Evaluation, and
Reporting
Enterprise Data Oversight, Monitoring and Evaluation
Strategy and Program: As County data management
and analysis moves from siloed data sets to an
integrated environment where data sharing between
departments is essential to enable decision making, the
development of an Enterprise Data Integration Program
becomes a more critical need. Such a program would
provide oversight, management, and assistance with
prioritization and resourcing of data integration efforts,
recommendations on policies, privacy and security
compliance, and standardization of methodologies and
technology tools to:
¦ Enable, facilitate, or expedite interdepartmental and
Countywide program evaluation by addressing
barriers to data sharing.
¦ Enable or improve provision of interdepartmental
services to County residents by facilitating secure,
legally-compliant sharing of data from within and
outside the County.
¦ Increase awareness of and access management to
existing data sets and reports.
¦ Explore the emerging role of Chief Data/Digital
Officer position being established in industry to
manage this large, complex and valuable service.
There are FY 2016 funding recommendations within the
CEO's office regarding this emerging area, to establish
an overall Program Director and one Analyst. They will
lay the foundation for the Enterprise Data Oversight,
Monitoring, and Evaluation Program which is essential
to manage better the growing number of data
integration projects throughout the County. A
collaborative effort is underway to provide a strategy to
be reviewed by the County Executive, Board of
Supervisors and other key stakeholders.
Learning Organization - sccLearn: The County's
Learning Management System
The genesis of sccLearn began in a cross-boundary CLT
team in 2010. sccLearn was rolled out in March of 2012,
and capacity of the system has been building since that
time. Management of the sccLearn application is a joint
effort of ISD and ESA's Learning & Employee
Development (LED) division.
Significant accomplishments in FY 2015 include
implementation of 200-plus online training courses;
delivery of Healthcare Reform and Office 365 training
via online and instructor-led courses; and the
elimination of several manual and similar systems for 14
departmental training providers.
The CIO's office recently partnered with LED to offer
County staff-tailored courses and workshops designed
to maximize the power of newly introduced IT tools, as
well as Microsoft Office training. Additional information
is available in the ESA section of this document. Emergency call handling workload is expected to
increase significantly, not only because of the
continuing increased use of cellular telephones and
other wireless devices to report emergencies, but also as
a result of technological advances that will greatly
expand 9-1-1 system access for the public. The next
generation of 9-1-1 (NG 9-1-1) systems/services will
make it possible to report emergencies via Internet,
telematics (On-Star), text messaging, email, video, and
photo feeds. It is likely that dispatchers will receive
multiple reports from various sources for each incident,
and will need to quickly review, assess and extract the
pertinent information needed to dispatch the
appropriate emergency responders.
The increased demands on dispatching that are
expected with NG 9-1-1 system implementation will
continue the trend in public safety dispatching over the
past 15 years, with the need for processing more
information from various sources, for different kinds of
emergencies, and involving even more complicated
protocols.
New multi-media information will include face-to-face
communication and possibly the viewing of real time
images of crimes, fires and medical emergencies while
in progress. The emotional impact of viewing these
images will require new and enhanced training to
mitigate their potential adverse effect.
It is anticipated that restructuring of the emergency
medical dispatching (EMD) program as a result of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act also will
have a workload impact by increasing the time and
assessment knowledge needed to determine the
appropriate level of medical emergency response. Just Culture
The Facilities and Fleet Department's Just Culture
efforts began in November 2014 with the Just Culture
Executive, Manager, and Supervisor training session.
FAF has assigned a team of two employees to conduct
the necessary training sessions across the various
locations and divisions. The Individual Behavior
trainings will be conducted over 11 sessions through the
end of spring 2015. Although it is not mandatory to
attend, all employees are strongly encouraged to attend,
and the training sessions have been conveniently
scheduled immediately following mandatory staff safety
training.
In response to the Countywide survey and specific
feedback for FAF, the Department Director and
managers are actively engaging staff in open
communication efforts. By meeting with each trade to
seek out areas of improvement, staff 's ideas have been
incorporated into the budget recommendations for the
upcoming fiscal year.
While many efforts are underway to incorporate
elements of Just Culture, FAF has a specific focus on
communication between management and the
workforce. As a Department, staff represents roughly 65
percent of our operating budget. This highly skilled and
dedicated workforce provides service in the field every
day, and thereby provides the greatest opportunity to
suggest improvements that lead to increased safety and
enhanced levels of service at the lowest cost.
Facilities Planning
The Division of Asset and Economic Development in
the Office of the County Executive and the Facilities and
Fleet Department are collaborating to tackle two major
facility master planning and reuse efforts involving the
County Civic Center and the County Fairgrounds. This
is discussed in more detail in the Office of the County
Executive's section of the Recommended Budget. Other
efforts include:
¦ Future Master Planning: The County will need to
dedicate resources for strategic long-range comprehensive
planning for departments' facilities instead
of reacting to unplanned needs. These resources
would work on an ongoing basis with the Office of
the County Executive to match departments' needs
to the County’s real estate holdings and work space,
and to maximize the development or use of the
County's portfolio of property.
¦ Jail Needs: FAF is working with the County Executive's
Office, the Office of the Sheriff, the Department
of Correction, and Custody Health on the completed
comprehensive jail facility needs assessment. The
results of this study are being used to develop a proposal for State funding that could provide a
substantial portion of the funding necessary for
facility improvements. Recommendations from this
study are being incorporated into the Five-Year
Capital Improvement Plan.
Utilities and Energy Management
¦ Water: Water companies are increasing water rates
to encourage conservation, as well as to cover maintenance
costs. FAF is expecting an 11 percent
increase in water costs next fiscal year, a trend likely
to continue. It will be important to resource water
conservation projects to control costs and minimize
water usage.
¦ Electricity: PG&E is expected to continue to add
tariffs to the utility rates to fund their infrastructure
modernization projects. FAF is expecting a 10
percent increase in the cost of electricity next fiscal
year based on past tariffs and future forecasted
changes in this sector. Thus, it continues to be
important to resource energy conservation, maintenance,
and renewable energy generation projects.
¦ Renewable Energy: FAF has been in the process of
pursuing 11.5 megawatts of renewable solar power
that will directly feed the grid and result in credits for
the cost of electricity to operate County facilities.
Community outreach and consideration for environmental
impact studies are underway. The estimated
cost savings to the County is estimated to be approximately
$35 million over 25 years.
Real Estate
¦ Leased Property: It continues to be increasingly difficult
to find commercial properties to lease within
areas where there are concentrations of the public
seeking County services. Thus, lease costs will likely
continue to increase for County departments,
particularly in the north County area as long as the
Silicon Valley has economic success.
¦ Supportive Housing: FAF continues to work with the
County Executive’s Office, the Director of Homeless
Systems, and the Office of Asset and Economic
Development to address the goal to implement
affordable housing solutions. In the meantime, the
County is experiencing increased levels of homeless
encampments at vacant and occupied Countyowned
property.
Facilities Maintenance & Repair
¦ Maintenance Program: The average County building
is nearly 40 years old and the estimated backlog
roughly $600 million. The Board's policy for investing
in the maintenance and repair of its own infrastructure
is 2 percent of the current replacement value of
the facilities. For the past 10 years, the County has
been investing in the maintenance of its facilities at
a rate of slightly above 1 percent. As part of the
FY 2016 Recommended Budget, the County is taking
steps to begin to address both deferred maintenance
and ongoing maintenance needs by increasing the
budget for backlog projects, increasing expenditures
to maintain fire-life safety systems, and allocating
two percent of the value of new facilities coming on
line in FY 2016 to support the added maintenance
and repair requirements. The FY 2016 new positions
will manage projects that provide for new construction,
renovations, and energy efficiency and conservation
projects. These projects provide for new and
modern building systems and energy/resource efficient
workspace for County employees and visitors
to County facilities.
¦ Workforce: With the improvement in the local
economy, engineers, architects, building trades, and
qualified managers are more difficult to recruit and
retain. In addition, building trades in general are
attracting fewer people into those careers because of
comparatively low wages in this area. Thus, FAF's
strategy is to try and hire enough qualified staff to
perform preventive maintenance, minor repairs, and
address facility casualties, while outsourcing major
repairs and sizeable unplanned work.
Construction
With the uptick in the economy, the cost of
construction is going up. Both wage increases and the
cost of materials are driving these changes. As a result,
County project budgets will be impacted.
2008 Measure A Program
In late FY 2012, FAF was assigned oversight and
construction management of the Measure A projects
including the Seismic Safety Program at the Santa Clara
Valley Medical Center (VMC) and the new Downtown
San Jose Health Center. While the new Downtown San
Jose Clinic is on track to be completed at the end of this
calendar year, the new Bed Building project has suffered
further delays and is now expected to be completed
sometime in late 2016. The Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) station will come
online this fiscal year and the Department continues to
incorporate CNG vehicle purchases into the annual
fleet vehicle purchase recommendation. In FY 2015,
FAF negotiated an agreement for the provision of
electric vehicle charging infrastructure. This provides
the County the means to more aggressively install
charging stations at County facilities. Thus, the annual
Fleet vehicle purchase recommendations will start
including more electric vehicles.
Emergency Preparedness
FAF is working to develop a debris management
contract to support the Operational Area in the event of
a catastrophic earthquake that could generate as much
as an estimated 55 million tons of debris. Digital Shift in Information Technology
The dramatic shift from print to digital formats has
changed collection development, purchasing,
ownership, and lending practices for public libraries.
Virtual library visits now equal in-person visits. Not only
does library staff need new technology skills but the
public needs new skills to stay competitive in the job
market and to navigate the surplus of information that
is now on the Internet. The County Library District has
added a variety of free technology training options for
the public and a suite of subscription services that are
available online 24/7. The County Library District
continues to be a trusted source of information.
Income Disparity
The Library District helps to close Silicon Valley’s
growing digital and income gaps by providing free
programming, early literacy learning for children, tutors,
homework help, and public access to computers. Free
services help kids learn to read, succeed in school, and
promote life-long learning for all ages regardless of
income. The number of visits to libraries is projected to
increase.
Education
Succeeding in today's complex world requires that
individuals develop and improve their higher critical
thinking and problem-solving skills. The Santa Clara
County Library District and other public libraries are
the only educational institutions that connect lifelong
learners, from birth to golden age, to the resources they
need to achieve their educational goals.
The Santa Clara County Library District remains
committed to improving educational outcomes for
lifelong learners by creating new engaging and
collaborative spaces, offering robust collections of
diverse materials, and utilizing new technology that
enhances learning in the 21st Century. Demand for recruitment and classification services
continues to increase. The Department of Human
Resources continues to provide classification and
recruitment activities to meet staffing requirements in
law enforcement agencies, Santa Clara Valley Health
and Hospital System and Social Services Agency as
demand for these services continues to increase. As
County departments continue to implement
efficiencies that result in organization changes, Human
Resources continues to receive classification study
requests to properly classify positions that absorb or are
assigned new duties.
Recruitment continues to be a high priority for Human
Resources as the anticipated number of retirements
continues to grow. Positions are being added in
response to State legislation and the needs of
department operations. The improvement in the local
economy and reduction in pension benefits present
additional challenge for the County in competing with the private sector for qualified candidates. It is
especially true in recruiting for highly qualified and
experienced professionals in healthcare disciplines
required by the Affordable Care Act, as the County shifts
to a more community-based health care system.
Additionally, recruitment has been challenging in the
Information System/Information Technology areas.
As part of its focus on continuous improvement,
Human Resources has been working with the Merit
System Rules Review Committee to review Merit
System rules to modify the rules as necessary to
improve the timeliness of recruitment and the quality of
hires in a transparent, open, fair and competitive
process. The Committee was established in September
2014 and consisted of representatives from unions,
County executives and administrative personnel. The
Committee has made several modification
recommendations to the Personnel Board.
Recommendations approved by the Personnel Board
will be presented to the Board of Supervisors in June
2015. Human Resources will continue to work with
unions to implement recommendations approved by
the Board of Supervisors.
Recruitment and Classification are currently addressing
the increased service demands. The Department will be
elevating recruitment efforts, determining the
competitive and appropriate compensation level
corresponding to specific classifications, reducing the
time line in updating job classifications to ensure that
the employment standards and tasks reflect job
functions. In addition, Recruitment and Classification
continue to streamline and automate processes with
replacement of obsolete computer equipment and
system applications as needed, to improve the
effectiveness of recruitment and classification services.
Labor Relations
Labor Relations is engaged in negotiating successor
agreements with all bargaining units including Service
Employee International Union (SEIU) Local 521, which
represents eight bargaining units of County employees.
The other bargaining units where contracts are due in
FY 2016 are Government Attorneys Association,
Building Trades Council, and Committee of Interns and
Residents. The negotiations with Valley Physicians
Group, whose contract expired in 2014, is ongoing.
Equal Opportunity
The Equal Opportunity Department will be
implementing a new case management system that will
incorporate prior case records from all three Equal
Opportunity Office locations into one centralized
database to maximize data integrity and minimize data
redundancy. Sustaining the centralization of all Equal
Opportunity and Reasonable Accommodation data will
aid in maintaining data that is as accurate and
consistent as possible and enhance data reliability.
To comply with Assembly Bill 2053, as of January 1, 2015,
Equal Opportunity Department must incorporate a
new "Anti-Bullying", or "Anti-Abusive Conduct"
component into its Sexual Harassment Prevention
training for Managers, Supervisors, and Leads. This
additional component will provide managers with the
definition of "Bullying" and "Abusive Conduct", include
instructions to managers on what to do if a problem is
discovered, provide guidance on how to prevent or
address this behavior, and outline supervisor
responsibilities regarding intervention and reporting.
Learning and Employee Development
In the next 18 months, Learning and Employee
Development will be implementing the following new
programs and services:
¦ The Education Reimbursement Program (ERP) will
have a new online and self-service system for
employees to submit claims. ERP is a program that
manages reimbursements for tuition, professional
development and licensure set by union agreements
¦ Coded and Extra Help employees will have access to
online books and videos, in addition to an expanded
collection of online courses
¦ The design of three new developmental programs
for leads, supervisors and managers
¦ Executive managers will have access to a qualified
list of executive coaches for professional development
¦ Continue the implementation of Just Culture, the
Countywide organizational change effort, in partnership
with the County Executive's Office
¦ A curriculum of online IT courses to be co-developed
by LED and ISD
¦ Continuing education credits for selected
instructor-led courses provided by LED Revision of Countywide New Employee Orientation
to include an online component for easier, quicker
access to needed information by new employees to
improve the County's on boarding process
¦ LED will begin providing webinar courses using the
O365 Lync webinar platform
Employee Benefits
Increasing employee benefit costs continue to put a
considerable strain on the County's budget. Employee
Benefits continues to work towards implementing cost
control measures to contain the rising cost of
healthcare for the County. Employee Benefits has
committed to periodically market the County's existing
medical plans to ensure that the plans remain
competitive and provide the best value for the County
and its employees. The County will also continue to
explore trends in the health insurance market to
recommend modifications to the current health
benefits provision when appropriate and develop
alternate health plan options.
The County is once again expanding its workforce to
the current level of approximately 17,500 due to the
recovery of the economy and realignment of new
responsibilities from the State. In addition, the
population of retirees continue to increase due to the
retirement of baby boomers. The average annual
number of retirements has been 500 for the last three
years. The growing population of active employees and
retirees contribute to the increase in processing
hundreds of manual transactions that can be tedious
and time consuming. Employee Benefits will continue
to research and work towards implementing necessary
benefit platform tools that will streamline the
enrollment process, simplify plan configuration, and
empower employees.
Employee Benefits Department is responsible for
implementing changes in the laws for the benefit plan
programs it administers. Recently introduced in 2014,
the California Healthy Families, Healthy Workplaces Act
will require sick leave to be provided to all employees
working 30 days per year effective July 1, 2015. In
addition, the Department will continue to implement
health care reform provisions under the Affordable Care
Act (ACA). Beginning January 1, 2015, employers may be
subject to penalty if they do not offer medical coverage
that provides minimum essential coverage, is affordable
and meets minimum value requirements. ESA will
analyze the effect the Healthy Families, Health
Workplaces Act, and the ACA mandate will have on the
County and its use of Extra Help employees and
dependent contractors.
Workers’ Compensation
The Workers' Compensation Department continues to
experience the positive impact of Senate Bill 863, which
was enacted January 1, 2013. The overall industry has
experienced a decline in medical costs and the
implementation of several key administrative
requirements are proving to expedite the medical
treatment for injured workers. The State Division of
Workers' Compensation continues to monitor the
impact and is hopeful for continued streamline of
benefit delivery to injured workers and reduced costs.
The Workers' Compensation Department targets
FY 2017 for implementing of a new claims system will
meet the needs of and can support both the Workers'
Compensation and Liability Property Claims operations
to reduce ongoing maintenance costs. In FY 2015, the
Information Systems Department, Procurement
Department and claims staff, will meet to begin
development of the system requirements and moving
forward with the Request for Proposal process.
Liability/Property Insurance
The County is seeing some stabilization of property
insurance rates over those from last year even though
catastrophic property losses continue to occur
nationally and internationally. This stabilization has
been supported by the County's participation in the
CSAC Excess Insurance Authority (EIA) and the group
purchase of the County's property insurance through
this joint powers authority.
Learning Organization
The Employee Services Agency continues to make
progress with two CLT projects: Human Resources
Focus and Center for Excellence in Employee
Development (CEED)/Learning Management System
(sccLearn).
The Human Resources Focus project’s goals are to
streamline recruiting processes, update job descriptions
that enhance the candidate pool, and customize elearning
modules to educate on complex human
resources processes. The focus has been on human
resources processes with the goal of a more accurate,
streamlined recruitment process. HR continues to
revise job descriptions that are being used in the recruitment of vacant positions to ensure that the
candidates possess the appropriate knowledge, skills,
abilities, and experience for the job. Additionally, efforts
have been made in training staff on the County’s human
resources processes, which many found to be highly
complex and difficult to navigate. LED has developed an
online course on the County’s hiring process. The
internal transfer/promotional process was reviewed
and redundancies were identified, leading to
streamlining of the approval process. By making
changes, the necessary hiring requisition arrives at
Human Resources in minutes, rather than days. HR also
has begun keeping track of recruitment cycle times and
to discuss how HR and departments can work together
to reduce the cycle time while maintaining or
improving the quality of the candidates.
The Center for Excellence in Employee Development
(CEED) and Learning Management System (sccLearn)
project’s goals are to create a learning center for the
County employees, consolidate tracking into a central
source, and make training for employees more
accessible. Recent accomplishments include:
¦ Implementation of course catalog and online registration
lifecycle process for CJIC-JRC training (Criminal
Justice Information Control and Juvenile
Records System) for County employees as well as
employees with external partner agencies in the
Public Safety and Justice Community in 2014
¦ Piloting of a Team Dashboard with the Parks and
Recreation Department in 2014
¦ Building customized, County-specific web-based
training courses with access through sccLearn.
Courses include Performance Appraisal Process for
Santa Clara County and Blood Borne Pathogens
¦ Launching Skillsoft’s Leadership Advantage (SLA) -
an online management development portal with
courses, videos, assessments, executive book
summaries, webinars, and facilitator material in
November 2014
¦ Implementation of compliance certification process
for Sexual Harassment Prevention Training for
Managers, Supervisors and Leads in February 2015.
¦ Completion of an RFP for a master contract list of
trainers, with an emphasis on courses which are in
sync with Learning Organization objectives and Just
Culture
ESA is in the process of implementing a course catalog
and online registration life cycle process for the Parks
and Recreation Department, and the Behavioral Health
Department, including employees of external partner
agencies; implementing an external user selfregistration
process; plans for adding more County
departmental course catalogs, registration and
compliance processes; and plans to implement
additional system features to increase business benefits
from existing cloud software offerings. The Agency will
continue to identify more opportunities to implement
sccLearn capabilities to achieve the vision elements for
employees and internal training providers.  The Controller-Treasurer Department protects County
financial resources and ensures adequate fiscal
accountability within the County government. As
mentioned in last year's Recommended Budget, the
Department has been facing challenges to keep up this
important mission with competing priorities and
increased mandates. It began the process of refocusing
efforts to strengthen the control environment, increase
control activities, and serve as leaders in transparency
and fiscal integrity.
Demonstrating this commitment, the Department and
a task force of fiscal staff from the Office of Budget and
Analysis, the Board of Supervisors' Management Audit
Division, and Health and Hospital Systems continued
efforts to improve the integration between the County's
SAP financial and budget system and the separate
financial systems used by the Valley Medical Center.
This task force developed a project work plan with the
goal of reconciling accounting differences between the
two systems and developing processes and procedures
to ensure that such differences are kept to a minimum
and resolved in a timely fashion. Great progress has
been made with major differences resolved and efforts
are ongoing to complete the remaining work plan items.
Moreover, the Department has conducted training
sessions and held quarterly County fiscal officer
meetings to discuss financial policies, procedures, and
internal controls. It also convened a special meeting of
fiscal officers to offer a sounding board and safe haven
for staff to report any financial improprieties. Such
training sessions, meetings with department fiscal staff,
and opportunities to give assistance to department
fiscal staff will continue in future years.
Rebuilding Department Staff
With the loss of key staff members to retirement and
promotions over the past year plus newly created
positions from last year’s budget, the Department finds
itself at a rebuilding stage. The upcoming fiscal year will
concentrate on training staff to allow them to be
competent performers in their roles with the
Department. This effort is evident in almost all units of
the Department, but in particular in the Debt, General
Accounting, Administrative, and Disbursement areas.
The Department needs to rebuild its core, its knowledge
base, and its relations with internal and external
contacts.
Transfer of Tax Roll Control Unit from the Office of
the Tax Collector
The Tax Roll Control Unit was moved from the Office of
the Tax Collector to the Controller-Treasurer
Department in Fiscal Year 2015. This Unit has
undergone a two-year effort to reduce a backlog of
45,000 tax roll petition changes to approximately 3,500
as of this date. For the upcoming fiscal year, the Unit will
concentrate on documenting policies and procedures
and consolidating staff to ensure a more cohesive
operation.
Areas of Major Work
The Department will complete a Request for Proposal
process for operational banking services for the County,
school districts, and special districts within the next
month. If a new operational bank is selected, it is
anticipated that extensive efforts will be needed to use
full services offered. Also, the Department is currently
involved in the implementation of a new procurement
to pay system for the County. This system will automate
the requisition, purchase order, receiving, and invoice
payment processes used by the County. However,
extensive work still needs to be done to configure, test,
and roll out the system to County departments.
Learning Organization
Over the past year, the Finance Agency (Agency) has
held open discussion on an individual, work group,
department, and Agency-wide basis to review the
outcomes of the organizational assessment and
determine where it is most needed to improve and
implement the County Executive’s vision of a Just
Culture. Based on the feedback received from
employees, the Agency has identified key areas
consisting of open communications, working together
as an Agency and not as four separate departments,
career growth opportunities within the Agency and the
County, and respect for one another. The Agency will be
hosting a career conference in partnership with the
Employee Services Agency and the Training for Office
Professionals Program in May 2015. This effort aligns
with the County’s vision and the development of an
engaged workforce. The Controller-Treasurer Department continues to
make progress with its Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) project related to the ePayable
Program. The goal is to improve services to County
vendors who wish to get paid with a pre-loaded debit
card instead of Electronic Funds Transfer/ACH or
County warrant. The project focuses on addressing
program effectiveness, cost savings, timely payments,
reducing the County’s exposure, and increasing rebate
revenues to the County. In FY 2015, the County has
realized revenue in excess of $450,000 and expects to
generate additional revenue in the future as more than
70 new vendors have been added in the last two
months. The initiative to stabilize and enhance the Tax
Collection and Apportionment System (TCAS) was
scheduled to be completed in December 2014. However,
this has been extended to September 2015 due to the
Steering Committee placing a lower priority for certain
items in the stabilization project than the new functions needed by the business as the high priority stabilization
functions have been delivered and only the less critical
functions remain.
Another key item the Steering Committee addressed is
the ongoing operational support, maintenance, and
enhancement of the TCAS system. The committee
looked at the following options:
¦ Build a County team to provide ongoing operational
support, maintenance, and enhancements
of the system
¦ Engage an outside vendor to provide ongoing
operational support, maintenance, and enhancements
of the system
¦ Employ a hybrid model where the ongoing operational
support, maintenance, and enhancements
of the system are jointly supported by a
County team and an outside vendor
The committee evaluated the above options and
determined that the County would proceed with option
two and engage a vendor to provide the ongoing
operational support, maintenance, and enhancements
of the system for the next two to three years. During this
time, the Steering Committee will evaluate the longterm
support model for TCAS and may move towards
option 1 or 3 based on where TCAS resides in the
systems roadmap for property tax functions. An
evaluation by Gartner Inc. was performed on the TCAS
platform and showed that the platform is very much in
line with best practices for mission-critical applications.
A formal write-up of the evaluation was presented to
the Finance and Government Operations Committee in
April 2015. In addition, the outlook for a viable vendorsupplied
California compliant system is years away at
best.
TCAS Improvements
The system stabilization and enhancement initiative
that was launched in late FY 2012 to focus on the
critical needs that were not addressed in the initial
deployment of the TCAS system is drawing to a close.
The completion date has been extended to September
2015 based on the prioritization of functions set by the
TCAS Steering Committee. As of January 2015, the
project has spent approximately $5.2 million of the $5.9
million allocated by the Board. During this time
significant improvements to TCAS have been made
including:
¦ Implemented Secured, Unsecured, and Supplemental
roll correction functionality
¦ Implemented name/address change functionality,
stub printing capability, and multiple abstract functionality
¦ Stabilized payment and credit processing and implemented
payment reversal functionality
¦ Developed accounting structures, enhanced
reporting for accounting and reconciliation, and
developed an apportionment engine
In addition, other key functions were delivered that
were in addition to the stabilization initiative.
¦ Electronic interfaces with the Assessor's Office for
transmission of Secured and Unsecured roll corrections
¦ New payment portal for tax payers to pay property
taxes online, including redemption bills
¦ Automation of credit refunds under certain circumstances
¦ Enrolling Possessory Interest on the Secured roll
instead of the Unsecured roll
Developing Today with an Eye to the Future
The Tax Collector's Office is exploring the cost-benefit
of migrating payment processing tasks to an external
lockbox service. Preliminary research shows that tax
collectors in other California counties of similar size
reported high satisfaction in outsourcing this service to
third party providers. If a migration is selected, the
Department will still need to support the current
Remittance Processing System for a significant period of
time. Therefore, the Department is making efforts to
upgrade the existing system to the latest available
version which will make the system compatible with
Windows 7 and allow the Department to finally migrate
off of unsupported Microsoft XP.
The current online payment system, implemented in
2003 was re-written in a joint effort involving the Tax
Collector's Office, Information Services Department,
Official Payments Corporation, and Gorilla Logic, Inc.
The number of payments received during the December
2014 collection period increased 93.9% over December
2013, increasing from 24,618 to 47,738. The payment
amount increased 92.3% from $107,814,511.22 to
$207,363,667.18. This significant growth was driven by the elimination of e-check fees, previously from between
$15 and $27, by the Board of Supervisors. The new
system handled the volume without any downtime.
The Department is also in the early stages of developing
and obtaining a document management system, which
should streamline work processes, as well as work
towards the County's goals of being environmentally
conscious. The Department plans to collaborate with
its sister department - the Clerk-Recorder's Office - to
leverage existing contracts to efficiently obtain a system
which meets County standards and legal requirements
regarding document retention policies, and which will
also easily interface with the other property tax-related
Departments like the Assessor's Office and the
Controller-Treasurer Department to share and
exchange appropriate data and documents.
Electronic Interface with Assessor
In FY 2014, a new initiative was launched to develop an
electronic interface with the Office of the Assessor for
the transmission of roll corrections. That initiative was
completed and deployed. Additionally, an electronic
interface to deliver secured and unsecured roll
corrections from the Assessor to the Tax Roll Control
unit has been deployed. This eliminated the need for
Tax Roll Control to re-key the corrections from paper
and eliminated the associated data entry errors.
Learning Organization
The Office of the Tax Collector continues to make
significant progress with its Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) projects. The Department is
continuing efforts to create efficiencies, modernize
operations, and reduce costs while maintaining its
commitment to taxpayer services.
¦ Building and Expanding Services Tools (BEST): The
goal of BEST is to improve the customer service
delivery to taxpayers through face-to-face assistance,
telephone assistance, and via the Tax
Collector’s public website.
¦ Procurement of CUBS Collection System: The
project focuses on streamlining collection processes
by producing automated letters and notices to Unsecured
taxpayers, producing timely releases of liens,
and increasing revenue collection of Unsecured
delinquent tax.
¦ Document and Management System: The goal is to
improve operations of the document management
system and maintain excellent customer service. The Clerk-Recorder’s Office plans to increase its
technology offerings to the public with the emergence
of applications for smart phones and tablet devices. The
Clerk-Recorder’s Office is exploring mobile device
integration within its queuing solution enhancement
project and in the implementation of a new document
management system. In addition, Bring-Your-Own-
Device concepts and electronic scheduling/check-in
capabilities are being researched for use in the public
lobby.
Obtaining Secure Off-site Records Storage
Facility
The Clerk-Recorder’s Office is fully responsible for
maintaining and tracking the inventory of microfilmed
official records and the Clerk-Recorder’s original record
books. The Recorder’s complete and official record
archive spans the years between 1848 and the present.
These official record books are housed in the West Wing
at 70 West Hedding Street and at the County Archives.
As mandated by state law, the microfilmed records are
stored in a secure off-site facility.
The Department currently pays a contracted vendor for
secure off-site storage of microfilm. Service providers for
this type of storage are limited and doing business with
outside vendors has been costly and extremely
problematic. The Clerk-Recorder’s Office has
experienced numerous problems, such as relocation of
the records without prior notice and failure to meet
temperature, humidity and security standards, thereby
risking the integrity and safeguarding of the records.
The Department has been actively investigating
different locations for the purchase of a secure facility to
house the Clerk-Recorder’s Office’s film records
collection. The project and facility should have no
impact on the General Fund as it will be funded by the
special funds specifically designated to the Clerk-
Recorder’s Office.
Hardware Infrastructure for Disaster Recovery
In 2013, the Department worked closely with
technology vendors to design a solution based on a
mirrored data center and storage replication
technology. However, with the emergence of computer
hardware virtualization and secure cloud solutions,
alternatives to a mirrored data center are being
explored. Using the Recorder's Modernization fund, the
redesign and implementation of this solution will take
place in FY 2016.
Enhanced Self-Service - Online Appointment
Scheduling
In the consistent pursuit of excellence in customer
service, the Department updated the queuing system to
improve efficiency and reduce customer wait-time. In FY 2016, the Clerk-Recorder’s Office plans to enhance
this self-service offering by integrating online
appointments with the customer queuing system. This
effort will further increase customer and staff efficiency.
Learning Organization
The Clerk-Recorder’s Office continues to make
significant progress with its Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) projects related to the AS400
Replacement, the Call Center, Website Redesign, and
Queuing System Upgrade. The goal of these projects is
to improve the service delivery to customers by
providing technological enhancements to strengthen
system efficiency and effectiveness. The Department is
in the process of replacing the AS400 imaging system to
boost interface improvements for both internal and
external customers. In FY 2016, the Department plans
to utilize the latest technology to implement
calendaring for passport applications and the smart
phone module to the Queuing System. Victim Restitution As the County’s central collection
agency, the Department of Revenue (DOR) collects
victim restitution payments which are sent directly to
the victims named in court orders. Each year, the
County collects an average of $6.3 million for victims of
crime. There is strong support in existing California
statute and the California constitution for recognizing
the rights of all persons who suffer losses as a result of
criminal activity, and for providing assistance in seeking
and securing restitution from the persons convicted of
the crimes for causing the losses they suffer.
DOR continues to chair the Countywide Victim
Restitution Committee, a collaborative effort on victim
restitution services by its law and justice partners.
Members of the committee include the Probation
Department, the Offices of the District Attorney, Public
Defender and County Counsel, the Department of
Correction, the Superior Court, and the Victim Witness
Center.
DOR partners with numerous departments to
streamline the restitution process, increase public
awareness, provide information, and secure payment to victims. For example, in 2014, faster and more efficient
systems were jointly developed for documentation
transfers, research requirements and corrective actions.
Special search procedures resulted in locating victims
who had moved or whose addresses were incorrectly
recorded, yielding funds to victims for previously
unclaimed payments.
In 2014, at the request of the County Executive and the
District Attorney, partnering departments and the
Superior Court collaborated to analyze how to change
protocols for victim restitution collection and revenue
distribution. A new payment processing methodology
was developed with the expectation that victim
restitution collections would increase and that more
rapid payment would be made. The new method was
implemented in November 2014. In the first three
months, DOR collected an additional $46,000 from
diverted payments from 708 accounts, and these funds
have been sent directly to victims of crime. These
enhanced collections for victims will continue on an
ongoing basis.
In addition, the Board of Supervisors approved the
establishment of a pilot program between DOR and the
Probation Department that will explore enhancing
financial assessment and analysis skills in the Probation
Department, related to restitution. At the FY 2015 Mid-
Year Budget Review, a Senior Collections Officer
position was allocated to DOR, to serve in an outreach,
off-site capacity at the Probation Department. It is
expected that on-site collector expertise will be helpful
in providing immediate assistance and advice to
probation officers and other staff who are working
directly with probationers and will help to bridge
existing collection efforts and management of court
order compliance. Conversely, insights into the
operations and processes at the Probation Department
will be carried back to the DOR collections teams, thus
widening their overall understanding of the full process,
beyond DOR. After 18 months, the program will be
evaluated for effectiveness and whether to continue
permanently.
Evening Hours In FY 2013, DOR conducted a pilot
program to expand its service to the public by adding
early and late hours (7:30 a.m. - 7:00 p.m.). Public access
to DOR in the early evenings and mornings resulted in
better customer service for debtors who find it difficult
to visit or call DOR during the normal 8-5 work day. It
also opened evening hours for collectors to make
telephone contact with debtors. It is well-known that
direct and personal contact is an essential component
of successful collections.
Now, two years later, the pilot has been shown to be
very successful, demonstrating improved customer
service, enhanced revenues, as well as personal and
operational benefits to the Department and staff. The
Department and SEIU 521 labor organization are to
conduct a joint review of the pilot program to
determine whether to continue the existing Alternate
Hours Pilot Agreement on a permanent basis. One
adjustment under consideration is to reduce the
evening coverage from five to four nights per week, in
order to improve staffing coverage.
DOR Space and Facility Improvements DOR has been at
its current Berger Drive location since 1998. Since that
time, the Department has grown significantly as the
result of new collection programs and increased
account volume, which has increased the visits of
clients to the office. DOR will continue a multi-phased
project for reconfiguration of the office to
accommodate program growth, increase space
efficiencies and improve the current space
configuration. In the FY 2015 budget, the first phase of
pre-design work was approved by the Board. For
FY 2016, DOR presented its request for remodeling to
the Administrative Capital Committee to continue this
long-term project.
Security at Berger Drive Campus DOR has taken a lead
role in forming a task force representing the seven
departments and offices located at the Berger Drive
campus to jointly coordinate and collaborate on
increased security measures and safety awareness. The
task force has reviewed exterior and interior security
camera coverage, set up campus-wide training and
awareness presentations by the Office of the Sheriff, and
worked together on shared-cost evening patrol and
Sheriff Deputy presence. At this time, the group is
exploring the possibility of daytime watchperson
services in the parking lot and Berger Drive buildings.
Learning Organization
The Department of Revenue continues to make
significant progress with its Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) projects with the focus of
improving customer service and employee engagement. Emergency Response: This project aims to
increase employee confidence, comfort, and awareness
that effective workplace safety measures are in
place. Because DOR is committed to serving a widerange
of citizens that can be under severe stress, it is
important for the Department to generate and
maintain an atmosphere of workplace safety and
employee confidence.
¦ Paperless 4G (Go Green Get Green): The goal of
Go Green Get Green is to improve efficiency and
effectiveness of DOR collection processes by
providing back-up documents to collectors in an
electronic format.
¦ Web Portal: After a successful launch of its public
portal site, DOR plans to create a well-designed
Sharepoint Intranet site that is set to go-live later
this year.
¦ Acumen Accounting: The goal is to improve collections
and control costs by scoring the Department’s
collection system, otherwise known as CUBS,
accounts. The desired outcome will also improve
and streamline processes and workflow by reducing
duplication and maximizing automation of existing
manual processes in order to free up collector and
support staff for direct collection activities. Victim Witness Services
Silicon Valley FACES and its predecessor entities have
provided nearly 40 years of services to the victims and
witnesses of crime in Santa Clara County. During the
midyear review process, the District Attorney requested
the development of a new victim and witness assistance
unit within his office to assume the work historically
performed by Silicon Valley FACES. On March 24, 2015,
the Board directed Administration to provide
supplemental information relating to the cost to
facilitate the provisions of Victim and Witness
Assistance (VWA) directly by the District Attorney,
including personnel and costs relating to the transition
of the current contract with Silicon Valley FACES.
The total cost for the County to provide VWA services
is expected to cost significantly more than the current
contract with Silicon Valley FACES, since the County
must also provide its employee benefits package and
has higher overhead expenses.
Transferring VWA services to the District Attorney is
not recommended at this time. However, a
recommendation will be developed after the following
efforts conclude:
¦ A thorough analysis for position classification determinations,
creation of job specifications, and determination
of salary ranges with union concurrence.
SEIU and CEMA will likely want to meet and confer
regarding any new position classifications and
wages before finalization.
¦ A thorough analysis to determine the numbers of
positions to provide the most effective and efficient
delivery of victim and witness services.
¦ The County needs time to create and establish the
necessary infrastructure to provide these valuable
services to the community.
¦ An analysis by the Office of Women's Policy to assess
the potential difference in services and confidentiality
if the District Attorney provides VWA services
in lieu of a community based organization. Collective bargaining with SEIU for a new agreement
and recruitment for new positions will significantly
impact ESA through this summer, which
impacts the delivery time for the analysis above.
¦ A transition plan to align with Silicon Valley FACES
lease obligations. Right now is not good timing for a
transition, given these fixed costs.
The County cannot make an informed decision until
after a reasonable estimate of General Fund impact
costs can be determined. For this impact to be known,
the above work must be accomplished.
Community Prosecution
The Office first established a Community Prosecution
Unit in 1988 to proactively solve and prevent crime in
under-served or high crime neighborhoods in the
County. At its outset, the program was designed to
locate a prosecutor directly in a neighborhood as part of
a team of law enforcement and other stakeholders, with
a particular focus on youth crime prevention. This
approach produced excellent results, reducing youth
crime in the targeted areas at a much higher rate than
the Countywide average.
Last year, the Board of Supervisors approved the
addition of two prosecutors to the one Community
Prosecutor the Office previously had. This addition,
which responded to the strong desire of community
groups and leaders for the County to do more to prevent
crime, rather than only being able to react to it, has
proven to be tremendously successful. The unit is
increasing awareness of crimes such as notario fraud,
shutting down illegal businesses such as massage
parlors that are fronts for prostitution and human
trafficking, and collaborating with at-risk communities
on crime prevention strategies.
Criminal Investigation
The Office's Bureau of Investigations (BOI) has made
significant efforts to continue to uphold public safety in
the wake of the shrinking capacity of SJPD. Investigative
referrals within the Office are up more than 60%
compared with two years ago, largely because of the
need for more investigations of cases that originated in
San Jose. In addition, nearly all investigation
responsibilities for fraud cases, particularly in the areas
of elder fraud and environmental protection, have been
taken on by the BOI.
Proposition 47
The passage of Proposition 47 last November converted
a significant number of crimes from felonies to
misdemeanors. As the new law is retroactive for those
still serving sentences for affected crimes, there are a
large number of defendants coming forward with
petitions to reduce their convictions based on the new
law.
The Superior Court, Public Defender's Office, and
District Attorney's Office have responded to the new law
by establishing court calendars to hear petitions related
to the changes. In the FY 2015 mid-year process the
Board added positions in the Public Defender's Office
and the District Attorney's Office on a temporary basis
to help with the volume of petitions and resulting
hearings. The Office will be working with the Public
Defender's Office to assess the long-term impacts of the
new law, in part to analyze to what extent these
temporary additions should be made permanent. 

On November 4, 2014, the voters of California passed
proposition 47, “The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools
Act” (Proposition 47). Proposition 47 represents an
enormous shift in the way the justice system addresses
drug possession and minor theft related offenses, and
will arguably have the most significant impact on the
California criminal justice system since realignment.
Proposition 47 added and amended various California
Penal and Health & Safety Code sections. The
Proposition limits the time to apply for re-sentencing or
re-designation to three years from the effective date of
the Proposition, unless the petitioner can show good
cause why relief was not sought within the three year
time constraint.
Not every defendant convicted of an offense subject to
misdemeanor reclassification pursuant to
Proposition 47 is eligible for relief; the Proposition
excludes from eligibility persons with prior convictions
for certain strike offenses, and/or persons required to
register under the sex offender registration law (Penal
Code section 290). Nonetheless, the number of current
and former Public Defender Office (PDO) and Alternate
Defender Office (ADO) clients potentially eligible for
some degree of relief is staggering. The benefit to our
clients, and the potential for improving outcomes,
particularly for the mentally ill and substance addicted
segment of the re-entry population who stand to benefit
most from this aspect of Proposition 47 relief cannot be
overstated.
The Office is working diligently to prioritize clients
eligible for such relief within the statutorily authorized
period. This undertaking is massive, but will
significantly help reentry and rehabilitation efforts for
thousands of Public Defender clients.
Case Management System
Work on the implementation of the new Case
Management System (CMS) is underway, with the goal
of full live implementation by the end of 2015 or early
2016. The CMS is robust with business intelligence
capacity, document creation and management features,
compatibility with other justice system partners, and
the potential for future paperless implementation.
Public Defense Office Case Management System (CMS)
will support both the Public Defender (PDO) and
Alternate Defender Offices (ADO) and will maintain the
ethical wall between the two offices. The system's
features will include modules for felony, misdemeanor,
juvenile, civil and mental health law. Additionally, it will
include a Master People File (MPF) to detect conflicts.
The MPF will contain all types of cases within the
system. It will include a case number, charge, California
Criminal Statute, case status and other useful
information that can be linked with each case. The CMS
will have the capability of scanning evidence into the file
and attaching it to a specified case. Calendaring and
Docketing will be set up for each attorney's caseload
and document assembly such as pleadings will be
provided. The CMS will also have the ability to
electronically store files. The full implementation of the
new CMS will improve the business processes for both
offices, and will help streamline the effective
representation of indigent clients in Santa Clara County.
Creative Solutions
The Public Defender has creatively dealt with many of
the staff reductions and increased caseloads. The Public
Defender actively seeks out fellowships and
collaboration with nationally recognized law schools
such as Yale University Law School, UCLA, and Stanford
University Law School. Other examples are the creation
of a partnership with civil law firms in the Volunteer
318
Section 2: Public Safety and Justice County of Santa Clara
Office of the Public Defender FY 2016 Recommended Budget
Attorney Program and the development of a
Misdemeanor Clinic with Santa Clara University Law
School and Stanford Law School.
Recognizing these challenges throughout the justice
system, the Superior Court, County Executive, District
Attorney, Public Defender, Department of Correction,
Pretrial Services, Information Services Department and
Probation Department meet regularly to try to identify
efficiencies and improvements in the justice system. In
part this is a search for ways to cut costs. However, a
major benefit of these regular discussions is the
recognition by every partner that what happens in one
area of the justice system impacts all departments. A
continuing effort is being made to coordinate and
streamline the system to respect the resources of all of
the partners involved while fulfilling the mandates of
each partner.
Departmental Improvement Efforts
The County Executive’s Office delivered a presentation
on Just Culture to the Public Defender Office and
Alternate Defender Office Executives, Managers and
Supervisors. Public Defender staff have been identified
as trainers and will have presented an office-wide Just
Culture training to the Department staff in mid-March
and April of 2015. The Public Defender’s Office is excited
about the infusion of Just Culture because it provides a
set of management skills and tools that will help
transform the office environment from within. The Just
Culture program connects everyone with respect to
values, and provides a true understanding of
expectations. Most importantly, Just Culture is inclusive
as it allows contributions from everyone to resolve
issues. Electronic Monitoring Program (EMP) Population
The EMP population is increasing. As of February 2015,
the EMP caseload has increased to an average of 64
cases per month. The average caseload for Fiscal Year
2014 was 24.
Learning Organization - Just Culture
During FY 2015 the Office of Pretrial Services (OPS)
took many steps to further enhance Just Culture within
the organization. What follows is a summary of efforts,
as well as some departmental background, on Just
Culture.
OPS Just Culture efforts staunchly began in the latter
half of FY 2014 with the distribution of survey results to
all OPS personnel. The distribution of these results were
then followed by several meetings with personnel to
develop a list of which topics to prioritize. Out of these
meetings three improvement efforts were identified for
FY 2015:
¦ Improved communication by supervisors and more
effort on their part to create better inter-personal
relationships with staff
¦ Better dissemination of information from management
to staff and between operational units
¦ Cross training of officers within operational units
In addition to identifying these improvement areas, two
department champions of Just Culture were identified.
These champions were responsible for developing a
work plan for FY 2015 as well as setting up training on
Just Culture for all personnel. The work plan included
several recommended operational enhancements that
subsequently occurred during FY 2015
¦ Mandatory weekly individual supervision meetings
between the supervisor and each of their staff were
implemented. These meetings focused on developing
inter-personal relationships with staff, career
growth of staff and dissemination of information
¦ Twice per month open meetings for all staff with the
director were implemented. These meetings allowed
employees to provide feedback directly to the
Director. They also morphed into an arena for
employees to share their ideas regarding operational
improvements for better efficiency
¦ Meeting minutes from all department meetings
were required to be generated and shared with all
department personnel
¦ Our new office setting was designed in a new open
concept setting based on unit assignment. This
allowed staff to turn around and collaborate with
fellow team members. This was a huge change for staff who were previously isolated in individual
offices. This improved collaboration and communication
between staff
¦ New communication techniques were learned by
supervisors through a suite of classes they were
required to attend through SCC Learn. In addition,
supervisors received reading materials on communication
directly from the director during weekly
supervision meetings. Finally, supervisors were
required to read “Good Boss, Bad Boss” by Bob
Sutton
¦ Staff were allowed and encouraged to spend a day
cross-training in another operational unit
Just Culture training was a focal point for OPS during
FY 2015. Below is a list of trainings department
personnel participated in during FY 2015:
¦ Director attended Just Culture presented by County
Executive
¦ The Department Just Culture Champion attended
five training sessions on Just Culture Systems and
Training for Trainers
¦ The Department management team attended an inhouse
training presented by the County Executive’s
Office on Just Culture
¦ All department personnel attended Just Culture
Training presented by department champion at the
annual day-away event
¦ All department personnel attended a training
designed by Learning and Employee Development
titled “Steering Clear of the Ladder of Inference.” This
training was designed to tie into the Just Culture
Initiative and address specific issues within OPS
The Department is currently working to devote a
regular portion of all staff meetings to its Just Culture
efforts. Some ideas being considered are 10-15 minute
flash trainings, videos of examples of Just Culture, follow
up staff surveys, and dissemination of other efforts
going on throughout the County. Regional Disaster Services
The Sheriff is the Law Enforcement Mutual Aid
Coordinator for the County of Santa Clara, as
designated by the State Office of Emergency Services.
Through homeland security grants, the Sheriff ’s Office
is active in the planning and implementation of regional
disaster services.
Recruitment and Retention
Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. As of May, the number of Deputy
vacancies is approximately 34, and vacancies are an
ongoing challenge for the Department. With an aging
workforce, the Department is anticipating many
retirements in the next few years. The Office of the
Sheriff continues to develop new and innovative
methods to recruit top applicants, and is targeting
significant resources at recruiting and backgrounding
many applicants. The Administration is supportive of
the Sheriff ’s additional enforcement academies that are
being held to fill vacancies within the Department, and
will address the issue during Fiscal Year 2016 if
additional funds for academies are necessary.
Expansion of Regional Services
Since the opening of the Santa Clara County Justice
Training Center in 2005, the Department has been
working to expand the number of training classes, as
well as increase enrollment from outside agencies in the
Academy. The Sheriff ’s Office also maintains an outside
Firing Range that is used by the Sheriff ’s Office and
other law enforcement agencies for training and
mandated firearms qualifications. The Sheriff ’s Office is
developing the Range into a regional training center,
and plans to include a Situational Training Facility,
which will be utilized by the Sheriff ’s Office, as well as
other law enforcement agencies. The purpose of the
facility is to provide real-world training for law
enforcement officers.
Increase in Gang Cases
At the start of 2011, the Office of the Sheriff established
new guidelines for tracking gang activity. As a result of
the new guidelines, staff training, and the hiring of a
gang crime analyst, gang-related crime tracking has
improved. An analysis of Field Interview (FI) cards show
that from 2011 to 2014 there were 655 gang-related FI
cards. This was a substantial increase over the prior 4-
year period of 2007 to 2010, which had 193 gang-related
FI cards. There was an overall decrease of 7% of gang related cases in 2014 as compared to 2013. The
collaborative effort among the Patrol Divisions, Special
Operations, and the Investigations Division of the Office
of the Sheriff has been crucial to the continued
monitoring of gang activity.
Just Culture
Since the summer of 2013, when the Sheriff 's Office and
Department of Correction Administration presented
the concept of Just Culture to about 30 mid-level and
executive managers, Just Culture themes and
discussions have been continuing and growing.
Recurring themes in discussions include the
importance of transparency, trust in an organization,
the role of management allowing inquiry to take place,
and mentoring.
In the fall of 2014, several new executives attended the
County’s New Executive Onboarding and Networking
(NEON) Program. Also, several managers attended the
Just Culture train-the-trainer program. Since that time,
these managers developed a department-wide plan to
roll out the Just Culture initiatives. The initial phase is
the presentation of the materials to the Department's
executive managers in April 2015. Based on the
feedback from the executive managers, the presentation
materials will be revised for use by the remainder of the
Department. Through the late spring, the training will
be presented to all levels of sworn and professional staff
in the Department of Correction, Sheriff 's Office, and
Medical Examiner-Coroner's Office. Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) transferred a
number of services previously provided by the State, to
the local government. The most significant impact on
the Department of Correction is a result of sentencing
changes that make offenders without any current or
prior serious or violent or sex convictions the
responsibility of the local jails. This shift of inmates
continues to increase the jail population, lengthen the
sentences of some inmates, and impacts the jail’s ability
to accept voluntary revenue-generating inmates from
other jurisdictions. This has also resulted in a significant
change in the demographics of those inmates eligible to
be housed on the Elmwood Correctional Complex
minimum camp. The criminal sophistication of these
inmates has caused increasing concerns regarding
escape prevention, organized inmate disturbances,
emergency response, and staffing plans.
Protective Custody Population
Protective custody is a classification that may be
assigned to inmates who are affiliated with a gang, have
committed certain violent crimes, whose case has a
high degree of notoriety, or who, for some reasons, have
been determined to be at risk of victimization. Over the
past several years, there has been a dramatic increase in
inmates requiring protective custody, primarily due to
affiliation with gangs. It is a challenge to provide the
physical segregation required for these inmates.
Increasing Number of Mentally Ill Inmates
The number of inmates in the jail with mental health
issues requiring special attention has historically been
significant and is always a key factor in the
management of the jail and inmate population. More
recently, however, a dramatic increase in the number of
inmates with mental health issues is a growing concern
to the Department. Specifically, the portion of the
average daily inmate population requiring special
management due to mental health issues has grown
from 22% in 2012 to more than 25% in the first half of
FY 2015 and this population continues to grow. This
increase has exacerbated the jail management
challenge of ensuring all mentally ill inmates are housed
appropriately in order to minimize the risk of harm to
themselves and others.
Physical and Mental Health of Inmates
In this decade, the percentage of inmates 55 years of age
or older has increased from 2.1% to 5.8%, and from an
Average Daily Population (ADP) of 86 to 229 in the first
half of FY 2015. Additionally, individual inmates are
experiencing multiple health issues with significant
pathology and disabilities. There is a strain on the
availability of infirmary and special management beds
which must be triaged every shift to accommodate the
sickest and most vulnerable inmates. Several times
during FY 2015, the need for special management beds
for the mentally ill was exhausted, resulting in the need
to open suitable housing for these inmates. This
situation is further constricted by the AB 109 inmates,
because their length of stay is longer and many have
chronic physical and mental health issues.
Aging Jail Facilities
Both Main Jail South and Elmwood have very old
facilities that are in need of renovation or replacement.
The annual maintenance and repair cost for these
facilities continues to increase. In addition, the
population of AB 109 inmates is continuing to increase.
These inmates have longer lengths of stay and add wear
and tear to these facilities.
The jail facilities were the subject of a recent Jail Needs
Assessment study performed by MGT of America. The
report contained a recommendation that the Main Jail
South facility be replaced, that facility hardening
renovations be completed at Main Jail North, and that
medium security beds and programming space be
added to Elmwood. Significant one-time and ongoing
costs are associated with the report's
recommendations.  Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. As of May, the number of
Correctional Deputy vacancies was approximately 36,
which is an ongoing challenge for the Department. With
an aging workforce, the Department is anticipating
many retirements in the next few years. The Office of
the Sheriff continues to develop new and innovative
methods to recruit top applicants. The Administration
is supportive of the Sheriff ’s additional correctional
academies that are being held to fill vacancies within
the Department, and will address the issue during Fiscal
Year 2016 if additional funds for academies are
necessary.
Inmate Telephone Services and Inmate Welfare
Fund Revenue
By order of the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) and effective February 11, 2014, the rates charged
for interstate inmate telephone calls were capped at a
level significantly lower than the rates charged prior to
the order. This reduction in the cost of interstate inmate
telephone calls has caused a corresponding reduction
to the level of commissions paid to the Inmate Welfare
Fund (IWF). Additionally, the FCC has asserted it has
regulatory authority over other call categories
(intrastate and international) and has also expressed its
intent to seek reductions to those rate categories as
well. The Department is preparing for any mandated
changes by the FCC and plans to respond to these
changes while continuing to ensure appropriate service
levels at all times. The Department continues to aggressively infuse
evidence based practices in all areas of operation.
Extensive training and resources have been dedicated
to this effort to ensure that service delivery models and
programming efforts are based on proven practices.
This transformation to serving clients and their families
will provide positive outcomes with appropriate and
effective treatment services and supporting strength
based assets to build capacity, thus reducing the
likelihood that clients will re-offend. The Department’s
focus on Continuous Quality Management will assist in
managing key operational and support processes,
through quality assurance, quality control and quality
improvement. The development of a strategic plan is
underway that will support and enhance the current
work in the area of evidence based practices. In FY 2016 the Department will embark on the
implementation of Just Culture. In FY 2015 Probation
Executives and Managers were trained by the County
Executive's Office, and several managers were identified
and trained to give the foundational presentations
department-wide. The values and principles of Just
Culture are naturally aligned with evidence-based
practices, continuous quality improvement efforts and
will be embedded within the Department’s strategic
plan.
Public Safety Realignment - AB 109 Program
Public Safety Realignment, the legislation which shifted
the responsibility of supervising specified offenders
being released from state custody back to local counties
for supervision, and changed sentencing laws to keep
offenders from being committed to state prison,
continues to be a major focus of services. The expansion
of the County's Re-Entry Resource Center, the myriad of
services being provided as a result of this effort and the
partnerships forged with the faith based community has
positively impacted outcomes for this population. Data
collection and specific outcome measurements
continue as the Department moves into the fourth year
of this program. The Community Corrections
Partnership, chaired by the Chief Probation Officer,
adopted a definition of recidivism which will be the
basis of defining success. Recently, the department was
able to fill all existing vacancies in the AB 109 units,
ensuring that these high risk clients are supervised with
a 30:1 ratio.
Development of Alternatives to
Custody for Adults
The Department, in collaboration with our other justice
and community partners, will develop a continuum of
services for adults in the criminal justice system. Often
low to moderate risk clients remain in jail because they
cannot afford bail and there are limited services
available to provide adequate community supervision.
The department will work closely with Pre-Trial
Services, the Sheriff 's Custody Bureau and other
essential stakeholders to maximize existing resources,
limit the duplication of services and to provide the
appropriate supervision level to match the risk level of
the client.
Additionally, while the AB 109 clients receive a fairly
robust array of services, the vast majority of adult
probationers do not. Unlike juvenile, adult probation
services are almost completely dependent on County
General Fund support because there are not specific
state and federal funding streams for this use. As the
department expands its continuum of community
supervision, commensurate services will also be
activated to address the high needs of this population.
Title IVE California Well Being Project
(Title IV-E Waiver)
In October 2014, the County of Santa Clara, jointly with
the Department of Family and Children's Services opted
to participate in a 5 year, Title IV-E (Foster Care)
California Well-Being Project. The Well Being Project is
a federal program that provides a capped funding
allocation to participating counties that are contingent
upon an approved submitted Title IV-E Waiver Plan.
Plans are approved and funds are monitored by the
California Department of Social Services. The capped
allocation is in lieu of the quarterly fluctuating
administrative funding stream. The overall goals of the
project are to improve the array of services and
supports available to children, youth and families
involved in the child welfare and probation systems,
engage families through more individualized casework
with an emphasis on family involvement, increase child
safety without an over-reliance on out of home care,
improve permanency outcomes and child/family wellbeing,
and to decrease recidivism and delinquency for
youth involved with probation. The Department has the
option of submitting a plan with up to three
interventions. Currently, the plan submitted includes a
subset of higher risk youth, regardless of their legal
status, to receive wraparound services. The Well Being
Project includes a required evaluation component of
wraparound services, which was identified by all the
participating probation departments as a primary
intervention of the project.
Dually Involved Youth Initiative
The Probation Department and the Department of
Family and Children's Services (DFCS) have partnered
to implement new programming to address the needs
of youth involved in both the juvenile justice and child
welfare systems. This process has included on-going
leadership by a robust group of stakeholders who have
met monthly for over two years. A Dually Involved
Youth Unit, consisting of probation officers, social
workers and a youth advocate, was established in FY 2014 in an effort to create an environment in which
staff from different disciplines work together to
understand and serve the family unit as a whole and
respond effectively to the complex needs of the youth
and family. This team is empowered and encouraged to
develop non-traditional solutions to meet specific
needs. The initial group of youth and families served by
this model are showing very promising outcomes.
Additionally, many other jurisdictions nationally are
attempting to replicate this strategy in their own
systems. There are many more youth and families who
could benefit from this unique approach, but the unit
has reached full capacity. As a result, in FY 2016 the
Dually Involved Youth Unit will be expanding to serve
more youth and families in this holistic manner.
Probation will primarily use existing resources to
expand the unit.
Commercially Sexually Exploited Children (CSEC)
Pursuant to Senate Bill 855, the Welfare and Institutions
code has been amended to clarify that “commercially
and sexually exploited children whose parents or
guardians failed or were unable to protect them may be
adjudged dependents of the juvenile court”.
Additionally, counties can participate in a state funded
county CSEC Program administered by the California
Department of Social Services (CDSS.) As part of this
program, the Department of Family and Children's
Services (DFCS) is required to develop a local protocol
to be implemented by July 1, 2015. In support of DFCS's
efforts to appropriately respond to the unique needs of
this population, Probation and other stakeholders are
participating in the development of a county protocol.
This work is occurring parallel to the County's Human
Trafficking Commission, which focuses on all types of
trafficking for both youth and adults.
Education Related Issues
Educational attainment of juvenile justice engaged
youth remains an important life domain for both the
Department and the Court. In an effort to better serve
clients, Probation entered into a cost sharing agreement
with East Side Union High School District to fund a
Social Worker position at the District. This Social
Worker will be dedicated to helping students and
families through the re-enrollment process. The goal of
this joint venture is to eliminate barriers to the reenrollment
process and get youth quickly re-engaged in
school. The Social Worker will provide ongoing case
management and truancy assistance, with the help of
campus Social Workers, and the families will receive
support through the Parent Liaisons on each campus as
needed. Through this initiative, the Department hopes
to reduce truancy, recidivism and the loss of educational
opportunity, to youth engaged in the juvenile justice
system. The County Office of Education will act as a
conduit for information related to the educational
services and/or assessments that were conducted while
the client was in custody and will provide professional
development to the Probation Officers regarding
educational issues. The Office of the Medical Examiner-Coroner (MEC) has
been focusing on equipment replacement and capital
improvements that support business processes and
services to the community. With regard to replacing
outdated equipment, the Department replaced gurneys
that are in use 24 hours a day and replaced a critical
cooling unit used for specimen storage for criminal
evidence. For future equipment needs, the Department
is developing a multi-year equipment replacement plan
in order to anticipate end-of-life purchasing needs and
more effectively budget for these needs. In conjunction
with the County's Facilities and Fleet Department, the
Department was able to address a major capital need,
which was the replacement of the building's HVAC
system. The new system allows the Department to
more effectively control the environment, especially in
the areas that require specific temperatures for the
storage of cadavers.
The Department was able to meet the community's
need for a continuity of operations in a major disaster by
installing a mass fatality storage unit on property
adjacent to the building. In planning for the future, the
Department is reviewing office reconfiguration plans to Modernization of the Child Support Program
In November 2014, the Federal Office of Child Support
Enforcement (OCSE) issued a Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (NPRM) in response to President Obama's
directive in Executive Order 13563: Improving
Regulation and Regulatory Review. The NPRM proposes
revisions to make child support program operations
and enforcement procedures more flexible, more
effective, and more efficient by recognizing the benefit
of existing best practices, leveraging advancements in
technology, and establishing a renewed focus to
improve customer service. In addition, changes are
proposed to clarify and correct technical provisions in
existing child support regulations. This is the first major
review and revision of child support regulations since
the establishment of the child support program under
Title IV-D of the Social Security Act approximately 40
years ago.
The County of Santa Clara Department of Child
Support Services (DCSS) has been working in
conjunction with the Child Support Directors
Association of California (CSDA) and the California
Department of Child Support Services (CDCSS) to
review and analyze the proposed regulatory changes
and issue comments to OCSE for consideration in
finalizing any new child support rules. Key components
of the proposed rules include expanding child support
services to include the establishment of parenting time
orders, employment services for non-custodial parents,
and setting accurate orders based on actual income.
The new regulations provide opportunity for
progressive change in state and local child support
policy and practice.
Budget Strategy
DCSS has been flat-funded from the State for over a
decade. This historical flat funding, combined with
increased labor and operating expenses, has fueled a
projected deficit. In discussions with the State regarding
the Department's need for additional funding, CDCSS
has given the Department direction to streamline
operations, implement efficiencies, and become more
cost effective so that the requests for additional funding
can be appropriately evaluated. This includes aligning
the Department’s child support operations with current
funding by leveraging best practices and proven
efficiencies already in place in other California counties.
For FY 2015, the Department held a significant number
of positions vacant to mitigate its ongoing deficit with
salary savings. At the onset of the FY 2016 budget
process, DCSS was facing a $2.9 million budget deficit,
not including prior year salary savings. The $2.9 million
deficit equates to approximately 8% of total funding
from the CDCSS. After the Department submitted its
proposals for the FY 2016 Budget Review, favorable Intra-County adjustments to the base budget were
made and thus, reduced the $2.9 million deficit to
approximately $1.8 million.
The Department will engage in a comprehensive
operational assessment to help develop a long-term
budget plan. The assessment is necessary to set clear
strategic direction, identify appropriate operational
goals, create positive change, and ensure the effective
and efficient use of resources. The assessment will
include a review of Santa Clara County's child support
business model, which includes current processes,
policies, and related staffing. It will also include a review
of industry best practices for implementation. The
completed assessment will be used by the Department
to implement recommendations to improve operations
and develop sustainable budget solutions.
The goal of the assessment is to maximize program
performance, improve customer service, streamline
business processes, and transform the organization to
better align with new state mandates relating to the
more efficient delivery of child support services. It is
anticipated that a new business model would be
implemented in deliberate and methodical phases over
the next few years commencing with the FY 2017
budget proposal.
After DCSS can demonstrate to CDCSS that the
organization is both more efficient and effective in
meeting its mission, the Department will be better
positioned to negotiate future increases in its State
funding allocation. Beginning July 1, 2012, as part of 2012-2013 State budget,
the Legislature and Governor approved major policy
changes within the Medi-Cal program aimed at
improving care coordination, particularly for people on
both Medi-Cal and Medicare. Also approved as part of
this Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) are a number of
changes to the IHSS program, including State collective
bargaining for IHSS, creation of a County IHSS
Maintenance of Effort (MOE), and creation of a
Statewide Authority.
Effective July 1, 2012, counties have a MOE requirement
in lieu of paying a share of the non-federal costs for IHSS
services and IHSS and Public Authority administration.
The County IHSS MOE base was calculated based on
Fiscal Year 2011-2012 actual expenditures on IHSS
services and FY 2011-2012 allocation for IHSS program  and Public Authority administration. The final MOE
base for Santa Clara County was calculated at
$58,826,689.
Beginning on July 1, 2014 and annually thereafter, the
County IHSS MOE base shall be adjusted by an inflation
factor of 3.5%. In fiscal years when the combined total of
1991 State Local Realignment revenues received for the
prior fiscal year are less than revenues received two
years prior, the inflation factor will be zero.
In addition to 3.5% inflation factor, the County IHSS
MOE will be adjusted for the annualized cost of
increases in provider wages or health benefits that are
locally negotiated, mediated, or imposed before the
Statewide Authority assumes the responsibilities. The
annual County IHSS MOE adjustment will be revised
after the fiscal year end close to reflect the actual
increase in costs for that year.
Restoration of 7 Percent Across the Board Cut
The Governor's Budget proposes to restore the 7%
across the board cut in service hours that was
implemented due to the Oster Settlement Agreement in
2013. This restoration will be implemented on July 1,
2015. It will be funded by a new Health and Human
Service Fund which receives revenues from Managed
Care Organization (MCO) taxes.
The restoration of the 7% cut is contingent on approval
by the Federal government of the new tax on managed
care organizations (MCOs) that the Administration is
proposing. The MCO tax currently in place expires in
2016. The Federal government has indicated that the
current tax is likely impermissible under Federal
Medicaid regulations because it only applies narrowly to
Medi-Cal managed care plans and will not be allowed to
be extended after 2016. The Administration is
proposing a new managed care tax that complies with
Federal law. If this new tax is approved, the 7% acrossthe-
board cut will be restored.
Coordinated Care Initiative
The Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) was passed in July
2012 and marks an important step toward transforming
California's Medi-Cal (Medicaid) care delivery system to
better serve the State's low-income seniors and persons
with disabilities. The CCI integrates delivery of medical,
behavioral, and long-term care services and also
provides a demonstration pilot opportunity to integrate
Medicare and Medi-Cal for people in both programs,
called dual eligible beneficiaries. A major component of
the CCI is the IHSS program, which is a managed care
benefit, though still administered by the County. Under
CCI, Medi-Cal beneficiaries, including dual eligible
beneficiaries, are required to join a Medi-Cal managed
care health plan to receive benefits, including IHSS. CCI
is composed of three major parts.
¦ Long-Term Supports and Services (LTSS) as a
Medi-Cal Managed Care Benefit: CCI includes the
addition of LTSS into Medi-Cal managed care. LTSS
includes nursing facility care, In-Home Supportive
Services, Multipurpose Senior Services Program,
and Community Based Adult Services. This change
impacts about 60,000 Medi-Cal only enrollees and
up to 456,000 persons eligible for both Medicare and
Medi-Cal who are in Cal MediConnect.
¦ Cal MediConnect Program: A three-year demonstration
project for persons eligible for both Medicare
and Medi-Cal (dual eligibles) to receive
coordinated medical, behavioral health, long-term
institutional, and home- and community-based
services through a single organized delivery system
(health plan). No more than 456,000 beneficiaries
would be eligible for the duals demonstration in the
seven counties. This demonstration project is a joint
effort with the Federal Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS).
¦ Mandatory Enrollment of Dual Eligibles and
Others into Medi-Cal Managed Care: Most Medi-
Cal beneficiaries, including dual eligibles, partial
dual eligible, and previously excluded Seniors and
Persons with Disabilities who are Medi-Cal only, are
required to join a Medi-Cal managed care health
plan to receive their Medi-Cal benefits.
The purpose and goal of CCI is to promote the
coordination of health and social care for Medi-Cal
consumers and to create fiscal incentives for health
plans to make decisions that keep their members
healthy and out of institutions (given that hospital and
nursing home care are more expensive than home and
community-based care).
Prior to CCI, dual eligibles accessed services through a
complex system of disconnected programs funded by
different government programs (e.g., Federal CMS,
Department of Health Care Services-Medi-Cal, IHSS County based). This fragmentation often led to
beneficiary confusion, delayed care, inappropriate
utilization, and unnecessary costs.
The Governor's proposed 2015-16 Budget continues to
implement the CCI, which provides for a coordinated
medical, behavioral health, long-term supports and
services and home and community based services all
coordinated through managed care plans. The budget
makes no changes in the current County IHSS role in
CCI with respect to eligibility determination,
assessment of hours, and program administration. The
budget does however indicate several unexpected
changes in the program which threaten its continued
viability:
? County participation has changed since the CCI
enactment. Originally, eight counties were
intended to operate CCI (Alameda, Los Angeles,
Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego,
San Mateo, and Santa Clara). Alameda will no
longer participate in the demonstration project.
Six counties have begun passive enrollment and
the seventh, Orange County, will begin in July
2015.
? The Federal government reduced the amount of
savings California is allowed to retain, from 50%
to 30%.
? The 4% tax on managed care organizations will
not be continued beyond June 30, 2016 due to
recent federal guidance that indicates the tax is
inconsistent with Federal Medicaid regulations.
As discussed earlier, however, the Administration
is proposing a new managed care tax that is
supposed to be consistent with Federal law for
approval.
? As of November 2014 there was an approximate
69% opt-out rate, much higher than initial
projections of 33%. The opt-out rate is higher
among IHSS recipients, at 80% though participation
in CCI varies widely by county.
The budget also seems to attribute increases in the
state's IHSS costs due to implementation of Federal
Labor Standards Act as a factor in the overall increase in
the CCI program and notes that, although the CCI is
expected to generate savings in 2015-16 of $176.1
million, these savings are primarily attributed to the
funds generated from the tax on managed care. Without
the tax, the CCI would cost the State $396.8 million in
2015-16 (although as discussed earlier, the
Administration is proposing a new tax consistent with
Federal law). The Administration indicates that absent
any changes by January 2016, the CCI would cease
operating effective January 2017. Note statute that
established the CCI requires a determination by
Department of Finance that the CCI is cost-effective
and requires an analysis every January if it continues to
be cost effective, and automatically terminates the
program if costs exceed savings. Because the County
IHSS MOE and collective bargaining are tied to the
continuation of the CCI, collective bargaining and
county share-of-cost in the IHSS program could also
revert in January 2017.
Federal Labor Standards Act Regulations
On October 1, 2013, the U.S. Department of Labor
(DOL) issued a new rule revising the Federal Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) domestic service regulations. The
new rule was scheduled to become effective on January
1, 2015 and required the payment of minimum wage,
overtime, travel time, and wait time during medical
appointments for domestic service employees,
including IHSS providers. State law was passed to
conform to the new DOL regulations by capping
provider hours to 66 hours per month per provider, and
instituting a cap of 7 hours of travel time. However, in
December 2014 a U.S. District Court ruled that a portion
of the regulations exceeded DOL’s authority and delayed
the rule’s implementation.The DOL has appealed this
decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals, which is
scheduled to hear the case on May 7, 2015. Although a
the court is expected to issue its decision before the
State budget is completed, this litigation may delay the
implementation of FLSA regulations to a date
uncertain.
Statewide Authority
Under the CCI, upon completion of enrollment of CCI
participants the collective bargaining for IHSS wages
and benefits will transition from the county to the
California IHSS Statewide Authority. While there has
been no formal announcement made on the transition
date for collective bargaining, it is estimated that Santa
Clara County will transition to the Statewide Authority
effective January 1, 2016. The County IHSS
Memorandum of Agreement currently in effect with
SEIU Local 521 will remain in place until it expires on
February 1, 2017. The following is a summary of organizational
improvement efforts that the Agency initiated in
FY 2015 in collaboration with the Center for Leadership
and Transformation (CLT):
¦ Innovation - Identify and develop solutions to
streamline processes for improved productivity and
client services focused on a No-Wrong Door
approach to service delivery.
¦ Title IV-E - Support the development of fiscal,
program evaluation and mitigation strategies.
¦ Communications - Respond to the SSA results of the
Countywide Employee Assessment Survey by developing
communication strategies that improve
Agency-wide collaboration, efficiencies and effectiveness.
¦ Just Culture - Customize the Individual Behavior;
and Executive, Manager, and Supervisor (EMS)
curriculum to align with SSA’s strategic mission and
goals. The Agency built interval subject matter
expertise within each department and began
training in spring 2015. The sessions promote
employee ownership and accountability of work and
outcomes.
In addition, the Agency has undertaken the following
departmental improvement efforts:  In collaboration with the Social Services Agency
Council for Cultural Excellence, the SSA Research
and Evaluation Unit provided SSA staff with a survey
to assess the cultural training needs of the Agency.
Of those who responded to the survey, results
suggest that staff desire Agency wide training on
topics related to Culture and Equal Opportunity.
Trainings to address these topics were developed
with the goal of building skills and supporting staff
who work with clients, as well as improving internal
staff relationships.
¦ SSA is participating in the County Welfare Directors
Association’s Customer Experience Workgroup. This
initiative was created to address the Statewide
changes in the application process for medical benefits
coverage driven by Health Care Reform. This
Workgroup is comprised of representatives from 15
counties Statewide, and is tasked with laying the
foundation for customer service principles and
approaches across the participating counties. The
group's goal is to develop a Statewide definition for
Customer Service Excellence and determine what
outcome measures are needed to evaluate the level
of customer service delivered.
¦ Cross Agency Data Sharing is a Countywide focus
that allows for the tracking of service utilization by
clients who are served by multiple County service
providers (the Office of Housing and Homeless
Support Services, the Health and Hospital System,
the Sheriff ’s Office, and the Probation Department).
Most recently, as part of this collaborative, SSA
participated in the Cost of Homelessness study
project and contributed major and significant data
sets. The study is expected to yield details on the
County's cost of homelessness and observed trends
and client usage of services across various channels.
¦ The Welfare Fraud Collaborative offers the Social
Services Agency the opportunity to work with staff
from the offices of the Sheriff, the District Attorney,
and the Probation Department in order to minimize
welfare fraud. The team works on mitigation strategies
to avoid misuse of funds, and develops partnerships
to maximize the utilization of resources. Social Worker Recruitment and Retention
In FY 2015, DFCS operations were impacted by the
continual loss of experienced social workers and the
ongoing challenge to recruit bilingual, specifically
Spanish-speaking, candidates. Despite hiring 50 new
social workers in 2014, the Department had 39 current
and five future social worker vacancies in February
2015.
The majority of social worker vacancies in DFCS are in
continuing services units and for bilingual social
workers. These positions often remain vacant for over
seven months. Despite constant recruitment efforts, the
Department has been receiving an average of one to
three qualified Spanish Bilingual Social Worker III
candidates quarterly. Unfortunately, many have
declined positions due to better opportunities in the
public and private sectors.
Newly hired workers not only lack the extensive
expertise of departing staff, but also require ten weeks of
induction training, followed by a period of caseload
building. Thus, benefits from adding staff are not felt for
a number of months.
Integration Initiative
In 2013, the Social Services Agency began collaboration
with the University of Illinois at Chicago's Integration
Initiative project, an effort to transform child welfare
policy and practice to more effectively serve Latino and
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans-gendered and Questioning
(LGBTQ) children and youth. DFCS is participating as a
demonstration/laboratory site and will assist the
initiative to understand the unique needs of Santa Clara
County’s local target populations. This includes
identifying the core components of services effective in
meeting their needs and implementation drivers
necessary to sustain culturally competent service
provision.
In 2014, the Social Services Agency implemented the
research phase of the project. The primary research
methods are case reviews and focus groups with social
work staff, community providers, youth, and families.
The case reviews and focus groups started in February
2015 and will continue through the fiscal year.
DFCS applied for and was awarded a grant from the
Walter S. Johnson foundation to support this scope of
work. This will allow the DFCS to build on their current
efforts to ensure that their services for LGBTQ and
Latino youth are supported by best practices, research,
and cultural humility.
Cultural Brokers
Cultural Brokers bridge and link groups or individuals of
different cultural backgrounds for the purpose of
reducing conflict and producing positive change. The
Cultural Brokers Program is a model that is emerging as
a promising practice in California, in which community
members serve as liaisons and catalysts for change, and
bridge the cultural gap by communicating both differences and similarities between cultures. The
Cultural Brokers Program is being introduced as a
strategy within the Systems Improvement Plan (SIP) to
help break the pattern of disproportionality and
outcome disparity, and provide greater opportunity and
new avenues for success that may not have been tried
before for families and youth involved in the Santa Clara
County child welfare system.
DFCS held three community forums in 2014 to obtain
information, perspectives, and input from community
stakeholders and partners. The feedback obtained was
instrumental in framing the program's parameters and
determining how to best develop and operate it. The
Request for Proposal will be issued in the spring of 2015.
Resource Family Approval Process
DFCS has begun implementation of the Resource
Family Approval (RFA) process. This process eliminates
duplication and increases approval standards by
incorporating a comprehensive psychosocial evaluation
of all families who want to provide care to a child,
including relative care, foster care, adoption, or legal
guardianship. The process is unified, family-friendly,
and child-centered.
The RFA process eliminates redundancy for resource
families and allows for a streamlining that includes one
application, one background check, a home assessment
and a permanency assessment. The permanency
assessment will replace the adoption home study. The
focus is on stable, caring, and lifelong relationships. The
new process will take 90 days or less, therefore
accelerating the process to permanency and more
quickly determining eligibility for families, relatives, and
non-relatives seeking to become caregivers.
The RFA unit is comprised of a Social Work Supervisor
and three RFA Social Workers. To date, 11 Resource
Family homes have been approved, with 25 pending
approval and 58 people in pre-approval training, which
includes seven kinship families.
Juvenile Justice and Child Welfare System
Integration (Dually-Involved Youth)
The Department of Family and Children's Services
(DFCS) is working in collaboration with the Juvenile
Justice Court and Juvenile Probation Department (JPD)
on a joint project intended to improve outcomes for
youth dually involved in both the juvenile justice and
child welfare systems.
Juvenile Probation received a technical assistance grant
from the MacArthur Foundation's Model for Change to
implement effective practices, reduce recidivism and
out-of-home placement, and to improve correctional
alternatives for youth in the juvenile justice system with
a history of maltreatment. Additional partners in this
effort include the Department of Behavioral Health
Services, County Office of Education, District Attorney's
Office, Public Defender's Office, Legal Advocates for
Children & Youth, community-based organizations, and
community representatives. The initial work has
focused on developing effective cross-system
communication and a shared vision on how best to
serve dually-involved youth. DFCS and JPD have
engaged in joint decision-making meetings to discuss
families who are or could be served by both systems and
their specific needs. Additionally, both departments are
involved in joint case planning efforts to determine how
they can work together to support family needs and
concerns.
On June 23, 2014, the Dually-Involved Youth Unit (DIY)
officially launched and is currently co-located at the
DFCS San Jose Family Resource Center. The DIY unit is
seeing promising anecdotal results. Youth feedback
indicates the combination of probation officers and
social workers collaborating, coordinating, and
providing services in tandem has been remarkably
effective. Probation officers in the DIY unit have been
able to forge a different type of relationship with their
clients, given their understanding of the client's history
of abuse and neglect. Intensive data collection is
structured into the program design so more substantive
qualitative results will be available once more youth and
families are served using this new structure.
Self-Assessment and Systems Improvement
Process
AB 636, the Child Welfare System Improvement and
Accountability Act of 2011, required counties to
undertake an extensive self-assessment of the local
child welfare system, resulting in the development of a
multi-year System Improvement Plan (SIP). The main
outcomes of the SIP are child safety, child permanency,
440
Section 3: Children, Seniors, and Families County of Santa Clara
Department of Family and Children’s Services — Social Services Agency FY 2016 Recommended Budget
and child and family well-being. The goal is for
continual improvement in child welfare practices that
address these outcomes.
This process is working toward system improvement
through thoughtful quantitative and qualitative
evaluation and analysis. The quantitative evaluation
component is a county's Self-Assessment. This analysis
includes program strengths and barriers as they relate
to those children, youth, and families being served. In
May 2012, Santa Clara County completed an
assessment of services and programs provided in 2009-
2012. The qualitative assessment is accomplished
through a county's Peer Quality Case Review (PQCR).
The purpose of the PQCR is to supplement the
quantitative information obtained through the selfassessment,
with qualitative data gathered from peer
Social Workers, Probation Officers, and supervisors
identifying areas of strength and areas needing
improvement. Santa Clara County's PQCR for DFCS
was completed in June of 2011, with a focus on the
reasons why some children remain in care for eighteen
months or longer and the necessary supports to ensure
permanency for these children.
The SIP hopes to address the concerns of the
disproportionate numbers of Latino and African-
American/African Ancestry children and families
involved in the child welfare system and to understand
why a disproportionate number of Asian-American and
Pacific Islander children and families are involved in
Santa Clara County's Child Welfare system.
Santa Clara County has also included an evaluation and
analysis of preventative services provided through
funding from Child Abuse Prevention Intervention and
Treatment (CAPIT), Community-Based Child Abuse
Prevention (CBCAP), and Promoting Safe and Stable
Families (PSSF).
The goals and action steps contained in the current SIP
focus on the following:
¦ Eliminating the over-representation of African
Ancestry and Latino families, resulting in a situation
where these children are no more likely than others
to enter the Child Welfare System;
¦ Addressing safety and ensuring that children and
families are assessed in a timely manner and families
are provided the necessary resources and supports
so that children do not enter or re-enter the Child
Welfare System;
¦ Addressing permanency for children and families by
ensuring family reunification. This can include
helping children return to live with one or both
parents, or if this is not possible, placement with
relatives or non-relatives in a guardianship or adoption
situation;
The Board of Supervisors and designated partners
approved the Santa Clara County System Improvement
Plan in February 2013.
Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option
Federal and State laws require preferential
consideration be given to relative caregivers when
placing children in foster care. Although placement
with a relative is preferred, relatives who care for non-
Federally-eligible children have significantly less
financial support than caregivers who care for Federallyeligible
children.
In 2014, the Legislature, via Senate Bill (SB) 855, Chapter
29, enacted legislation creating the Approved Relative
Caregiver Funding Option Program (ARC). The ARC
program gives counties the option to equalize payments
for relative caregivers of non-Federally-eligible and
Federally-eligible dependent children. Santa Clara
County has chosen to opt-in to the Approved Relative
Caregiver Funding Option and will be implementing the
program in the fall of 2015.
Participation in the program will increase relative
placements and thus preserve family and cultural ties
and as a result improve overall outcomes.
Commercially Sexually Exploited Children
On October 10, 2014, the California Department of
Social Services (CDSS) notified counties of ongoing
allocations to fund local activities related to the
Commercially Sexually Exploited Children Program
(CSEC).
In Santa Clara County, formal interdisciplinary efforts
began in FY 2011 to plan and advocate for CSEC issues.
The Department of Family and Children's Services
(DFCS), in collaboration with the District Attorney's
Office, Judge Patrick Tondreau, the Department of
Behavioral Health Services, various law enforcement
agencies, dependency and juvenile justice attorneys,
and various community-based organizations have been
in the process of developing countywide, inter-agency
approaches to ensure consistency in the identification, 
assessment, protection, intervention and treatment of


youth who have been sexually exploited. Working
committees have been developed and meet regularly to
discuss issues and approaches to address this growing
issue that impacts many of the County's at-risk youth.
DFCS is working with agency partners to determine the
most effective use of the State CSEC allocation. It is
anticipated that the majority of funds will be expended
on protocol development and youth training.
DFCS staff is co-chairing the Super Bowl Law
Enforcement/Government Agency group. DFCS is
leading the group in planning and developing a more
victim-centered and seamless approach that firstresponders
can use to interact with CSEC victims
during the 2016 Super Bowl week. The workgroup is
also working to make this improved response a
permanent approach for victims in Santa Clara County.
The group includes representatives from the San Jose
Police Department, Federal Bureau of Investigations,
Probation Department, District Attorney, and Santa
Clara and San Mateo County Sheriff 's offices.

CalWORKs Family Stabilization
Family Stabilization is a component of the CalWORKs
program that provides intensive case management and
services aimed at stabilizing families. The Family
Stabilization program includes funding to help families
avoid eviction and homelessness. The stabilization
services provided to each CalWORKs family focuses on
the immediate housing crisis and long-term stability. In
the first seven months of FY 2015, 196 unduplicated
applications were received and 107 payments were
made to assist clients enrolled in the program. These
services continue to evolve and are expected to increase
over the next year.
CalWORKs Housing Support Program
In partnership with Abode Services, the CalWORKs
Housing Support Program (HSP) provides homeless
CalWORKs families with a variety of services and
assistance to secure stable and permanent housing.
AB855 provided authorization of funds for the
administration of this program, which launched in
November 2014. The HSP is well on its way to meeting
its goal of 105 families served in FY 2015 and anticipates
additional funding for FY 2016 to continue these much
needed services.
Health Care Reform
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) was officially
implemented January 1, 2014 following a preenrollment
period from October to December 2013. As
Santa Clara County's Medi-Cal caseload grew
substantially during that first year, staff was dedicated
to ensuring all eligible applicants were enrolled timely
and accurately. Now, as this influx of cases enters into
regular annual redetermination cycles, efforts are
focused on the maintenance of benefits for existing
clients and a smooth transition for new clients,
including those moving from Covered California to
Medi-Cal coverage.
Summer Youth Jobs Initiative Pilot
In Summer 2015, SSA will partner with the City of San
Jose and Work2Future to administer the Summer Youth
Jobs Initiative Pilot program, targeting 500 youth
between the ages of 16 and 21 years, whose families
reside in Santa Clara County and are receiving benefits
through CalWORKs, CalFresh, or Foster Care.
Participating youth will be given the opportunity to
work in either subsidized or unsubsidized positions
under this program. The program will include
workshops designed to enhance the participants' jobreadiness
and support the successful performance of
these youth on the job.
CalFresh Telephonic Signature
In the ongoing effort to improve and simplify the
CalFresh recertification process, DEBS is exploring
several options in FY 2015, including sending easy-toread
reminder flyers to clients before their
recertification period, e-mail and text messaging
reminders for annual and semi-annual
redeterminations, and providing a telephonic signature
option. The Social Services Agency's Information
Technology Unit is working together with DEBS to
implement a new system for current CalFresh and
CalWORKs clients, allowing redeterminations to be
completed over the phone, eliminating the need to visit
a district office. This system is expected to be in place by
April 2015.

Seniors’ Agenda
Santa Clara County is working toward achieving the
World Health Organization's designation of an Agefriendly
County and joining the international network of
cities and counties who are intentionally preparing for
two global demographic trends: The rapid aging
population and increasing urbanization.
Over the next five years, the Seniors' Agenda in
collaboration with the City of San Jose, will work toward
this designation by assessing the community's strengths
and weaknesses in eight domains: 1) Transportation; 2)
Housing; 3) Outdoor space & building; 4)
Communication & information; 5) Civic Participation &
Employment; 6) Respect & Social inclusion; 7) social
respect; 8) Community Support & Health Services. With
support and input from elected officials and the
community, the Senior's Agenda will decide on what
initiatives to implement in order to achieve the Agefriendly
County designation.
Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI)
The Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) was passed in July
2012 and marked an important step toward improving
California's Medi-Cal (Medicaid) care delivery system.
The CCI integrates delivery of medical, behavioral, and
long-term care services and provides a demonstration
pilot opportunity to integrate Medicare and Medi-Cal
for people in both programs, called dual eligible
beneficiaries. A major component of the CCI is the IHSS
program. Under CCI, Medi-Cal beneficiaries, including
dual eligible beneficiaries, are required to join a Medi-
Cal managed care health plan to receive benefits,
including IHSS. CCI is composed of three major parts.
¦ Long-Term Supports and Services (LTSS) as a Medi-
Cal Managed Care Benefit: CCI includes the addition
of LTSS into Medi-Cal managed care. LTSS includes
nursing facility care (NF), In-Home Supportive
Services (IHSS), Multipurpose Senior Services
Program (MSSP), and Community Based Adult
Services (CBAS). This change impacts about 60,000
Medi-Cal only enrollees and up to 456,000 persons
eligible for both Medicare and Medi-Cal who are in
Cal MediConnect.
¦ Cal Medi-Connect Program: A three-year demonstration
project for persons eligible for both Medicare
and Medi-Cal (dual eligibles) to receive
coordinated medical, behavioral health, long-term
institutional, and home-based and communitybased
services through a single organized delivery
system (health plan). No more than 456,000 beneficiaries
would be eligible for the duals demonstration
in the seven counties. This demonstration project is
a joint effort with the federal Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS).
¦ Mandatory Enrollment of Dual Eligibles and Others
into Medi-Cal Managed Care: Most Medi-Cal beneficiaries,
including dual eligibles, partial dual eligibles,
and previously excluded Seniors and Persons with
Disabilities (SPDs) who are Medi-Cal only, are
required to join a Medi-Cal managed care health
plan to receive their Medi-Cal benefits.
The purpose and goal of CCI is to promote the
coordination of health and social care for Medi-Cal
consumers and to create fiscal incentives for health
plans to make decisions that keep their members
healthy and out of institutions; especially given that
hospital and nursing home care are more expensive
than home and community-based care.
Prior to CCI, dual eligibles accessed services through a
complex system of disconnected programs funded by
different government programs (e.g., federal CMS,
DHCS-Medi-Cal, IHSS-county based). This
fragmentation often led to beneficiary confusion,
delayed care, inappropriate utilization and unnecessary
costs.
The Governor's proposed 2015-16 Budget continues to
implement the CCI, which provides for a coordinated
medical, behavioral health, long-term supports and
services, and home based services all coordinated
through managed care plans. The budget makes no
changes in the current County IHSS role in CCI with
respect to eligibility determination, assessment of
hours, and program administration. The budget does
however indicate several unexpected changes in the
program which threaten its continued viability:
¦ Participation by counties has changed since CCI
enactment. Originally, eight counties were intended
to operate CCI (Alameda, Los Angeles, Orange,
Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, San Mateo
and Santa Clara). Alameda will no longer participate
464
Section 3: Children, Seniors, and Families County of Santa Clara
Department of Aging and Adult Services — Social Services Agency FY 2016 Recommended Budget
in the demonstration project. Six counties have
begun passive enrollment and the seventh, Orange
County, will begin in July 2015.
¦ The federal government reduced the amount of
savings California is allowed to retain, from 50
percent to a maximum of 30 percent.
¦ The 4% tax on managed care organizations will not
be continued beyond June 30, 2016 due to recent
federal guidance that indicates the tax is inconsistent
with federal Medicaid regulations.
¦ As of November 2014 there was an approximate 69
percent opt-out rate, much higher than initial
projections of 33 percent. The opt-out rate is higher
among IHSS recipients, at 80 percent, though participation
in CCI varies widely by county.
Coordination of Services between Adult
Protective Services and Public Guardian
In 2014 the Department of Aging and Adult Services
Director through the County's Center for Leadership
and Transformation (CLT) program, formed a team of
Adult Protective Services (APS) and Public
Administrator/Guardian/Conservator (PAGC) staff
members for the purpose of writing a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU), which would provide
clarification of each program's respective role and
expectations for inter-program communication.
Additionally, the team developed a protocol to facilitate
Referrals for Conservatorship made to the PAGC by
APS, hospitals, the VA, care homes, and others. The
process included identifying responsible parties, timelines,
and protocols to enhance accountability and
communication of cases under investigation.
After several months of working together, the CLT team
completed its recommendations and provided a
protocol, flow chart, and process to the managers of
APS and PAGC. The MOU and related attachments
were accepted by management and instituted during
the summer of 2014. The referral process has greatly
improved since, with clerical support keeping a record
of conservator-ship referrals to PAGC, documenting
decisions, and notifying the referral originator as to the
disposition of the request. Referrals are now more
accurately tracked and decision making has become a
team effort. 

National Public Health Accreditation
In May 2014, the Santa Clara County Public Health
Department submitted a formal application to the
Public Health Accreditation Board (PHAB) committing
the department to the accreditation process.
National Public Health Accreditation was launched in
2011 by PHAB following years of development and
research by the Centers for Disease Control, Robert
Wood Johnson, and a myriad of other thought leaders in
the practice of public health. National Public Health
Accreditation aims to improve and protect the health of
the public by advancing the quality and performance of
state, tribal, and local health departments.
Currently the department is focusing its accreditation
efforts on selecting documentation to meet the
standards and measures established by PHAB. The
documentation selection and submission process will
be completed by April 2015 at which point a three-day
site visit will be scheduled followed by a decision to
either grant or deny accreditation status.
Through the accreditation process, Public Health will be
able to document its ability to deliver the Ten Essential
Services of Public Health and drive the department to
continuously improve the quality of the services we
deliver to the community as well as increase our
accountability and credibility to the public, funders,
elected officials, and other stakeholders.
Development of Health Performance Indicators
Staff from Public Health, Santa Clara Valley Medical
Center, Department of Alcohol and Drug Services,
Mental Health, and Santa Clara Valley Health &
Hospital System (SCVHHS) Finance, are developing a
system-level dashboard of health indicators and 

performance benchmarks. The Department is honored
to have been part of helping launch the Epi-Center for
Population Health Improvement and intends to
continue to provide its full support to the ongoing effort
to use insights from our data and the clients and
patients we serve to constantly strive to improve
population level health. This team is reviewing the
organizational and human capacity needs for the
County Health System to become a strategic decision
support unit for population health improvement and
health resource utilization. The goal is to drive strategy
and examine progress in meeting population health
goals and system performance goals tied to the triple
aim of Health Care Reform, specifically addressing
redundancies, delays and cost of care.
Emergency Medical Services
The EMS System has experienced challenges with
Ambulance and First Responder Provider performance,
including call time and fiscal stability. As such, the
Board of Supervisors has requested a series of reports
that may lead to contract or system redesign as EMS
system partners collaborate to identify and implement
strategies that address performance expectations in an
effective and fiscally responsible manner. The EMS
Agency is working with system stakeholders to develop
and prepare for the possible release of a new 911
Ambulance RFP. The Agency will bring forward
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors over the
course of the coming months. The EMS Agency will rely
upon recent lessons learned and its Strategic Plan to
chart the course of the Santa Clara County EMS System
for the next five to seven years.
Health Care Reform & Managed Care
Public Health Department efforts to improve
population health remain a highly relevant aspect of
National Health Reform. Several initiatives are
underway that further highlight the value of an
integrated health system where key staff across multiple
HHS Departments are collaborating on improving case
management and helping to address the whole person
health care needs of key cohorts of populations.
Transition care teams, the Nurse Family Partnership
and the Homeless Health program are, again, strong
examples of an integrated health system.
Learning Organization
The Public Health Department has embraced the Just
Culture framework and rolled out training to its entire
workforce in 2014. The Department's Just Culture
trainers are further supporting Just Culture adoption by
systematically communicating about Just Culture
through the staff engagement committee, manager staff
meetings, leadership team meetings, the Department
newsletter, and the Intranet; compiling and
disseminating tools to support managers and staff,
including dialogue tips, systems checklists, problem
report templates, and quality improvement tools; and
promoting advanced and complementary trainings.
The Department has several initiatives underway that
align with performance improvement efforts.
The Center for Infectious Disease initiated a rapid
transformation project focused on the infectious
disease surveillance with participation from all staff
levels within the Center. Surveillance involves collecting
data, collating it, analyzing it and communicating
information to those who need to know. These activities
result in quality data for knowledge and long-term
planning, early detection and rapid response, and a
reduction in the impact of disease. Infectious disease
surveillance is a function unique to Public Health.
Ultimately, this allows the Department to reach its long
term outcome of reducing morbidity and mortality and
improving the health of our populations.
The California Children's Services Program (CCS)
successfully implemented a Unit Based Team (UBT) to
increase the percentage of new CCS applications that
receive a medical eligibility determination within 5
business days to 90% of all cases, a State-mandated
performance goal. A multi-disciplinary team with
representation from employee groups assessed and
then designed a more effective and integrated approach
in the CCS Medical Case Management unit. A pilot was
rolled out with new work processes established and
tested. The Program increased the percentage of ontime
medical eligibility determination from 67% to 93%.
The CCS UBT members attribute much of their success
to (1) Collecting and collectively reviewing meaningful
data, (2) Standardizing work processes, and (3)
Maintaining a learning culture in which the focus is on
analyzing data and testing solutions to learn what is
working. In addition to surpassing its performance
target, the CCS UBT process has resulted in a culture
484
Section 4: Santa Clara Valley Health and Hospital System County of Santa Clara
Public Health Department FY 2016 Recommended Budget
change of working together in a supportive atmosphere,
where everyone has a voice. CCS UBT members share
that this has improved morale overall in the program.
The Department's quality improvement (QI) efforts
advanced significantly in 2014 with the implementation
of a department-wide QI plan, including an extensive
training and technical assistance program for all staff,
QI projects, and assessments of customer service
satisfaction, a quality culture, and workforce
competencies in QI. As part of the QI plan, the
Department adopted a performance measurement
system for monitoring and reporting the Department's
progress on key performance metrics and regularly
engaged six teams of QI champions across all programs.
Trainings and technical assistance have included
coaching sessions, QI projects training, and Lean Six
Sigma training.

Behavioral Health Integration
In FY 2015, DBHS released two Requests for Proposal
(RFPs) for Children, Youth and Families and Adults and
Older Adults integrated outpatient services. These RFPs
represent approximately $100 million in contracted
services, include a continuum of mental health and
substance use outpatient programs, and reflect a
transformational change in the new department and for
the provider community.
In FY 2016, DBHS will be actively involved in
strengthening core administrative functions and reengineering
current services into an integrated service
delivery system. Integration of the treatment system
will occur in phases over the next couple of years in
partnership with staff, community-based providers and
community stakeholders. DBHS will continue to focus
on engaging staff and managers in a collaborative effort
to implement effective administrative practices and
integrated services that are of value to clients, achieve
meaningful and measurable outcomes, and are the
most cost effective. Drawing from the Behavioral Health
Unit Based Teams, Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) improvement strategies, and
rapid cycle process improvement initiatives, the new
integrated DBHS will move towards implementation of
a state-of-the-art delivery system for those with mental
health, substance use and co-occurring conditions.
Health Care Reform
The California Department of Health Care Services
(DHCS) has submitted an 1115 Waiver Proposal to the
Center for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) that would
greatly expand the services that are covered by Medi-
Cal in the State for substance use disorder services. The
expanded services will include Residential Treatment,
Intensive Outpatient Services and Recovery Support Services. Additionally, counties that opt-in to these
expanded services will be the authorizing entity for all
new providers requesting to serve Medi-Cal clients
within a county. This will provide all counties with
greater control over development and placement of
new or expanded Medi-Cal services in the county. The
inclusion of residential treatment as a Medi-Cal benefit
will significantly expand the revenue that is available to
DBHS and will free up current local, State and Federal
funding that is required to pay for all non-perinatal
residential treatment services. This new system will be
an Organized Delivery System and will follow the
current managed care system that Santa Clara County
has operated for the past 20 years. Santa Clara County
will be among the earliest wave of counties in California
to implement the 1115 Waiver.
DBHS providers, including psychiatrists, licensed
clinicians and addiction specialists, serve clients in
several Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). In
Fiscal Year 2016, DBHS will continue to partner with the
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center’s Ambulatory Care
Division to develop a fully operational Behavioral Health
Unit within the FQHCs. In addition, DBHS will explore
the development of a fee-for-service provider network
to serve clients with mild to moderate needs, a new
level of care that will provide short-term, more intensive
services for the adult mild to moderate population, and
primary care clinics within an adult mental health
specialty care clinic.
Given the significant number of clients with cooccurring
mental health and substance use issues that
are served in specialty and integrated care settings,
DBHS will develop a co-occurring training and
technical assistance plan in the coming year. This
system-wide effort will build on existing County and
community-based provider expertise, engage leading
experts in the field and include staff and managers,
community-based contract providers, primary care
partners and other health partners.
DHCS is requiring that all county behavioral health
systems upgrade to the ICD-10 disease and billing
coding by October 1, 2015 to comply with federal
regulations. Upgrading to ICD-10 is a necessary step in
maximizing the using of Information Technological (IT)
to improve the overall treatment outcomes of the
clients served by DBHS. It will also provide a common
data platform for integrating care with the primary
health systems. The conversion to ICD-10 will be
coordinated by the SCVHHS Information Services
Department.
The expanded services afforded by the Affordable Care
Act (ACA) require expanded administrative and service
delivery infrastructure to address these needs and to
comply with many new regulations. The ACA priorities
are access to care, timeliness to service and the quality
of services provided, with a focus on reducing the cost
of care. To support these priorities, DBHS will need to
increase capacity in Administration, Contracting,
Quality Management, Utilization Management and an
Integrated Call Center, as well as in specific clinical
services.
Electronic Health Record
DBHS has been involved in overhauling and
implementing the existing electronic health record
(EHR) system and creating an integrated record for
both substance use and mental health clients. The new
EHR will be designed to create a common portal into
treatment and seamless care for clients between the
two specialty treatment systems. Information
technology funding has been allocated to create an
interface to ensure accurate and timely data gathering
from community-based organization (CBO) partners, as
well as implementing a business intelligence tool that
meets the Affordable Care Act (ACA) goals of improving
service through efficient use of client data. The new
system is expected to go live in early 2016.
Critical Workforce Needs
One of the greatest challenges facing DBHS is the
recruitment and retention of professional staff,
including psychiatrists, licensed Master in Social Work
and Marriage and Family Therapists, and counselors
certified by the California Association of Alcohol and
Drug Abuse. With the ACA's significant expansion of
behavioral health services, public and private health
providers, managed care plans and hospital systems
across the Greater Bay Area and the State are recruiting
behavioral health clinicians. With limited licensed staff
available and significant salary differentials for
psychiatrists, DBHS faces stiff competition for a
relatively small pool of candidates, who may receive
numerous recruitment offers. In addition, Santa Clara
County's cultural and ethnic diversity of clients, families
and communities and high proportion of mono-lingual
speaking clients, necessitates culturally and
linguistically competent providers. Working with
502
Section 4: Santa Clara Valley Health and Hospital System County of Santa Clara
Behavioral Health Services FY 2016 Recommended Budget
SCVHHS and the County's Employee Services Agency,
DBHS intends to explore creative approaches to
recruitment that will increase the number of licensed
clinicians employed in Santa Clara County.
Juvenile Hall Behavioral Health Integration
Initiatives
Juvenile Hall's Mental Health Clinic was chosen as a
pilot site to test out implementation strategies and
identify barriers of the DBHS integration effort.
In September 2014, Juvenile Hall established a Unit
Based Team (UBT), which met with a goal of choosing a
project that could be implemented in 90 days. The team
decided that Mental Health staff would start training on
the use of the Substance Use Treatment System’s
assessment tool. Confidence in the new tool has
increased since the start of this project. The hope is that
with training, clinicians can address both mental health
and substance abuse issues so clients will have a more
efficient and positive treatment experience.
There are several other integration initiatives going on
simultaneously at Juvenile Hall including the creation of
a Co-Occurring Court; merging the two referral forms
that Probation uses to link the youth to services;
piloting use of an integrated assessment tool; creating
documentation standards for our integrated charts;
working on streamlining screening to include more
Substance Use Treatment Services info to avoid
duplication of efforts; cross-training; and integrating the
Behavioral Health Orientation for newcomers. These
projects require staff involvement in many crossdiscipline
work groups, but are necessary to achieve the
expectation of coordinated, integrated best practices,
and the Triple Aim of better service, better client
experience and lower cost.
These projects have illuminated some of the
questions/barriers regarding the integration, and will
help the larger integration by providing and opportunity
to clarify and address these issues in advance.
Mental Health Initiatives
Primary Care Behavioral Health
Over the past six years, Mental Health has been
providing primary care-based behavioral health services
to close to 5,000 primary care clients in SCVHHS clinics.
Currently, psychiatrists and licensed clinicians are
providing direct care services, working closely with
DBHS clinical managers. In January 2014, with the
implementation of the mild to moderate behavioral
health benefit, primary care behavioral health
experienced an increased demand for services for this
level of care. Based on the first year of mild to moderate
client data, DBHS and the SCVHHS clinics are
analyzing demand for these services and working
together to streamline operational processes. In
addition, to address demand for these services, DBHS is
exploring new health plan partnerships and the
development of a fee-for-service, individual provider
network.
Pay for Success Acute Mental Health: Frequent Users
Care Coordination Project
The Pay for Success (PFS) Acute Mental Health:
Frequent Users Care Coordination Project is designed
to reduce crisis and inpatient readmissions through
more effective care coordination, care transition and
procurement strategies. Since early 2013, the County
has been developing a PFS project, the goal of which is
to provide more optimal care for frequent users of the
County's emergency and inpatient mental health
system. This project will focus on clients who have
frequent or extended stays in psychiatric emergency,
inpatient and other institutional settings, ensuring that
they are stabilized in community-based, less restrictive
environments. The community-based care provided
through this project will be designed to improve the
overall wellness of these clients, measured by the
reduced utilization of emergency room and inpatient
hospitalizations. This project aims to better meet the
needs of these clients in the least restrictive setting and
to avoid costs to the County by reducing bed days
purchased from contract psychiatric hospitals, reducing
utilization of Emergency Psychiatric Services (EPS) and
improving the bed efficiency of bed use in the Barbara
Arons Pavilion (BAP).
In December 2014, a Request for Proposal was released
to procure a lead agency for this PFS project; the
estimated date for contract award is April 2015.
Contract negotiations between DBHS and the selected
lead agency will commence following this notice.
Crisis and Inpatient Services
One of the priorities for the new Behavioral Health
leadership is examining the costs of psychiatric
emergency and inpatient care and the services and
supports needed to successfully transition clients from
the hospital into the community. This includes concerns like 24-hour psychiatric resources, Santa Clara
Valley Medical Center licensing and regulatory
requirements, current and needed capacity of
community resources, care coordination with
community-based services and utilization
management.
DBHS contracts with EMQ Families First (EMQFF) to
provide crisis services for children and youth and to
offer a continuum of services including Mobile Crisis,
Community Transition Services and the Crisis
Stabilization Unit (CSU). This continuum of care was
developed for youth ages 0-17 who are at risk for
psychiatric hospitalization because of grave disability,
suicidal potential or homicidal intent. The services are
inclusive of family and the programs work closely with
the family and caregivers to support a safe transition for
the child/youth. In the first four months of operation,
the CSU has served 427 youth and EMQFF's Mobile
Crisis Team has referred 67 youth to the CSU during
that period of time. The CSU was designed to divert
children and their families from Emergency Psychiatric
Services and to support children and youth in crisis
within an age appropriate setting. On average, 6.3 youth
are served per day with 3.7 admits per month.
With a $3.9 million grant from the California Health
Facilities Financing Authority for community-based
crisis services, DBHS is developing a 24/7 adult crisis
stabilization unit (CSU) and two adult crisis residential
facilities. These services are designed as alternatives to
psychiatric emergency room visits and hospital stays,
with the goal of reducing hospital visits and addressing
crisis needs in the community. The County is in the
process of purchasing two facilities which will be
renovated to house these programs. The County Fleet
and Facilities team is working on the building
assessments and architectural planning work. The East
Valley Pavilion property, the site of the Central/East San
Jose Project, will house both the CSU and a crisis
residential unit. The Madrone property will serve as the
South County Crisis Residential project. Construction
on both projects is expected to be completed by July
2016.
In the coming year, DBHS will be reviewing the current
5150 psychiatric hold evaluation policy and processes,
working with legal partners and providers, and
researching and evaluating alternative models of
community-based, adult crisis services.
Mental Health Challenges
Santa Clara County faces a shortage of Residential Care
Facilities (RCFs), which provide assisted living
environments for individuals with mental health
disorders and related conditions, often including
physical health needs. In addition to housing, these
individuals may require additional services to support
living in the community. DBHS currently has contracts
in place for a total of 234 RCF beds, under which it
partially subsidizes the cost of RCF care for certain
severely mentally ill clients through patch payments.
These patch payments are designed to be short-term in
nature, are not an entitlement, and are not provided by
most counties. Even though DBHS provides these
funds, there is an acute shortage of beds at licensed
RCFs, due in large part to the high cost of housing in the
County. To address this need, and expand housing
options for this vulnerable population, DBHS will be
releasing an RFP for these services in 2015.
Substance Use Treatment Services Initiatives
The influx of newly insured clients will tax the current
capacity in specific modalities such as residential
treatment. Given the relative scarcity of residential
treatment beds in the adult system, and a very small
capacity in the youth system, there is a possibility of
lengthy wait lists developing if there is a significant
influx of new clients. A similar situation could arise with
respect to transitional housing units, which are
treatment-linked housing in the Adult System of Care.
Department Improvement Projects: Unit-Based
Teams (UBTs)
The Administration/Contracts UBT continues to move
forward to improve efficiencies and effectiveness of
contract systems in both mental health and substance
use programs. This UBT includes representatives of
both areas who are meeting regularly to communicate
and review best practices for streamlining the
contracting process to meet the needs of all providers.
The group is working to create common boilerplate
language to use in mental health and substance use
treatment programs, taking into consideration the
complexity of contracts and funding sources.
Ultimately, the goals are to have a streamlined
contracting process to expedite payment for providers
and support them in providing services to county
residents in a timely manner. This will lead to county
residents receiving the help they need for happy,
healthier lives and promote better health for all. 

The Behavioral Health Call Center (BHCC) UBT
identified workflow issues created by system capacity
demands. The current improvement efforts focus is to
develop tools in conjunction with the providers to help
facilitate placement. A second performance
improvement initiative was added to assist the
integrated ( formerly DADS/Gateway staff) team with
training regarding the Suicide and Crisis (SACS) Hotline
since some callers report they are experiencing suicidal
thoughts.
Emergency Psychiatric Services (EPS) has launched a
UBT with a focus on recognition and disposition of nonadmitted
(low acuity) patients in EPS. The first small
test of change was to establish a system/guideline for
acuity and use this to identify patients for early
disposition. This action would lead to shorter lengths of
stay and improved access. To date, the guidelines have
met with favorable responses from staff and early
indications demonstrate a reduced length of stay. The
next step will be to conduct staff surveys.
The Barbara Arons Pavilion (BAP) UBT focus is on
improving patient experience regarding food and food
service. The first small test of change was to increase
availability and nutritional value of meals and snacks.
To evaluate success, Patient Satisfaction Surveys are
being reviewed for improved satisfaction with food and
food service at time of discharge. Additionally, the staff
are being surveyed before and after implementation.
Performance Improvement Projects
The State's External Quality Review Organization
(EQRO), a quality review body for County Mental Health
Plans, requires the department to implement two
performance improvement projects (PIPS) and to track
improvement over time. For 2015, DBHS has identified
the following PIPs:
Improving Access for New Level 1 Clients
This PIP's goal is to develop a process to ensure that
new Level 1 clients are engaged in follow-up outpatient
services within five working days or seven calendar
days. This project is designed to identify system
changes that would assure that these clients receive
initial outpatient services in a timely manner. This
standard is both clinically appropriate to assure all new
Level 1 clients do not experience set-backs in their
mental health status, as well as to meet our Mental
Health Plan contractual requirements. This early and
timely access is a critical aspect to beginning our work
with our clients and assuring they have begun to receive
beneficial services when they are most in need of it.
Demand, Capacity and Census Management
Currently, the Santa Clara County Mental Health
System is serving over 18,000 individuals, or
approximately 6% of the County's Medi-Cal
beneficiaries. The current capacity of the system is
estimated to be 12,000 individuals at any given point in
time. Since the system capacity is not static, it is difficult
to determine actual capacity on an ongoing basis. This
fluid capacity creates a challenge of matching services
to needs with appropriate language, cultural, geography
and timeliness. The aim of this project is to develop:
¦ Routine use of demand, capacity and census data
(by category of need) to support management of
referrals and system-wide capacity.
¦ Improved tracking of call volume to predict demand
based on historical trends/patterns.
¦ A standard communication approach regarding
available capacity to support referrals.
¦ A method of tracking demand, capacity and census
that all providers can access in real time.
¦ A method to track number of clients that were
referred to each particular program.
¦ Improved tracking of clients that are in an acute care
setting and their discharge disposition.
Space Needs and Request
DBHS is requesting new space to house all
administrative staff in one location, which will support
integration of the administrative functions of Mental
Health and Substance Use Treatment Services. A
unified space will facilitate the merger/integration by
having a single administration structure to manage the
change in the business model and consolidation of
services. Approximate total staffing for the integrated
administration services is 140, with the potential to
combine other programs as needed. No direct client
services will be provided at this location. 

As a result of the Public Safety Realignment AB109 Plan
(AB109) that became effective in October 2011, some
inmates who were previously sentenced to the State
Prison system are now sentenced to local County jail
facilities to serve their period of incarceration. The
Department has been challenged to find means of
providing health care services, to the inmate
population, that meet regulatory and accreditation
standards due to the increased census that has resulted
from the implementation of AB109. Due to the length of
time which these inmates are sentenced, the Custody
Health Services Department has had to reassess clinical
operations and develop reasonable plans that ensure
inmates receive all necessary preventive, episodic, and
chronic care services that are due over long periods of
time. Health screening such as routine breast
examinations, which were not previously provided to
the inmate population due to their short length of stays
in the County jail facilities, are now required to be
provided to AB109 inmates due to their protracted
length of stay within the jail. All other routine health
screenings and non-urgent surgeries which could be
postponed until inmates were released from custody are
now provided to this population of inmates. The
department works closely with County Counsel and
SCVMC in establishing guidelines and standards for the
provision of these services.
The mental health population in the County's jail
facilities has swelled to approximately 25% of the
population. This has created strains on the Sheriff 's
Office Custody Bureau and the Custody Health Service
Department's ability to provide safe housing for the
mentally ill inmates. The Special Management beds
within the Main Jail facility have periodically been
exhausted, creating the need to house mentally fragile
inmates in general population units. Housing mentally
vulnerable inmates in these units can potentially
deteriorate the inmates' mental status, and subjects the
inmates to victimization by other inmates. The
Department is working closely with the Sheriff 's Office
to find appropriate housing for all mentally fragile
inmates. Additionally, the census on the acute mental
health unit of the jail has reached its capacity, and has
exceeded the capacity for 30% of FY 2015. Plans to
address this critical issue by expansion of acute mental
health services to an adjacent unit in the Jail are
underway.
Due to the increased number of inmates who are older
than 55 years of age and the increased number of
inmates with several medical pathologies and physical
disabilities, there has been a strain on the number of
infirmary and Special Housing beds available for the
inmates who require such treatment and beds. The
Medical Infirmary, as well as the Special Housing Units,
must be triaged every shift to accommodate inmates
who have the need for these beds. The AB109 inmates
have placed a further strain on the availability of these
beds as they may need a specialty housing unit for the
entire period of their lengthy incarceration. Additionally,
due to inmates being sentenced to jail for lengthy
periods of time, the Department will need to embark on
initiating treatment for Hepatitis C for inmates who
meet the established criteria for treatment.
There continues to be an increased demand for
comprehensive discharge planning for inmates released
from Custody Facilities to ensure that both the
medically fragile inmates as well as the mentally ill
inmates are provided continuity of care upon their
release to the community.
The women's inmate population has significantly
increased since 2011, reaching an Average Daily Census
of approximately 500 inmates. Incarceration of pregnant
inmates has also dramatically increased by 67% since
2013. The mentally ill female population has risen
dramatically, with females utilizing 30% of the acute
mental health beds on a daily basis. 


PACE Clinic - HIV/AIDS and Infectious Disease
Management
The PACE Clinic has had stable Ryan White Program
(RWP) funding for more than 20 years. The Federal
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
has become much more stringent in reporting
requirements, which the Department is hoping will be
easier now that the HealthLink project has been
implemented. There is an increase in co-infection with
TB, syphilis, and Hepatitis C among PACE Clinic
patients, all of which negatively impact maintenance of
optimal health for those infected with HIV. The clinical
staff have aggressively increased screening for these
diseases to identify comorbidity early.
Approximately 200 PACE patients have transitioned
from Ryan White eligibility to Medi-Cal with ACA, and
approximately 100 transitioned to Covered California
coverage. These changes have reduced the revenue to
the PACE Clinic.
To meet the growing demands, the Infectious Disease
clinic significantly increased its capacity from one halfday
clinic - one provider a week, to the current 13 halfday
clinics, staffed with multiple providers a week,
including resident and procedure clinics. The expanded
service improves patient access, and health outcomes.
Since its expansion, patient backlogs were reduced over
80% and patient wait time for an appointment was
reduced from months to two weeks. However, the clinic
has never had designated staffing and is sharing with
PACE/HIV clinic's existing support staff to meet the
service needs, mainly by extra help and overtime. In
order to maintain the service expansion, a group of
dedicated clinic support staff may be needed to ensure
sufficient clinic coverage and help fill the existing
staffing gaps.
Performance Improvement/Unit Based Teams
(UBT)
There are a couple of teams in various stages of their
performance improvement activities.
¦ The TB/Refugee Clinics started a Quality Management
Committee last year that includes representatives
from all staff classifications. As a result of
various discussions, a new service related to medical
exams for Aliens Seeking Adjustments of Status
(Form I-693) was recommended and approved by
the Board.
¦ The PACE Clinic Quality Management Committee
has continued with its primary focus on retention in
care, clinic flow, multidisciplinary care management,
and pre-exposure prophylaxis. These projects will
lead to improved access, capacity, quality and
service.
558
Section 4: Santa Clara Valley Health and Hospital System County of Santa Clara
Community Health Services FY 2016 Recommended Budget
¦ The Countywide Just Culture training was first
presented to staff last year and will continue its full
rollout to over 50 staff in the Department. 


VHP is currently seeking full accreditation from the
National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA).
Covered California Issuers must have NCQA
accreditation in order to participate in the Exchange
market. Currently, VHP has an interim accreditation.
There are many requirements for this accreditation
including compliance and regulatory thresholds that
must be met in order to obtain this recognition.
VHP continues with the second phase of the Core
System Implementation and is anticipated to be
complete in October, 2015. The benefits and efficiencies
of the project are apparent. The department may
request technical and support positions in August,
funded by current VHP revenue streams, so that
recruitment can be completed in time for the Core
System Implementation deployment in the fall.
Finally, developing a Medicare Advantage product is still
something on the horizon. The experience gained
through implementing Covered California has given
many reasons to look forward to this additional product
and other products in the future. 

California’s Medicaid Waiver Renewal
California's “Bridge to Reform” Medicaid Waiver expires
at the end of October, 2015. In Fiscal Year 2014, Santa
Clara Valley Health and Hospital System received $115
million in Waiver funds from the Delivery System
Reform Incentive Program (DSRIP) and the Safety Net
Care Pool (SNCP), two of the most important Waiver
programs. However, the Affordable Care Act has
dramatically changed the insurance status of patients,
requiring California to focus on value-based and
population health improvements rather than on costrecovery.
While important progress has been made in improving
the quality and cost-effectiveness of the SCVHHS
delivery system, a successful Waiver renewal in 2015 is a
crucial priority for the system.
Economic Changes Related to Healthcare
SCVMC’s payer mix will continue to change in 2016
related to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (ACA) implementation which includes Medi-Cal
expansion (MCE) and participation in Covered
California. SCVMC will focus on ensuring existing
members, who now have a choice in selecting a
provider, retain SCVMC. It is estimated that SCVMC
will serve over 250,000 individuals in FY 2015. The
enrollment in MCE exceeded expectations with the
current enrollment of almost 45,000 covered lives, with a
projected enrollment of nearly 50,000 by the end of the
FY 2015. This increase is expected to stabilize and
remain static for FY 2016.
The goals for the other covered lives for 2016 are: 76,350
VHP Medi-Cal Managed Care, 18,434 VHP Commercial,
2,200 Covered California, 7,500 Blue Cross Medi-Cal
Managed Care, and 9,000 Blue Cross MCE.
Transitions of Care
As a member of the Health System, SCVMC will
continue its focus on helping residents focus on health
and well-being by improving access to primary and
specialty care in the ambulatory setting. To reduce
dependence on higher cost services such as the
emergency department and ensuring patients are not
readmitted to the hospital after hospitalization, an
increased focus on care transitions and seamless handovers
is essential. SCVMC, as well as an integrated team
from across SCVHHS, is focused on improving
processes for care transitions to provide the necessary
ongoing care utilizing community based resources and
an integrated care delivery system to improve wellbeing,
health outcomes and to lower the overall cost of
health care.
ICD 10 implications
Beginning on October 1, 2015 there will be a significant
change from the International Classification of
Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-
CM), which is the official system used in the United
States to classify and assign codes to health conditions
and related information. The use of standardized codes
improves consistency among providers in recording
patient symptoms and diagnoses. The system is being
changed to ICD-10 which is designed to streamline the
claim submission process, yielding fewer miscoded or
rejected claims, resulting in more accurate and timely
payments. The impact will be felt across many
departments at SCVMC. In preparation for this new
system, the coders in Health Information Management
began double coding (ICD9 and ICD10) inpatient and
large dollar outpatient claims in March 2015. This will
enable the coding staff to receive training on actual
cases for six months prior to the switch in October. Due
to the double coding, it is anticipated there will be a loss
of productivity with this additional work. However,
SCVMC administration will continually monitor and, if
necessary, add temporary resources to prevent backlogs
and minimize any negative impact to operations. 

Downtown Clinic
The Downtown Clinic is expected to open in 2016. In
response to growing demands in one of the
communities with the greatest need for health care
resources, the clinic will provide urgent care services
seven days per week. Once services are established and
specialized staff hired, the clinic will expand to provide
comprehensive primary care services, and an array of
specialty services that are focused on improving chronic
diseases such as diabetes management.
Customer Experience
As the current market competition for health care
services and the pay for performance incentive plans
increases, there is also an increase in financial risk.
SCVMC wants to ensure the best possible experience
for customers across the continuum of services from
well-baby care, to primary care in a patient-centered
medical home, or when emergency or hospital care is
required. One opportunity for growth and improving
service is the Women's and Children's Health (WCH)
services. Focus on this service line began this year by
reinvigorating the organization's commitment to
support breastfeeding mothers and submit a letter of
intent to Baby-Friendly USA to become a designated
Baby Friendly hospital. The Baby Friendly initiative
validates an organization's commitment to families who
choose to breastfeed their newborns and strives to
improve optimal infant nutrition through education
and lactation support.
EpiCenter
In FY 2015, the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors
approved the creation of the EpiCenter Population
Health Improvement. The purpose is to improve the
health of all residents in Santa Clara County by
systematically and effectively linking individual clinical
health and community-level population health efforts.
The department is just getting started, but is already
surveying other existing system-wide population health
projects, identifying target populations, and developing
a robust data infrastructure with advanced analytics.
Hiring is ongoing as the Department aims to bring on
staff with skills in epidemiology, facilitation, analytics,
project management, and improvement science.
Whole Person Care
The California Department of Health Care Services is
proposing a Whole-Person Care pilot project that would
coordinate health, behavioral health and social services
in a patient-centered manner as it develops the initial
submission to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services for the 2015-2020 Waiver. The goal is improved
health and well-being for individual and families.
SCVHHS is hoping to participate in this pilot to develop
innovative programs for targeted populations. Clients
selected for the program would have an individualized
care plan and a single accountable care manager who
supports them to ensure they receive needed services,
which hopefully will include job training to housing or
peer support. Financial flexibility will permit providers
across partnering sectors to do what is right for the
client and align incentives for providers to collaborate,
with savings to be reinvested in the Whole Person Care
program.
HealthLink Electronic Health Records
HealthLink has provided SCVMC with a whole new
environment, and the greatest gain has been
transparency. SCVMC has seen improvement in quality,
safety and patient satisfaction that is attributable in
large part to HealthLink. In addition, SCVHHS has
received in excess of $15 million in Meaningful Use
funding and forecasts receiving another $17 million
before the program ends in 2022. Furthermore, with
HealthLink, SCVMC has been able to see much
improved billing production. At the end of February
2015, Accounts Receivable days were at 72.5 days for
hospital billing, the lowest point on record.
Our immediate goal is to continue rolling out additional
components of the HealthLink Electronic Health
Record (EHR). Wave 2, which is more than 60%
complete, includes the implementations of Beaker for
lab, Willow for outpatient pharmacies and Mediware for
blood bank. These three systems will go live in July 2015.
Beaker includes general lab, microbiology and quality
control testing. Barcode-enabled workflows will allow
lab technicians to track specimens within and across
sites. Willow will support outpatient medication
management and billing, and will allow medication
ordering and administration processing to be managed
as a single order record for pharmacists, physicians,
nurses, and other healthcare professionals.
In the spring of 2015, the HealthLink team will launch
Wave 3 and is expected to go live in October 2016. It's
two principle components include OpTime (Surgical
and Anesthesia) which will be used to schedule patients
for surgery and request supplies and equipment needed
to perform the case, and Radiant (Radiology) which will 


combine tools for rules-based scheduling,
documentation, results communication, chart/film
tracking, and statistical reporting.
The addition of these components further establishes a
unified end-to-end system, which fully supports quality
throughout the full continuum of care.
Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT)
There are ten CLT projects, with over 200 staff involved,
underway within SCVMC of which two have been
completed. The project list and accomplishments
include:
¦ Advanced Practice Practitioner’s (APP) Billing:
Developed a method to streamline APP billing by
aligning providers with National Provider Identification
numbers, issued by Medicare.
¦ Breast Imaging: Decreased the non-value added
time from diagnostic mammogram through conditional
order sets in HealthLink. Additional work is
now focused on gaining efficiencies to support the
increasing volumes and demands. For FY 2014 the
mammography volume was 15,869 and is projected
to be 17,834 for FY 2015, an increase of 12.4%.
¦ Care Coordination and Transitions Initiative
(includes SCVMC, Behavioral Health and Supportive
Housing staff): Working toward a coordinated care
team approach to whole person care. Focus is on
high utilization of deep end services and access to
the right care at the right time.
¦ Care Transitions (includes Public Health): Collaborating
with Public Health and Pharmacy to create a
safe discharge plan for patients at high risk of readmission
patients. Key interventions to patients
prevent readmission and support care int eh
community.
¦ Compliance Committees: Staffed the Compliance
Hotline. In addition, Compliance, Quality and Risk
has collaborated to develop a database to track all
quality, privacy and risk incidents. This database will
allow for better communication and collaboration
to address incidents being reviewed by regulators.
¦ Patient Flow: Four teams conducting projects across
the inpatient hospital flow are currently working on
decreasing non-acute patient days, eliminating the
weekend effect, patient movement, culture of
mobility, and overall throughput. Gains have been
made through multiple pilots, optimization, and
education work in all areas. Notable gains: 742
patient days avoided with extended contracts, optimization,
and weekend pilots; 90% complete data
dictionary for ASAP module in HealthLink; 15%
improvement in turnaround times from Emergency
Department to Emergency Psychiatric Services;
telemetry guidelines updated to current evidence
based practice; Emergency Department to Medicine
order sets completed and in production; and Human
Resource team supported a hiring process allowing
hospital transport department to hire 15 positions in
4 weeks.
¦ The Patient Experience: 4MED completed its work,
had great success and saw unit patient satisfaction
scores significantly improved in the areas of nurses
better listening to the needs and concerns of the
patients and responsiveness of staff. Currently,
SCVMC are in the planning stages of moving those
efforts to 3SURG. The CLT process has completed
and now our Patient Experience Committee is
developing a broader based program to support a
customer focus across teams and departments.
¦ The Rehabilitation Center: The Rehabilitation
Center at Santa Clara Valley Medical Center undertook
a strategic planning process starting in
September 2014 with a Planning Retreat. During
the retreat, the future for the center was discussed
and characterized by transparency, clarity, support
and ongoing staff engagement. A Comprehensive
plan was completed and gives SCVMC an opportunity
to focus efforts in the same direction, to assure
that all activities are aligned with the strategic plan.
¦ Specialty Referral, Authorization and Access: Four
cross-functional teams, with a total of 60 members,
are engaged in reinventing the transition back to
primary care physicians from specialty center referrals,
authorization, and care. The holistic approach
includes key leaders across the organization and
into the community with our partners in primary
care. Phase One report of Rapid Transformation is
scheduled for June 2015.
Unit Based Teams (UBT)
There are eight (8) SCVMC UBTs in various stages of
performance improvement project, which include:
¦ Outpatient Pharmacy UBT: Focused on reducing the
wait time for prescriptions at the Moorpark Pharmacy
to 30 minutes or less, the goal of this UBT was
to increase prescriptions being ready in less than 30
576
Section 4: Santa Clara Valley Health and Hospital System County of Santa Clara
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center FY 2016 Recommended Budget
minutes from 46% to 56% by Jan. 31. In December,
80% of prescriptions were ready in less than 30
minutes, which will help improve the patient experience.
¦ Barbara Arons Pavilion UBT: The goal was to
increase the availability of nutritious snacks to
patients between meals by Dec. 31, 2014, to improve
patient satisfaction and reduce behavior issues. This
goal was achieved and in addition, patients are
provided nutrition education classes.
¦ Emergency Psychiatric Services UBT: The goal is
increased patient satisfaction due to shorter length
of stay and increased cost effectiveness due to
shorter stay. This effort will lead to improved access,
capacity, quality and service.
¦ Health Information Management UBT: The goal is
to improve the turn-around time for scanning of all
documents, reduce redundancy, and improve
customer service to patients and medical staff. Also
to improve growth, learning and development and a
better understanding of all document types. The
team has reduced the backlog from seven feet to
three feet of documents to be scanned.
¦ Cardiology UBT: The goal is to increase patient satisfaction
from 66% to 80% by Mid-February 2015 (73%
achieved by Mid-March). Improve patient access to
our scheduling department by responding to calls in
real time and voice-mail messages within 48 hours,
and create new templates for staff to perform more
timely scheduling.
¦ Pharmacy Procurement UBT: The goal was to
improve the Vaccine for Children inventory utilization
and documentation and in this effort implemented
Pyxis at VHC Tully, Pediatrics Outreach and
VHC Bascom.
¦ Sunnyvale Primary Care Behavioral Health UBT: The
goal is to establish a baseline for care pathways by
systematically identifying level of acuity of referred
patients and the associated level of care by acuity.
¦ Inpatient Pharmacy UBT: Designed pharmacist
Code Blue training by April 2015 to increase staff
comfort level with responding to Code Blue incidents,
and increasing nurse/physician satisfaction.
Training will begin in May 2015. Transformation and Modernization Project
The Planning and Development Department continues
to transform and modernize its operations through the
County Center for Leadership and Training
Transformation and Modernization Project (TM
Project).
The TM Project engages staff to improve customer
relations, the permit process and staff development.
The primary focus of the project in FY 2016 will be the
Department's permit process workflow and use of
information technology. After receiving in-depth
training in Lean and Six Sigma principles, staff is
redesigning the permit process to reduce delays,
improve consistency and better meet the needs of the
public and permit applicants. The redesigned permit
process will be supported by newly acquired software to
centralize permit data and automate permit workflow.
In FY 2016, the Department will also reorganize the
Building, Fire and Engineering offices into a
consolidated Development Services Division and create
the Central Permit Office to directly manage customer
relations and oversee the permit process. These
changes will allow the Department to meet the strategic
goals of the TM Project and achieve the following
operational targets:
¦ 20% increase in customer satisfaction scores over a
baseline survey.
¦ Achieve a 40% decrease in average elapsed permit
processing time for all permits in 2016 compared to
historical baseline data. To improve staff development in FY 2016 consistent
with the Executive Office's Countywide goals for the
development of a learning organization, the
Department will initiate a staff leadership development
and training program. Managers and supervisors will
meet regularly and receive training and coaching
designed to improve the leadership of the Department.
Staff will be trained in subject areas critical to their
professional development such as customer service,
time management, project management and use of
software. The operational targets for the staff
development program include:
¦ Achieve 20% increase in staff scores on the management
and leadership survey in 2016 over the 2015
baseline.
¦ Reach 80% completion of staff training identified in
the FY 2016 Staff Training Plan.
The Department's Strategic Plan provides additional
detail on the TM Project's goal, vision and values, and
the plans for FY 2016 in the form of strategic initiatives
and implementation projects.
Green Building, Energy Efficiency and Solar
Photovoltaic Systems
California AB 2188 signed into law by the governor on
September 21, 2014 requires local jurisdictions to
develop and pass an ordinance on or before September
30, 2015 that effectively streamlines the permitting
process for electrical solar panels. The volume of solar
permit applications in the County of Santa Clara has
increased by approximately 400% in the last five years.
In FY 2016 Development Services will continue to
develop personnel and implement new processes to
ensure compliance with the new ordinance and the
increased demand for solar permits. At the state level,
the Department closely collaborates with the California
Governor's Office of Planning and Research to maintain
a leadership role in ongoing development of best
practices related to permitting of photovoltaic and
other renewable energy projects.
Earthquake Preparedness
The August 2014 major earthquake in Napa is a
reminder of the importance to be prepared to respond
to a major earthquake in the county. An important
responsibility of the Development Services Division is
the rapid evaluation of buildings to identify and placard
buildings that are unsafe, and just as importantly, to get
residents and business owners back into safe buildings
expeditiously.
As part of an overall Department earthquake
preparedness plan, Development Services staff are
leading an inter-departmental effort to prepare for this
monumental task. A department earthquake
preparedness plan will include inter-departmental
professional and technical staff that can assist the
department in the evaluation of County owned
buildings after a major earthquake. Licensed County
engineers, architects and geologists have undergone
training to become certified to the same standard that
is required in order for individuals to participate in
mutual aid across the state. These certified professional
staff will reduce the time necessary to evaluate
buildings that support essential services and other
County owned buildings.
Plan Check, Inspection, CEQA and Habitat Plan
Services to County Departments
In FY 2016 County facility and capital projects will
undergo the same permitting, plan review and building
inspection processes conducted by the Department
that are required for private development in the county.
Review and inspection by the Department reduces the
need for Facilities and Fleet (FAF) to review these
projects for code compliance and centralizes building
code and Fire Marshal review in the Department of
Planning and Development.
The Department plans to provide CEQA and Habitat
Plan permitting assistance services to notable County
capital projects and programs, including the
Renewables for Revenue program, affordable housing,
bridge improvements, County Jails' improvements, and
Fairgrounds and Civic Center master planning projects.
Code Enforcement
The Department is implementing code enforcement
reforms presented to HLUET in FY 2015. Two new
Permit Technician positions will allow the Department
to reduce a violation backlog, improve the program, and
staff enhanced operations.
The Department is creating a two-tiered complaint
handling system; one tier for routine cases that can be
readily resolved through voluntary actions and a second
tier for difficult cases that require a higher level of
enforcement. In the routine tier, a Permit Technician
will receive a complaint, open a file, make contact with
596
Section 5: Housing, Land Use, Environment and Transportation County of Santa Clara
Department of Planning and Development FY 2016 Recommended Budget
the alleged violator and schedule site inspections. If a
violation is confirmed by a site inspection, the
technician will communicate the options for resolution
with the violator and refer the case to the appropriate
division for resolution through routine permitting
processes or re-inspections. The technician will
continue to track the status of the case until the
complaint is resolved and closed.
If the complaint is not resolved in a prescribed period of
time through this first tier process, the Permit
Technician will refer the case to the second tier for
resolution. Second tier cases will be resolved by staff
within a specialized unit in coordination with County
Counsel's office. These cases will typically require
additional compliance tools, such as Compliance
Agreements, cost recovery billing and nuisance
abatement proceedings.
To oversee the reengineering of the current process and
oversee code enforcement implementation, staff will be
working with a Code Enforcement Oversight
Committee (CEOC) that consists of the Deputy County
Executive, the Department Director, Planning Manager,
Building Official, Code Enforcement Manager, LDE
Manager and a representative from Environmental
Health and Roads and Airports. The CEOC will
coordinate across divisions and departments, provide
operational and policy direction to staff, prioritize code
enforcement cases, direct resources, track progress and
oversee continuous improvement efforts.
Policy and Ordinance Updates
Planned policy and ordinance updates include changes
to the language implementing rural area local serving
policies of the General Plan, establishing minimum
creek setbacks per Water Quality requirements,
consolidating staff level decision-making bodies,
streamlining the process for reviewing Cluster
Subdivisions, and modify permitting requirements for
adult entertainment uses. The Department will also
evaluate streamlining permitting for small commercial
stables and farmer's markets and assist as needed in the
development of a marijuana cultivation ordinance.
General Plan
Staff has recently completed or is completing the
Housing, Health and Circulation Elements of the
General Plan. Prior to initiating policy oriented updates
of the remaining elements of the General Plan, staff will
be developing alternatives for Board consideration for
updating the language and format of General Plan so
that it is current, more understandable to the public and
simpler to maintain over time.
Historical Heritage-Certified Local Government
Program
The Department is planning to reinvigorate the
County's Historical Heritage Program through pursuit of
grant funding to conduct historical surveys of County
neighborhoods, increasing training to Historical
Heritage Commissioners, and providing resources for
third party historical resource evaluations.
Support for Agriculture
In cooperation with the Santa Clara County Open Space
District, the Farm Bureau and other partners, the
Department is seeking State grant funding to inventory
and develop long-term protection strategies for priority
agricultural areas.
Consolidation of Administrative Decision-Making
Processes
To simplify the administrative permit approval process,
the Department is working with the Planning
Commission to consolidate the Architectural Site
Approval (ASA) Process with the Zoning Administrator
(ZA) Approval Process. A single streamlined process for
the staff-level approval of non-controversial, minor
permits will be more efficient and less-costly to
administer. The reforms will include an expedited path
to the Planning Commission for projects that warrant
Planning Commission review due to their complexity or
level of controversy.
Planning Commission MinuteTraq Conversion
Staff will be working with the Planning Commission to
author, process and deliver staff reports on the
MinuteTraq software platform. This will improve
efficiency, lower cost and reduce the paper involved in
Planning Commission review of project applications. Service Effectiveness and System Sustainability
In 2013, the Santa Clara County Parks and Recreation
Department began a transformation initiative aligned
with the County's Center for Leadership and
Transformation, entitled “Strategic Teams for Action
and Results” (STAR), to address the key areas of strategic
focus, including customer focus, the longterm financial
sustainability of the Department, leveraging community
assets, and measuring performance. Five STAR teams,
consisting of eight staff members each and representing
twenty percent of the Department across the entire
depth and breadth of the organization, developed 23
significant recommendations with 133 specific action
items through the three phases of the transformation
process, the majority of which are progressing steadily
within available resources. Highlights of
recommendations anticipated to be acted upon in the
near term are summarized below.
Enhancing Customer Service While Increasing
Operating Revenue Potential
The County's regional park system provides access to an
incredible array of 29 parks encompassing nearly 50,000
acres of rich natural, cultural, historic, and scenic  resources. As the county's population has grown
increasingly urban and diverse, and as technology has
advanced, the recreational desires of our residents have
diversified and expectations for convenient access to
information and customer service have increased.
Benchmarking and best practice research show that the
Department has the opportunity to provide enhanced
visitor amenities that will meet the evolving needs of
residents, such as: Shorter loop trails that are easy to
access, adding small reservable picnic areas and small
group campsites that cater to our changing
demographics, park stores that provide for the
necessities of campers, boaters, and other park visitors,
exciting and engaging nature-oriented play areas with
water features, expanded alternative camping facilities,
including yurts or cabins. Each of these amenities are
likely to expand park visitorship and provide enhanced
revenue to offset operating costs of the Department.
Technology also can allow residents and visitors access
to information about parks, the opportunity to reserve
campsites and other facilities, and even interpretive
information from the comfort of their home, car, or
while at the park using smart phones and tablets. The
department will continue to enhance its website, online
reservation system, and will expand into providing
interpretative information to users of mobile
technology. Providing connectivity to the internet while
in parks is another important request from visitors that
the department will endeavor to meet. These
technology solutions can leverage capital investment to
drive operating efficiencies and increased revenue.
Leveraging Community Support Through
Volunteers and Partnerships
Support for the park system is strong among county
residents and businesses. The Department will
continue its efforts to provide opportunities for those
who care about their parks, natural areas, cultural and
historic resources and who want to get involved and
give back a variety of opportunities to volunteer as an
individual, or part of a community or employer group.
The Department will focus on continuing to expand
and enhance its capacity to provide training and
support to its valued volunteers.
In 2013, the County allowed the Department to
repurpose a significant portion of the Muriel Wright
Center. The facility, which once served as a juvenile
detention center, is now being used to house the
Department's volunteer program and provide lodging
for AmeriCorps Teams.
Many community groups, other agencies, and
businesses are interested in working with the
department in more coordinated and longterm
partnerships. Identifying these opportunities, building
these relationships, and coordinating efforts in areas of
mutual interest requires concentrated focus. In early
2015, the Department repurposed a vacant position to
focus on developing an expanded and consolidated
partnership and resource development program.
Reviewing the policy framework to support enhanced
partnerships will be one of the first tasks addressed.
Habitat Conservation Plan Implementation
The Santa Clara Valley Habitat Agency opened its doors
for business in the fall of 2013. After getting the essential
mechanisms in place to function as an organization,
focus is increasingly turning to enrolling lands in the
reserve system. The department anticipates bringing
the first potential parkland for enrollment into the
reserve system to the Board for consideration.
Martial Cottle Park Development and Operations
The County's newest park, 287-acre Martial Cottle Park,
opened in late 2014. The County and State-owned
agricultural park, located at Snell Avenue and Branham
Road in San Jose, includes approximately 4 miles of
multi-use trails, 35 acres of developed parkland (picnic
areas, passive use areas, children's discovery area,
restroom facilities, public parking, staff/maintenance
building and visitor center), 22 acres of Cooperative
Partner use areas (UCCE Master Gardeners, 4-H and
research fields; urban forestry and a community
garden), and almost 200 acres of active farmland. With
construction of Phase 1 complete and open to public
use, additional resources will be required to support the
operation of the park. In 2016, the department expects
to begin the process of including the 32 life estate, which
includes the historic homestead and active agricultural
uses, into the broader park. 

Clean Water Program
The Clean Water Program was transferred from the
Department of Planning and Development to CEPA in
FY 2015. The Clean Water Program involves an
enforcement component, much like regulatory
activities performed by Registered Environmental
Health Specialists, Hazardous Materials Technicians,
Agricultural Biologists and Weights & Measures
Inspectors. The Program is consistent with CEPA's
mission to ensure public health and safety and to
protect the environment.
During FY 2016, the Clean Water Program will focus on
implementing enforcement programs and will lead
County coordination around the re-issuance of one of
its two State-issued storm water permits. The Clean
Water Program will continue to collaborate with other
departments, including Planning and Development,
Roads and Airports, Facilities and Fleet, and Parks and
Recreation, to ensure compliance with the State
permits. CEPA will also be exploring potential funding
sources to satisfy the increasing State-mandated
requirements and perhaps even to reduce the current
level General Fund obligation to the Clean Water
Program.
Recycling and Waste Reduction Division
Beginning July 1, 2015, a new garbage collection
franchise agreement for unincorporated residents takes
effect. The current eight garbage districts have been
consolidated into three, and new services such as food
waste collection for composting and a less expensive
and smaller 20-gallon can will be available. The County
will be the largest jurisdiction within Santa Clara
County to add residential food waste collection. Food
waste represents approximately 25% of the waste
stream, so the separate collection will greatly increase
the diversion rate and also should make the use of a
smaller sized garbage canister possible for more
residents. In addition, a limited Household Hazardous
Waste collection event will be added to one of two
community clean-ups per Garbage District annually
under the new franchise agreements, increasing
convenient access to safe disposal of Household
Hazardous Waste.
Household Hazardous Waste Program-
Whiteboard Animation Videos
The HHW Program developed (with funding from
CalRecycle) four whiteboard animation videos. The
videos address the proper disposal of: 1) Household
hazardous waste; 2) Fluorescent lamps and household
batteries; 3) Paint; 4) Used motor oil and oil filters. Each
video is 60 seconds in length and show someone rapidly
drawing on a whiteboard with a voiceover message.
These innovative videos are fun, have a clear and
concise message, and most importantly, keep the
audience engaged while educating them on how to
properly dispose of waste products. They deliver the
message to the audience with simple language and
graphic images and are more engaging than reading the
message in a brochure or pamphlet. 