Medi-Cal Enrollment
AB720, signed into law by Governor Jerry Brown on
October 8, 2013, expands the Affordable Care Act in
California. AB 720 will assist formerly incarcerated
individuals in enrolling into the Medi-Cal program prior
to being released. Additionally, costs associated with
Medi-Cal are covered using federal funds. AB 720 will
address one of the main barriers to reentry by helping
formerly incarcerated inmates access physical, mental
health and substance abuse services.
The importance of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to
county corrections budgets cannot be understated.
Anything that increases the authority at the county (or
state) level to create more gateways towards enrollment
expands the cost-saving opportunities at all levels
(100% federal reimbursement until 2016, then 90%
after). As a result, the more offenders who are enrolled,
the more money the county will save overall on inmate
healthcare. Even individuals with pre-trial status are  eligible and in those cases, increased access to
treatment may become a valuable means of preventing
first offenses or recidivism.
Housing
The Board of Supervisors adopted the FY 2014 Final
Budget, which included the allocation of $4 million in
one-time AB 109 funds to develop a housing plan that
will implement subsidies or housing funds for
permanent supportive and/or long-term transitional
housing with supportive services. These supportive
services include intensive case management and much
needed treatment programming. The Office of Reentry
Services continues to work with housing stakeholders
to implement this housing program in conjunction with
other housing initiatives the County is currently
undertaking. Without reliable, affordable housing,
successful reentry and long term stability are nearly
impossible to achieve. Establishing a reliable network of
resources for “housing the hard to house” in FY 2015 will
further the common goal of reducing recidivism in
Santa Clara County.
Parolee Reentry Services Program
The County entered into a formal partnership in the
amount of $2.6 million with the California Department
of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) to
reintroduce CDCR parolees back to their respective
communities with increased support. Specifically the
Santa Clara County Reentry Resource Center (RRC) in
collaboration with the Office of Reentry Services and
the Department of Alcohol & Drug Services (DADS) will
establish the Parolee Reentry Services Program,
targeting parolees residing within the County of Santa
Clara. This partnership is in alignment with the RRC’s
mission to reduce recidivism by using evidence-based
practices.
The project will serve a minimum of 200 male and
female offenders residing within the County of Santa
Clara per year, who have been referred by a Parole
Agent. The Program will run between April 2014
through June 2015. At any given time, it is planned that
the RRC will accommodate up to 82 parolees receiving
intensive program-funded services for a typical period
of six to nine months, after which they will continue to
receive support through RCC and its partners. The
Program’s caseworkers will continue to closely monitor
the offenders for a period of one year. Assessment Appeals
A current challenge for the Department is the increased
workload, particularly in the areas of Assessment
Appeals and records. In Assessment Appeals, for
example, while appeals applications have decreased
from a high point of nearly 13,000 in 2009-2010, there are
still more than 7,000 applications expected during the
current tax year. While the next tax year might see a
further drop to 6,000 applications, this level is still much
higher than the historically 3,000 range in more normal
years. In order to successfully absorb this workload,
while at the same time moving various projects
forward, the Department continues to identify areas to
streamline work, shift existing Department resources in
and out of the areas of most need, and rely on the
dedication of hard working staff.  Emergency Operational Area Council
Planning for response to, and recovery from, a natural
disaster or other emergency has long required regional
approaches due to the wide area of impact. Multijurisdictional
coordination can be problematic
whenever such regional efforts are required, and
Emergency Management is no exception. The County
Executive’s Office of Emergency Services, in conjunction
with the County Fire Department, plays a leadership
role in County efforts in this regard. In Fiscal Year 2013,
the Board of Supervisors acted to reorganize,
streamline, and consolidate the disaster and emergency
planning efforts through the creation of the Santa Clara
County Emergency Operational Area Council (EOAC).
Through its creation the new council absorbed the roles
previously filled by the County Disaster Council and the
Emergency Preparedness Council. This new council is
an interim measure until a formal joint powers
authority (JPA) can be established. Work is currently
underway on the development of a JPA. Although it will
likely require a year or more to formalize a JPA, the
council recognized the value of working together as
partners under the EOAC immediately, Efforts are also underway to better integrate support of
the upward of 40 other non-profit and private sector
groups who support preparedness and recovery efforts.
The unified EOAC will conduct joint training and
exercising to ensure key leaders and staff know each
other and develop a shared basis of knowledge before
being put to the test in a major emergency.
Civic Center Master Planning and Development
With the County’s acquisition of the former San Jose
City Hall site and the former U.S. Army Reserve site from
the Federal Department of Defense, the County has
begun the master planning process to re-evaluate the
Civic Center Campus and its relationship to the
communities it serves.
The Civic Center encompasses 55 acres and includes
County operations, administration, judicial and
correctional uses. Over half the building stock is more
that 40 years old, and many of those buildings are in
need of upgrades. Despite some of the Civic Center site’s
constraints, the size of the site and its proximity to
downtown San Jose, shopping, and access to transit
provides a good opportunity for the County to create a
sustainable, mixed-use, transit-oriented development
that will reshape the function and feel of the Civic
Center as well as benefit the surrounding
neighborhoods.
As the first step during Fiscal Year 2014, the County
initiated an assessment of its own space needs founded
on principles of improving efficiency and reducing the
cost of delivering County services. During this period,
the County also begun exclusively negotiating potential
terms of a master development agreement with the
Lowe Enterprises, successful winner of the County’s
2014 Civic Center Developer Request for Qualifications
process. The County intends to complete the Facilities
Needs Assessment by September 2014, followed by
master planning efforts headed by Lowe Enterprises in
mid-Fiscal Year 2015.
Fairgrounds Master Planning
During FY 2015, the County Executive’s Office and the
Board of Supervisors will continue the process of
master planning the future of the County Fairgrounds.
The County will evaluate strengths, weaknesses, and
opportunities that currently exist as the Fairgrounds, as
well as future development potential. The Fairgrounds
will be assessed against current and best practices of
fairgrounds management, as well as having its
underutilized areas analyzed to determine options for
use that would maximize public benefit for all residents
of the County. The process will continue the County’s
commitment to engage stakeholders and the larger
community throughout the creation and
implementation of the master plan. It will answer many
of the questions posed by Board members and the
public about the best balance and timing of community
uses and income generation for the benefit of all Santa
Clara County residents.  Backlog
As of June 30, 2013, the backlog of incomplete
assessment activities stood at 4,027 – a 65.7% decrease
from the prior year’s 11,741 backlog. Additionally, the
Department achieved improvements in all major
workload indicators and processing times (see budget
metrics). The major indicator of completed assessments
increased by 1.6% (to 98%) for FY 2013.
As real estate markets improve, assessment appeals
typically decline allowing redirection of limited
resources toward processing change of ownership and
new construction activities. Last year’s $26 billion
increase in assessed roll resulted in a 6.3% increase
(3,400 units) in changes of ownership and new
assessment activities. When the backlog is eliminated,
the Department will focus resources on creating new
discovery programs to identify and accurately assess
unreported assessment events, such as unpermitted
construction activities, and businesses that fail to file
annual business property statements. Additional nonmandatory
audits and increased use of technology and
data-sharing with other municipal agencies will also aid
in improving assessment compliance and accuracy.
New Positions
The 16 new positions allocated in FY 2013 have
significantly contributed to a reduction in the backlog
allowing greater flexibility to strategically respond to
increased workload demands. The positions were not
filled until midway through FY 2013. Despite substantial
training required for new employees, the new appraisers
and auditors have accomplished the following:
¦ The three new accountant auditors completed 92
audits identifying $70 million in escaped assessments
resulting in $800,000 in new property taxes.
Additionally, each auditor has been assigned 35 to 40
audits for FY 2014;
¦ In the first eight months of FY 2014, the eleven new
appraisers completed 6,828 assessment activities
resulting in a net increase to the assessment roll of
$1.1 billion. Additionally, the new appraisers resolved
195 assessment appeals with $1 billion in at-risk
value;
¦ The two new property transfer examiners contributed
to a 19% increase in recorded deeds, and a 67%
increase in parent-child transfers. Additionally, they
helped discover 27 companies that failed to provide
change of ownership documentation (e.g., merges
and acquisitions), resulting in $715,000 in mandated
penalties.
AIMS Replacement Project
In November of 2012, Harris-True Automation, the
vendor developing the new computer system to replace
the antiquated AIMS legacy system, terminated its $6
million contract without cause. With the assistance of
County Counsel, the Department negotiated the full
return of the $2.25 million already paid to Harris-True
Automation.
In May 2013, the Assessor’s Office retained the Gartner
Group to conduct an independent risk assessment of
options for the replacement project. Gartner initially
considered three options: Orange County’s ATS
Solution, an In-House Development Solution, and a
System Integrator-Led Solution. Gartner determined
that all three options posed unacceptable risks due to
functional gaps, vendor viability, development
capability, and integration with other departments.
Gartner recommended an interim solution: Re-hosting
AIMS onto a modern platform, thus mitigating the
failure and data security risks of having the entire
assessment roll system on an antiquated, unsupported
platform. The Department is currently preparing for the
development of an RFP to implement this recommendation. The re-hosting effort will cost
approximately $1.5 million and take between 12 and 18
months.
When the immediate risk of an antiquated platform has
been mitigated through the re-hosting strategy, Gartner
has recommended adding functionality through a
“surround and evaporate” approach. The Department
has successfully developed numerous small, custom
internet solutions. The surround-and-evaporate
approach involves systematically expanding this effort
in a scalable fashion such that all old functionality
would be seamlessly replaced by new internally
developed solutions and/or acquired through off-theshelf
options.
The Department has commenced a comprehensive
strategic planning effort to provide direction for the
surround-and-evaporate initiative. Only Orange County
has succeeded in developing an assessor replacement
system that complies with the State’s complex property
tax laws. All other efforts have been met with delays,
vendor failures, cost overruns, and significant
development challenges. It is imperative that the
Department carefully consider and plan to address
these challenges in order to successfully produce a fully
functional, cost-effective solution. The strategic plan
will align management, development, and governance
structures and processes with planned objectives
within available resources.
The Property Tax Administration Program (PTAP) trust
fund currently contains approximately $7 million,
including the $2.25 reimbursement from Harris-True
Automation in 2013. It is anticipated that these funds
will be exhausted by the close of FY 2017, primarily due
to re-hosting and additional staffing costs required for
surround-and-evaporate activities. In FY 2014, the
Board approved seven PTAP-funded positions for inhouse
development and project management
functions. An additional PTAP-funded position (ISM II)
is recommended for FY 2015.
During the assessment, planning, and approval process,
the Assessor’s Office will work closely with their
partners (Clerk of the Board, Tax Collector, Information
Services Department, and the Office of Budget and
Analysis) to ensure that a recommendation is put forth
that considers the project’s impact to all stakeholders.
The Assessor’s Office will continue to provide monthly
updates to the Governance Committee.  eProcurement Automation
Best practice in the procurement field is to provide
assistance to the business owner from identification of
need through implementation, or even termination, of
the contract. Despite efforts over the past decade to
adopt strategic sourcing principles and implement a
centralized/decentralized model to provide procurement
services, the County can only achieve so much
utilizing manual systems.
The primary opportunities for savings and efficiency are
in the areas of price reduction, spend compliance,
process improvement, and cash management. As an
example, the County aims to maximize its purchasing
power by aggregating purchase volume to establish
large Countywide contracts and negotiate greater price
discounts.
Though Departments are able to purchase off the
contracts without going through Procurement, most
procurement processes are manual, and the County is
challenged in utilizing two ERP (Enterprise Resource
Planning) systems that are not integrated. Departmental
staff are challenged in accessing the contracts
with negotiated pricing to buy the desired items, and
they utilize numerous “shadow systems” such as unique
spreadsheets to manage their respective contractingrelated
activities.
Determining the latest pricing for the desired goods is
critical to the Department’s ability to take advantage of
negotiated contracts and related cost savings. To
improve staff ’s ability to order goods with confidence
and also to do so efficiently is only one of the reasons
that the need for automation of the procurement functions
has become a high priority.
Based on the experience with jurisdictions that have
implemented a procure-to-pay solution, anticipated
outcomes of such automation are expected to include
the following:
¦ Leveraged buying power, due to cooperative
contracts.
¦ Increased administrative efficiency through
reducing the costs of each purchasing transaction.
Manual processes that are part of the solicitation
process are reduced, speeding up processes and
using a standard format that reduces errors.
¦ Reduced cost of goods and services due to increased
supplier access to business opportunities.
¦ Increased competition due to an increase in number
of suppliers submitting bids.
¦ Faster delivery times.
¦ Reduction of duplicate systems used to maintain
contract-related data.
¦ Enhanced reporting capabilities, including spend
analytics and improved contract management.
Management of the Delegated Authority for Small
Dollar Purchases and Minor Construction
Within the authority granted to the Director of Procurement
by the Board of Supervisors and State law, the
Director of Procurement has delegated authority to
agencies and departments to procure small dollar
goods and services via the Procurement Card Program
and Field Purchase Order methods for goods and
services that are not on contract. Although this delegation
provides a means for departments to purchase
goods efficiently for their operations, a recent audit
found a need for training staff Countywide on the use of
competitive purchasing methods and documentation of
purchases. The Procurement Department must focus
its attention in this area and will be working closely with
County Counsel and the Controller’s Office to revise
existing policies and procedures and to ensure program
compliance by agencies and departments.
Additionally, the audit identified a need for data mining
of Field Purchase Orders to identify contracting opportunities
for cost savings and improved efficiencies,
which would be facilitated by the eProcurement automation.
Therefore, the eProcurement automation is
crucial to address current issues of compliance and
operational efficiencies in small dollar purchases.
The Minor Construction authority was delegated to the
Director of Facilities and Fleet in October 2010.
Pursuant to Board Policy, the Director of Procurement
retains authority and is ultimately accountable to the
Board for purchases made under this delegation. Therefore, it is prudent for the Procurement Department to
audit the delegated function to ensure compliance and
operational efficiencies via this delegation.
Contracting Support to County Departments
The County’s contracting structure could be characterized
as a hybrid model, with the centralized
Procurement Department handling procurement and
contracting activities for goods and services, while
agencies and departments have the flexibility to
perform professional services contracting activities
independently. Both the Board of Supervisors and the
Purchasing Agent have authority to execute agreements
that meet certain dollar thresholds unless a specific
delegation has been provided to the department.
The Procurement Department has begun shifting
resources to assist agencies and departments who
conduct their own decentralized contracting activities
for professional services and other specialized
contracting activities. Training, consulting, help desk
support, and the development of tools and templates
for department staff who are engaged in such
contracting activities are a few examples of this shift.
This shift is in response to two identified issues:
¦ A significant portion of the County’s contracting
volume includes acquisitions that are handled by
staff whose primary functions in their respective
departments may be other than contracting.
Although training has been provided, the results
have not been optimal because of the complex
nature of procurement processes and the inconsistent
handling of the contracting function due to the
infrequent participation of these staff in contracting
activities.
¦ Early involvement by the Procurement Department
in large and/or complex solicitations has proven to
be an efficient and effective means of procuring the
goods and services desired by County Departments.
When Procurement is a late entrant to a complex
departmental request, meeting appropriate deadlines
and quality requirements is difficult. To
improve on this situation, the Procurement Department
is experimenting with project liaisons for solicitation
activities in County Departments.
Procurement Center of Excellence
Keeping Departmental staff up to speed on policy,
procedures and processes is a time-consuming effort.
While there are numerous methodologies for managing
contract knowledge, such as the provision of staffing,
training, restructuring, and automation, as identified
above, the County will benefit from use of a Center of
Excellence (COE) model whereby subject matter
experts from Procurement, County Counsel and the
Office of Budget and Analysis meet routinely with
Departmental staff to assist with addressing the
procurement needs of the Department. This COE will
get underway within the next quarter.
Disposition of Property
The Department is focusing on implementing
compliance and operational changes as suggested by
the Internal Auditor. With the one-time funding
provided at the FY 2014 Mid-year Budget, an external
consultant will provide the additional support to
implement the recommended changes and streamline
the operations. There is a need to formally solicit
vendors for recycling, auction services, and buyers for
scrap metal, which will be completed in FY 2015.

Health and Hospital System With the implementation of
the Affordable Care Act in January 2014, numerous
issues related to the Health and Hospital system
continue to consume a significant amount of staff time
and resources. Matters include the operation of the
HealthLink system, Medicaid expansion with the
inclusion of all lower income individuals under the
Affordable Care Act, and other challenges in a rapidly
changing environment.
California Redevelopment Agency (RDA) Dissolution The
Office of the County Counsel provides legal advice and
support to the Finance Agency in carrying out legal
responsibilities associated with the dissolution of each
of the nine Redevelopment Agencies in Santa Clara
County. Additionally, the Office provides legal counsel
and representation on several related cases currently in
litigation, including appellate matters. The Office
anticipates that Redevelopment dissolution will
continue to require a substantial amount of attorney
and support-staff time for the foreseeable future to
ensure that the interests of local taxing entities,
including the County, are fairly addressed. The Board of
Supervisors has taken actions to authorize necessary
resources to vigorously pursue pending litigation.
California Public Records Act Requests The County
continues to experience a significant number of public
records requests under the California Public Records
Act (CPRA), California Government Code sections
6250 – 6270. The CPRA requires that copies of most
County records must be provided to the requestor
promptly. In addition, the law requires public agencies
to assist members of the public “make a focused and
effective request that reasonably describes an identifiable
record or records.” Complex CPRA requests have
been made by legal counsel involving current and
potential litigation, bargaining units in negotiations,
political campaigns and advisors, media outlets,
vendors in competitive situations, as well as the general
public. A significant amount of attorney and supportstaff
time and resources are devoted to compiling and
reviewing records and redacting information that is not
disclosable under a variety of CPRA exceptions.
In FY 2014 a new Senior Paralegal position was
authorized and recently hired in February 2014 to assist
with CPRA requests. This work volume will be
monitored to ensure that the Office retains sufficient
capacity to address the workload.
Public Safety Realignment Since the adoption of AB 109
and AB 117 in 2011, the Office of the County Counsel
has provided legal advice and services regarding the
implementation of changes to the State’s criminal
justice system resulting from these laws. Primary clients
include the Offices of the County Executive, Sheriff,
District Attorney, Public Defender, Department of
Correction, Probation Department, and Social Services
Agency.  Whistleblower Program In April 2010, the County
launched the 24/7 Whistleblower Program to provide
the public and County employees the ability to submit a
confidential report regarding suspected fraud, misuse or
waste of County resources or funds, or any perceived
improper activities by County officials, employees, and
contractors.
The Office of the County Counsel administers this
program and manages the receipt, acceptance,
investigation, documentation, and monitoring of
reported complaints. The Whistleblower Program
accepts reports 24 hours per day, 7 days a week, and 365
days per year. Many complaints are also investigated by
attorneys in the Office. If a complaint is sustained, the
Office may provide legal advice regarding actions
required to address issues identified in the investigation
of the complaint, including any changes that are
designed to prevent a recurrence of the event. In
addition, the Office submits semiannual status reports
to the Board of Supervisors.
Since the inception of the program through October 15,
2013, the last reporting period, the Whistleblower
program had received 396 complaints. For the one-year
period of October 15, 2012 through October 15, 2013,
the County Counsel received 129 new contacts. With
the number of complaints received, administration of
the Whistleblower Program uses a substantial amount
of departmental resources.  New Language Mandates
In December 2013, the Secretary of State’s Office (SOS)
issued new targeted precincts for ROV to provide
translated ballots and language assistance at the polls,
as required by state law. These new targets substantially
increased the number of precincts covered under the
four federally-mandated languages of Chinese, Spanish,
Tagalog, and Vietnamese. It also added precincts for
coverage in Hindi, Japanese, Khmer, and Korean. These
new mandates resulted in significantly higher costs for
translating and proofreading ballot materials as well as
recruiting bilingual poll workers.
Vote by Mail and Early Voting
The Vote by Mail program continues to expand as ROV
strives to offer more convenient and accessible options
for voters to cast their ballots. In 2012, weekend drivethrough
ballot drop-off sites were established at
shopping centers, parks, and other convenient locations
within voters’ communities, as well as on college
campuses, making it easier for the next generation of
voters to participate in the democratic process. In 2013,
ROV conducted a pilot project for a satellite Early
Voting Center at the Sunnyvale Public Library, which
utilized ballot-on-demand technology. This allows staff
to print ballots on an as-needed basis in whatever ballot
type and language is needed. Based on the
overwhelming success of the pilot, the program will be
expanded to five Early Voting Centers in 2014.
Going Paperless
In 2012, ROV began posting complete electronic sample
ballot pamphlets in PDF format on its sccvote.org
website as well as its SCCVOTE mobile app. The next
year, based on changes in state law, ROV began offering
voters the opportunity to opt-out of being mailed a
paper pamphlet and instead receive the electronic
version by email. This new program was piloted in
November 2013 and will now be implemented
Countywide for the first time in the June 2014 primary
election. ROV expects the number of voters opting-out
to increase significantly this year as voter awareness
begins to build.
Same-Day Voter Registration
State law provides for conditional voter registration
(CVR), commonly known as same-day registration, to
take effect after the Secretary of State certifies that the
Vote Cal statewide voter registration database is online.
While the current project timeline for Vote Cal has
deployment scheduled in 2016, county elections
officials have already begun preparing for CVR. There is
some question at the state level as to what extent the
law allows conditional voter registration to occur
outside of the county election office. ROV staff is staying
closely involved with these statewide discussions, as
these determinations will determine the impact CVR
will have on ROV operations. CVR will lead to an
increase in the number of provisional ballots cast, which
will in turn impact the post-election canvass. This likely
will result in increased staffing and technological
process innovations in order to continue to certify
election results within the statutory 28-day period.
There is also debate at the State level as to how widely
available conditional voter registration will be and what
the definition of a satellite office is.
Voting System
Last year the legislature passed SB 360, which enabled
the California Secretary of State to conduct state testing
and certification of voting systems in lieu of federal
testing. The bill also included provisions that would
facilitate a county developing its own voting system
utilizing non-proprietary software and firmware with
disclosed source code. Los Angeles County is currently
working to develop such a system. With these changes,
next-generation voting systems are expected to become
available to California counties in the coming years.
These new systems will provide increased security,
auditability, and transparency, while presenting a more
intuitive usability to voters and enhanced accessibility
features for individuals with disabilities.
Santa Clara County’s voting system, purchased in 2003,
is now over ten years old and will soon be approaching
its end of life cycle. The system is only minimally
supported by the vendor, who will no longer be
pursuing State certification for new builds. The central
count design, in which all ballots cast at the polls must
be tallied in the Registrar’s office, contributes on an
ongoing basis to later results reporting on election night
compared to counties with precinct count systems. The
County will need to begin planning soon for the
acquisition of a new voting system. IT Transitions: There have been many Center for Leadership
and Transformation (CLT) efforts initiated in the
last few years that have resulted in major cross-County
projects, such as the County Common Directory and
Office 365 project, and with these projects, changes to
IT Services, IT organization, and IT job classifications
are being planned. In addition, there are many changes
occurring in the IT industry which are also driving the
need to rethink how the County manages and provides
IT Services. IT Services, the supporting IT organization
and specific IT job classifications needed to support
those IT Services, need to evolve to best support the
increasing needs of the various business services the
County provides. As the County moves toward consolidation
of some IT services, and standardizing of
products and services, the consolidation of staff is
required to achieve a reduction in the cost of doing business,
increased efficiencies and more effective services.
Some of these changes are reflected in the FY 2015
budget recommendations.
In addition, funding to assist IT and ESA to support
these transitions has also been recommended. Critical
areas of transition include the need to:
¦ Review and revise IT Services and the supporting
organization to improve operational performance
and become more customer focused. This pertains
only to the areas of the responsibility of the CIO (ISD
and HHS-Information Services).
¦ Conduct a County IT job classification study to
refresh and establish more appropriate job descriptions,
sustainable career paths, and effective training
plans based on best practices, in partnership with
ESA, labor representatives, and staff members.
¦ Work with department stakeholders to consolidate
IT infrastructure under ISD. Initial plans are being
developed in FY 2014, and will continue in FY 2015.
IT Asset Management: In FY 2014, there were multiple
software audits performed by software manufacturers
to ensure procurement and implementation records
match. In some cases, the County was unable to show
procurement records of software licenses that matched
what was installed, resulting in costs to the County to
acquire the necessary licenses. To avoid future costs
and liabilities to the County, a better means to manage
IT assets is required. Resources and staff are
recommended in the FY 2015 budget to address this
issue and manage IT Assets centrally.
IT Security: County IT Security needs are constantly
changing due to regulation requirements and the
increasing technology threats to all industries. More
emphasis is needed to manage the security of the
County’s data, information systems, and the
communication and sharing of those assets.
Where security breaches have occurred in industry, the
Federal response has been to impose six and sevenfigure
financial penalties on organizations and
individuals where inadequate security measures were in
place. In the healthcare industry, public disclosure of
data breaches is perhaps even more damaging than the
financial penalties, due to the loss of patient trust and
damage to organizational reputation.
The main objectives of the County IT Security
programare:
¦ To protect County data, information and systems
from external and internal vulnerabilities and
threats.
¦ To ensure compliance with changes and number of
regulations, e.g., HIPAA/HITECH.
¦ To educate staff on protecting the data, information,
and systems for which they are responsible.
¦ To foster security awareness and good practices.
With the fast changing landscape in technology today
the need for clear direction, best practices, easy to
understand policies, training, and awareness programs
are becoming more critical. Resources and staff are
recommended in the FY 2015 budget to address this
issue.
IT Support: With increased functionality in services
such as Office 365, there is an increased need for
additional staff support to assist and advance user
capabilities, providing value-added IT Business support
and solutions. This is reflected in the FY 2015 budget
recommendations.  Additionally, many departments have needs that
require IT Professional Services. In order to manage and
meet the demand, the CIO’s office will be reviewing
these requests, and assist with funding and resourcing
to more proactively meet the need. Larger efforts will be
reviewed by the Business Information Technology
Steering Committee (BITS).
Data Analytics and Reporting
Enterprise Data Integration Strategy: As County data
management and analysis moves from siloed data
sets to an integrated environment where data sharing
between departments is essential to enable decision
making, the development of an Enterprise Data Integration
Program becomes a more critical need. Such a
program would provide oversight, management, and
assistance with prioritization and resourcing of data
integration efforts, recommendations on policies, and
standardization of methodologies and technology
tools to:
¦ Enable, facilitate, or expedite interdepartmental and
Countywide program evaluation by addressing
barriers to data sharing.
¦ Enable or improve provision of interdepartmental
services to County residents by facilitating secure,
legally-compliant sharing of data from within and
outside the County.
¦ Increase awareness of and access to existing data
sets and reports.
¦ Explore the emerging role of Chief Data/Digital
Officer position being established in industry to
manage this large, complex and valuable service.
There are no FY 2015 funding recommendations
regarding this emerging area, but the need to establish
the foundation of Enterprise Data Integration is essential
to better manage these efforts that are growing
across the County. Key stakeholders are working
together to provide a strategy and approach to be
reviewed by the County Executive, Board of Supervisors
and other key stakeholders.
Public Safety and Justice
Legacy Technology Modernization and Replacement:
The Adult and Juvenile Criminal systems are the last
two critical applications running on the mainframe
environment at ISD. The IT staff providing support for
these systems, much like the hardware they maintain,
are nearing retirement and replacements who are
skilled in preserving this specialized technology are
increasingly difficult to find. Meanwhile, the Superior
Court has completed their Request for Proposals to
replace six of their systems, with the Criminal Administration
(currently hosted on the ISD mainframe) being
one of the six. Coordination efforts are critical to
prevent any negative impacts to the regional Law and
Justice business processes with the changes and implementations
of new systems. The CIO and ISD are
working with the County Executive’s Office, Law and
Justice Agency Heads and the Court to prepare, and
implement a comprehensive plan to collaborate on the
implementation of systems, and to replace the County’s
legacy CJIC system while maintaining or enhancing
existing levels of inter-departmental process integration.
In addition, this team is working to improve
technology that supports business operations in County
criminal justice agencies, provide better access to
existing information, and continue to develop technology
to meet new business needs. This effort is
critical and has been discussed with Executive Steering
committees as part of the ongoing Law and Justice
System Roadmap efforts. Funding is recommended to
resource the first year of this effort, to investigate
options, develop requirements and further develop
strategy and plans.
Public Safety Realignment: Data solutions are critical to
the future efficiency of Public Safety. Key are the needs
to improve access to information by developing a ‘data
warehouse’ to consolidate and share data across justice
and Health and Human services agencies (see the above
Enterprise Data Integration Strategy section), provide
the ability to measure and track outcomes across the
spectrum of service for realignment individuals and
other clients, and finally, to improve technology to
enhance analysis and presentation of data in different
formats and contexts to better support operational
decision-making.
Emergency Management Technology: There is a need to
implement new technology that streamlines emergency
management business processes, provides better access
to emergency event information, and offers multiple
channels to communicate timely and accurate emergency
information to both first responders and
the public. Emergency call handling workload is expected to
increase significantly, not only because of the
continuing increased use of cellular telephones and
other wireless devices to report emergencies, but also as
a result of technological advances that will greatly
expand 9-1-1 system access for the public. The next
generation of 9-1-1 (NG 9-1-1) systems/services will
make it possible to report emergencies via Internet,
telematics (On-Star), text messaging, email, video and
photo feeds. It is likely that dispatchers will receive
multiple reports from various sources for each incident,
and will need to quickly review, assess, and extract the
pertinent information needed to dispatch the
appropriate emergency responders.
The increased demands on dispatching that are
expected with NG 9-1-1 system implementation will
continue the trend in public safety dispatching over the
past 15 years, with the need for processing more
information from various sources, for different kinds of
emergencies, and involving ever more complicated
protocols.
New multi-media information will include face-to-face
communication and possibly the viewing of real time
images of crimes, fires and medical emergencies while
in progress. The emotional impact of viewing these
images will require new and enhanced training to
mitigate their potential adverse effect.
It is anticipated that restructuring of the emergency
medical dispatching (EMD) program as a result of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act also will
have a workload impact by increasing the time and
assessment knowledge needed to determine the
appropriate level of medical emergency response. Facilities Planning
FAF is actively participating in three planning initiatives
involving County-owned facilities.
¦ Civic Center: With the County's acquisition of the
former San Jose City Hall site and the no-cost Public
Benefit Conveyance of the former Private George L.
Richey U. S. Army Reserve site from the Federal
Department of Defense, the County has begun a
master planning process to re-evaluate the now 55-
acre Civic Center Campus and its relationship to the
communities it serves. Despite some of the Civic
Center site's constraints, the size of the site and its
proximity to downtown San Jose, shopping, and
access to transit provides an opportunity for the
County to create a sustainable, mixed-use, transitoriented
development that will reshape the function
and feel of the Civic Center, as well as benefit the
surrounding neighborhoods. The County should
complete the first step in the planning process, the
facilities needs assessment, by September 2014,
followed by master planning efforts in FY 2015.
¦ County Fairgrounds: During FY 2015, the Administration
and the Board will continue the process of
taking a fresh and in-depth look at the County Fair grounds. The purpose is to conduct a master planning
process and evaluate its strengths, weaknesses,
and opportunities that currently exist as well as
future potential. The Fairgrounds will be assessed
against current and best practices of fairgrounds
management, and analyzed to determine options for
use that would maximize public benefit for all residents
of the County. Key to this process is engagement
with stakeholders and the community early
and often throughout the process.
¦ Jail Needs Assessment: FAF is working with the
County Executive's Office, the Office of the Sheriff,
the Department of Correction, and Custody Health
to develop a comprehensive jail facility needs assessment
that will consider alternatives to current
facility conditions, and provide one-time capital
costs and ongoing operational costs for each alternative.
This planning requirement has been driven
by the both the age and condition of the existing
facilities and the impact of Public Safety Realignment
as the County has taken responsibility for
inmates that were previously the responsibility of
the State. The assessment will consider increasing
the number of Medical Infirmary beds, Medical
Special Housing beds, and Mental Health Special
Management beds throughout the Jail facilities, as
well as retrofitting the jails to better ensure a safe
physical environment for elderly inmates.
Facilities Maintenance & Repair
The average County building is now nearly 40 years old
and the estimated maintenance backlog is well over
$500 million. During the last 13 years, the County has
expanded services to the public and the number of
County facilities, while decreasing the maintenance
budget by over 30 percent without considering
inflation. Except for healthcare facilities, the County's
lack of investment in maintenance and recapitalization
(backlog) is causing an increase in building systems
failures requiring more costly emergency repairs to keep
County facilities operational and providing services.
Even without a decreased budget, the ability of FAF to
respond to system failures remains impaired. Assuming
the budget remains the same as FY 2014, the County
will be investing in the maintenance of its facilities at a
rate of only 1.12 percent of the current replacement
value, and the deterioration of the facilities will
accelerate. On average, institutional facility owners
nationwide invest more than double this rate.
Legislation continues to add unfunded mandates to
FAF responsibilities. For example, California Fire Code,
Chapter 7, section 5.2.1, requires that fire door
assemblies be inspected and tested not less than
annually, and a written record of the inspection signed
and kept.
The County recently added some 38,000 square feet of
additional space with the acquisition of the former
Ritchey Army Reserve Center. In addition, the County
reactivated the Muriel Wright Center that is roughly
44,000 square feet. Together, these properties require
additional resources to maintain and operate.
With the improvement in the local economy, engineers,
architects, building trades, and qualified managers are
less willing to move to government because of the
County's changes in compensation. In addition,
building trades in general are attracting fewer people
into those careers because of comparatively low wages
in this area. This situation is causing FAF to continue
reliance on construction contractors to accomplish
maintenance and repair work that must be supervised
by a small core of dedicated County staff who are
knowledgeable of the County's facilities, building
systems maintenance, project management, contract
administration, and contract quality assurance.
Despite resource constraints, FAF received 30,449 work
orders and completed 27,459 during this past year. This
was made possible through the implementation of a
new work center that consolidates the administration
and quality assurance of contract services, a new
inventory control system, and the management of a
consolidated Building Operations and Capital Programs
divisions.
Administration
Over the last few years, FAF and VMC Facilities have
been actively pursuing consolidation of the two
organizations to improve service and possibly reduce
costs. The goal will be to increase staff flexibility and
bench strength, and also to create a common system of
procurement, project management, facilities
information systems programs, accounting and
budgeting, and call center. It is expected that a
consolidated facilities administration would improve
services to all client departments. Shift to Local Funding
The County Library District’s revenues are expected to
grow modestly allowing for maintenance of current
service levels. Since the elimination of the State’s
reimbursement for public library resource sharing in
2011, the Library District has struggled to meet current
demands through local revenue sources, primarily
property tax. Additionally, County Library District
residents voted to extend the special tax for the next 20
years, thus ensuring the continuation of $5 to $6 million
per year (18% of total revenue) for hours and materials.
There continues to be a growing disparity between the
level and quality of services among library jurisdictions
across the State.
Digital Shift in Information Technology
The dramatic shift from print to digital formats has
changed collection development, purchasing,
ownership, and lending practices for public libraries.
Virtual library visits now equal in-person visits. Not only
does library staff need new technology skills but the
public needs new skills to stay competitive in the job
market and to navigate the surplus of information that
is now on the Internet. The County Library District has
added a variety of free technology training options for
the public and a suite of subscription services that are
available online 24/7. The County Library District
continues to be a trusted source of information.
Income Disparity
The Library District helps to close Silicon Valley’s
growing digital and income gaps by providing free
programming, early literacy learning for children, tutors,
homework help, and public access to computers. Free
services help kids learn to read, succeed in school, and
promote life-long learning for all ages regardless of
income. The number of visits to libraries is projected to
increase. Human Resources
Demand for recruitment and classification services
continues to increase. The Department of Human
Resources continues to provide classification and
recruitment activities to meet staffing requirements in
the law enforcement agencies, Santa Clara Valley Health
and Hospital System and the Social Services Agency to
handle the influx of inmates from the State system to
the County jail facilities under AB 109. As County
departments continue to implement efficiencies that
result in organization changes, Human Resources
continues to receive classification study requests to
properly classify positions that absorb or are assigned
new duties.
Recruitment continues to be a challenge for Human
Resources as the anticipated number of retirements
continues to grow. Positions are being added in
response to State legislation and the needs of
department operations. The improvement in the local
economy and the reduction in pension benefits present
additional challenge for the County in competing with
the private sector for qualified candidates. It is
especially true in recruiting for highly qualified and
experienced professionals in healthcare disciplines
224
Section 1: Finance and Government County of Santa Clara
Employee Services Agency FY 2015 Recommended Budget
required by the Affordable Care Act, as the County shifts
to a more community-based health care system.
Additionally, recruitment has been challenging in the
Information System/Information Technology areas.
Competitive compensation is emerging as a concern for
both management and the bargaining units as a result
of the County's tenuous budget situation in the past
decade. Classification has conducted an increased
number of compensation surveys. Assessment work is
expected to be continued on the compensation
assigned to specific classifications to ensure appropriate
and competitive wages, especially for classifications
where it is difficult to attract qualified applicants and
retain existing employees.
Recruitment and Classification are currently addressing
the increased service demands. The department will be
elevating recruitment efforts, to determine the
competitive and appropriate compensation level
corresponding to specific classifications, and to shorten
the time line in updating job specifications to ensure
that the employment standards and tasks reflect job
functions. In addition, Recruitment and Classification
continue to streamline and automate processes with
replacement of obsolete computer equipment as
needed, to improve the effectiveness of recruitment and
classification services.
Labor Relations
Labor Relations is currently engaged in negotiating with
two bargaining units and will be negotiating successor
agreements with sixteen bargaining units during
FY 2015. In addition to the continuing bargaining cycle,
there is an anticipated increase in the number of meet
and confers with employee organizations largely due to
the labor impact of health care reform and the
EPIC/HealthLink Project.
Equal Opportunity
Equal Opportunity/Civil Rights Office located at SSA
has embarked on a joint project with Learning and
Employee Development (LED) to consolidate and
streamline mandated civil rights training for all SSA
employees. The Office anticipates continued
cooperation from community advocacy agencies
toward improving services to disabled clients and
continued training to SSA employees on civil rights
issues related to clients. The Office has begun revising
the SSA Civil Rights Plan and participating in the
biennial Civil Rights Compliance review. County Equal
Opportunity Department is poised to implement a case
management system in the upcoming months as a
result of a need to update and upgrade record keeping
and compliance requirements.
Learning and Employee Development
Learning and Employee Development is partnering
with the Information Services Department to provide
Countywide training for the Office 365 implementation.
LED is providing training and change management
support to the key implementers in the departments as
well as the end users of the new software programs. This
year LED will explore webinar and online training for
new employee orientation.
Learning and Employee Development is also creating a
new program for leads and other employees that want
to be supervisors to provide an opportunity for career
development. This year's executive development
program will focus on providing executive leaders with
Just Culture training. LED will partner with the Office of
the County Executive to deliver a summer program for
new executives that will incorporate the Seven Samurai
vision elements into the program. Just Culture and
Seven Samurai trainings are part of the County’s Center
for Leadership and Transformation program.
Employee Benefits
Increasing employee benefit costs continue to put a
considerable strain on the County’s budget. Employee
Benefits continues to work towards implementing costcontrol
measures to contain the rising cost of
healthcare for the County. The County uses a benefit
consultant to assist in the annual renewal of the Kaiser
plan. Employee Benefits has also committed to
periodically market the County's existing medical plans
to ensure that the plans remain competitive and
provide the “best value” for the County and its
employees. The County will also continue to explore
trends in the health insurance market to recommend
modifications to the current health benefits provision
when appropriate and develop alternate health plan
options. With the growing population of active
employees and retirees, processing hundreds of manual
transactions can be tedious and time consuming.
Employee Benefits will research and work towards implementing necessary benefit platform tools that will
streamline the enrollment process, simplify plan
configuration, and empower employees.
Employee Benefits will continue to implement health
care reform revisions under the Affordable Care Act
(ACA). Beginning January 1, 2015, employers may be
subject to penalty if they do not offer medical coverage
that provides minimum essential coverage, is affordable
and meets minimum value requirements. ESA will
analyze the effect this ACA mandate will have on the
County and its use of Extra Help employees. In order to
avoid potential penalties, Employee Benefits will
explore possible health plan options for the County to
consider.
Workers’ Compensation
The 2012 Workers’ Compensation Reform Act (effective
January 1, 2013) increased costs in some workers’
compensation components and reduced costs in
others. The Reform Act also mandated additional
administrative processes that have impacted all levels of
the claims work flow. While the 2012 Reform Act
mandates additional administrative processes, there are
provisions in the Act that are intended to reduce
workers' compensation indemnity and medical
payment costs, and to streamline the claim process
allowing case resolutions to occur more expeditiously.
Additional changes with the reforms are anticipated
following the State's review of the Act's financial and
administrative impact to the industry. No net program
cost savings are anticipated for at least three years
following the reform implementation.
The Workers' Compensation Department targets
FY 2017 for implementing a new claims system
supporting the workers' compensation operation, and
will begin the RFP process in the near future. ESA
intends to acquire a system that will meet the needs of
and can support both the Workers' Compensation and
Liability Property Claims operations to reduce ongoing
maintenance costs.
Liability/Property Insurance
National and international catastrophic property losses
resulting from floods have begun to affect the overall
insurance market in this area. The County is seeing the
effect of these losses on its flood insurance rates and
coverage. The impact on the County is greatly mitigated
by its participation in the joint purchase of its property
insurance through the CSAC Excess Insurance Authority
(EIA). Liability/Property Insurance will continue to work
with the EIA to leverage the County’s ability to obtain
sufficient flood insurance at reasonable rates. The Controller-Treasurer Department protects County
financial resources and ensures adequate fiscal
accountability within County Government. The
Department has been facing challenges to keep up this
important mission with competing priorities and
increased mandates. Working collaboratively with
county departments and the management auditors, the
Department will refocus their efforts in the coming year
to strengthen the control environment, increase control
activities and serve as leaders in transparency.
Transfer of Tax Roll Control Division from Tax
Collector’s Office
The County of Santa Clara is the only county in the
State that performs property tax extension and
correction of tax rolls in a tax collector’s office. All other
counties perform this function in the Auditor-
Controller’s Office. In order to enhance the segregation
of duties and to provide more relevant support and
supervision, the Tax Roll Control Division will be
transferred to the Department, from the Tax Collector’s
Office, in Fiscal Year 2015.
The Department has been working collaboratively with
the Tax Collector’s Office to eliminate the backlog of roll
corrections. The goal is that incoming petitions, unless
with constraints from other factors, are processed
within 90 days or sooner, in the upcoming fiscal year.
Redevelopment Dissolution Act
After the upholding of Assembly Bill 26 that dissolved
the local redevelopment agencies, several County
departments have partnered to implement the
Redevelopment Dissolution Act that comes with
aggressive deadlines and significant complexities. As
required by State law, the Department has overseen the
completion of mandated, agreed upon procedures,
audits, and due diligence reviews, each with its own
objectives and required procedures, and reviewed a
multiple of recognized obligation payment schedules
submitted by our nine successor agencies. These efforts
have resulted in the termination of two agencies and
have led to millions of property tax dollars flowing back
from the redevelopment agencies to the affected taxing
jurisdictions, including school districts, special districts,
cities, and the County. The Department continues to
evaluate the appropriate resource levels necessary to
administer the reporting requirements and monitor the
ongoing activities of the seven remaining successor
agencies, and to ensure that the property taxes are
properly and timely distributed to the holders of the
enforceable obligations and the affected taxing
agencies.
Vision Elements
In line with the County Executive’s vision elements, the
Controller-Treasurer Department is seeking ways to
build bench strength and to mentor and develop future
managers for the Department, which is a key to
ensuring continuity of financial oversight and
leadership for the County. Action plans for this area will
be developed and proposed in the near future.
Operational Bank Request for Proposal
To evaluate the desired outcomes and scopes of the
County’s operational banking services and to comply
with Board policy relating to competitive bidding, the
Department will issue a request for proposal (RFP) for
the County’s banking services after September 2014.
This process will involve dynamic outreach to all
stakeholders including schools and dependent districts
utilizing the County’s banking services. The
Department expects to complete the selection of an
operational bank provider by spring of 2015.  Tax Roll Backlog Project
On June 19, 2013, the Board of Supervisors directed the
Tax Collector’s Office to provide monthly status updates
on the backlog of petitions of tax roll changes, to the
Finance and Government Operations Committee. As of
March 2014, approximately 9,900 petitions remain
outstanding, of the 45,000 petitions reported to the
Board in August of 2013. The Tax Collector’s Office is
scheduled to eliminate the remaining backlog by the
end of December 2014.
TCAS Improvements
A system enhancement initiative was launched in late
FY 2012 to focus on critical needs that were not
addressed in the initial deployment of the TCAS system.
The areas of focus are roll corrections, payment
processing, tax bill maintenance, accounting,
apportionment, and reconciliation.
The Board allocated $5.9 million in FY 2012 to provide
funding for additional TCAS functionality. The effort
will be completed by December 2013 and will eliminate
many manual processes currently in place. Through
January of 2014, the project spent approximately $3.5
million.  The determination of the functionality to deliver is
being driven by the TCAS Steering Committee which is
a representation of the business users from the Tax
Collector’s Office and the Controller-Treasurer
Department.
Developing Today with an Eye to the Future
The Tax Collector’s Office is exploring the cost-benefit
of migrating its payment processing tasks to an external
lock box service. If a migration is warranted, the
Department will still need to support the current
Remittance Processing System for a period of time.
The current online payment system implemented in
2003 is being re-written in a joint venture involving the
Tax Collector’s Office, Information Services
Department; and an outside vendor.
The Department is also in the early stages of developing
and obtaining a document management system, which
would streamline work processes, as well as work
towards the County’s goals of being environmentally
conscious.
Electronic Interface with Assessor and Clerk of
the Board
In FY 2013, the Department was scheduled to work with
both the Office of the Assessor and the Clerk of the
Board in the development of electronic interfaces
between the departments. This work was delayed when
the Assessor’s system project was delayed. A new
initiative is being launched to interface with the
Assessor’s existing system.  Exploring the Use of Smart Phones and Tablets
The Clerk-Recorder’s Office is looking to increase its
technology offerings to the public with the emergence
of applications for smart phones and tablet devices. The
Clerk-Recorder’s Office is exploring mobile device
integration within its queuing solution enhancement
project and in the implementation of a new document
management system. In addition, Bring-Your-Own-
Device concepts and electronic scheduling/check-in
capabilities are being researched for use in the public
lobby.
Obtaining Secure Off-site Records Storage
Facility
The Clerk-Recorder’s Office is fully responsible for
maintaining and tracking the inventory of microfilmed
official records and the Clerk-Recorder’s original record
books. The Recorder’s complete and official record
archive spans the years between 1848 and the present.
These official record books are housed in the West Wing
at 70 West Hedding Street and at the County Archives.
As mandated by state law, the microfilmed records are
stored in a secure off-site facility.
The Department currently pays a contracted vendor for
secure off-site storage of microfilm. Service providers for
this type of storage are limited and doing business with
outside vendors has been costly and extremely
problematic. The Clerk-Recorder’s Office has
experienced numerous problems, such as relocation of
the records without prior notice and failure to meet
temperature, humidity and security standards, thereby
risking the integrity and safeguarding of the records.
The Department has been actively investigating
different locations for the purchase of a secure facility to
house the Clerk-Recorder’s Office’s film records
collection. The project and facility should have no
impact on the General Fund as it will be funded by the
special funds specifically designated to the Clerk-
Recorder’s Office.
Mirrored Site for Disaster Recovery
The Clerk-Recorder’s Office is looking to improve its
current disaster recovery solution. During a test
recovery exercise in 2010, the current solution was
deemed inadequate for the Clerk-Recorder’s business
continuity requirements. In 2013, the Clerk-Recorder’s
team worked closely with technology vendors to design
a solution based on a mirrored data center and storage
replication technology. Using the Recorder’s
Modernization fund, the procurement and
implementation of this solution will take place in
FY 2015. Department of Revenue-Health and Hospital
System Partnership
Significant changes in the Health and Hospital System
(HHS) brought about by upgrades and reorganizations,
as well as by Health Care Reform have correspondingly
impacted all aspects of the health care system,
including medical debt management and collection
services provided by the DOR.
DOR collects delinquent debt for the hospital, thus a
high priority is placed on the partnership between DOR
and HHS. The new HealthLink system now includes
DOR staff in its user base and has incorporated account
referral processes and shared information. Shared goals
for an improved service model include streamlined
front-end information and documentation gathering
from patients, efficiencies in early identification of
special assistance and ability-to-pay programs for
patients, reduction in case transfer errors, and
improvements in the debt compromise process. The
new patient-flow design is set up so that patient status
and progress are tracked throughout the course of
treatment. Required information will be complete
sooner and/or at the point of discharge - a large benefit
to DOR where accurate patient information is essential.
There is a plan to re-design hospital letters to provide
accelerated payment pursuit. Increased attempts to
collect will be made before cases referred to DOR.
One possible outcome of these efforts may be greater
collection success before the referral to DOR. Early data
is showing a general decrease in account referrals to
DOR. If this trend continues, over the long term, DOR
referrals and collections could decrease, though overall
County revenue recovery will improve.
Victim Restitution
DOR collects court-ordered debt that may include
restitution owed to victims of crime. There is strong
support in existing California statute and the California
constitution for recognizing the rights of all persons
who suffer losses as a result of criminal activity, and for
providing assistance in seeking and securing restitution
from the persons convicted of the crimes for causing the
losses they suffer.
DOR continues to chair the Countywide Victim
Restitution Committee, a collaborative effort on victim
restitution services by its law and justice partners.
Members of the committee include the Probation
Department, the Offices of the District Attorney, Public
Defender and County Counsel, Department of
Correction, Superior Court and Victim Witness Center.
DOR partnership activities include the development of
faster turnaround in documentation transfers; proactive
tracking and cross-departmental inquiry and
request mechanisms; and increased research and
corrective action processes. The Department has been
involved with the new Prevention & Early Intervention
(PEI) Program which is a “restitution diversion” program
for juveniles. Escheatment research and outreach were
expanded several years ago and continue currently.
Unclaimed restitution payments were escheated on
Fiscal Year 2014.
County departments and the Superior Court are
collaborating to investigate where benefit to victims can
be enhanced by changing and/or streamlining
restitution collection and revenue distribution
protocols. Recently, a standing court order was
developed that will facilitate a proposed new
methodology for the distribution of payment to victims.
As a result, the Department expects to see increased
and more rapid payment of restitution to victims, with
an offsetting delay or reduction in the collection of fines
and fees that are revenue to the County and other
entities. DOR will return to the Board with a full report
regarding implementation plans, including resource
needs and revenue impacts in August 2014.
DOR Space and Facility Improvements
DOR has been at its current Berger Drive location since
1998. Since that time, the Department has grown
significantly as the result of new collection programs
and increased account volume, which has increased the
visits of clients to the office. DOR will continue a multiphased
project for reconfiguration of the office to
accommodate program growth, increase space
efficiencies and improve the current space  configuration. DOR presented its request for
remodeling to the Administrative Capital Committee to
assist in this effort.
Countywide Parking
Following a revision of the County's parking ordinance
in FY 2013, the Countywide Parking Management CLT
established Parking Administrative Guidelines (PAG)
and a Countywide committee to maintain them in
order to meet the objectives of efficient use of limited
parking areas, ease public and employee access to
County facilities, and support the County's
environmental goals, including the support of
alternative commuting and the reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions. The committee, Parking Enforcement
Review Committee (PERC) is chaired by DOR. Future
considerations for the PERC include signage review,
parking permit reorganization, and development of a
program for the ongoing promulgation of County
parking services and requirements. 

Human Trafficking
Given its location and international travel
infrastructure, the Bay Area is a major target for human
trafficking, both for commercially sexually exploited
children and for forced labor. National studies indicate
that as many as 100,000 children in the United States
are victims of commercial sexual exploitation. The
Office, along with the Human Trafficking Task Force
(spearheaded by the San Jose Police Department) and
the South Bay Coalition to End Human Trafficking,
believe the numbers for the County are equally
alarming.
Budget reductions in various agencies throughout the
County have resulted in only a very small number of law
enforcement personnel dedicated to this important and
growing area of crime. The Office would like to pursue
reinvigorating an interagency effort to:
¦ Educate – Raise public awareness of human trafficking
in our County in order to help prevent it.
¦ Investigate – Actively investigate these crimes,
which are most often perpetrated by organized,
tech-savvy, sophisticated offenders who have an
ability to control their victims.
¦ Incarcerate – Prosecute the crimes to achieve justice
for the community and protect the victims of these
crimes, who are frequently recent immigrants,
runaway children, and other vulnerable youth and
adults.
Public Safety Realignment
The Office of the District Attorney continues to play an
important role in Public Safety Realignment, also
referred to as AB 109, the State’s effort to reduce prison
overcrowding, recidivism, and the resulting costs.
In addition to ensuring that all sentencing in felony
cases is conducted in compliance with these changes in
the law, the Office’s primary current role relates to
providing legal representation for the People of the State
of California in court hearings associated with
modifications and revocations of supervision for Post
Release Community Supervision (PRCS) and
Mandatory Supervision (MS) offenders due to their
failure to comply with the terms of their supervision, as
well as parole revocation matters. These duties, along
with the analysis necessary to fulfill the Office’s role in
the County’s continuing efforts to successfully
implement Realignment, are growing.
304
Section 2: Public Safety and Justice County of Santa Clara
Office of the District Attorney FY 2015 Recommended Budget
The District Attorney’s Office will work in partnership
with the Public Defender’s Office to track and evaluate
the workload associated with these efforts. The Office
remains committed to supporting this new direction for
California’s criminal justice system while continuing to
ensure that the public safety of the County’s residents is
preserved. Parole Revocations Under Realignment
AB 109, also referred to as Public Safety Realignment,
became effective October 1, 2011. This legislations is
strongly viewed as the most sweeping change to
California sentencing in recent history. Realignment
amended the law so that most low level felonies result in
local jail sentences rather than state prison. In addition,
Probation assumed supervisory responsibilities for
those released from state prison on Post Release
Community Supervision (PRCS) and those released on
Mandatory Supervision (MS) after serving as split
sentence under Penal Code section 1170(h). On July 1,
2013 parole revocations began to be heard by Santa
Clara County judges rather than by a California
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR)
hearing officers at the state level. Issues remain related
to the lack of historical communication with parole by
County criminal justice groups, as well as the failure of
State Parole to provide rap sheets when revocation
petitions are filed. The Public Defender Office is in
communication with the District Attorney to address
the cost of providing the rap sheets to the Public
Defender Office.
Creative Solutions to Resource Needs
The Public Defender has creatively dealt with many of
the staff reductions and increased caseloads. The Public
Defender actively seeks out fellowships and
collaboration with nationally recognized law schools
such as Yale University Law School, UCLA, and Stanford
University Law School. Other examples are the creation
of a partnership with civil law firms in the Volunteer
Attorney Program and the development of a
Misdemeanor Clinic with Santa Clara University Law
School and Stanford Law School.
Recognizing these challenges throughout the justice
system, the Superior Court, County Executive, District
Attorney, Public Defender, Department of Correction,
Pretrial Services, Information Services Department and
Probation Department meet regularly to try to identify
efficiencies and improvements in the justice system. In
part this is a search for ways to cut costs. However a
major benefit of these regular discussions is the
recognition by every partner that what happens in one
area of the justice system impacts all departments. A
continuing effort is being made to coordinate and
streamline the system to respect the resources of all of
the partners involved while fulfilling the mandates of
each partner. MOU with Superior Court
Since 2002 the department has had a MOU with
Superior Court in which the department provides
criminal background record checks to Family Court. It
is unknown at this time what, if any, the impact of the
State budget will have on the Court’s ability to continue
to fund this MOU. Revenue from this agreement fully
supports four FTE positions within the department.
This is a non-mandated function for the department
and if the Court determines they must either reduce or
eliminate funding, it will be necessary for the
department to delete up to four FTE’s; two Pretrial
Service Officer I/II’s and two Justice System Clerks I/II.
All of these positions are currently filled. The Judges
who receive services through this agreement are very
supportive of the program due to the increased
information they receive which assists them in their
decision making. This has always been a year-to-year
agreement because the Court generally does not know
until May whether they will have the funding to support
this program. The total amount of funding for FY 2014
was $423,732 and would be approximately $466,990 for
FY 2015.
County Consolidation of Drug Testing Services
In July of 2013, the Office assumed responsibility for
drug testing approximately 700 Prop 36 defendants.
This resulted in the Office collecting approximately
1100 more urine tests per month than in FY 2013. In
addition, the Office experienced an increase of
approximately 25% in its release population during
2013. This increase in the pretrial release population has
also added more defendants in need of drug testing
services. Between the Prop 36 population and the
pretrial release population, the Office is now collecting
over 1700 urine samples per month. Regional Disaster Services
The Sheriff is the Law Enforcement Mutual Aid
Coordinator for the County of Santa Clara, as
designated by the State Office of Emergency Services.
Through homeland security grants, the Sheriff ’s Office
is active in the planning and implementation of regional
disaster services.
Recruitment and Retention
Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. Currently, the number of Deputy
vacancies is approximately 73, and vacancies are an
ongoing challenge for the department. With an aging
workforce, the department is anticipating many
retirements in the next few years. The Office of the
Sheriff continues to develop new and innovative
methods to recruit top applicants, and is targeting
significant resources at recruiting and backgrounding
many applicants. The Administration is supportive of
the Sheriff ’s additional enforcement academies that are
being held to fill vacancies within the department, and
will address the issue as part of the mid-year budget
review in Fiscal Year (FY) 2015 if additional funds for
academies are necessary.
Expansion of Regional Services
Since the opening of the Santa Clara County Justice
Training Center in 2005, the department has been
working to expand the number of training classes, as
well as increase enrollment from outside agencies in the
Academy. The Sheriff ’s Office also maintains an outside
Firing Range that is used by the Sheriff ’s Office and
other law enforcement agencies for training and
mandated firearms qualifications. The Sheriff ’s Office is
developing the Range into a regional training center,
and plans to include a Situational Training Facility
which will be utilized by the Sheriff ’s Office as well as
other law enforcement agencies. The purpose of the
facility is to provide real world training for law
enforcement officers.
Increase in Gang Cases
At the start of 2011 the Office of the Sheriff established
new guidelines for tracking gang activity. As a result of
the new guidelines, staff training and the hiring of a
gang crime analyst, gang-related crime tracking has
improved. Analysis of crime and investigations data has
shown that gang related criminal investigations have
increased by 82% since 2010. The validated
identification of gang members through field interviews
has increased by 714% during the same time period.
Office of the Sheriff Patrol Divisions work closely with
the Special Operations and Investigations Divisions to
identify and track gang crime. Public Safety Realignment
Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) transferred a
number of services previously provided by the State, to
the local government. The most significant impact on
the Department of Corrections is a result of sentencing
changes that make offenders without any current or
prior serious or violent or sex convictions the
responsibility of the local jails. This shift of inmates
continues to increase the jail population, lengthen the
sentences of some inmates, and impacts the jail’s ability
to accept voluntary revenue-generating inmates from
other jurisdictions. This has also resulted in a significant
change in the demographics of those inmates eligible to
be housed on the Elmwood Correctional Complex
minimum camp. The criminal sophistication of these
inmates has caused increasing concerns regarding
escape prevention, organized inmate disturbances,
emergency response and staffing plans.
Protective Custody Population
Protective custody is a classification that may be
assigned to inmates who are affiliated with a gang, have
committed certain violent crimes, whose case has a
high degree of notoriety, or who, for some reasons, have
been determined to be at risk of victimization. Over the
past several years, there has been a dramatic increase in
inmates requiring protective custody, primarily due to
affiliation with gangs. It is a challenge to provide the
physical segregation required for these inmates.
Increasing Number of Mentally Ill Inmates
The number of inmates in the jail with mental health
issues requiring special attention has historically been
significant and is always a key factor in the
management of the jail and inmate population. More
recently however, a dramatic increase in the number of
inmates with mental health issues is a growing concern
to the department. Specifically, the portion of the
average daily inmate population requiring special
management due to mental health issues has grown
from 22% in 2012 to more than 25% in the first half of
FY 2013 and this population continues to grow. This
increase has exacerbated the jail management
challenge of ensuring all mentally ill inmates are housed
appropriately in order to minimize the risk of harm to
themselves and others.
Physical and Mental Health of Inmates
In this decade the percentage of inmates 55 years of age
or older has increased from 2.1% to 5.7%, and from an
Average Daily Population (ADP) of 86 to 235.
Additionally, individual inmates are experiencing
multiple health issues with significant pathology and
disabilities. There is a strain on the availability of
infirmary and special management beds which must be
triaged every shift to accommodate the sickest and
most vulnerable inmates. Several times during FY 2014,
the need for special management beds for the mentally
ill was exhausted, resulting in the need to open a
suitable housing for these inmates. This situation is
further constricted by the AB 109 inmates, because
their length of stay is longer and many have chronic
physical and mental health issues.
Aging Jail Facilities
Both Main Jail South and Elmwood have very old
facilities that are in need of renovation or replacement.
The annual maintenance and repair cost for these
facilities continues to increase. In addition, the
population of AB 109 inmates is continuing to increase.
These inmates have longer lengths of stay and add wear
and tear to these facilities. The County is preparing to
conduct a new jail facility needs assessment to better
understand the condition of our facilities and our needs
to better move forward towards a new facility.
High Vacancy Rate
Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. Currently, the number of
Correctional Deputy vacancies is approximately 77, an
ongoing challenge for the department. With an aging
workforce, the department is anticipating many
retirements in the next few years. The Office of the
Sheriff continues to develop new and innovative
methods to recruit top applicants. The Administration
is supportive of the Sheriff ’s additional correctional
academies that are being held to fill vacancies within
the department, and will address the issue as part of the
mid-year budget review in Fiscal Year (FY) 2015 if
additional funds for academies are necessary. Implementing Evidenced-Based Practices
The Department has been working aggressively to
infuse evidence based practices in all areas of operation.
Extensive training and resources have been dedicated
to this effort to ensure that service delivery models and
programming efforts are based on proven practices.
This transformation to serving clients and their families
will provide positive outcomes with respect to engaging
in appropriate and effective treatment services and
supporting strength based assets to build capacity, thus
reducing the likelihood that our clients will re-offend.
The focus on Continuous Quality Management will
assist in managing key operational and support
processes, through quality assurance, quality control
and quality improvement. The development of a threeyear
strategic plan is underway that will support and
enhance current work in the area of evidence based
practices.
Public Safety Realignment – AB 109 Program
Public Safety Realignment, the legislation which shifted
the responsibility of supervising specified offenders
being released from state custody back to local counties
for supervision, and changed sentencing laws to keep
offenders from being committed to state prison,
continues to be a major focus of services. The expansion
of the County’s Reentry Resource Center, the myriad of
services being provided as a result of this effort and the
partnerships forged with the faith based community
have positively impacted outcomes for this population.
Data collection and specific outcome measurements
continue in the third year of this program. The
Community Corrections Partnership, chaired by the
Chief Probation Officer, adopted a definition of
recidivism which will be the basis of defining success as
we progress.
Dually Involved Youth Initiative
The Probation Department and the Department of
Family and Children’s Services have partnered to
implement new programming to address the needs of
youth involved in both the juvenile justice and child
welfare systems. A Dually Involved Youth Unit,
consisting of probation officers, social workers and a
youth advocate, will soon be established in an effort to
create an environment in which staff from different
disciplines will work together to understand the family
unit as a whole and respond effectively to the complex
needs of the youth and family. This team will be
empowered and encouraged to develop non-traditional
solutions to meet specific needs. Impact of Vacancies on Caseloads
The Medical Examiner-Coroner’s Office (MEC) received
a total of 4,279 reported cases in calendar year 2013, of
which 1,141 were under the jurisdiction of the MEC. The
Medical Examiner-Coroner continues to adhere to the
national standards set by the National Association of
Medical Examiners (NAME). There are two vacancies
within the support staff, and the MEC is using
supplemental resources to assist with the caseload
while recruitments continue.  The Changing American Family
Families in 2014 look very different when compared to
their counterparts in 1975 when the child support
program was first established. Today, two-thirds of
single heads of households are working outside the
home. Seventy percent of U.S. mothers with children
under the age of 18, married or not, are in the labor
force. Over 24 million children (1 out of 3) live apart
from their biological fathers. While the American family
has changed, one thing that has not changed is the
value of the family to the healthy development of
children.
Government, nonprofit and private organizations often
work towards a common mission or goal, but generally
do so within their own pre-established silos. Services
offered through the child support program are but one
component of a much larger effort to promote positive
outcomes for children and families. The challenge is for
the child support program to work collaboratively with
other social services agencies toward a shared objective
while recognizing that our society has experienced
dramatic changes in how families are structured.
The child support program today is one of the Big Three
anti-poverty programs, along with the Earned Income
Tax Credit and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP). Twenty-six percent of all children in
America live in single parent households, and child
support provides 40% of the income of low-income
families who receive support. Child support can mean
the difference between poverty and self-sufficiency.
State Funding Level
Ten years of relative flat-line allocation from the State,
coupled with an expectation that the Department
spend 98% of the allocation to keep more people
employed collecting child support and not leave money
on the table at the end of the year that must be returned
to the State, does not provide the flexibility to deal with
unanticipated (at the time the budget is finalized in
June) cost increases, i.e., negotiated salary and benefits,
increased contributions to retiree medical and pension
liabilities, etc., that occur during the fiscal year.
FY 2015 Deficit
In FY 2015, the Department of Child Support Services
(DCSS) will have a $2.9 million deficit. A significant
portion of the deficit is due to another year of flat-line
allocation from the State and increases in costs. The
FY 2015 cost to maintain the current level of service is
$39,544,995. Because the expected revenue is only
$36,975,666, the Department must reduce expenses.
The Department’s budget consists primarily of salary
and benefit costs, and the Department is forced to
eliminate positions in order to stay within the State
allocation. 

Public Authority Rate Increase
In March 2014, the County increased the Public
Authority (PA) rate from $16.73 to $17.14 due to changes
in benefits rates (health, dental, and vision), payroll
taxes projected for FY 2015, and a contractually
approved provider wage increase of $0.24. The rate has
been submitted to the State for approval in order to
claim and maximize IHSS program cost reimbursement
from the State and Federal government.
Coordinated Care Initiative
In 2012, the State budget authorized the Coordinated
Care Initiative (CCI) in eight counties (Alameda, Los
Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego,
San Mateo, and Santa Clara) and thus expanded the
number of Medi-Cal enrollees who must enroll in Medi-
Cal managed care to receive their benefits. CCI is
composed of three major parts:
¦ Long-Term Supports and Services (LTSS) as a Medi-
Cal Managed Care Benefit: CCI includes the addition
of LTSS into Medi-Cal managed care. LTSS includes
nursing facility care (NF), In-Home Supportive
Services (IHSS), Multipurpose Senior Services
Program (MSSP), and Community Based Adult
Services (CBAS). This change impacts about 60,000
Medi-Cal only enrollees and up to 456,000 persons
eligible for both Medicare and Medi-Cal who are in
Cal Medi-Connect.
¦ Cal Medi-Connect Program: A three-year demonstration
project for persons eligible for both Medicare
and Medi-Cal (dual eligibles) to receive
coordinated medical, behavioral health, long-term
institutional, home and community-based services
through a single organized delivery system (health
plan). No more than 456,000 beneficiaries would be
eligible for the duals demonstration in the eight
counties. This demonstration project is a joint effort
with the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS).
¦ Mandatory Enrollment of Dual Eligibles and Others
into Medi-Cal Managed Care: Most Medi-Cal beneficiaries,
including dual eligibles, partial dual eligibles,
and previously excluded Seniors and Persons with
Disabilities (SPDs) who are Medi-Cal only, are
required to join a Medi-Cal managed care health
plan to receive their Medi-Cal benefits.
The purpose and goal of CCI is to promote the
coordination of health and social care for Medi-Cal
consumers and to create fiscal incentives for health
plans to make decisions that keep their members
healthy and out of institutions; especially given that
hospital and nursing home care are more expensive
than home and community-based care.
Under the current system (prior to CCI), dual eligibles
must access services through a complex system of
disconnected programs funded by different government
programs (e.g., federal CMS, DHCS-Medi-Cal, IHSScounty
based). This fragmentation often leads to
beneficiary confusion, delayed care, inappropriate
utilization and unnecessary costs.
As a pilot county, Santa Clara will initiate the LTSS
portion of the CCI effective July 1, 2014 and implement
the Cal Medi-Connect Program January 1, 2015. Santa
Clara County’s two identified health plans are Santa
Clara Family Health Plan and Anthem Blue Cross.
IHSS Maintenance of Effort (MOE)
Beginning with FY 2013, based on SB 1036, counties are
responsible for an MOE funding level for the IHSS
program in lieu of the long-standing State/county cost
sharing ratios. Each county’s MOE is established based
on the sum of: 1) the county’s actual IHSS services
expenditures in FY 2012, and 2) the county’s State
FY 2012 allocations for county administration and
public authority administration. On July 1, 2014, the
County IHSS MOE base is scheduled to be adjusted by
an inflation factor of 3.5%. Beginning on July 1, 2015, and
annually thereafter, the County IHSS MOE from the
previous year will be adjusted by an inflation factor of
3.5%. In fiscal years when the combined total of 1991-
1992 State Local Realignment revenues received for the
prior fiscal year are less than revenues received two
years prior, the inflation factor will be zero.
The MOE will become inoperative if the CCI
demonstration project and the responsibilities of the
Statewide Authority become inoperative. If the MOE
becomes inoperative then the prior county share of
non-Federal cost would again become effective.
400
Section 3: Children, Seniors, and Families County of Santa Clara
In-Home Supportive Services Program Costs FY 2015 Recommended Budget
Federal Overtime Regulations
Federal Department of Labor (DOL) regulations will
require, as of January 1, 2015, payment to domestic
workers for time worked over 40 hours per week. In
addition, the regulations require payment to providers
traveling between multiple recipients, wait time that is
associated with medical accompaniment, and time
spent in mandatory provider training. The Governor
estimates the regulations would increase IHSS program
costs by over $600 million (total funds) by 2015-2016.
The Governor’s current budget proposes to prohibit any
IHSS provider from working more than 40 hours in a
week. A provider would not be allowed to work more
than 40 hours in a week for a single client, and would
additionally prohibit an IHSS provider who has multiple
clients work more than 40 hours combined for their
clients (including clients served under Waiver Personal
Care Services programs). There are approximately
49,000 recipients statewide who have over 160
authorized hours per month. Of those, 37,000 have a
single provider and 12,000 have multiple providers.
State Settlement
Reducing IHSS Authorized Hours
In March 2013, the State reached a settlement
agreement regarding various lawsuits against the IHSS
program changes that have been enacted since 2009.
These legal challenges included: 1) State sharing in IHSS
wages and benefits, 2) reductions authorized by the
legislature based on the functional index scores, and 3)
20% across-the-board trigger cuts. The settlement
agreement includes an 8% cut in authorized hours on
July 1, 2013 for 12 consecutive months. After that period,
the total hours reduction will be 7% ongoing. The
Governor’s Budget continues implementation of the
Oster Settlement Agreement which required an 8% cut
in 2013-14, and reduces the amount of the cut to 7%
beginning July 1, 2014, consistent with that Agreement.
Statewide Collective Bargaining
The State IHSS Services Authority (also known as the
Statewide Authority) will take over collective bargaining
responsibilities for wages, benefits, and other economic
terms and conditions for each county when all IHSS
recipients in that county have been enrolled in the CCI.
The MOU with the union will remain in place until it
expires. Engaging Father’s Initiative Workgroup
DFCS continues to be involved in the countywide
efforts with additional system partners to specifically to
address “father’s involvement” in county systems
including the child welfare system. Efforts have been
made toward trainings and discussions aimed at
understanding barriers impacting positive involvement
of fathers with their children; identifying the role of
fathers, what they do and how they do it from a cultural
context; and understanding how engaging fathers in the
lives of their children will impact development in a
positive way. The Fatherhood Initiative Workgroup
continues to work to identify ways to foster substantive
engagement with fathers, and paternal relatives of
children that are touched by the child welfare system,
and to address issues relating to inequity in services and
engagement with fathers.
California Partners for Permanency (CAPP)
DFCS is in its fourth year of the five year California
Partners for Permanency (CAPP) Federal grant. The
CAPP Practice Model is an exciting and innovative
approach to working with DFCS families. Development
of this practice model is focused on behaviors and
approaches to better engage children and families who
become involved with the child welfare system. The
goal of using this new model is designed to increase
permanency and decrease over-representation of
African-American children specifically, but also with the
overall long term goal of addressing these issues for all
children in our communities. In addition, the CAPP
project involves Implementation Science as a way to
ensure tracking and to monitor what approaches are
working, and then ensure replication of the approaches
that have been validated. The goal of the Department is
for all staff and community partners to participate in
this valuable training and to receive the coaching,
mentoring and support for changes in the ways in
which DFCS works with children and families.
Integration Initiative
In 2013, the Social Services Agency began collaboration
with the University of Illinois at Chicago’s Integration
Initiative project, an effort to transform child welfare
policy and practice to more effectively serve Latino and
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans-gendered and Questioning
(LGBTQ) children and youth. DFCS is participating as a
demonstration/laboratory site and will assist the
initiative to identify and understand the unique needs
of Santa Clara’s local target populations, core
components of services effective in meeting their needs,
and core implementation drivers necessary to sustain
culturally competent service provision.
DFCS applied for and was awarded a $50,000 grant from
the Walter S. Johnson foundation to support this scope
of work. This Initiative will allow DFCS to build on their
current efforts to ensure that their services for LGBTQ
and Latino children and youth are supported by best
practices, research, and cultural humility.
Juvenile Justice and Child Welfare System
Integration (Dually-Involved Youth)
The Department of Family and Children’s Services
(DFCS) is working in collaboration with the Juvenile
Justice Court and Juvenile Probation Department (JPD)
on a joint project intended to improve outcomes for
youth dually involved in both the juvenile justice and
child welfare systems.
Juvenile Probation received a technical assistance grant
from the MacArthur Foundation’s Model for Change to
implement effective practices to reduce recidivism and
out-of-home placement, and to improve correctional
alternatives for youth in the juvenile justice system with
a history of maltreatment. Additional partners in this
effort include leadership from the Mental Health
Department, Department of Drug and Alcohol Services
and County Office of Education along with
representatives from the District Attorney’s Office,
Public Defender’s Office, Legal Advocates for Children &
Youth, community-based organizations and
community representatives. The initial work has
focused on developing effective cross-system
communication and collaboration and a shared vision
on how best to serve dually-involved youth. However,
DFCS and JPD have begun joint decision-making
meetings to discuss families who are or could be served
by both systems and their specific needs. Additionally,
both departments are involved in joint case planning
efforts to determine how they can work together to
support the family in addressing the family’s needs and
concerns. Self-Assessment and
Systems Improvement Process
AB 636, the Child Welfare System Improvement and
Accountability Act of 2011, required counties to
undertake an extensive self-assessment of the local
child welfare system, resulting in the development of a
multi-year System Improvement Plan (SIP). On a fiveyear
cycle, DFCS submitted Santa Clara County’s SIP
plan for 2013-2018. The main outcomes of the SIP are
Child safety, child permanency, and child and family
well-being. The goal is for continual improvement in
child welfare practices that address these outcomes.
This process requires specific steps toward system
improvement through thoughtful evaluation and
analysis. The quantitative evaluation component is a
county’s Self- Assessment. This analysis includes
program strengths and barriers as they relate to those
children, youth, and families being served. In May 2012,
Santa Clara County completed an assessment of
services and programs provided in 2009-2012. The
qualitative assessment is accomplished through a
county’s Peer Quality Case Review (PQCR). The purpose
of the PQCR is to supplement the quantitative
information obtained through the self-assessment, with
qualitative data gathered from peer Social Workers,
Probation Officers, and supervisors identifying areas of
strength and areas needing improvement. Santa Clara
County’s PQCR for DFCS was completed in June of
2011, with a focus on the reasons why some children
remain in care for eighteen months or longer and the
necessary supports to ensure permanency for these
children.
The results of a county’s Self-Assessment and PQCR
support the development of a System Improvement
Plan (SIP) that establishes measurable goals for a
county’s system improvement and strategies for
achieving those goals. Santa Clara County has
attempted through all of these efforts to ensure a strong
community partnership, and ensure the voices of
parents and youth it serves is included in the decision
making process. The SIP hopes to address the concerns
of the disproportionate numbers of Latino and African-
American/African Ancestry children and families
involved in the child welfare system and to better
understand how few children and families from many of
the Asian-American and Pacific Islander communities
are involved in Santa Clara County’s Child Welfare
system.
Santa Clara County has also included an evaluation and
analysis of efforts toward prevention services provided
through funding from Child Abuse Prevention
Intervention and Treatment (CAPIT), Community
Based Child Abuse Prevention (CBCAP), and Promoting
Safe and Stable Families (PSSF).
The goals and actions steps contained in the current SIP
focuses on the following:
¦ Eliminating the over-representation of African
Ancestry and Latino families, resulting in a situation
where these children are no more likely than others
to enter the Child Welfare System.
¦ Addressing safety and ensuring that children and
families are assessed in a timely manner and families
are provided the necessary resources and supports
so that children do not enter or re-enter the Child
Welfare System.
¦ Addressing permanency for children and families by
ensuring family reunification or helping children
returning to live with one or both parents, or if this is
not possible, placement with relatives or non-relatives
in a guardianship or adoption situation.
The Board of Supervisors and designated partners
approved the Santa Clara County System Improvement
Plan in February 2013.
Title IV-E Waiver
Title IV-E of the Social Security Act provides restricted
Federal funding for specified foster care maintenance
payments and child welfare related services for children
removed from their homes. In 2004, California proposed
that Federal Title IV-E requirements be “waived” for
counties electing to participate in a federal
demonstration project from July 1, 2007 through June
30, 2012 (now extended through June 30, 2013). Through
the demonstration project, Title IV-E Waiver (restricted
Federal Title IV-E funding) could be used flexibly to
provide services while children remained safely at
home. The funding was provided as a “capped allocation
based on each county’s pre-Waiver average
expenditures over a three year period (base years were
FY 2003 - FY 2005). The Waiver counties were able to
build upon existing innovative practices to create a
more responsive and comprehensive array of services
and supports. The current Waiver Demonstration
Project will sunset on June 30, 2013. The State is in negotiations with federal agencies to
extend the Title IV-E Waiver Demonstration Project
beyond June 30, 2013, and to expand participation
beyond the current two California counties. The State
has asked counties to submit a Letter of Interest to be
considered for participation should the State
successfully negotiate an extension and expansion
beyond the current two counties. In 2012, the Social
Services Agency and the Juvenile Probation
Department submitted a Title IV-E Waiver Letter of
Interest to the State, to ensure the County has the
opportunity to be considered for the Waiver
Demonstration Projection (if extended and expanded to
other counties).
Participation in the Waiver Demonstration Project
could result in a more flexible approach to using the
current $44.5 million in federal Title IV-E funds received
by the Social Services Agency and the Juvenile
Probation Department. The primary issue in
considering the Waiver Demonstration Project is to
determine if the unrestricted flexible funding in the
foster care system would improve outcomes for
children and families, provide more supportive in- home
and family based services, and enhance preventative
interventions in both the Child Welfare and Probation
systems. CalWORKs Family Stabilization
As of January 1, 2014, Family Stabilization is a new
component of the CalWORKs program that provides
intensive case management and services aimed at
stabilizing families. The Family Stabilization program
includes funding to help families avert eviction and
avoid homelessness. The stabilization services provided
to each CalWORKs family will focus on the immediate
housing crisis and the long-term stability.
Inmates Health Care Enrollment
Assembly Bill AB720 encourages counties to enroll
county jail inmates into medical programs prior to their
release from custody. Social Services and Health and
Hospitals are partnering with the Sheriff ’s office to start
a pilot program to assist those inmates who are
awaiting residential treatment beds or are mental
health users. SSA is exploring how to best assist inmates
obtain medical coverage prior to their release.
Health Care Reform
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) was officially
implemented January 1, 2014 following a preenrollment
period from October to December 2013. In
late 2013, DEBS launched a new Health Care Reform
Call center that accepted over 10,000 calls in the preenrollment
period, taking over 2,000 new applications
for the new health care options. During this same
period, the department transitioned over 20,000 Low
Income Health Program (LIHP) participants into the
new Medi-Cal program. Since January 2, 2014, all benefit
district offices have reported a dramatic increase in
Medi-Cal applications, particularly for those single
individuals between 18-64 years of age and previously
unable to receive Medi-Cal benefits.
Covered California fell behind during the preenrollment
period by over 300,000 cases statewide.
These incomplete applications have recently been
transferred to counties to complete. Santa Clara has
received approximately 30,000 of these applications.
With the large number of pending cases, coupled with
the increased interest of our community, DEBS has seen
a unprecedented surge in calls and an increase in walkin
clients anxious to receive health care coverage for the
first time.  Seniors’ Agenda
After a year-long community wide planning process, the
Seniors’ Agenda was implemented in 2013. The Board of
Supervisors adopted this strategic plan to begin
addressing the future needs of the rapidly growing
population of older adults. It is estimated that by 2030
one in four residents of Santa Clara County will be over
the age of 60, with the fastest growing population being
over the age of 80. The planning process was a
collaborative effort of more than one hundred and fifty
individuals from sixty eight organizations that
collectively created a vision and plan for how best to
prepare for an aging society.
Over the course of the past year, the Department of
Aging and Adult Services’ leadership began
implementing the Seniors’ Agenda, through six work
teams, to make a collective impact on how an agefriendly
community is created to improve the lives of
our older adults. Twice a year, the Seniors’ Agenda
Network Summit convenes nearly two hundred
attendees from diverse agencies and organizations to
report on significant progress within the identified areas
of need: Transportation, Volunteerism & Civic
Engagement, Information & Assistance, Education &
Outreach, Policy & Funding, and Housing.
The Seniors’ Agenda has began a collaborative effort to
add over $250,000 in funding to non-profit
organizations serving the elderly. The County’s aging
services contract awards were modified to align with
the priorities of the Seniors’ Agenda to support safety
net services for older adults. Valuable input was
provided to the County of Santa Clara General Plan
update in the Housing Element Update regarding the
need for increased affordable housing for seniors. The
General Plan’s Health Element was also updated to
include pedestrian safety needs for nearby senior
centers and senior housing facilities.
In FY 2014, a Seniors Policy Council was formed for the
purpose of modifying policy in support of the Seniors’
Agenda. Seniors Policy Council is made up of the
executive level staff from: Office of County Executive,
Mental Health Department, Public Health Department,
Valley Medical Center, County Planning, Aging and
Adult Services, City of San Jose, Cities Managers’
Association of Santa Clara County, Sourcewise, Santa
Clara County Housing Authority, Santa Clara Valley
Transportation Authority, and Aging Services
Collaborative of Santa Clara County, as well as a
representative from the County Board of Supervisors
(ex-officio). The Seniors Policy Council is scheduled to
meet quarterly.
To increase outreach and information to the County’s
senior population, leadership from the Seniors’ Agenda
was able to align resources to ensure the Agents for
Change brochure, "A Good Place to Start" could be
translated, printed and distributed. Through the
sponsorship of OUTREACH, DAAS and Sourcewise
produced over 7,000 copies of the “A Good Place to
Start” brochure in English, Spanish, Vietnamese, and
Chinese. The brochure provides seniors with
information on community services and resources. The
Santa Clara County Fire Department has included the
brochure in their Senior Resource packet given to
elderly residents in their homes. This example is one of
the many ways the Senior Agenda is collaborating to
achieve positive outcomes that address the growing
needs of the community.
Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI)
In 2012, the State budget authorized the Coordinated
Care Initiative (CCI) in eight counties (Alameda, Los
Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego,
San Mateo, and Santa Clara) and thus expanded the
number of Medi-Cal enrollees who must enroll in Medi-
Cal managed care to receive their benefits. CCI is
composed of three major parts:
¦ Long-Term Supports and Services (LTSS) as a Medi-
Cal Managed Care Benefit: CCI includes the addition
of LTSS into Medi-Cal managed care. LTSS includes
nursing facility care (NF), In-Home Supportive
Services (IHSS), Multipurpose Senior Services
Program (MSSP), and Community Based Adult
Services (CBAS). This change impacts about 60,000
Medi-Cal only enrollees and up to 456,000 persons
eligible for both Medicare and Medi-Cal who are in
Cal Medi-Connect.
¦ Cal Medi-Connect Program: A three-year demonstration
project for persons eligible for both Medicare
and Medi-Cal (dual eligibles) to receive
coordinated medical, behavioral health, long-term
institutional, home and community-based services
through a single organized delivery system (health plan). No more than 456,000 beneficiaries would be
eligible for the duals demonstration in the eight
counties. This demonstration project is a joint effort
with the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS).
¦ Mandatory Enrollment of Dual Eligibles and Others
into Medi-Cal Managed Care: Most Medi-Cal beneficiaries,
including dual eligibles, partial dual eligibles,
and previously excluded Seniors and Persons with
Disabilities (SPDs) who are Medi-Cal only, are
required to join a Medi-Cal managed care health
plan to receive their Medi-Cal benefits.
The purpose and goal of CCI is to promote the
coordination of health and social care for Medi-Cal
consumers and to create fiscal incentives for health
plans to make decisions that keep their members
healthy and out of institutions; especially given that
hospital and nursing home care are more expensive
than home and community-based care.
Under the current system (prior to CCI), dual eligibles
must access services through a complex system of
disconnected programs funded by different government
programs (e.g., federal CMS, DHCS-Medi-Cal, IHSScounty
based). This fragmentation often leads to
beneficiary confusion, delayed care, inappropriate
utilization and unnecessary costs.
As a pilot county, Santa Clara will initiate the LTSS
portion of the CCI effective July 1, 2014 and implement
the Cal Medi-Connect Program January 1, 2015. Santa
Clara County’s two identified health plans are Santa
Clara Family Health Plan and Anthem Blue Cross.
Coordination of Services between Adult
Protective Services and Public Guardian
In California, relationships between the Public
Administrator/Guardian Conservator (PAGC) and
Adult Protective Services (APS) vary greatly and only a
few counties manage their PAGC and APS programs the
same. With that in mind, members of several county
APSs and PAGCs met to discuss the most effective way
to address the issue and developed a template for a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between APS
and PAGC. The purpose of the draft MOU is to provide
clarification of each program’s respective role and
expectations for inter-program communication. The
plan is for the California Public Administrator/Public
Guardian/Public Conservator Association, the
California Welfare Director’s Association, and Adult
Protective Services to review this document annually. It
will also be reviewed, as needed, in response to
substantive legislative changes.
DAAS, through the County’s Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) program, has formed a team of
APS and PAGC staff members to write a Memorandum
of Understanding (MOU) to meet our needs locally. The
team is developing a protocol to facilitate Referrals for
Conservatorship made to PAGC by APS, hospitals, the
VA, care homes, and others that will identify responsible
parties, timeliness and protocols to enhance
accountability, and communication of cases under
investigation. The team is also looking at trainings to
cross-educate staff on the challenges and important
functions of both APS and PAGC. National Public Health Accreditation
In 2009, the National Public Health Accreditation
Program was launched by the Public Health
Accreditation Board following years of development
and research by the Centers for Disease Control, the
Robert Wood Johnson and a myriad of other thought
leaders in the practice of public health. National Public
Health Accreditation aims to improve and protect the
health of the public by advancing the quality and
performance of state, tribal and local health
departments. Accreditation will drive public health
departments to continuously improve the quality of the
services they deliver to the community as well as
increase accountability and credibility to the public,
funders, elected officials and other stakeholders. Also,
the accreditation assessment process provides valuable,
measurable feedback to health departments about
strengths and areas of improvement, so that
departments can better protect, promote and preserve
the community’s health.
The Santa Clara County Public Health Department
formally launched its journey to accreditation in
February of 2013 but began laying the foundations of
this effort in 2010. The Department issued its letter of
intent to seek National Public Health Accrediation
earlier this year. The formal application requires that the
Department complete each of the following mandatory
prerequisites: 1) Community Health Assessment;
2) Community Health Improvement Plan; and
3) Departmental Strategic Plan. All three components
are close to completion and the Department plans to
submit its formal application by June 2014.
Emergency Medical Services
The Emergency Medical Services (EMS) System has
experienced challenges with Ambulance and First
Responder Provider performance including call time
and fiscal stability. As such, the Board of Supervisors has
requested a series of reports that may lead to contract
or system redesign as EMS system partners collaborate
to identify and implement strategies that address
performance expectations in an effective and fiscally
responsible manner. The EMS Agency will rely upon
recent lessons learned and its Strategic Plan to chart the
course of the Santa Clara County EMS System for the
next five to seven years.
Development of Health Indicators
Staff from Public Health, Santa Clara Valley Medical
Center, Department of Alcohol and Drug Services,
Mental Health, Custody Health, and Santa Clara Valley
Health & Hospital System (SCVHHS) Finance, have
made significant progress in developing a system-level
dashboard of health indicators and performance
benchmarks. This team is reviewing the organizational
and human capacity needs for the County Health
System to become a strategic decision support unit for
population health improvement and health resource
utilization. The goal is to drive strategy and examine
progress in meeting population health goals and system
performance goals tied to the triple aim of Health
Care Reform.
Health Care Reform and Managed Care
The Public Health Department anticipates an evolving
participation in the idea of aligning historic public
health programming and services with managed care
entities. For example, the State Department of Health
Care Services has already expressed an interest in
carving the California Children’s Service program back
into the 2016 Medicaid Waiver. As the idea of aligning
safety net public health services with managed care
evolves, Public Health will participate to protect the
integrity and quality of the services and programs
provided to individual clients and their respective
communities. Behavioral Health Integration
To position the current Mental Health and Alcohol &
Drug Services systems to respond to the changes
related to Health Care Reform, and to maximize the
current resources of both departments, Mental Health
and Alcohol & Drug programs are in the process of
integrating the two systems into a new Department of
Behavioral Health Services. The Board of Supervisors
approved the integration plan proposed by the two
departments on January 28, 2014. The Employee
Services Agency will establish the job classification for
the new Director of Behavioral Health Services prior to
the end of Fiscal Year 2014. The new consolidated
Behavioral Health System will be implemented through
a staged and phased-in process under the leadership of
the new Director in collaborative partnership with staff,
community-based partners, customers, and other
stakeholders. Administrative functions will be
integrated first, followed by integration of the treatment
system.
In the next year, both departments will be actively
involved in re-engineering current services into an
integrated service delivery system. The upcoming year
will focus on engaging staff and managers in a
collaborative effort to implement integrated services
that are of high-value to clients, achieve the best
outcomes, and are the most cost-effective. Drawing
from effective disciplines such as Unit Based Teams,
Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT)
improvement strategies, and rapid cycle process
improvement initiatives, the new integrated Behavioral Health System will seek to put in place a state-of-the-art
delivery system for those with mental health, substance
use, and co-occurring conditions.
Health Care Reform
As with all agencies involved in providing health
services, in the next few years, Alcohol and Drug and
Mental Health Services will be shaped by Health Care
Reform, which will affect its reimbursement streams,
integration with mental health and primary care health
care systems, electronic health record keeping, and
mainstreaming of substance abuse and mental health
clients under the broader health care rubric.
The Santa Clara Valley Health & Hospital System
(SCVHHS) is charged with responding to mandates of
Federal health care legislation, specifically the
Affordable Care Act (ACA), Health Information
Technology for Economic & Clinical Health (HITECH)
and the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act
(MHPAEA). The Parity Act has not been fully
implemented, as its provisions will be eventually rolled
into ACA.
Changes in Medicaid and Medicare rules, in particular,
will have a major impact on reimbursement for services,
as the changes will render large segments of the
currently ineligible population eligible for public funded
or publicly subsidized insurance plans. Implementation
of Mental Health Parity and Substance Abuse Equity
will be required of most health plans by January 2015.
The need to provide services to individuals with “mild”
to “moderate” substance use and mental health issues
will potentially open up new lines of business for the
new behavioral health system. The challenge will be to
demonstrate effectiveness in terms of intervention and
cost such that other health entities will be interested in
developing direct contracts with Behavioral Health
Services.
Santa Clara County has participated in the Medi-Cal
Waiver project. The DADS and the MHD have enrolled
eligible clients into the LIHP (Low-Income Health Plan)
in preparation for treatment for substance abuse
disorders becoming part of the essential benefits
package in the ACA and for expanded mental health
benefits. Almost all LIHP members have been
transitioned to Medi-Cal beginning on January 1, 2014.
Alcohol & Drug Services is currently developing a
utilization management team, to address the influx of
new Medi-Cal eligible clients in 2014. Under Medi-Cal,
patients will have ten hospitalization days available
each year to be used for substance abuse services.
Alcohol & Drug Services will monitor the utilization of
services and obtain authorizations for additional days
through this utilization management team.
The implementation of an 1115 or 1919B waiver by the
California Department of Health Care Services (DHCS)
will provide increased local county control and
responsibility for Drug Medi-Cal services. Over the next
several years, it is anticipated that demand for
behavioral health services will steadily increase with the
newly covered populations. This will put severe
pressure on the current system to address the new
beneficiaries both for the outpatient and residential
treatment systems. The challenge will be to help the
non-profit providers grow with the new beneficiary
population. Many of the smaller organizations have
marginal internal administrative strength to take on the
growth of their services. The DADS will need to work
closely with the contract association in developing
additional “bench strength” to take on what will be a
substantial increase in service needs for the County.
New Electronic Health Record
The integrated department will be moving to a new
electronic health record (EHR) system over the next 15
to 18 months. The new EHR will be designed to create a
common portal into treatment and seamless care for
clients between the two specialty treatment systems.
Information technology funding has been allocated to
create an interface to ensure accurate and timely data
gathering from community-based organization (CBO)
partners, as well as implementing a business
intelligence tool that meets the ACA goals of improving
service through efficient use of client data.
The new system will require dedicated IS and
Behavioral Health staff to both manage the new system
and provide data analysis and ongoing technical
assistance as the Data Warehouse is implemented to
provide interfaces between the Epic and the CoCentrix
systems. The Behavioral Health Department will need
to identify funds for the hiring and training of new
CoCentrix qualified staff both for the IS and the Quality
Assurance and Data Management teams within the
integrated department.
Public Safety Realignment Program (AB 109)
California’s Realignment Program as described in
AB 109 and companion legislation has brought new
funding for treatment and other services for adult  reentry clients, parolees and others diverted from State
prisons. Special funding was made available for specific
criminal justice populations such as those released
under California’s AB 109 Realignment Program for
FY 2011 through FY 2014. Alcohol and Drug and Mental
Health Services have received realignment funds to
place assessment and case management staff at the
Reentry Resource Center, to fund residential treatment
beds, outpatient slots, and transitional housing units.
Alcohol and Drug and Mental Health Services will
continue their successful partnership with several
County criminal justice agencies at the Reentry
Resource Center.
Drug and Alcohol Innovative Initiatives and
Current Data
In spite of a challenging funding landscape, Alcohol &
Drug Services has pursued a number of innovative
initiatives that hold great promise for the future. Alcohol
& Drug Services has been involved in developing
linkages with the County’s medical clinics and the
hospital, with a view to greater integration of behavioral
health and the primary care health care system. Alcohol
& Drug Services will be co-locating addiction medicine
staff at the Heart Failure Program, as 50% of patients
have a co-occurring substance use disorder
(methamphetamine abuse).
Addiction Medicine is also involved in the Pain
Management Initiative involving several ambulatory
care clinics and the Healthcare for the Homeless
program. Addiction Medicine staff are also available for
consultation to primary care physicians throughout the
Health & Hospital System. Finally, the Addiction
Medicine program has established a medical residency
program with Stanford University School of Medicine to
provide a rotation in addiction medicine and behavioral
health care. This residency program helps prepare the
future workforce of physicians to routinely provide early
identification and brief intervention to their adult
patients with substance use disorders.
Some emerging challenges include the influx of newly
insured clients who will tax the current capacity in
specific modalities such as residential treatment. Given
the relative scarcity of residential treatment beds in the
adult system, there is a possibility of lengthy waiting
lists developing if there is a significant influx of new
clients. A similar situation could arise with respect to
transitional housing units, which are treatment-linked
housing in the Adult System of Care.
Mental Health Initiatives
Primary Care Behavioral Health (PCBH)
Mental Health is nearing five years in providing primary
care-based behavioral health services. Currently,
psychiatrists and licensed clinicians are providing
services to close to 5,000 primary care patients in Santa
Clara Valley Medical Center Clinics. Hundreds of
underserved populations that would not have been
eligible for, or would not have availed themselves of, the
specialty mental health system, are now receiving
service in the context of primary care settings. In the
coming year, these services will be expanded into
pediatric settings, and the supporting infrastructure will
be formalized, providing a solid model of integrated
behavioral health care for SCVMC patients.
Crisis and Inpatient Services
The new Behavioral Health leadership will need to
examine the rising cost of psychiatric emergency and
inpatient care. This includes such concerns as 24-hour
psychiatric staffing resources, Santa Clara Valley
Medical Center licensing and regulatory requirements,
care coordination with community-based services, and
utilization management. Through initiatives such as
Partnership for Patients (PfP) and Pay for Success (PFS),
new and innovative strategies that reduce crises and
inpatient readmissions through more effective care
coordination, care transition and procurement
strategies will be explored.
In addition, alternative models of crisis service delivery
will be implemented through the addition of a Child
and Adolescent Crisis Stabilization service provided in
concert with mobile crisis and a 90-day transition
program. This blended service of mobile, 24-hour
stabilization, and 90-day intensive support is aimed at
reducing the placement of children in locked
institutional care, reducing readmissions, reducing cost,
and increasing parent/family involvement in and
satisfaction with care. These new intervention
strategies are expected to provide alternative options to
the current Emergency Psychiatric Services (EPS).
Mental Health will be exploring the feasibility of
providing “psychiatric hold” evaluation and crisis
intervention programs in various geographic areas of
the County. Options will be developed and presented to
the Board of Supervisors through the Health and
Hospital Committee (HHC) over the coming year. School-Linked Services (SLS) Implementation
In FY 2012, the Board of Supervisors approved a plan to
implement a new model of School-Linked Services
(SLS). This plan is being administered by Mental Health
Services. This initiative consists of a collaborative of 13
school districts and 13 service funding partners (e.g., the
County MHD, the Social Services Agency, the Probation
Department, the Public Health Department, FIRST 5,
United Way Silicon Valley, Healthier Kids Foundation,
the City of San Jose, and other public service funders).
The plan involves implementing coordinated service
delivery on school campuses and in the community to
students and families of many of the highest need
districts in the County. The Department has been challenged to find means of
providing health care services (to the inmate
population) that meet regulatory and accreditation
standards due to the increased census that has resulted
from the implementation of the Public Safety
Realignment AB 109 Program (AB 109).
As a result of the Public Safety Realignment AB 109 Plan
that became effective in October 2011, inmates who
previously were sentenced to the State Prison system
are now sentenced to local County jail facilities to serve
their period of incarceration. Due to the length of time
to which these inmates are sentenced, the Custody
Health Services Department has had to reassess clinical
operations and develop reasonable plans that insure
inmates receive all necessary preventive, episodic and
chronic care services that are due over long periods of
time. Health screenings such as a routine breast
examinations, which were not previously provided to
the inmate population due to their short lengths of stay
in County jail facilities, are now required to be provided
to AB 109 inmates due to their protracted length of stay
within the jail. All other routine health screenings and
non-urgent surgeries which previously could be
postponed until inmates were released from custody are
now provided to this population of inmates. The
Department works closely with County Counsel and
SCVMC in establishing guidelines and standards for the
provision of these services.
The mental health population in the County’s jail
facilities has swelled to approximately 25% of the
population which has created strains on both the
Sheriff ’s Office Custody Bureau and the Custody Health
Service Department’s ability to provide safe housing for
the mentally ill inmates needs. The Special
Management beds within the Main Jail facility have
periodically been exhausted, necessitating the opening
of unused housing areas for the mentally fragile
inmates.
Due to the increase inmates who are older than 55 years
of age and the increased number of inmates with several
medical pathologies and physical disabilities, there has
been a strain on the number of infirmary and Special
Housing beds available for the inmates who require
such treatment and beds. The Medical Infirmary as well
as the Special Housing Units must be triaged every shift
to accommodate inmates who have need for these
beds. The AB 109 inmates have placed a further strain
on the availability of these beds as they may need a
specialty housing unit for the entire period of their
lengthy incarceration.
There continues to be an increased demand for
comprehensive discharge planning for inmates released
from Custody Facilities to insure that both the medically
fragile inmates as well as the mentally ill inmates are
provided continuity of care upon their release into the
community.
The women’s inmate population has significantly
increased since 2011, reaching an Average Daily Census
(ADC) of over 500 inmates. Incarceration of pregnant
inmates has dramatically increased by 67% increase in
FY 2013. Financial Support Services – Patient Access
The Patient Access Department will continue to
provide financial counseling assistance in the areas of:
the Emergency Department, Express Care, Admitting,
Inpatient, Outpatient and Community Clinics.
The Patient Access Department is moving toward a
pro-active and progressive model of completing the
front-end processes, registration, and financial
screening. The next phase will include pre-registration
and screening of patients with appointments. The
Patient Access Department must also shift emphasis to
the retention of coverage of those individuals
successfully transitioned from the Valley Care program
to coverage under a Medi-Cal managed care plan.
Refugee Health Program
For refugee populations, the major issue is tying them
into ongoing care for the medical problems identified
through their initial exams. Refugees lose their Medi-Cal
benefits at eight months, dental care for adults is
virtually unavailable, and mental health care for many of
the refugees is a priority. Through a partnership with the
Asian Americans for Community Involvement Center
for Survivors of Torture, on-site screening is provided for
refugees who may be suffering from Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and/or depression, and
it has been extremely helpful for patients.
PACE Clinic – HIV/AIDS Care
The PACE Clinic has had stable Ryan White Program
(RWP) funding for more than 20 years. The Federal
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
has become much more stringent in reporting
requirements, which the Department is hoping will be
easier now that the HealthLink project has been
implemented. There is an increase in re-infection with
TB, syphilis, and Hepatitis C among PACE Clinic
patients, all of which negatively impact maintenance of
optimal health for those infected with HIV.
Many of the patients who are currently covered by Ryan
White grant-funded programs qualify for the Low-
Income Health Program (LIHP). During the past 18
months, approximately 200 patients have been
transitioned from the Ryan White Program to the Low-
Income Health Program (LIHP) and then into the Medi-
Cal expansion, thus reducing the number of patients
eligible for coverage under the Ryan White Program and
also reducing funding. Delivery System Reform
Incentive Payments (DSRIP) added a Category V for
HIV care to monitor the transition of patients from the
RWP to the LIHP for the 18 months ending December
2013. This program has provided funding for meeting
the metrics of quality care.  Three issues pose significant challenges and
opportunities for VHP.
¦ Valley Health Plan is seeking full accreditation from
the National Committee for Quality Assurance
(NCQA) as a Covered California Issuer must have
NCQA accreditation in order to participate in the
Exchange market. Requirements for this accreditation
include compliance and regulatory thresholds
that must be met in order to obtain this recognition.
¦ The Diamond system has been VHP’s core claims
system since 1996 and in its current state is
becoming a barrier to the rapidly changing environment
of managed health care. A core system replacement
is one of VHP’s highest priorities.
¦ VHP will begin the application process in FY 2015 to
create a Medicare Advantage (MA) Commercial
product. Similar to the work required to become a
Qualified Health Plan for Covered California, The
MA implementation will require extensive planning
and development work. The lessons learned thus far
from Covered California will have a resonance with
the implementation of Medicare Advantage.  Economic Changes Related to Healthcare
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center's (SCVMC) payer mix
will continue to change in 2015 related to the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
implementation which includes Medi-Cal expansion
and participation in Covered California. SCVMC will
focus on ensuring existing members, who now have a
choice in selecting a provider, retain SCVMC. SCVMC
will serve over 250,000 individuals in FY 2015. The
enrollment in Covered California has been slow;
however, the numbers are increasing with a goal of 2,000
in by the end of FY 2015. The goals for the covered lives
by the end of 2015 are approximately: 80,000 VHP Medi-
Cal Managed Care, 18,000 VHP Commercial, 21,500
Medi-Cal Coverage Expansion (MCE), and 2,000
Covered California
It is projected at least 140,000 residents in Santa Clara
County will remain uninsured in 2019 as they do not
qualify because of immigration or financial status for
other sources of coverage.1
As part of the Health & Hospital System, SCVMC will
continue helping residents focus on health and wellbeing
by improving access to primary and specialty care
in the ambulatory setting, reducing dependence on the
emergency department and, after hospitalization,
ensuring patients are not readmitted to the hospital by
providing the necessary ongoing care utilizing
community based resources.
Health Care Reform
Health Care Reform remains a significant issue for the
County, the Health & Hospital System and the nation.
Coverage changes began January 1, 2014 and many
challenges will continue through December 31, 2015 as
consumers experience shifts in health coverage, as well
as providers.
Reduction in State funding including $38.5 million for
Realignment (due to AB 85) and an estimated $4 million
from the Safety Net Care Pool will have a significant
impact on the SCVMC revenue stream. There will be
additional reductions in these areas in future years.
These revenue losses will be partially offset by the Medi-
Cal expansion revenue increase of $55.1 million which
highlights the importance of the retention of the Medi-Cal population for SCVMC. Strategic initiatives that will
ensure residents are satisfied with care and service are
critical over the next year. There is now competition
from other providers in the county, who are also
expanding, to provide access to primary care to the
newly insured clients as they are eligible to choose
among health plans and providers. The continued
priority of ensuring timely, user-friendly access to
primary and specialty care is ever more important to
ensure SCVMC retains market share of existing patients
and gains patients from Covered California who see
SCVMC as a provider of first choice. The expansion of
the Patient-Centered Medical Home will provide the
level of service and model of care required to move
residents on the path to a healthier lifespan.
ICD 10 Implications
There will be a significant change from the
International Classification of Diseases (ICD), Ninth
Revision, Clinical Modification which is the official
system used in the United States to classify and assign
codes to health conditions and related information. The
use of standardized codes improves consistency among
physicians in recording patient symptoms and
diagnoses. The system is being changed to ICD-10
which is designed to streamline the claim submission
process yielding fewer miscoded or rejected claims
resulting in more accurate and timely payments. The
impact will be felt across many departments at SCVMC.
An additional program being implemented
concurrently is the Clinical Documentation
Improvement (CDI) program a component to the
ICD-10 implementation. The CDI program should have
a beneficial impact on SCVMC revenue over time as
Clinical Documentation Improvement Specialists work
with physicians and advanced practice providers to
improve the accuracy of the medical record for coding
and processing claims.
Customer Experience
With the continuing market competition for health care
services and the pay for performance incentive plans
there is a financial risk associated with ensuring the
best possible experience for customers across the
continuum of services from well-baby care to primary
care in a patient-centered medical home or if
emergency or hospital care is required.
One priority that began this year was the focus on
improving the Women's and Children's Health (WCH)
services by providing single room options on the
postpartum unit. Other services are being evaluated to
improve the experience for this service line across the
continuum of care.
In addition, the priority will continue around enhancing
the Patient Centered Medical Homes to meet the
varying needs of consumers and to provide as much
care in the community as possible. Evolution of the
model will focus on providing care by the appropriate
member of the care team, utilizing navigators or team
members to facilitate ease of service and focus on
health promotion services. Collaboration across the
health system with Public Health and Mental Health
will continue to ensure the customer experience is
consistent for all care needs and in all settings.  The Department of Planning and Development is
engaged in a transformation and modernization project
(TM Project) to make improvements to the
development permitting process. The TM Project began
with feedback from residents, as well as an internal
assessment of processes. Based on the results, the
Department plans to make improvements to the areas
of information technology, customer relationships and
staff leadership.
The specific targets for the project through FY 2015 are:
1. Twenty percent increase in customer satisfaction
scores over baseline survey.
2. Achieve thirteen week building permit application
processing time for 80% of Stanford projects in 2015
(represents 50% decrease).
3. Achieve 40% decrease in average elapsed permit processing
time for all other permits in 2015 compared
to historical baseline data.
4. Achieve 20% increase in staff scores on management
and leadership survey in 2015 over 2014 baseline.
5. Complete 90% of staff training sessions identified in
the Department’s FY 2015 Staff Training Plan.
In addition to these specific objectives, the TM Project
aims to reduce overall permitting costs and increase the
convenience and simplicity of the process.
Public Outreach and Notification
The Department of Planning and Development has
begun implementing the Board adopted Early
Notification and Outreach Policy for private
development in the unincorporated areas. The Policy
requires that the County use certain public outreach
tools to notify neighbors and community groups when
larger private development projects are proposed. This
includes the mailing of postcards to nearby property
owners, installation of onsite notification signs, and the
use of community meetings to allow review and
discussion of projects between an applicant and
interested parties.
When a private development project is proposed, early
public outreach and communication promotes public
engagement and improves overall understanding of the
development project and County processes and policies
ultimately resulting in better projects.
Plug in Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
The Department of Planning and Development is
implementing a Board adopted ordinance requiring
new buildings in unincorporated Santa Clara County to
install pre-wiring necessary for plug in electric vehicle
(PEV) charging systems. This approach provides a great
cost savings for property owners who later purchase an
electric vehicle and want to install a charging system in
their house, eliminating the need to tear-up walls to
install the conduit for an electrical vehicle charging
system.
The Ordinance also requires that new large commercial
or multi-family buildings with more than 100 new
parking spaces install plug in electric vehicle charging
systems for 1% of the parking spaces at the time of
initial construction. This approach supports the
regional need to make PEV charging systems visible and
available (as part of a network) to encourage PEV
ownership.
Transfer of Clean Water Program to Department
of Agriculture and Environmental Management
The County Executive’s recommendations include
moving the Clean Water Program from the Department
of Planning and Development to the Department of
Agriculture and Environmental Management in
FY 2015.
Transfer of Office of Affordable Housing to
Mental Health
To support the County’s housing mission to serve
special needs and extremely low-income populations
with supportive housing, the Office of Affordable
Housing (OAH) and the Office of Housing and
Homeless Services (OHHSS) are merging to form the
Office of Supportive Housing (OSH) within the Mental
Health Department (MHD), which will soon merge with
the Department of Alcohol and Drug Services (DADS).
While supported by the MHD administratively, the OSH
will receive general direction from the County’s Chief
Operating Officer and support all County departments
and initiatives including the Office of Reentry Services
and the Seniors Agenda. Service Effectiveness and System Sustainability
In 2013, the Santa Clara County Parks and Recreation
Department began a transformation initiative aligned
with the County’s Center for Leadership and
Transformation, entitled “Strategic Teams for Action
and Results” (STAR), to address the key areas of strategic
focus, including customer focus, the long-term financial
sustainability of the Department, leveraging community
assets, and measuring performance. Five STAR teams,
consisting of eight staff members each and representing
twenty percent of the Department across the entire
depth and breadth of the organization, developed 23
significant recommendations with 133 specific action
items through the three phases of the transformation
process, the majority of which have been incorporated
into the department’s work plan. Highlights of
recommendations anticipated to be acted upon in the
near future are summarized below.
Enhancing customer service while increasing
operating revenue potential
The County’s regional park system provides access to an
incredible array of 29 parks encompassing nearly 50,000
acres of rich natural, cultural, historic, and scenic
resources. As the county’s population has grown
increasingly urban and diverse, and as technology has
advanced, the recreational desires of our residents have
diversified and expectations for convenient access to
information and customer service have increased.
Benchmarking and best practice research show that the
department has the opportunity to provide enhanced
visitor amenities that will meet the evolving needs of
residents, such as: shorter loop trails that are easy to
access, small reservable picnic areas and small group
campsites that cater to our changing demographics,
park stores that provide for the necessities of campers,
boaters, and other park visitors, exciting and engaging
nature oriented play areas with water features, and
expanded alternative camping facilities including yurts
or cabins. Each of these amenities are likely to expand
park visitorship and provide enhanced revenue to offset
operating costs of the department.
Technology also can allow residents and visitors access
to information about our parks, the opportunity to
reserve campsites and other facilities, and even
interpretive information from the comfort of their
home, car, or while at the park using smart phones and
tablets. The department will continue to enhance its
website, on-line reservation system, and will expand
into providing interpretative information to users of
mobile technology. Providing connectivity to the
internet while in our parks is another important request
from visitors that the department will endeavor to
meet. These technology solutions can leverage capital
investment to drive operating efficiencies and increased
revenue.
The Department is in the process of retaining VFA, Inc.,
specialists in facilities assessments, to perform a
condition assessment of its major buildings and
facilities in response to the Board’s concern that
deferred maintenance is identified and addressed
through the Department’s capital program.  Development of an Agency Structure
The next steps in integrating the existing three separate
budget units within the Department of Agriculture and
Environmental Management (AEM) into a more
cohesive Agency structure will be carried out in FY 2015
with the proposed consolidation and reorganization of
the Administrative Units in Environmental Health and
Agriculture. Similar to the consolidation of the
Accounting Units that occurred in FY 2014, this
consolidation will open up opportunities for cross
utilization and training of existing staff, and streamline
oversight and review. The Agency will also explore a
name change to more accurately reflect the current
structure of AEM.
Staff from different divisions from within two of the
three budget units attended Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) workshops together and have
initiated four teams to look strategically at the
organization and develop recommendations for
improving processes, customer service, training and
communication.
County of Santa Clara Animal Shelter –
Pet Adoption Days
The County of Santa Clara Animal Shelter participated
in the Maddie’s Pet Adoption Days in 2013, which was a
huge success. Maddie’s Fund has again invited Santa
Clara County to participate in their 2014 Pet Adoption
Days, which will include 14 communities in 9 states
throughout the country to find loving homes for 10,000
shelter animals in just two days: May 31, 2014 and June
1, 2014. California will have four counties participating,
including Alameda, Contra Costa, San Francisco and
Santa Clara. Maddie’s Fund has earmarked $10 million
as a way to give back to the participating organizations,
donating up to $2,000 per adopted dog or cat. All
adoption fees for the public will be waived.
Clean Water Program
The County Executive’s recommendations include
moving the Clean Water Program from the Department
of Planning and Development to the Department of
Agriculture and Environmental Management in
FY 2015.
On-Site Wastewater Treatment System Ordinance
The Department of Environmental Health, with
assistance of the Department of Planning and
Development, completed a long-term project to
comprehensively review and update of the County’s Onsite
Wastewater Treatment System Ordinance (OWTS).
As part of the project, technical studies and GIS-based
analyses were completed. This formed the basis for
recommendations for updates and improvements to
the County ordinance. The Board of Supervisors
unanimously approved the Ordinance and it was
adopted December 26, 2013.
The County of Santa Clara’s previous OWTS Ordinance
and related General Plan policies allowed only
conventional septic tanks and drain fields. The revised
ordinance allows for more efficient and
environmentally superior alternative OWTS systems.
The new systems will provide significant benefits to
property owners in unincorporated areas of the County
( for example, Holiday Lake Estates and Redwood
Estates), which have older septic systems and will need efficient and sustainable solutions for dealing with
marginal or failing systems.
This Ordinance and associated policies, along with a
detailed application, will be submitted to the Regional
Water Quality Control Board in Spring 2014 in order to
demonstrate compliance with AB 885, legislation that
governs the state-wide oversight of on-site wastewater
disposal.
Site Mitigation Program – Local Oversight
Program (LOP) Certification
On April 19, 2013, the Department of Environmental
Health (DEH) was certified by the State Water
Resources Control Board (SWRCB) as a Local Oversight
Program (LOP) in response to regulatory changes from
AB 1701. This certification allowed DEH to continue to
oversee corrective actions from Underground Storage
Tank releases (as of June 30, 2013, only a certified local
agency is permitted to oversee these corrective actions).
Several criteria were established to evaluate local
agency resources and include on-going state agency
audits of local programs.
Environmental Health has served as a LOP through a
contract with the SWRCB for underground storage tank
releases since 2005. Maintaining a local program
provides enhanced oversight and enforcement efforts
for developers and responsible parties who are looking
for faster turnaround for clean-up of these sites.
On-line Reporting of Restaurant
Inspection Results
The Department of Environmental Health, Consumer
Protection Division (CPD), provides the public with
access to important information collected by staff
during routine and non-routine inspections. California
SB 180 (Sher, 2000) mandated a standardized approach
to Internet posting of violations, which CPD
implemented in 2001.
Since then, the Department upgraded its inspection
information portal by incorporating Google Maps to
facilitate searches by the public, and has made
modifications to the report seen by the public.
Additionally, the website visibility is regularly modified
to ensure that when the public searches for “restaurant
inspections in Santa Clara County” the DEH website is
at the top of the search results.
Significant changes to the presentation of the
information and the content displayed on the website
are planned for Summer 2014, following the completion
of an upgrade to computerized inspections. Mobile,
computerized devices will streamline data collection by
field specialists. Electronic inspection data will allow
the Department to enhance its on-line reporting of sitespecific
data to the public and improve office
efficiencies by reducing the processing of paperwork by
hand. With the incorporation of electronically collected
inspection information, along with modifications made
to the Department’s website, the public will have access
to more information in a more user-friendly format.
California Environmental Reporting System
State law requires that all Unified Program-related
information which was previously submitted by
businesses to Certified Unified Program Agencies
(CUPAs) in hard copy format be submitted
electronically beginning January 1, 2013. This
information is now required to be electronically
transmitted to the California Environmental Reporting
System (CERS) for all future submittals. The electronic
reporting requirements impact approximately 6,274
businesses in the Department of Environmental Health
(DEH) jurisdiction. These businesses have a combined
total of almost 9,153 permits issued by DEH.
DEH is developing a local portal to collect and send the
required information from our local businesses to the
State. To assist small businesses, businesses that are not
“computer savvy” and businesses with limited or no
English speaking ability, DEH staff will provide technical
support and guidance, directly enter businesses’ data
when necessary, and provide translation assistance as
needed. Business and public outreach efforts will be
greatly expanded by hosting workshops and providing
assistance directly in the field.
The initial data entry process poses the main challenge
to many businesses. The shift to electronic reporting
impacts some businesses more than others. Larger or
more sophisticated companies that are already
managing their hazardous materials disclosure and
compliance information in databases may see an
immediate positive impact since the transition to
electronic reporting will be relatively easy. However, a
majority of small businesses have not historically 

managed their compliance information in that manner,
and do not have in-house regulatory compliance
personnel to facilitate the necessary changes in their
business practices. Many small businesses may not have
a sufficient comfort level with the use of computer
systems to accurately and efficiently enter required
information into CERS.
DEH is making every effort to assist our local businesses
through the reporting process by developing a local
portal and by providing outreach and direct assistance
to our businesses.
Weights and Measures – New Technologies
The purpose of the Weights & Measures Division is to
protect consumers and businesses by ensuring that
equity prevails in all commercial transactions involving
determinations of quantity. These standards function to
discourage unfair and dishonest commerce and help
eliminate fraud and misrepresentation in commercial
transactions.
In recent years, many alternative vehicle fuels and
motors including hydrogen, ethanol, natural gas,
compressed natural gas, liquefied natural gas, biodiesel,
and electric motors have been developed and are
becoming mainstream products. The automobile
passenger transportation industry has introduced a
smart phone and an application to measure time and
distance. In addition, the vehicles used to provide this
taxi service are not required to be identified, which may
encourage many operators to remain unregulated.
As industry introduces new technologies into the
marketplace, Weights and Measures faces the challenge
of learning and understanding these technologies in
order to develop requirements, testing methods, and
protocols to protect public interest and ensure a fair
price is paid for services rendered.
Agriculture Canine Inspection Team –
Post Office Search Warrants
The Canine Inspection Team in the San Jose Post Office
enhances inspection and surveillance efforts involving
packages containing fruit and plant materials that enter
the State through parcel delivery sites. Agricultural
products have the ability to carry eggs, maggots, insects,
diseases, invasive weeds, and other threats to State
plants and wildlife. The California Department of Food
and Agriculture estimates that California agriculture
losses to exotic pests exceed $3 billion annually to the
State’s $44.7 billion agriculture industry.
Under the Canine Parcel Inspection Program, the
trained “sniffer” dog will scratch at parcels to alert the
dog handler that a particular package may contain
agricultural products. The package is then pulled from
the sort for inspection. However, all First Class Mail and
Priority Mail is protected under privacy laws and
require either permission from the sender or receiver, or
a search warrant to open and inspect the parcel. In an
effort to expedite the process, the Agriculture Division
has been working with the local United States
Attorney’s Office and a United States Magistrate Judge
to identify the canine alert to a parcel as probable cause
and allow the Agricultural Biologist to immediately
open and inspect the suspect parcel. When this process
is in place, the Canine Inspection Team will be
extremely efficient at intercepting packages that
contain potential pests that could threaten California’s
agriculture industry.
Vector Control District – West Nile Virus and
Invasive Mosquitos
Since 2004, 19 human cases (including one fatality) of
West Nile Virus have been reported in Santa Clara
County; two human cases were detected during the
summer of 2013. In FY 2014, the Vector Control District
conducted 11 ground fogging operations (over twice the
previous record) in what turned into the third most
intense virus season since 2004.
In addition to the West Nile Virus, the District now faces
the possibility of two new invasive mosquito species
entering the County: Aedes albopictus (Asian Tiger
Mosquito) and Aedes aegypti (Yellow Fever Mosquito).
Both species are efficient vectors of Dengue and
Chikungunya viruses, which are significant human
pathogens. If established in Santa Clara County, they
would significantly alter the operational burden on the
District because they are small container breeders and
can successfully breed in the water filling a bottle cap.
They are also day-biters and will have a significant
impact on quality of life for County residents.
In FY 2015, the District’s aerial surveillance program for
backyard breeding sources will continue. The District
will continue to test dead birds for West Nile Virus,
monitor mosquito-breeding areas, and respond to
citizen requests for assistance and information. The District also released its first mobile application
(SCCVECTOR) for the iPhone and will use this new tool
to expand its public outreach efforts and begin enlisting
the public through citizen-science projects.
Solid Waste Program – All Purpose Closed
Landfill Development
The Department of Environmental Health (DEH) acting
as the Local Enforcement Agency (LEA) has oversight
authority over closed landfills in the County, with the
exception of the City of San Jose. This includes the All
Purpose Closed Landfill development in Santa Clara.
The property is currently used as a golf course, BMX
track, and open space. The landfill is adjacent to the
new San Francisco 49ers stadium and has been
identified by the City of Santa Clara as an ideal location
to build a new City Center that consists of commercial,
residential, retail and mixed use on over 215 acres. The
proposed project will need to be reviewed and approved
by the LEA, Regional Water Quality Control Board and
the California Department of Resources, Recycling and
Recovery for conformance with closed landfill
development and water quality regulations.
In addition, the LEA recently approved a proposal by
the City of Santa Clara to allow parking in the golf
course area of the closed landfill to support the parking
needs of the new Levi’s Stadium. Parking on the closed
landfill will only take place during game days and
special events throughout the year and special
precautions will be taken to ensure the protection of
human health and the environment. 