current challenge for the Department is that
workloads continue to remain high, particularly in the
areas of Assessment Appeals and records. In
Assessment Appeals, for example, while appeals
applications have decreased from a high point of nearly
13,000 in 2009-2010, there are still more than 8,000
applications expected during the current tax year. While
the next tax year might see a further drop to 7,000
applications, this level is still much higher than the
historically 3,000 range in more normal years. In order to
successfully absorb this workload, while at the same
time moving various projects forward, the Department
continues to identify areas to streamline work, shift
existing Department resources in and out of the areas of
most need, and rely on the dedication of hard working
staff.
Assessment Appeals Automation Project
Another challenge on the horizon for the Department is
to investigate and determine the best strategy for
moving forward with the Assessment Appeals
Automation Project, begun in 2010 but not yet
completed. After a series of release delays and other
problems, the vendor selected to develop both the
Assessor's new property assessment computer system
and the Clerk of the Board's module for management of
assessment appeals opted to terminate its contracts
with the County, leaving both the Assessor and Clerk of
the Board projects on hold pending determination of
appropriate options and course of action. Because the
Clerk of the Board's relatively small appeal system is
overlapping and linked with the Assessor's larger
property assessment system, until the Assessor’s Office
determines a course of action for its system, no decision
on strategy for automating the appeals process will be
made. With no vendor currently having a Californiacompliant
appeals system, it is possible that COB will
eventually look internally to the Information Services
Department to develop an appeals system that will
interface with whatever system that the Assessor’s
Office selects.

Redevelopment Agencies were dissolved on February 1,
2012, pursuant to the California Supreme Court's
decision in California Redevelopment Association et al.
v Matosantos et al., and replaced with successor
agencies to administer the orderly and expeditious
wind-down of former redevelopment agencies.
However, the legal and auditing work required to
appropriately disposition financial and real estate assets
will continue for several years. To date, many of the less
contentious matters have been resolved, leaving
primarily the matters with the greatest fiscal
consequences, and therefore greatest legal complexity,
still to be resolved.
The Office of Emergency Services is a unit within the
Office of the County Executive focused on coordination
of all County departments and regional partners to plan
for and manage a unified response to an emergency or
natural disaster. Such a response includes fire, law
enforcement, emergency medical services, and public
works, among others. In September 2012, the Board of
Supervisors approved a pilot program contracting for
emergency management leadership from the County
Fire Department. The County Executive retained overall
responsibility for the program, but leveraged the unique
operational expertise and regional scope of County Fire
to serve as OES Director. This arrangement has worked
well in the pilot phase and long-term organizational
recommendations will be brought forward in the
coming months.
The Office of Cultural Competency for Children’s Services is
part of a central, cross departmental effort to address
the challenges of the disproportional representation of
children of color within the Social Services Agency
Department of Families and Children's Services and
Juvenile Probation. The creation of this new office, a
function of the Office of the County Executive, is one of
several strategies in the Santa Clara County System
Improvement Plan 2013-2018, approved by the Board of
Supervisors February 26, 2013 (Agenda Item No. 11).
The Office will work to eliminate disparity not only as it
relates directly to client populations, but also disparity
within both internal and external service providers. The
Office will include a Latino Planning Council and an
African American Social Planning Council in order to
ensure appropriate community input and monitoring of
progress. The Director of the Office of Cultural
Competency for Children's Services will be responsible
for the Countywide implementation of policies and
programs that address racial and ethnic disparities that
currently exist within County services. The Director will
ensure that the issues of equity are dealt with in a
manner that adheres to programmatic requirements
and addresses equity as a critical priority Countywide.
No new resources have been authorized for this Office,
although this Recommended Budget does include a
recommendation for the Employee Services Agency to
develop a Director position. Presently, the Director's
responsibilities are assigned to a Deputy County
Executive. Property Assessment Appraisal Management
System (PAAMS) Replacement Project
In November 2012, Harris-True Automation, the vendor
developing the new computer system to replace the
antiquated AIMS legacy system, terminated the
contract without cause. The Department is in the
process of working with County Counsel to consider
options for resolving the legal aspects of this action. The
abrupt cancellation of the contract will result in a
substantive delay in the progress toward a replacement
system which was scheduled to “go live” in July 2014.
The Department is conducting a detailed risk
assessment and evaluating its options. Currently, three
viable options exist within the California assessment
landscape:
¦ Duplicate Orange County’s self-developed, in-house
solution.
¦ Issue a Request For Proposals for a California COTS
(commercial off the shelf) solution. One commercial
vendor has contracted with several counties in the
State, including Santa Cruz County.
¦ Utilize in-house information systems experts to lead
a team of contracted developers to design a
customized solution.
It is imperative that the Department complete a
replacement system project as rapidly as possible. The
existing AIMS system, which processes all aspects of
assessment roll production, lacks stability and is built
on technology no longer supported by the

manufacturer. Each option has its attendant risks, costs,
and timeline considerations. The Department expects
to utilize FY 2013 salary savings to contract with
Information Services Department-approved vendor,
Gartner, for a comprehensive independent evaluation of
the various options, as well as perform gap analyses of
the Orange County solution. A recommendation will be
presented to the Board following the conclusion of
these assessments. It is anticipated that first-year
project costs can be borne by remaining PTAP funds
and that County funding for the project will be
necessary beginning in FY 2015.
During the assessment, planning, and approval process,
the Department will work closely with its partners,
including the Clerk of the Board, Tax Collector, ISD, and
the Office of Budget and Analysis to ensure that it puts
forth a recommendation that considers the project’s
impact to all stakeholders. The Department will
continue to provide monthly updates to the
Governance Committee, and the Business Information
Technology Steering Committee as necessary.
Backlog
During the last year, the Department has made
substantial progress toward reducing a backlog of
unworked assessments while managing an increasingly
heavy workload. It has accomplished this through the
additional staffing that was added in FY 2013 (sixteen
permanent roll production employees, including
auditors, appraisers, and property transfer examiners)
and implementing various technological efficiencies
and in-house tools to improve workflow and
productivity.
The positions were filled at mid-year, and all new
employees have completed both classroom and on-thejob
training. Detailed production statistics of these new
employees will be available in the next fiscal year, after
they have completed a full roll-production year.
However, the Department is already experiencing
positive production benefits. Additionally, the
Department is engaged in developing new discovery
methodologies to increase productivity consistent with
reductions in its backlog.
As of June 30, 2012, the backlog of incomplete
assessment activities stood at 11,741 units. The
Department’s ability to eliminate the backlog continues
to be impacted by the need to direct more resources
toward assessment appeal resolution. Last year, the
Department spent 61,000 hours (equivalent of 38 FTE’s)
on assessment appeal resolution, and 6,000 fewer hours
on the enrollment of property transfers, new
construction, and audit activities. The Department
expects that the additional 16 roll production
employees will have a positive impact on its production
rates.
As assessment appeals decline, the Department will
direct resources toward the assessment of changes of
ownership and new construction. For the first time in
several years, the number of assessment appeals
resolved exceeded the number of assessment appeals
filed. The Department is currently on track to resolve
8,700 appeals this fiscal year, which exceeds the current
filings of 7,800. Public procurement functions continue to face a
momentous change in strategic positioning. The
emphasis has shifted from a limited “buy transaction” to
supply chain management, which includes the
requirement definition and disciplines such as supplier
development and strategic sourcing.
Over the past several years, the department has
adopted strategic sourcing principles and implemented
a centralized/decentralized model to provide
procurement services. Through this approach, the
County maximizes its purchasing power by aggregating
purchasing volume to establish large Countywide
contracts and negotiate greater price discounts.
Departments are able to purchase off the contracts
without going through Procurement, resulting in
streamlined processes and quick delivery of products
and/or services. The Department continues to strive to
move Procurement’s decentralized contracting
activities from reactionary, where they are responding
to the Departments’ calls for assistance, to a more
proactive and strategic approach to the acquisition
process.
Solicitation and Contracting
With the adoption of the new Board Policy related to
Soliciting and Contracting in February 2012, the
Procurement Department has played an active role as
an expert in soliciting and contracting, partnering with
the County Executive's Office and County Counsel to
provide the training and support for decentralized
contracting related to professional services. The
Procurement Department has been engaged in an
intensive effort to lower risks and bring efficiencies to
purchasing throughout the County. These efforts have
focused on (a) developing standardized procedures,
policies and contracts for all County departments and
(b) training and assisting departments in solicitation
methods for staff outside of Procurement. These efforts
have been conducted in close cooperation with County
Counsel and have required a significant commitment
from Procurement staff, above and beyond the day to
day activities of County Procurement.
Assistance to County Departments
In addition to the purchasing and contracting activities
of a centralized procurement department, as directed
by the Board of Supervisor's, the Department has
focused its attention to assist agencies and departments
who do their own contracting activities such as
professional services and other specialized contracting
activities. While the Department has not been able to
give every area the full attention it needs due to the
volume, additional responsibilities and resource issues,
there are several areas of the procurement functions
that require close review and streamlining to increase
compliance and efficiencies. These areas are related to
the small dollar purchases via the Procurement Card
Program, small dollar purchases via the Field Purchase
Order method, and lastly the use of the Direct Payment
method. The Procurement Department has a need to
focus its attention in these areas and will be working
very closely with County Counsel and the Controller's
Office to revise the policies and processes and to ensure
program compliance by agencies and departments.
The e-Procurement team in the Procurement
Department has been actively working with agencies
and departments to address additional technical
improvements at the Santa Clara Valley Medical Center
for service agreements and Board contracts and
addressing the inventory management needs as
required by several departments in the County. This is
an area with many emerging needs that requires
significant involvement of Procurement staff resources
and external consulting help.
Disposition of Property
Another area of priority the Department is focusing on
is the disposition of property. The Procurement
Department is reviewing its current operations and will
be implementing program compliance and operational
changes. The Department is working closely with the
Internal Auditor and County Counsel to strengthen
controls and streamline the disposition process.

In April 2010, the County launched the 24/7
Whistleblower Program to provide the public and
County employees the ability to submit a confidential
report regarding suspected fraud, misuse or waste of
County resources or funds, or any perceived improper
activities by County officials, employees, and
contractors.
The Office of the County Counsel administers this
program and manages the receipt, acceptance,
investigation, documentation, and monitoring of
reported complaints. Many complaints are also
investigated by attorneys in the Office. If a complaint is
sustained, the Office may provide legal advice regarding
actions required to address the situation, including any
changes that are designed to prevent a recurrence of the
event. In addition, the County Counsel's Office also
submits semiannual status reports to the Board of
Supervisors.
Through the period ending October 15, 2012, the
County Counsel received 267 contacts via the
Whistleblower Program. Due to the volume of
complaints received, the administration of the 24/7
Whistleblower Program is utilizing a substantial
amount of departmental resources. If the trend
increases, the department may find it difficult to
administer this program with existing resources.
California Redevelopment Agency (RDA)
Dissolution
The Office of the County Counsel provides legal advice
and support for the Finance Agency, Controller-
Treasurer in carrying out legal responsibilities
associated with the dissolution of each of the nine
Redevelopment Agencies in Santa Clara County.
Additionally, the County Counsel provides legal counsel
and representation on a number of related matters
currently in litigation. The Office anticipates that
Redevelopment dissolution will continue to take a
substantial amount of attorney and support staff time
for the foreseeable future in order to ensure that the
interests of local taxing entities, including the County,
are fairly addressed. The Board of Supervisors has taken
actions to authorize necessary resources to vigorously
pursue the cases in litigation. However, as the
dissolution process continues, County Counsel may
need to add resources to address the County's legal
obligations and financial interests related to the
dissolution of redevelopment agencies.
Public Safety Realignment
Since the adoption of AB 109 and AB 117 in 2011, the
Office of the County Counsel has provided legal advice
and services regarding the implementation of changes
to the State's criminal justice system resulting from
these laws. Primary clients include the Offices of the
Sheriff, District Attorney, Public Defender, Department
of Correction, Probation Department and others.
Additional legal support will be required in FY 2014
resulting from the additional realignment of state
services.
Health and Hospital System
With the impending implementation of the Affordable
Care Act in January 2014, a number of urgent issues
related to the Health and Hospital system continue to
consume a significant amount of staff time and
resources. It is likely that matters including the
operation of the new electronic health record system,
anticipated Medicaid expansion with the inclusion of all
lower income individuals under the Affordable Care
Act, and other challenges in a rapidly changing
environment will eventually require additional
resources to support the Health and Hospital System.


In August 2012, the Secretary of State’s Office (SOS)
informed the ROV it was requiring Santa Clara County
to post facsimile ballots in Japanese and Korean in some
precincts. The ROV created 10 Korean or Japanese
ballot types and posted them in 19 precincts in the
November 2012 Presidential General Election. In
January 2013, the SOS shared preliminary data
suggesting that Santa Clara County will be required to
provide facsimile ballots in two more languages, Hindi
and Khmer, beginning with the June 2014 Primary
Election. The new mandated languages increased costs
for translating and proofreading ballot materials, and
recruiting bilingual poll workers in November 2012.
These costs will rise even more with the addition of two
more languages.
Going Paperless
Existing legislation allows counties to offer voters the
opportunity to receive their sample ballot pamphlet
electronically. This is often referred to as “opting out.”
The ROV is working on creating a process in order to
offer this to Santa Clara County voters. Toward this end,
the ROV ordered sample ballot pamphlets in hard copy
and in electronic format (PDF files) for the November
2012 Presidential Election. The electronic pamphlets
were posted to the ROV’s website and provided to
voters who downloaded the ROV’s new phone app that
gave voters with Android or iPhone smartphones access
to services available on the Department’s website.
Federal Commission
During the November 2012 elections, there were reports
of voters waiting in long lines in several states. President
Obama made note of this in his February 12, 2013 State
of the Union address, when he said “When any
Americans...are denied that right simply because they 

can’t wait for five, six, seven hours just to cast their
ballot, we are betraying our ideals.” In his address,
President Obama said he was creating a commission “to
improve the voting experience in America.” The last
Federal election commission, a result of issues in Florida
in 2000, decertified prescored punch card voting and
required Santa Clara County to purchase a new, multimillion
dollar voting system. That new system is now
almost ten years old, the electronic component (DRE) is
only conditionally certified by the Secretary of State
because of accessibility requirements, and the
Department has maintained a portion of the DRE
equipment by utilizing parts from unused machines.
The optical scan ballot creation software was originally
written 16 years ago and is only minimally supported by
the vendor at this point. A new voting system cannot be
far off in Santa Clara County’s future.
Same-Day Voter Registration
Legislation passed that will allow same-day voter
registration when the State’s registration program is up
and running. While this is currently scheduled to occur
in 2015, there is movement in the legislature to
implement same-day registration before that. Same-day
registration will require the ROV to increase the number
of ballots and other precinct supplies provided to
polling places. Polling places will need additional
election officers to handle this new task. The law will
result in more provisional ballots to be verified and
processed for tally. More ROV staff will be needed to
recruit and train the additional election officers and to
process the registrations and provisional ballots
received from polling places.
Vote-by-Mail
The Vote-by-Mail program continues to play a pivotal
role in making Santa Clara County voters heard in
Federal and local elections. During the November 2012
Presidential Election, the Registrar of Voters issued over
603,000 Vote by Mail ballots, the highest number ever
requested in a single election in the County. As Vote-by-
Mail grows while the USPS restructures its service, the
Registrar of Voters has expanded the availability of
ballot drop-off locations to make sure ballots can be
returned and received by Election Day. In 2012, weekend
drive-thru ballot drop-off sites were established at
shopping centers, parks, and other convenient locations
within voters’ communities, while ballot drop-boxes
were also placed on college campuses, making it easier
for the next generation of voters to participate in the
democratic process. In total, over 59,000 ballots were
cast at drop-off sites in the Presidential election.
Legislation has been proposed to require the
acceptance of VBM ballots for several days after the
election, which would delay ballot tallying. As a result of the 2011 Management Audit report
concerning Countywide Cell Phone Authorization, Use
and Oversight, the Information Services Department
(ISD) is implementing the following cellular service reorganization
measures:
¦ ISD and Procurement are working with the three
major cellular service providers used by the County
(AT&T, Verizon and Sprint) to consolidate and
rationalize service plans within each carrier's
offerings and initiate cost saving measures.
Currently, the County is paying monthly for an
inordinately high number of unused cellular service
voice minutes due to an inefficient account
structure and grossly underutilized cellular plans.
¦ Billing for cellular services will be centralized in ISD
and ISD will re-bill the County user agencies and
departments. This process will be similar to the rebilling
already performed by ISD for telephone
services at many multi-tenant locations.
Centralizing the management, provisioning and
billing eases the burden on both the County and the
providers.
¦ ISD will be responsible and accountable for cellular
account management, provisioning, and oversight.
User agencies and departments will still determine
which employees should be issued County cellular
phones and data devices. Local user support will
remain with the agency and department IT staff
with technical assistance as needed from ISD
Telecommunications.
¦ ISD will develop standards, with guidance by the
Business Information Technology Steering (BITS)
Committee, with respect to specific approved
cellular device models that can be acquired by
agencies and departments as well as rules governing
the issuance of County cellular devices.
The goal is to initiate these improvements without
disrupting any current operational capabilities or needs.
ISD will communicate directly with County agencies,
departments and the BITS Committee as specific action
plans and recommendations are further developed.
In parallel with the cellular oversight and management
changes, ISD is implementing a Mobile Device
Management (MDM) solution which will be used
Countywide to inventory, manage and secure cellular
devices including phones and tablets. Procurement for
that system is in the RFP process, and ISD will reach out
to agencies and departments that register devices into
the system. This solution will provide improved device
management and security. Law and Justice System Roadmap – CJIC (Adult
Criminal System) and JRS (Juvenile Record
System) Replacement
ISD is completing a Countywide Law and Justice
Systems Roadmap (LJSR) in conjunction with County
law and justice agencies and local law enforcement
representatives. This roadmap will focus on leveraging
information technology to meet the law and justice
community's current and future business needs. Key
focus areas include improving information sharing and
collaboration among agencies; business process
improvement through the implementation of new
technology; and a detailed plan for transforming the
County's legacy Criminal Justice Information Control
(CJIC) system.
CJIC is the County's adult criminal case management
system, which supports unified end-to-end operational
processes in all local law and justice agencies. CJIC
interfaces with various State and local systems, and is
used by Federal agencies as well. The migration and
transformation of this system, which includes
approximately 600,000 persons, three million bookings,
two million Court cases, and about 1,500 programs, is a
key technology objective for both the County and the
Courts. It is anticipated that this effort will span
multiple years and require the integration and
assimilation of several complementary technologies to
provide improved case management processing,
enhanced reporting and analytics, and advanced
information sharing.
The State Court branches have completed an RFP
process and are beginning to negotiate with multiple
solution providers that meet the needs of small,
medium and large-sized courts and their various
functions, e.g. criminal, traffic, etc. Multiple master
contracts will be setup for each court to utilize.
ISD held preliminary meetings with the Court to
understand potential options for partnering to meet
both entities’ needs. If the Court proceeds, it could begin
a cascade of multiple system implementations to ensure
a comprehensive replacement of current functions that
are currently fulfilled using CJIC. As an example, the
Court Case Management System will not perform
bookings and the surrounding processes, so a new
solution or new interfaces with CJIC would need to be
investigated. Discussions and demonstrations of
potential solutions will continue over the next several
months. Given the interconnected nature of the
criminal justice system, this will be a major undertaking
and require a significant resource investment. Should a
CJIC replacement project be initiated, the Juvenile
Record System would then be the last system on the
mainframe. A replacement plan for that system would
need to be developed in order to realize the benefits of
completely retiring the mainframe applications and
system.
Alignment of Service Areas and Internal Service
Fund Rate Development
Each fiscal year, ISD Internal Service Fund 0074
establishes rates for services, products and other
offerings provided to internal and external customers.
The rate development process had grown in complexity
over the last several years. The department relied upon
several different systems to produce its final rate
structure. The use of disparate systems made it difficult
to provide an easily interpreted breakdown of costs and
budget to actual monitoring.
During the course of FY 2013, ISD has been redefining
its service categories and analyzing costs included in
the previous rate structure. A core team is working with
ISD staff to ensure a full understanding of revenue and
expenses that should be accounted for in the updated
rate structure and used as part of the monthly billing
process for both internal and external stakeholder
groups. The core team regularly reports to a Steering
Committee, which includes representatives from ISD,
the Office of Budget and Analysis, the Controller’s
Office, and the Harvey Rose Management Auditor.
In FY 2014, ISD will initiate a project to define
requirements and analyze the issues to address the
changes in the financial, time tracking, and project
management systems that this new model will require
to be successful. One component of the solution may be
a new project monitoring system that will interface
with SAP. The project funding will allow the department
to research issues and options, then bring a
recommendation to the Committee. Emergency call handling workload is expected to
increase significantly, not only because of the
continuing increased use of cellular telephones and
other wireless devices, but also as a result of
technological advances that will greatly expand 9-1-1
system access for the public. The next generation of 9-1-
1 (NG 9-1-1) systems/services will make it possible to
report emergencies via many means other than
telephone, such as Internet, telematics (On-Star), text
messaging, video and photo feeds, email and other
ways.
The impact on County Communications Dispatchers
will be dramatic; for a given incident, they will receive
more reports from multiple sources providing more
information in varying formats, which they must review
in order to extract the pertinent critical information
needed to dispatch the appropriate emergency
responders. New multi-media information will also
change the essential job duties of a dispatcher to
include face-to-face communication and possibly the
viewing of real time images of crimes, fires and medical
emergencies while in progress. The emotional impact of
viewing these images will require new and enhanced
training to mitigate their potential adverse effect.  However, the Department's staffing of 112, which
includes 5 unfunded Dispatcher positions, is at the
same level that it was in FY 1998. It is possible to meet
current service level requirements consistently only
with mandatory overtime assignments.
County Communications continues to explore
opportunities to improve operational efficiencies and
costs, such as consolidating services and/or shared
systems to optimize operational and economies of scale
cost benefits. With consolidation, there is also an
opportunity for increased revenue to the County. Over the past year, FAF started exploring development
of the Old City Hall property along with other
parts of the County government center area
including the former Army Reserve property that
should transfer in April 2013. Efforts to seek out
public-private partnership opportunities and
community outreach for the project is underway.
¦ In Fiscal Year 2013, FAF secured a new power
purchase agreement (PPA) that will bring fuel cell
systems to four sites and solar photovoltaic systems
to nine County sites. The four fuel cell installations
will combine to produce 2.8 megawatts of power,
and the solar photovoltaic systems will have a
combined generation capacity of 2.3 megawatts. The
new PPA projects are expected to provide nearly $16
million in net utility cost savings over the 20-year
contract.
¦ FAF was able to secure $3 million through the California
Energy Commission Low Interest Loan
Program for energy efficiency measures at the
County Government Center. Once implemented,
these measures will result in an annual reduction of
2.6 million kilowatt-hours of electricity usage and
avoid $470,000 in electricity costs annually over the
next ten years.
¦ It is becoming increasingly difficult to find commercial
properties to lease within areas where there are
concentrations of the public seeking County
services. As a result, lease costs will increase for
County departments, particularly in the north
County area.
¦ The final transfer of the remaining leased Court facilities
to the Administrative Office of the Courts is
underway. Even with the transfer, the County must
continue to pay the Court Facilities Payment based
on lease, maintenance, and utility costs, in
perpetuity.
¦ Vending revenue continues to decline, apparently as
a result of the adoption of stricter nutritional standards.
However, FAF is working with the vendor to
identify items that meet the new standards and
appeal to this market. Since County cafeteria equipment
has primarily been resourced from vending
sales, the County will have to allocate other
resources to repair and replace cafeteria equipment
if those operations are to continue.
¦ With less activity in the area, revenue at the Civic
Center Parking Garage has also continued to
decline.
Facility Capital and Renewable Power
Improvements, Maintenance, and Repair
¦ The County has experienced a noticeable increase in
building systems failures requiring emergency
repairs over the past fiscal year. This is directly
attributable to the lack of investment in maintenance
and recapitalization of County facilities.
Because funding preventative maintenance has
been half the recommended level for the past eleven
years, the facilities have entered a phase of accelerated
deterioration. The plant is nearly 40 years old
and has an estimated backlog of well over $500
million.
¦ In late FY 2012, FAF was assigned oversight and
construction management of the Measure A projects
including the Seismic Safety Program at the
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center (VMC) and the
new Downtown San Jose Health Center. The new
VMC facilities are expected to be delivered in late 2014. Groundbreaking for the Health Center is
scheduled for April 2013, with project completion
scheduled in 2015.
¦ With the acquisition of the Army Reserve Center
and the reactivation of the Muriel Wright Center,
some 82,000 square feet of additional space will
require additional resources to maintain and
operate.
¦ Recently through the leadership of the Clean &
Green Group, the County is conserving water and
saving more than $160,000 per year with the installation
of low-flow shower heads, the use of recycled
water, and Bay-friendly Landscaping practices at
various facilities.
¦ The Clean & Green Group has also continued its
education and outreach for waste diversion. In fact
over this last year, this effort saved the County over
$65,000 and the County achieved a 75 percent diversion
rate of the County's waste from landfills.
Fleet Planning and Asset Management
The Board adopted the 10-Year Fleet Plan in 2007.
However, the Board has never approved purchases
according to that plan. As a result, more than half the
fleet assets are beyond replacement criteria and the fees
associated with the depreciation of the assets are not
adequate to replace these vehicles. And of note in FY
2010, the Board approved reallocating nearly $3 million
of funding from the fleet capital holding account to
other programs. As a result, it is estimated that $2
million per year for the next five years will need to be
infused into the vehicle replacement fund to meet the
Board's plan and limit repair costs, increase fuel
efficiency, and avoid a detrimental effect on the
environment by reducing emissions. For example, more
than twenty security buses are overdue for replacement.
If the replacement were spread out over a five-year
period, $1.25 million would be needed, per year, to
replace these buses.
Fleet Equipage, Maintenance, and Repair
There is a causal relationship between the cost of fuel
and vehicle maintenance costs. As fuel prices rise, the
price for vehicle parts, tires and lubricants also
increases. This will increase Fleet maintenance rates.
Emergency Preparedness
The ability of FAF to staff the Emergency Operations
Center and execute the continuity of operations plan is
increasingly compromised due to staff reductions.
Nonetheless, FAF continues to provide support for
Operational area planning and coordinates with
community partners for response and recovery efforts.

Revenue Recovery
After two years of decline, the Library District's revenues
are expected to grow modestly in the near term. In
addition to recovery in the housing market and the
associated increases in assessed valuation, the
dissolution of redevelopment agencies in four cities
within the Library District's service area is producing a
positive effect. Nevertheless, the effect of dissolution will
not be immediate as the State is allowing obligated debt
and other expenses to be paid off from the
redevelopment agency successor agencies before the
revenue shifts to entities that received secured property
tax revenue. In general, secured property tax proceeds
(the Library District's largest single revenue source) are
projected to increase 2% in FY 2014. This modest
growth will allow the current level of service to be
sustained.
Additionally, while all of the State of California's funding
to support universal library access was eliminated in the
“trigger cuts” enacted in FY 2012, a small amount of
funding from the California State Library in support of
the Library District's Reading Program is expected to
continue indefinitely. This $46,000 annual grant pales in
comparison to the funding in excess of $1.4 million that
disappeared with the trigger cuts.

Human Resources
Demand for recruitment and classification services
continues to increase. The Department of Human
Resources continues to provide classification and
recruitment activities to meet staffing requirements in
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center (SCVMC) for the
implementation of the EPIC/HealthLink Project, a
project in SCVMC to create new electronic medical 

records aimed at providing more coordinated care and
better outcomes. The Department is continuing the
recruitment and classification activities for adding
personnel in law enforcement agencies, the Health and
Hospital System and Social Services Agency to handle
the influx of inmates from the State system to the
County jail facilities under the enacted State legislation
AB 109. As County departments continue to implement
efficiencies that result in organization changes, Human
Resources continues to receive classification study
requests to properly classify positions that absorb or are
assigned new duties. Human Resources has also
embarked on a project to update all class specifications
that have not been revised prior to year 2000.
The passage of the Public Employees Pension Reform
Act of 2013, effective January 1, 2013 may pose a
challenge to the County in recruiting candidates to fill
County job positions. Under the Act, the reduction in
retirement benefits for new employees in the public
sector has the effect on reducing the County
recruitment effectiveness in competing with private
sector for the best and brightest candidates.
Labor Relations
During FY 2011 and FY 2012, the Department of Labor
Relations negotiated labor agreements with employee
bargaining units resulting in an estimated $75 million
dollars in General Fund savings per year. In FY 2013 and
continuing in FY 2014, Labor Relations has embarked
on another round of contract negotiations with the
majority of County bargaining units.
Learning and Employee Development
Employee Development is launching two new suites of
online training courses to reach a broader employee
audience, make the training more accessible, leverage
County budget dollars to provide more training than is
possible with just instructor-led courses, provide more
depth on topics that meet the needs of the County’s
employee population, and reduce travel and printing
costs.
Employee Development is also creating a new
manager/supervisor program that focuses on tying the
competencies that employees are measured against in
the performance appraisal process with the courses
being delivered web-based. This new program allows
managers and supervisors to select the course they
need based on a self assessment and their development
plan. This year’s executive development program will
focus on providing executive leaders with more
strategic tools to execute the vision plans that
executives created.
Employee Benefits
Employee benefit costs continue to put a considerable
strain on the County’s budget. The growing funding
deficit for providing medical benefits to County retirees
continues to be a major concern for the County.
Strategies are being developed to contain the growth in
health premium costs and to mitigate long-term
unfunded liability obligations in County’s Other Post
Employment Benefits (OPEB) program. Strategies
include engaging consultant services to assess health
plan renewal rates, assist the County in negotiating with
plan providers for more favorable rates, explore design
changes in health plans, recommend modifications to
the current health benefits provisions, and develop
health plan options for the County to consider.
Workers’ Compensation
Provisions in the enacted 2012 Workers’ Compensation
Reform Act effective January 1, 2013, increase costs in
some workers’ compensation components and reduce
costs in others. The Reform Act also mandates
additional administrative processes that have worsened
the claims adjuster caseload issue. The current average
caseload of the claims adjusters in Workers’
Compensation exceeds the industry best practice
caseload standard and it is at the CSAC Excess
Insurance Authority’s caseload cap. Overburdened
claims adjusters increase the possibility of errors that
may result in the County paying penalties.
The purchased claims system supporting the Workers’
Compensation operations will be changing to a new
platform. Ongoing cost increases are anticipated for this
change over and may require Workers’ Compensation
to seek a less expensive claims system available in the
market in the near term.

Redevelopment Dissolution Act
After the upholding of ABx1 26 in December 2011, the
Controller-Treasurer Department has dedicated staff
and resources to implement the Redevelopment
Dissolution Act. As required by State law, the
Department has overseen the completion of mandated,
agreed upon procedures, audits, and due diligence
reviews, each with its own objectives and required
procedures, and reviewed a multiple of required
obligated payments statements submitted by our nine
successor agencies. These efforts will ultimately lead to
tens of millions of property tax dollars flowing back
from the redevelopment agencies to the affected taxing
jurisdictions, including school districts, special districts,
cities, and the County. Furthermore, the Department
has established infrastructure to monitor future
activities of each successor agency, and to ensure that
the property taxes are properly and timely distributed to
the holders of enforceable obligations and the affected
taxing agencies.
Vision Elements
In line with the County Executive’s vision elements, the
Controller-Treasurer Department is seeking ways to
build bench strength and to mentor and develop future
managers for the Department, which is a key to
ensuring continuity of financial oversight and
leadership for the County. Action plans for this area will
be developed and proposed in the near future.

Work Process Challenges and Improvements
The past few years have seen an unprecedented
increase in tax changes and roll corrections. Starting in
FY 2011, the department created a Center for
Leadership and Transformation (CLT) team to confront
the problem. The team has significantly improved the
business processes necessary to complete the roll
corrections. Additionally, the TCAS unit is looking for
ways to re-engineer and automate the remaining
manual business processes. These improvements will
positively affect other manual roll corrections.
TCAS Improvements
A system enhancement initiative was launched in late
FY 2012 to focus on critical needs that were not
addressed in the initial deployment of the TCAS system.
The areas of focus are roll corrections, payment
processing, tax bill maintenance, accounting,
apportionment, and reconciliation.
The Board allocated $5.9 million in FY 2012 to provide
funding for additional TCAS functionality. The effort
will span approximately 24-months and eliminate many
manual processes currently in place. Through January
of 2013, the project spent approximately $1.6 million.
Functionality received includes:
¦ Roll correction
? Corrections to Secured property bills.
? Corrections to Redemption bills.
¦ Payment processing
? Initial expansion of payment reversal capability.
¦ Tax bill maintenance
? Ability to update Name/Address on tax bills midcycle.
? partial automation of bill generation.
? functionality to split multiple redemption
abstracts.
¦ Accounting, apportionment, and reconciliation
? design of accounting structures and an apportionment
engine is in progress.

The Clerk-Recorder's Office primary application
environment was initially deployed in 1994 and has
significantly exceeded its life-cycle. The code base is
increasingly difficult and expensive to maintain and to
modify in response to changes in the government code
or to deliver enhanced service to the public. The
mainframe hardware hosting the application is
significantly more expensive to maintain and does not
benefit from advances in server management such as
virtualization. There is an increasing risk of serious to
catastrophic loss of critical records and data.
Since this emerging issue was identified in 2011, the
Department initiated a Finance Agency Center for
Leadership and Transformation (CLT) project to replace
the application environment and mainframe hardware.
The project should have no impact on the County's
General Fund as it will be funded by the special funds
specifically designated to the Clerk-Recorder's Office.
Obtaining Secure Off-site Records Storage
Facility
The Clerk-Recorder's Office is fully responsible for
maintaining and tracking the inventory of microfilmed
official records and the Clerk-Recorder's original record
books. The Recorder's complete and official record
archive spans the years between 1848 and the present.
These official record books are housed in the West Wing
at 70 West Hedding Street and at the County Archives.
As mandated by state law, the microfilmed records are
stored in a secure off-site facility.
The Department currently pays a contracted vendor
$75,300 per year for secure off-site storage of microfilm.
This is an increase of $33,900 for the use of the same
vault space. Service providers for this type of storage are
limited and doing business with outside vendors has
been costly and extremely problematic. The Clerk-
Recorder's Office has experienced numerous problems,
such as relocation of the records without prior notice
and failure to meet temperature, humidity and security
standards, thereby risking the integrity and
safeguarding of the records.
Storage and safekeeping of the original record books has
been problematic as well. Official record books stored in
the West Wing Annex were damaged in the flood of 1995. The collection was moved to the warehouse at
Berger Drive for a number of years. Since the facility was
shared with other County departments, consistent
security was difficult to maintain. In 2007, the entire
collection was again relocated to the Lower Level in the
West Wing where a number of books were damaged by
an overhead water leak.
Since this has been an ongoing issue since 2009, the
Department has incorporated this project into the
Finance Agency CLT Process and has identified
resources to move this project forward. Working with
other County departments, including Capital Programs
and the County Surveyor, the department has finalized
facility requirements and begun investigating different
locations to house the Clerk-Recorder's Office's entire
records collection. The project and facility should have
no impact on the County's General Fund as it will be
funded by the special funds specifically designated to
the Clerk-Recorder's Office. Health Care Reform and Hospital Collections –
EPIC
DOR collects delinquent debt for the County hospital.
With the passage of national health care reform,
changes in debt patterns and obligations, as well as in
the means by which medical debt may be collected
from both patients and insurance, have become
evident.
The hospital and DOR are collaborating on multiple
projects which should have positive effects on medical
debt collection by DOR. These efforts include the
implementation of the HealthLink system, as well as
streamlined front-end information and documentation
gathering from patients, efficiencies in early
identification of special assistance and ability-to-pay
programs for patients, reduction in case transfer errors,
and improvements in the debt compromise process.
Patient status and progress will be tracked throughout
course of treatment so that required information will be
complete sooner and/or by point of discharge. Hospital
letter series will be re-composed to provide accelerated
payment pursuit. More attempts to collect will be made
before cases are referred to DOR.
One possible outcome may be greater collection
success before referral to DOR, thus over the long term,
DOR referrals and collections could decrease, though
overall revenue recovery will improve.
Public Safety Realignment– AB 109
AB 109, also known as State Realignment, has set into
motion the transfer of many services from the state to
the local level. The statewide changes resulting from
Realignment have resulted in an increased caseload for
debt collection at DOR.
The department is working closely with the Court and
Probation Department to create an effective and
efficient local program. The effort includes the
identification of anticipated impacts, including caseload
increases, process and procedural changes, new service
areas, additional system interfaces, accounting and
fund distribution requirements, and collection
protocols. DOR is paying particularly close attention to
ramifications to Victim Restitution collections.
While some additional revenue will be collected as the
result of this program, it is not expected that the
collection rate will be high due to the typical low
income and employability, and sizable challenges facing
individuals re-entering the community after
incarceration. However, as part of the overarching goal
to coach and support individuals toward eventual social
normalcy as well as civic participation and
responsibility, financial stability and satisfaction of debt
are goals shared by DOR as members of the overall
program team. In addition, any collections made will
contribute to public funding, as well as to victims owed
restitution.
Victim Restitution
DOR collects court-ordered debt that may include
restitution owed to victims of crime. There is strong
support in existing California statute and the California
constitution for recognizing the rights of all persons
who suffer losses as a result of criminal activity, and for
providing assistance in seeking and securing restitution
from the persons convicted of the crimes for causing the
losses they suffer.
DOR continues to chair the Countywide Victim
Restitution Committee which joins numerous
departments to discuss, collaborate and coordinate
victim restitution services. Other members include
Adult and Juvenile Probation, District Attorney's Office,
Public Defender's Office, Department of Correction,
Superior Court, Victim Witness Center, and County
Counsel.
Recent DOR partnership activities include the
development of faster turnaround in documentation
transfers; pro-active tracking and cross-departmental
inquiry and request mechanisms; and increased
research and corrective action processes. The
Department has been involved with the new
Restorative Justice Program (RJP) which is a “restitution
diversion” program for juveniles. Escheatment research
and outreach were expanded several years ago and
continue.
At this time, the department is investigating its current
restitution collection and revenue distribution
protocols to see where benefit to victims can be
enhanced. This may result in delay or reduction in the
collection of fines and fees in favor of higher payment to
victims. These and other streamlining efforts will be
carefully monitored in the coming year. DOR has been very active in CLT development both
internally and externally. At this time 7 departmental
CLT projects, and 2 cross-departmental CLT projects
are in various stages of development and progress. The
DOR CLT program will continue to be a high priority in
the department's organizational development.
To date, the most significant outcomes from CLT
projects come from the 4G Paperless project and the
Countywide Parking program. This is due in large part
because these projects were among the first undertaken
by the Department. 4G has transformed DOR's existing
paper-driven manual processes, and significantly
improved efficiency by reducing research time and
allowing staff more time for collections. It has also
reduced paper costs and freed up office space.
The Parking CLT project closely touches a handful of
DOR staff and numerous partnering organizations, but
transparently reaches every employee and department
in the County every day.
The CLT with the largest scope and business impact is
Acumen, a long-term automation project which
provides account scoring, balances workloads, and
provide enhanced reporting capability, thereby raising
the effectiveness and efficiency of the collection
process.
Other newer, but very important CLTs are Web Site
Upgrade, Equipment Review, Microfiche Archiving and
DOR Emergency Response.
The department also participates in two important
cross-department CLTs: Parking Management and SSA
Debt Management and Communication Development.
DOR Space and Facility Improvements
DOR has been at its current Berger Drive location since
1998. FY 2014 will be the second year in a multi-phased
project for reconfiguration of the office to
accommodate program growth, increase space
efficiencies and improve the current space
configuration.
Parking
Following a revision of the County's parking ordinance
in FY 2013, the Countywide Parking Management CLT
established Parking Administrative Guidelines (PAG)
and a Countywide committee to maintain them in
order to meet the objectives of efficient use of limited
parking areas, ease public and employee access to
County facilities, and support the County's
environmental goals, including the support of
alternative commuting and the reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions. The committee, Parking Enforcement
Review Committee (PERC) is chaired by DOR. Future
considerations for the PERC include signage review,
parking permit reorganization, and development of a
program for the ongoing promulgation of County
parking services and requirements. Public Safety Realignment
The Office of the District Attorney has absorbed a
number of important roles related to Public Safety
Realignment, the State’s effort to reduce prison
overcrowding, recidivism, and the resulting costs. These
processes are sometimes referred to as “AB 109”
processes.
In addition to ensuring that all sentencing in felony
cases is conducted in compliance with these changes in
the law, the Office’s primary current role relates to
providing legal representation for the People of the State
of California in court hearings associated with
modifications and revocations of supervision for Post
Release Community Supervision (PRCS) and
Mandatory Supervision (MS) offenders due to their
failure to comply with the terms of their supervision.
PRCS and MS revocation hearings are now held weekly.
It is likely that the volume of the PRCS caseload will
decrease over time while the number of MS matters will
increase as more offenders are ordered to this type of
supervision as part of a felony sentence imposed under
Penal Code section 1170(h). This work volume will be
monitored to ensure that the Office retains sufficient
capacity to address it.
As a result of further changes in Public Safety
Realignment law which become effective July 1, 2013,
the Office will also be involved in representing the
People’s interests in Parole revocation matters.
Representatives of the Office are collaborating with
other criminal justice partners to develop an efficient
local process for these cases. The Department and the
Administration will monitor this process and the
staffing of court calendars created by the new
revocation process to determine if current resources
can adequately handle this workload.
The Office remains committed to supporting this new
direction for California’s criminal justice system while
continuing to ensure that the public safety of the
County’s residents is preserved.
Paperless Initiative
The Office has made recent improvements in its
information technology capabilities and continues to
look for innovations that would add capacity to
Department staff by giving them access to more
information in more locations than previously possible.
The Office recently completed a significant upgrade to
its case management software and continues to make
strides toward the goal of a paperless approach.
Caseload Increase
Since 2002, the caseload of the office has increased
nearly 25%. There has been a 25% increase in new cases
opened per attorney between FY 2003 and FY 2012. The
following chart reflects a peak increase of 46% in
FY 2008 in new cases opened per attorney over the time
period of FY 2003 and FY 2012. Of note, the PDO/ADO
represents clients in excess of 80% of the cases filed in
the Santa Clara County criminal justice system.
Caseload per Attorney Increase from FY03 – FY12
Indigent defense workloads are driven by two dynamics:
caseload and court coverage demands. The Public
Defender is obligated by law to provide service to the
client in two ways: by preparing the case to a
constitutionally adequate standard at minimum
(caseload), and by effectively advocating for the client in
court (court coverage demands). The Office monitors
both attorney caseloads and workloads regularly to
ensure that constitutional standards are met. The
Public Defender communicates regularly with the
Board of Supervisors and the County Executive on
these issues.
Homicide Rate Increase – Alternate
Defender Office
The City of San Jose experienced a record number of
homicides in 2012. As a result, both PDO and ADO have
doubled the number of homicides handled this year as
compared to last. In 2012, there were 46 homicides in
San Jose. During all of FY 2012, the PDO opened 32
homicides and conflicted on 10, resulting in the ADO
opening 10 homicide cases. In FY 2013, to date, the PDO
has opened 15 homicide cases and conflicted on 11,
resulting in ADO opening 11 new homicide cases. ADO
now has 26 open and active homicide cases. Two of
these cases are potential capital cases. Due to the
experience level of ADO attorneys, the office has been
able to absorb the increase in homicides by assigning
homicide cases to both the homicide and felony trial
team attorneys. However, the impact on ADO
investigator and paralegal support staff has been
significant and presents an ongoing challenge.
In November 2012, ADO requested and received a halftime
extra help investigator. As of this month, this extra
help employee will be working full time to assist with
the increased workload. Should the demand for
investigator service remain high, it is anticipated the
department will seek additional augmentation to
investigative staff. At present, the ADO Investigation
unit is comprised of four investigators and one
supervising investigator who also supervises the
paralegal unit. The ADO investigation unit is unique in
not having a dedicated homicide unit due to having a
small staff. As a result, ADO investigators have the
difficult task of managing competing workloads that are
driven by divergent court processes. With the number of

homicide cases doubling since last year, each
investigator presently carries a caseload of 4 to 6
homicides, in addition to a full load of juvenile and
serious felonies cases. This exceptionally high and
varied caseload which includes capital cases requires
healthy staffing levels and stability. The extra help
position is not sufficient to address the inherently
complex caseload and staffing needs of the ADO.
Insufficient staffing levels adversely impact the high
level of productivity and quality representation the ADO
strives to achieve. It is anticipated that Prop 36 cases
will further stress investigator and paralegal resources
at the ADO. It should be noted that the PDO’s
significantly larger staff of attorneys, paralegals and
investigators allows greater flexibility in managing
caseload fluctuations and staffing shortages.
Three Strikes Law Reform
On November 6, 2012 California voters passed
Proposition 36, legislation that drastically changed the
Three Strikes law and rendered roughly 156 clients from
Santa Clara County eligible for resentencing. The law
provides that clients who were sentenced for crimes
that were not serious or violent can now be resentenced
as two-strike clients (non-life) as long as they do not
pose a public safety risk, were not armed in the
commission of the underlying felony and did not intend
to cause great bodily harm. This change in the law has
already resulted in the release of several clients who
were sent to prison for life. Some of the clients have
been incarcerated for over 15 years. It is anticipated that
approximately one third of these clients will not face
contested hearings regarding either eligibility or public
safety. However, for the clients that do face contested
hearings, it will be necessary to prepare a social history,
contest public safety issues, hire experts regarding
prison records or other custodial issues, examine the
entire criminal history, order school records, interview
family members and litigate all relevant legal issues.
Also, reentry plans will be necessary to help reintegrate
these clients back into the community. This will require
collaboration with local Community-Based
Organizations, Probation and the Reentry Center to
help ensure a successful transition out of prison.
PDO/ADO administration has met several times
already with the Superior Court, District Attorney and
Probation Department and will continue to streamline
the process where possible.
Parole Revocations Under Public Safety
Realignment (AB 109)
AB109 became effective October 1, 2011. This legislation
is strongly viewed as the most sweeping change to
California sentencing in recent history. Realignment
amended the law so that most low level felonies can
only result in local jail sentences rather than state
prison. In addition, Probation assumed supervisory
responsibilities for those released from state prison on
Post Release Community Supervision (PRCS) and those
released on Mandatory Supervision (MS) after serving a
split sentence under Penal Code section 1170(h). On July
1, 2013, parole revocations will begin to be heard by a
Santa Clara County hearing officer or judge rather than
by California Department of Corrections and
Rehabilitation (CDCR) hearing officers at the state level.
This will mean an increased workload in terms of
revocation hearings, as well as a need for increased
training and communication with CDCR and Parole.
Eventually, however, the parolee population will decline
as the PRCS population increases, as fewer and fewer
inmates will be housed in state prison.
Social Work Services
The Public Defender’s responsibility to the client does
not end with conviction. The development of mitigating
factors which can impact sentencing alternatives is also
an important and mandated aspect of quality criminal
defense services. The PDO’s ability to present viable
alternatives to incarceration for the court’s
consideration addresses the court’s public safety
concerns, improves favorable outcomes for clients,
reduces jail overcrowding and ultimately reduces
recidivism. It also leads to increased confidence in the
criminal justice system.
According to the CDCR, the percentage of state prison
inmates with mental illnesses increased from 19% in
2007 to 25% in 2012. Currently, Custody Health Services
deliver mental health services to 25% of our county jail
population, up from 22% a year ago. This increase in
mentally ill jail admissions; inmates returned from state
prison for probation supervision under AB 109, and the
numbers of PDO clients expected to be released from
prison under Prop 36 have begun to strain existing
resources and negatively impact PDO staff ’s ability to
provide this critical service. Increasingly, Public
Defender Offices across the country are employing
social workers to marshal available resources to meet 
 the legal, social and treatment needs necessary to
facilitate the successful transition of mentally ill and
substance addicted clients from jail facilities to the
community. The addition of a social worker to PDO staff
would greatly increase our ability to forge collaborative
relationships with community based treatment and
services for our most vulnerable clients; expedite the
release of eligible clients from the county jail, and better
equip clients to live productive lives as contributing
members of the community.
Impact of New Local Rules Governing
Probation Fees
As a result of recent negative media attention
highlighting unscrupulous private fiduciary fees in
certain probate cases, the Court is in the process of
revising local court rules governing fees in
conservatorship cases so as to increase oversight and
provide closer scrutiny of private fiduciary services and
fees. The Court’s proposed changes to the local rules
include, but are not limited to, the following: requiring
proposed private professional conservators to attach a
fee schedule to the petition for appointment including
the fee schedule of counsel; requiring proposed private
professional conservators to submit to the court at the
time of appointment an estimate of fees covering the
first year of the conservatorship, and requiring monthly,
rather than annual, billing statements for the court’s
review and approval.
Fee schedules and billing statements would be served
on the conservatee’s counsel for review and the possible
filing of objections with the court. Currently, the PDO
has one full time attorney assigned to the probate unit.
As counsel representing the conservatee in
conservatorship cases, the PDO attorney already spends
a significant number of hours reviewing accountings
and preparing for annual hearings on accountings. The
impact on PDO staffing resources that may result if the
court requires monthly, rather than annual accountings,
is presently unknown. The majority of PDO
conservatorship cases are Public Guardian cases to
which the new rules would not apply. Nonetheless, the
PDO does represent conservatees in some private
fiduciary cases. It is therefore possible that
implementation of the proposed rules may require
augmentation of existing staff in the probate unit.
Inter-agency Project to Reduce Costs Associated
with the Issuance of Bench Warrants
Bench warrants impact all the criminal justice partners
financially and administratively. Individuals facing
criminal allegations are required to appear in Court
often over long periods of time while the adjudication
process takes place. The length of time it takes to
adjudicate allegations depends on the seriousness of the
charge(s) but often takes months, and sometimes years.
On occasion during the adjudication process,
individuals fail to appear (FTA) for a court hearing
resulting in the issuance of a bench warrant for the
person’s arrest. Once a bench warrant is issued and the
individual surrenders or is arrested, he or she is booked
into the county jail and held for 2-3 days, sometimes
longer depending on the day of arrest.
The issuance of bench warrants unnecessarily tax the
criminal justice system in a variety of ways. Some of the
impacts include: law enforcement officer time
expended in locating, arresting and transporting
defendants to jail; time spent by jail staff booking,
housing, feeding and making sure the defendant has the
appropriate health care while incarcerated; time and
costs associated with transporting defendants to Court,
and time spent by the Court processing and inputting
warrants into data systems, scheduling court dates and
recalling warrants. Unfortunately, there is currently no
precise or accurate way to measure costs attributable to
the performance of bench warrant related duties
incurred by law enforcement, jail, or Court staff. There
are however reliable methods for measuring the cost of
a court hearing and a jail bed.
The California Administrative Office of the Courts
estimates the average cost of each court hearing at $238.
In addition, when an individual is arrested on a warrant,
it takes a minimum of two days in custody to get that
person back on the Court’s calendar.
An inquiry conducted in the Criminal Justice
Information Control (CJIC) revealed that in calendar
year 2011, 17,004 FTA bench warrants were issued.
From January 1, 2012 through September 30, 2012,
12,097 FTA bench warrants were issued. The chart
below illustrates the costs of FTA bench warrants from
January 2011 through September 2012 in the County. The Public Defender and the Office of Pretrial Services
will conduct further analyses on the possibility of
implementing an automated reminder system such as
telephone and text notification similar to successful
practices adopted in other jurisdictions like Multnomah
County, Oregon and Jefferson County, Colorado. The
project will utilize the reminder system to notify clients
of their next court dates, thereby generating cost
savings and streamlining the processing of criminal
cases. In addition to criminal justice system
stakeholders, Social Services and other agencies that
have clients going to Court will be invited to participate.
Furthermore, research of all County agencies may be
considered to explore the benefit of such a reminder
system in the different service areas. Finally, a detailed
return on investment study would be completed to
measure the cost effectiveness of either purchasing or
building such a system for the County.
Creative Solutions to Resource Needs
The Public Defender has creatively dealt with many of
the staff reductions and increased caseloads. The Public
Defender actively seeks out fellowships and
collaboration with nationally recognized law schools
such as Yale University Law School, UCLA, and Stanford
University Law School. Other examples are the creation
of a partnership with civil law firms in the Volunteer
Attorney Program; with the court’s cooperation, the
reassignment of staff from misdemeanors to other
teams by having a Public Defender “dark day” in
misdemeanor departments; and the development of a
Misdemeanor Clinic with Santa Clara University Law
School and Stanford Law School.
Recognizing challenges throughout the justice system,
the Superior Court, County Executive, District Attorney,
Public Defender, Department of Correction, Pretrial
Services, Information Services Department and
Probation Department meet regularly to try to identify
efficiencies and improvements in the justice system. In
part this is a search for ways to cut costs. However a
major benefit of these regular discussions is the
recognition by every partner that what happens in one
area of the justice system impacts all departments. A
continuing effort is being made to coordinate and
streamline the system to respect the resources of all of
the partners involved while fulfilling the mandates of
each partner. Since 2002, Pretrial Services has had a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) with Superior Court in which
the Office provides criminal background record checks
to Family Court. It is unknown at this time what, if any,
impact of State budget will have on the Court’s ability to
continue to fund this MOU. Revenue from this
agreement fully supports four FTE positions within the
Office. This is a non-mandated function for the Office
and if the Court determines funding must be either
reduced or eliminated it will be necessary for the Office
to delete up to four positions; two Pretrial Service
Officer II/I positions and two Justice System Clerk II/I
positions. All of these positions are currently filled.
As of April 2013, the Office has not been informed that
the Court will discontinue supporting this program.
The total amount of funding for FY 2013 was $410,832
and would be approximately $423,730 for FY 2014.
Inter-agency Project to Reduce Costs Associated
with the Issuance of Bench Warrants
Bench warrants impact all the criminal justice partners
financially and administratively. Individuals facing
criminal allegations are required to appear in Court
often over long periods of time while the adjudication
process takes place. The length of time it takes to
adjudicate allegations often depends on the seriousness
of the charge(s) but often it takes months, sometimes
years. On occasion during the adjudication process,
individuals fail to appear (FTA) for a Court hearing and
a bench warrant is issued for their arrest. Once a bench
warrant is issued and the individual surrenders or is
arrested, they are booked into county jail where they are
held for 2-3 days, sometimes longer depending on the
day of arrest.
Bench warrants tax the criminal justice system every
time one is issued. Some of the impacts include: length
of time taken by a law enforcement officer time to
locate, arrest and transport defendants to jail; time
spent by jail staff on booking, housing, feeding and
making sure the defendant has the appropriate health
care while incarcerated; time and costs of transporting
defendant to Court; and time spent by the Court to
process warrants, imputing warrant into data systems,
scheduling new Court date’s once the defendant is in
custody and recalling warrants. Unfortunately at this
time there is no accurate way to measure the cost for
law enforcement, jail staff and Court clerks regarding
their functions as related to bench warrants. There are
however ways to currently measure the cost of a court
hearing and jail bed.
The California Administrative Office of the Courts
estimates the average cost of each court hearing at $238.
In addition, when someone is arrested on a warrant, it
takes a minimum of two days in custody to get someone
back on calendar and before the Court.
An inquiry conducted in the Criminal Justice
Information Control (CJIC) revealed that in calendar
year 2011, 17,004 FTA bench warrants were issued.
From January 1st 2012 through September 31st, 2012,
12,097 FTA bench warrants were issued. The following
table illustrates the estimated cost of FTA bench
warrants from January 2011 through September 2012 in
the County. The Public Defender and the Office of Pretrial Services
will conduct further analyses on the possibility of
implementing an automated reminder system such as
telephone and text notification similar to successful
practices adopted in other jurisdictions like Multnomah
County, Oregon and Jefferson County, Colorado. The
project will utilize the reminder system to notify clients  of their next court dates, thereby generating cost
savings and streamlining the processing of criminal
cases. In addition to criminal justice system
stakeholders, Social Services and other agencies that
have clients going to Court will be invited to participate.
Furthermore, research of all County agencies may be
considered to explore the benefit of such a reminder
system in the different service areas. Finally, a detailed
return on investment study would be completed to
measure the cost effectiveness of either purchasing or
building such a system for the County.
County Consolidation of Drug Testing Services
During FY 2013 the Office actively participated in the
Santa Clara County Drug Testing Task Force. On April
23, 2013 the Board of Supervisors directed the Office to
coordinate all alcohol and drug testing services countywide
in two phases spanning FY 2014 and FY 2015. In
Phase I, the Office will begin testing Prop 36 clients
currently supervised by Probation and the Department
of Alcohol and Drug Services (DADS) commencing July
1, 2013. In Phase II, the Office will assume the testing of
the clients from Department of Family and Children’s
Services commencing July 1, 2014. The Office is
coordinating with Valley Medical Laboratory Services to
automate the electronic results and establishing a new
Memorandum of Understanding agreement with DADS
prior to the July 1, 2013 Phase I implementation.  The Sheriff ’s Office provides law enforcement in the
unincorporated areas of the County. When cities annex
unincorporated parcels, the result is a reduction in
patrol areas for which the Sheriff ’s Office is responsible.
Because these changes are small and incremental in
nature, the Department is unable to reduce patrol
staffing to the remaining unincorporated areas. The
Sheriff ’s Office has contracts with numerous public
agencies for law enforcement services, and continues to
pursue new opportunities for contracts.
Regional Disaster Services
The Sheriff is the Law Enforcement Mutual Aid
Coordinator for the County of Santa Clara, as
designated by the State Office of Emergency Services.
Through homeland security grants, the Sheriff ’s office is
active in the planning and implementation of regional
disaster services. The department also has a
management position assigned to, and fully reimbursed
by, the Bay Area Urban Area Security Initiative
(BAUASI).
Recruitment and Retention
Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. Currently, the number of Deputy
vacancies is approximately 60, out of 811, and vacancies
are an ongoing challenge for the Department. With an
aging workforce, the Department is anticipating many
retirements in the next few years. The Office of the
Sheriff continues to develop new and innovative
methods to recruit top applicants.
Expansion of Regional Services
Since the opening of the Santa Clara County Justice
Training Center in 2005, the Department has been
working to expand the number of training classes, as
well as increase enrollment from outside agencies in the
Academy. The Sheriff ’s Office also maintains an outside
Firing Range that is used by the Sheriff ’s Office and
other law enforcement agencies for training and
mandated firearms qualifications. The Sheriff ’s Office is
developing the Range into a regional training center,
and plans to include a Situational Training Facility
which will be utilized by the Sheriff ’s Office as well as
other law enforcement agencies. The purpose of the
facility is to provide real world training for law
enforcement officers.
Increase in Gang Cases
In 2011, the Office of the Sheriff established new
guidelines for tracking gang activity. As a result of the
new guidelines, staff training on gang-related crime
tracking has improved. Analysis of crime and
investigations data has shown that gang-related
criminal investigations have increased by 58% since
2011. The Sheriff Office’s areas of responsibility currently
include Santa Clara County, contract cities Cupertino,
Los Altos Hills and Saratoga, court facilities, custody
facilities, and Valley Transportation Authority (VTA)
transit lines and stations. Sheriff ’s Office patrol divisions
work closely with the Special Operations and
Investigations Divisions to identify and track gang
crime. State Realignment
The Governor’s 2011 realignment proposal (AB 109)
transferred a number of services previously provided by
the State to the local government. The most significant
of the realignment proposals for the Department of
Correction was offenders, sentenced after September
30, 2011, without any current or prior serious or violent
or sex convictions, became the responsibility of the local
jails. This shift of inmates continues to increase the jail
population, lengthen the sentences of some inmates,
and impacts the jail’s ability to accept voluntary
revenue-generating inmates from other jurisdictions.
This has also resulted in a significant change in the
demographics of those inmates eligible to be housed on
the Elmwood Correctional Complex minimum camp.
The criminal sophistication of these inmates has caused
increasing concerns regarding escape prevention,
organized inmate disturbances, emergency response,
and staffing plans.
Protective Custody Population
Protective custody is a classification that may be
assigned to inmates who are affiliated with a gang, have
committed certain violent crimes, whose case has a
high degree of notoriety, or who have been determined
to be at risk of victimization. Over the past several years,
there has been a dramatic increase in inmates requiring
protective custody, primarily due to affiliation with
gangs. It is a challenge to provide the physical
segregation required for these inmates.
Increasing Number of Mentally Ill Inmates
The portion of inmates in the jail with mental health
issues requiring special attention has historically been
significant and is always a key factor in the
management of jail and inmate population. More
recently however, a dramatic increase in the number of
inmates with mental health issues is a growing concern
to the Department. Specifically, the portion of the
average daily inmate population requiring special
management due to mental health issues has grown
from 22% in 2012 to more than 25% in the first half of
FY 2013. This increase has exacerbated the jail
management challenge of ensuring all mentally ill
inmates are housed appropriately in order to minimize
the risk of harm to themselves and others.
Physical and Mental Health of Inmates
One area of concern is the aging inmate population. In
this decade, the percentage of inmates 55 years of age or
older has increased from 2% to almost 4%, and from an
Average Daily Population (ADP) of 88 to 180.
Additionally, individual inmates are experiencing
multiple health issues with significant pathology and
disabilities. There is a strain on the availability of
infirmary and special management beds which must be
triaged every shift to accommodate the sickest and
most vulnerable inmates. Several times during FY 2013,
the need for special management beds for the mentally
ill was exhausted, resulting in the need to open a
suitable housing unit for these inmates. This situation is
further constricted by the AB 109 inmates, because
their length of stay is longer and many have chronic
physical and mental health issues.
Aging Jail Facilities
Both Main Jail South and Elmwood are very old facilities
that are in need of renovation or replacement. The
annual maintenance and repair cost for these facilities
continues to increase. There has been an increase in
sewage leaks and spills in the work areas of the Main
Jail. In addition, the population of AB 109 inmates is
continuing to increase. These inmates have longer
lengths of stay and are increasing the wear and tear to
these facilities.
High Vacancy Rate
Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. Currently, the number of
Correctional Deputy vacancies is approximately 103,
out of 741, and vacancies are an ongoing challenge for
the department. With an aging workforce, the
department is anticipating many retirements in the
next few years. The Office of the Sheriff continues to
develop new and innovative methods to recruit top
applicants.

Implementing Evidenced-Based Practices
The Department is now providing services that are
based on evidenced-based practices. Training on
implementing evidence-based practices is provided to
Probation employees, as well as the tools necessary to
support better service to clients. Community-based
service providers and other stakeholders associated
with the Adult and Juvenile Justice Systems will also be
trained on Probation’s paradigm shift towards the
delivery of evidence-based services.
Public Safety Realignment – AB 109 Program
Public Safety Realignment, the most significant change
in the criminal justice system in more than 30 years, was
signed into law in April 2011. This legislation shifted the
responsibility of supervising specified offenders being
released from state custody back to local counties for
supervision in the community. Additionally, this
legislation changed the penal code and sentencing laws
to keep these offenders from being committed to state
prison.
A Community Corrections Partnership, consisting of
both criminal justice system partners and communitybased
organizations, participated in the development of
Santa Clara County’s Implementation Plan. This crosssystem
collaborative set forth an evidence-based service
delivery model to serve this new population. In addition
to a new fourth generation risk and needs assessment
tool, which effectively links offenders to appropriate
services and supervision, a Reentry Team was
established. This Reentry Team consisting of Probation,
Health and Behavioral Health professionals engage with
and assess offenders being released from the California
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR)
and/or County Jail custody to develop individualized
case plans that better prepare offenders being released
and transitioning back into the community. These
teams of professionals have visited 25 state prison
facilities throughout California to assess offenders.
Intensive supervision is provided by Deputy Probation
Officers in the community at a ratio of 1:30. This
supervision includes the application of motivational
interviewing techniques, the use of graduated sanctions
for offenders, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, both
mental health and substance abuse treatment, as well
as peer support groups, GED preparation, and
educational/vocational training. Additionally, the
Probation Department has partnered with other system
partners to establish the Santa Clara County Reentry
Resource Center to effectively meet the needs of
offenders in the community. This comprehensive
approach to service delivery will provide a one-stop
center for offenders in need of services and supervision.

Impact of Vacancies on Caseloads
The Medical Examiner-Coroner’s Office (MEC) received
a total of 4,651 reported cases in CY 2012, of which 1, 179
were under the jurisdiction of the MEC. Three full-time
Forensic Pathologists are necessary to process the
volume of cases. A vacancy of one pathologist has left
the remaining staff with heavier than planned caseloads
and a significant backlog of cases. The current
recruitment for a qualified Forensic Pathologist has
proven challenging. The MEC staff continue to work
diligently to provide the highest level of efficiency while
working through these challenging staffing issues. The
MEC continues to adhere to the national standards set
by the National Association of Medical Examiners
(NAME).

Affordable Care Act
The State Department of Child Support Services is
closely following emerging issues and opportunities
related to the Affordable Care Act implementation.
Although there is a great deal of uncertainty regarding
the Child Support Program's role, the Department
expects to be involved in some capacity as it interacts
with families seeking services.

Coordinated Care Initiative
The Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) was passed in
July 2012 and marks an important step toward
transforming California's Medi-Cal (Medicaid) care
delivery system to better serve the State's lowincome
seniors and persons with disabilities. The CCI will
integrate delivery of medical, behavioral, and long-term
care services and also provide a demonstration pilot 

opportunity to integrate Medicare and Medi-Cal for
people in both programs, called “dual eligible”
beneficiaries. A major component of the CCI will be the
IHSS program, which will become a managed care
benefit, though still administered by the County. Under
CCI, Medi-Cal beneficiaries, including “dual eligible”
beneficiaries, will be required to join a Medi-Cal
managed care health plan to receive benefits, including
IHSS. In September 2013, implementation of the CCI
“dual eligible” demonstration pilot will begin in Santa
Clara County and seven other counties in California.
IHSS Maintenance of Effort (MOE)
Beginning with FY 2013, based on SB1036, counties are
responsible for an MOE funding level for the IHSS
program in lieu of the long-standing State/county cost
sharing ratios. Each county's MOE is established based
on the sum of: 1) the county's actual IHSS services
expenditures in FY 2012, and 2) the county's State
FY 2012 allocations for county administration and
public authority administration. On July 1, 2014, the
County IHSS MOE base is scheduled to be adjusted by
an inflation factor of 3.5%. Beginning on July 1, 2015, and
annually thereafter, the County IHSS MOE from the
previous year will be adjusted by an inflation factor of
3.5%. In fiscal years when the combined total of 1991-
1992 State Local Realignment revenues received for the
prior fiscal year are less than revenues received two
years prior, the inflation factor will be zero.
The MOE will become inoperative if the CCI
demonstration project and the responsibilities of the
Statewide Authority become inoperative. If the MOE
becomes inoperative then the prior county share of
non-Federal cost would again become effective.
Statewide Collective Bargaining
The State IHSS Services Authority (also known as the
Statewide Authority) will take over collective bargaining
responsibilities for wages, benefits, and other economic
terms and conditions for each county when all IHSS
recipients in that county have been enrolled in the CCI.
All current contracts will remain in place for each
county until the Statewide Authority takes over.

California Fostering Connections to Success Act
(AB 12)-Extended Foster Care
On January 1, 2012, AB12 became effective in California.
This legislation provides foster youths who meet certain
requirement with extended benefits until age 21. In
order to be eligible for the extended benefits, the youth
has to continue with education or job training and work
at least part-time. The cost for these extra years of
benefits will be negligible for California, as AB12 is
designed to bring the State into compliance with federal
requirements to access federal matching funds for these
program services and transitional support to qualifying
foster youths until age 21. The ability to access federal
funds will support State and county efforts to improve
outcomes and opportunities for young adults including
employment and housing success, reducing teen
pregnancy, decreasing reliance on public assistance, and
reducing other costly outcomes for young adults who
“age out” of foster care. Currently, DFCS, Juvenile
Probation Department, and partner agencies are
serving nearly 200 youths in extended foster care.
Wraparound
Effective July 1, 2012, Santa Clara County’s Wraparound
Services transitioned to a new funding model.
Historically, Wraparound Services have been provided
by primarily three providers who have delivered very
high level services, in home-based settings to children
otherwise eligible for high level group home placement.
In the previous funding model, providers were funded at
the higher rate classification levels, and remaining funds
not utilized to cover actual cost of Wraparound Services
were reinvested into DFCS-approved and directed child
specific services by the providers. Under the new
funding model, all providers receive a flat amount and
the County will manage the reinvestment dollars. This
funding model change requires issuing formal
solicitations for the services paid from reinvestment
funds (currently provided by one of the present
contractors). As transition to this new funding model
occurs, it will be critical that the current services
continue until new contracts are in place to prevent
disruption of necessary ongoing services for youths and
families experiencing high service needs.
California Partners for Permanency (CAPP)
DFCS is in its third year of the five-year California
Partners for Permanency (CAPP) Federal grant. The
CAPP Practice Model is an exciting and innovative
approach to working with DFCS families. Development
of this practice model is focused on behaviors and
approaches to better engage children and families who
are involved with the child welfare system. The goal of
using this new model is designed to increase
permanency and decrease over-representation of
African American children specifically, but also with the
overall long-term goal of addressing these issues for all
children in our communities. In addition, the CAPP
project involves Implementation Science as a way to
ensure tracking and to monitor what approaches are
working and then ensure replication of those
approaches that have been validated. The goal of the
Department is for all staff and community partners to
participate in this valuable training and to receive the
coaching, mentoring and support for changes in how
DFCS works with children and families.
Engaging Father’s Initiative Workgroup
DFCS continues to be involved in the Countywide
efforts with additional system partners to specifically
address “father’s involvement” in County systems
including the child welfare system. Efforts have been 

made toward trainings and discussions aimed at
understanding barriers impacting positive involvement
of fathers with their children; identifying the role of
fathers, what they do and how they do it from a cultural
context; addressing specific issues affecting African
American fathers involved in the Child Welfare system;
and understanding how engaging fathers in the lives of
their children will impact development in a positive
way. The Fatherhood Initiative Workgroup continues to
identify ways to foster substantive engagement with
fathers, as well as to identify paternal relatives of
children that are touched by the child welfare system,
and to address issues relating to inequity in services and
engagement with fathers.
Juvenile Justice and Child Welfare System
Integration (Dually-Involved Youth)
The Department of Family and Children’s Services is
working in collaboration with the Juvenile Justice Court
and Juvenile Probation Department (JPD) on a joint
project intended to improve outcomes for youths dually
involved in both the juvenile justice and child welfare
systems. Juvenile Probation received a technical
assistance grant from the MacArthur Foundation’s
Model for Change to implement effective practices to
reduce recidivism and out-of-home placement and to
improve correctional alternatives for youths in the
juvenile justice system with a history of maltreatment.
Additional partners in this effort include leadership
from the Mental Health Department, Department of
Alcohol and Drug Services, and County Office of
Education along with representatives from the District
Attorney’s Office, Public Defender’s Office, Legal
Advocates for Children & Youth, community-based
organizations and community representatives. The
initial work has focused on developing effective crosssystem
communication and collaboration and a shared
vision on how best to serve dually-involved youths.
However, DFCS and JPD have begun joint decisionmaking
meetings to discuss families who are or could
be served by both systems and their specific needs.
Additionally, both departments are involved in jointcase
planning efforts to determine how they can work
together to support the family in addressing the family’s
needs and concerns.
Self-Assessment and Systems Improvement
Process
AB636, the Child Welfare System Improvement and
Accountability Act of 2011, required counties to
undertake an extensive self-assessment of the local
child welfare system, resulting in the development of a
multi-year System Improvement Plan (SIP). On a fiveyear
cycle, DFCS submitted Santa Clara County’s SIP
plan for 2013-2018. The main outcomes of the SIP is
child safety, child permanency, and child and family
well-being. The goal is for continual improvement in
child welfare practices that addresses these outcomes.
This process requires specific steps toward system
improvement through thoughtful evaluation and
analysis. The quantitative evaluation component is the
County’s self-assessment. This analysis includes
program strengths and barriers as they relate to those
children, youths, and families being served. In May 2012,
Santa Clara County completed an assessment of
services and programs provided during 2009-2012. The
qualitative assessment is accomplished through a
County’s Peer Quality Case Review (PQCR). The
purpose of the PQCR is to supplement the quantitative
information obtained through the self-assessment, with
qualitative data gathered from peer Social Workers,
Probation Officers, and supervisors identifying areas of
strength and areas needing improvement. Santa Clara
County’s PQCR for DFCS was completed in June 2011,
with a focus on the reasons why some children remain
in care for eighteen months or longer and the necessary
supports to ensure permanency for these children.
The results of a County’s self-assessment and PQCR
support the development of a System Improvement
Plan (SIP) that establishes measurable goals for a
county’s system improvement and the strategies for
achieving those goals. Santa Clara County has
attempted through all of these efforts to ensure a strong
community partnership to look at the work within child
welfare and to ensure that the voice of the parents and
youths it serves is included in decision making. Special
attention has been noted to ensure efforts for goal
setting specifically to address the concerns of the
disproportionate numbers of Latino and African
American/African Ancestry children and families
involved in the child welfare system and to better
understand how few children and families from many of
the Asian American and Pacific Islander communities
are involved in Santa Clara County’s Child Welfare
System.

AB 109 Public Safety Realignment
AB109, also referred to as Public Safety Realignment,
shifts the responsibility of supervising specified lower
level offenders being released from State prisons to the
counties. DEBS is partnering with other County
stakeholders, including the Department of Correction,
Probation Department and Mental Health, on the
implementation of AB109 to ensure appropriate benefit
services are provided to this population. Eligibility staff
are out-stationed at the Re-Entry Resource Center to
determine benefit eligibility and issue Electronic Benefit
Transfer cards on site to expedite the benefit issuance.
Health Care Reform
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) increases access to
health care coverage beginning January 1, 2014. DEBS is
actively engaged in the discussions at the State and local
level regarding this California initiative and is
committed to providing quality services to eligible
populations in Santa Clara County. The effort started
with the transition of the Healthy Families Program to
Medi-Cal starting January 2013. In Santa Clara County,
32,000 children will be moved from Healthy Families to
Medi-Cal by December 2013. Also, it is expected that
approximately 600 children per month who would have
previously been enrolled in Healthy Families will now be
covered under the new Medi-Cal Targeted Low-Income
Children's Program.
California's Medicaid Waiver allows counties to receive
federal reimbursement for programs that serve lowincome
childless adults who are not eligible for Medi-
Cal or Medicare. This program is referred to as the Low-
Income Health Program (LIHP) and is administered
locally by the Health and Hospital System (HHS). DEBS
and HHS meet regularly to coordinate program
activities, and DEBS recently began a LIHP screening
and referral process for all individuals applying for
benefits at the General Assistance office. The intent is to
eventually transfer data from LIHP to the CalWIN
eligibility data system to establish a record for the
eventual eligibility to Medi-Cal under ACA.

Seniors’ Agenda
The Department of Aging and Adult Services continues
to lead a wide-spread community effort to create a
master plan to improve services for today’s seniors and
to address the challenge of serving an increasing
number of future seniors. Phase II of this effort involved
the collaboration of more than 150 individuals from 68
organizations that collectively dedicated more than
1,100 hours of time to create this vision. The resulting
Phase II plan contains one-year milestones that lead to
three-year strategic goals in seven areas of focus:
Transportation/Mobility Management, Senior
Volunteer/Civic Engagement, Information and
Assistance, Education/Outreach, Policy/Funding,
Mental Health and Leadership and Support. The Board
of Supervisors approved the recommendations outlined
in the Seniors’ Agenda in November 2012.
Case Management, Information and Payroll
System (CMIPS)
The State provides a statewide database and central
processing for In-Home Supportive Services for case
management, payroll processing for Personal Care
Service Providers, producing statistical and financial
reports for counties and the State. The current system is
a thirty-year-old Legacy application that is obsolete.
The California Department of Social Services, with
technical assistance from the California Office of
Systems Integration, has designed and developed
CMIPS II to replace CMIPS I. CMIPS II will be hosted at
a central facility operated by the California Department
of Technology Services. Implementation was scheduled
for 2010 but was postponed due to system development
delays. Based on the revised time line, Santa Clara
County is scheduled to go-live in the middle of calendar
year 2013. The change over to CMIPS II will shift IHSS
provider payroll processing responsibility from the
counties to the State and provide a user-friendly, webbased
system to improve efficiencies for all users.
Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI)
Passage of the CCI in July 2012 marks an important step
toward transforming California’s Medi-Cal (Medicaid)
care delivery system to better serve the state’s lowincome
seniors and persons with disabilities. The CCI
will integrate delivery of medical, behavioral, and longterm
care services and also provide a demonstration
pilot opportunity to integrate Medicare and Medi-Cal
for people in both programs, called “dual eligible”
beneficiaries. A major component of the CCI will be the
In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) program which
will become a managed care benefit, although still
administered by the County. Under the CCI, Medi-Cal
beneficiaries, including “dual eligible” beneficiaries, will
be required to join a Medi-Cal managed care health plan
to receive benefits, including IHSS. Implementation of
the CCI “dual eligible” demonstration pilot will begin in
Santa Clara County in September 2013, along with
seven other counties in California. National Public Health Accreditation
In 2009, the National Public Health Accreditation
Program was launched by the Public Health
Accreditation Board following years of development
and research by the Centers for Disease Control, the
Robert Wood Johnson and a myriad of other thought
leaders in the practice of public health. National Public
Health Accreditation aims to improve and protect the
health of the public by advancing the quality and
performance of state, tribal and local health
departments. Accreditation will drive public health
departments to continuously improve the quality of the
services they deliver to the community as well as
increase accountability and credibility to the public,
funders, elected officials and other stakeholders. Also,
the accreditation assessment process provides valuable,
measurable feedback to health departments about
strengths and areas of improvement, so that
departments can better protect, promote and preserve
the community’s health. National Public Health
Accreditation allows people across the country to
expect the same quality of public health programs and
services no matter where people live.
The Santa Clara County Public Health Department
formally launched its journey to accreditation in
February of 2013 but began laying the foundations of
this effort in 2010. It is the Department’s goal to submit
a letter of intent in January 2014.
Disease Control and Prevention
During FY 2013, the Department successfully
completed two Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention Federal Community Transformation Grants
equaling over $8 million to address obesity and tobacco
prevention using upstream systems, policy and
environmental change strategies focused particularly
on communities most impacted by obesity and tobacco
use and their associated chronic conditions. Working in
partnership with other County departments, cities,
healthcare organizations, and community-based
organizations Public Health implemented the following:
¦ Nutrition standards in jurisdictions, child care, and
the faith community;
¦ Active transportation and safe routes to school policies
to facilitate walking and biking;
¦ Tobacco retail policies aimed at reducing tobacco
use among youth;
¦ Environmental change strategies to reduce exposure
to second-hand smoke at college campuses, health
care settings, outdoor dining, and in public places;
and
¦ Education and promotion related to limiting
consumption of sugar-loaded beverages and
increasing consumption of water.
In October 2013, Public Health was granted a two-year
$1 million Community Transformation Grant - Small
Communities to address chronic disease and socialemotional
health disparities through upstream systems
and environmental changes in South County, with an
emphasis on school environments.
Mandatory Influenza Vaccine
On July 24, 2012, the County Health Officer issued a
Health Officer order mandating that all health care
facilities in Santa Clara County require their health care
workers to receive an annual influenza vaccination or, if
they decline, to wear a mask during the influenza
season. The order requires each facility to develop and
implement a flu vaccine and masking program which
will require that all health care workers who do not
receive the influenza vaccine wear a mask for the
duration of the influenza season. The order is ongoing
and applies to each influenza season unless the order is
rescinded. The influenza season is defined as November
1 to March 31 of the following year.
EMS Strategic Plan
The EMS System Strategic Plan will chart the course of
the Santa Clara County EMS System for the next five to
seven years. This process, started in July 2012 and
concluding in June 2013, was driven by anticipated
changes in healthcare economics, including federal
health reform. This stakeholder-based collaborative
process will lead to the development of an EMS System
that produces clinically superior care, high levels of
patient and stakeholder satisfaction, and is cost
effective.  Several emerging areas of system of development are
planned for the current and next fiscal year:
Health Care Reform
FY 2014 will bring significant changes in how public
health plans administer and deliver mental health and
substance abuse services. In October 2013, eight
counties, including Santa Clara County, will implement
Medi-Cal/Medicare Dual Eligibles Demonstration
projects intended to integrate and better coordinate the
health and behavioral health of those beneficiaries who
are covered by both Medi-Cal and Medicare. SCVHHS
departments, including MHD and DADS will be
negotiating agreements with Family Health Plan and
Blue Cross for the delivery of services to this population.
In addition, in January 2014, the Medi-Cal program will
expand to serve low income individuals. This new
benefit will be available to those who are currently
enrolled in the local Low Income Health Plan (LIHP)
known as Valley Care, and to all others who meet the
new eligibility requirements. Mental Health anticipates
that up to 6,000 individuals may seek mental health and
substance abuse treatment services with this new
benefit. Mental Health is assessing the system for these
new changes and will be coming forward in the future
regarding necessary changes to meet the demand.
Planning Process for Development of Behavioral
Health and Recovery Services
To position the current Mental Health and DADS
systems to respond to the changes related to Health
Care Reform, and to maximize the current resources of
both departments, Mental Health and DADS have
embarked on a planning process to integrate the two
systems into a new Department of Behavioral Health
and Recovery Services. The new structure will be
implemented over the next fiscal year and involve input
from a wide range of stakeholders in the process.
Over the past year, DADS and Mental Health have been
actively engaged in planning efforts, with the goal of
developing a treatment system responsive to cooccurring
mental health and substance use disorders.
Over the next sixteen months, both departments will be
actively involved in re-engineering current service
models into an integrated service delivery model. Electronic Health Record Implementation
The SCVHHS departments are involved in planning for
the implementation of new electronic health record
(EHR) systems that will greatly improve the delivery of
care to our patients and clients. Mental Health and
DADS will be involved in the implementation of both a
primary care focused application (HealthLink) and a
specialized behavioral health application (CoCentrix).
These two systems will be closely interrelated, with
functions and features that allow sharing of patient
information for the coordination and delivery of care.
Mental Health is actively involved in the
implementation of both applications and will focus
significant efforts on ensuring successful
implementation of both in the coming fiscal year.  The Department has been challenged to find means of
providing health care services (to the inmate
population) that meet regulatory and accreditation
standards due to the increased census that has resulted
from the implementation of the Public Safety
Realignment AB 109 Program (AB 109). Additionally,
the AB 109 inmate population has created the need for
the Department to identify means of providing preventative health care services as well as long term,
chronic care services to inmates sentenced to the Main
Jail under the AB 109 program.
The mental health population in the County’s Jail
Facilities has swelled to approximately 25% of the
population which has created strains on both the
Sheriff ’s Office Custody Bureau and the Custody Health
Service Department’s ability to provide safe housing for
the mentally ill inmates’ needs. The Special
Management beds within the Main Jail facility have
periodically been exhausted, necessitating the opening
of unused housing areas for the mentally fragile
inmates.
Due to the increase of inmates who are older than 55
years of age and the increased number of inmates with
several medical pathologies and physical disabilities,
there has been a strain on the number of Infirmary and
Special Housing beds available for the inmates who
require such treatment and beds. The Medical Infirmary
as well as the Special Housing Units must be triaged
every shift to accommodate inmates who have need for
these beds. The AB109 inmates have placed a further
strain on the availability of these beds as they may need
a specialty housing unit for the entire period of their
lengthy incarcerations.
There continues to be an increased demand for
comprehensive discharge planning for inmates released
from Custody Facilities to insure that both the medically
fragile inmates as well as the mentally ill inmates are
provided continuity of care upon their release into the
community. As with all agencies involved in providing health
services, DADS’ direction in the next few years will be
shaped by Health Care Reform, which will affect its
reimbursement streams, integration with mental health
and primary health care systems, electronic health
record keeping, and mainstreaming of substance abuse
clients under the broader health care rubric.
The Santa Clara Valley Health and Hospital System
(SCVHHS) is charged with responding to mandates of
federal health care legislation-specifically the Affordable
Care Act (ACA), Health Information Technology for
Economic & Clinical Health (HITECH) and the Mental
Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act (MHPAEA). The
Parity Act has not been fully implemented, as its
provisions will be eventually rolled into ACA.
DADS and the Mental Health Department (MHD) are
involved in overhauling and implementing the existing
electronic health record (EHR) system. Information
technology funding has been allocated to create an
interface to ensure accurate and timely data gathering
from community-based organization (CBO) partners, as
well as implementing a business intelligence tool that
meets the ACA goals of improving service through
efficient use of client data.
Changes in Medicaid rules will have a major impact on
reimbursement for services, as the changes will render
large segments of the currently ineligible population
eligible for public insurance plans, like Medi-Cal.
Santa Clara County is participating in the Medi-Cal
Waiver project. DADS has actively pursued enrolling
eligible clients into the LIHP (Low Income Health Plan)
as treatment for substance abuse disorders will become
part of the essential benefits package in ACA. Almost all
LIHP members will be transitioned to Medi-Cal
beginning on January 1, 2014. DADS is currently
developing an utilization management team, in
anticipation of the influx of new Medi-Cal eligible
clients in 2014. Under Medi-Cal, patients will have ten
hospitalization days available each year to be used for
substance abuse services. DADS will monitor the
utilization of services and obtain authorizations for
additional days through this utilization management
team.
Planning Process for Development of Behavioral
Health and Recovery Services
To position the current Mental Health and DADS
systems to respond to the changes related to Health
Care Reform, and to maximize the current resources of
both departments, Mental Health and DADS have
embarked on a planning process to integrate the two
systems into a new Department of Behavioral Health
and Recovery Services. The new structure will be
implemented over the next fiscal year and involves
input from a wide range of stakeholders in the process.
Over the past year, DADS and Mental Health have been
actively engaged in planning efforts, with the goal of
developing a treatment system responsive to cooccurring
mental health and substance use disorders.
Over the next sixteen months, both departments will be
actively involved in re-engineering current service
models into an integrated service delivery model.
Public Safety Realignment Program (AB 109)
California’s Realignment Program as described in
AB 109 and companion legislation, has brought new
funding for treatment and other services for reentry
clients, parolees and others diverted from state prisons.
Special funding was made available for specific criminal
justice populations such as those released under California’s AB 109 Realignment Program for FY 2011
through FY 2013. DADS has used Realignment funds to
place assessment staff at the Reentry Resource Center,
residential treatment beds, outpatient slots, and
transitional housing units. At the Reentry Center, DADS
partners with several County criminal justice agencies
and the Mental Health Department under the rubric of
the Multi-agency Plan (MAP), and in the Resource
Center created specifically for realignment clients.
Innovative Initiatives and Current Data
In spite of a challenging funding landscape, DADS has
pursued a number of innovative initiatives that hold
great promise for the future. DADS has been involved in
developing linkages with the County’s clinics and the
hospital, with a view to greater integration of behavioral
health and primary health care systems in the future.
DADS will be co-locating addiction medicine staff at the
Heart Failure Program, as 35% of patients have a cooccurring
substance abuse disorder (methamphetamine
abuse). Addiction Medicine is also involved in the
Pain Management Initiative involving several ambulatory
care clinics and the Healthcare for the Homeless
program. Addiction Medicine staff are also available for
consultation to primary care physicians throughout the
Health & Hospital System. DADS continues to support
recovery approaches such as the continuous monitoring
plan for adult clients with a view to early
detection and treatment of relapse, client directed clinical
practice and data-driven management of the
treatment system.  The Patient Access Department will continue to
provide financial counseling assistance in the areas of:
Emergency Department, Express Care, Admitting,
Inpatient, Outpatient and Community Clinics.
The Patient Access Department is moving toward a
pro-active and progressive model of completing the
front end processes, registration and financial
screening. This work will expand with new processes in
HealthLink, the new SCVHHS electronic health record
system.
Federal Health Care Reform will require expanded
enrollment activities on the part of the Patient Access
Department. The next phase will include screening and
enrollment of over 30,000 individuals as part of the
Medi-Cal expansion and 90,000 in the Health Benefit
Exchange.
Refugee Health Program
For refugee populations, the major issue is tying them
into ongoing care for the medical problems identified
through their initial exams. Refugees lose their Medi-Cal
benefits at eight months, dental care for adults is
virtually unavailable, and mental health care for many of
refugees is a priority. Through a partnership with the
Centers for Survivors of Torture, on-site screening for
refugees who may be suffering from PTSD, anxiety and
depression is provided, which has been extremely
helpful for patients.
PACE Clinic
For HIV/AIDS care, there has been an increase in
patients as people lose their healthcare insurance with
the loss of jobs. The Federal Health Resources and
Services Administration has become much more
stringent in reporting requirements, which the
Department is hoping will be easier once the
HealthLink project is implemented. There is an increase
in re-infection with TB, syphilis, and Hepatitis C among
PACE Clinic patients, all of which negatively impact
maintenance of optimal health for those infected with
HIV.
Many of the patients who are currently covered by Ryan
White grant funded programs qualify for the Low
Income Health Program (LIHP). Over the next year, the
clinic will continue an effort to transfer the patients to
LIHP and then into the Medi-Cal expansion, thus
reducing the number of patients eligible for coverage
under Ryan White.  Fiscal Year 2014 will be a time of transition as Valley
Health Plan continues to implement the Unified
Managed Care Strategies developed with the assistance
of Alvarez & Marsal. Together with our partners, the
Santa Clara Valley Health and Hospital System and the
Finance Agency, VHP will continue to refine the
products to best serve the health care needs of its
members and the community at large.
Valley Health Plan is also in the application review
process to become a Qualified Health Plan (QHP) for
Covered California, the California Health Benefit
Exchange. California was the first state to create a
health benefit exchange following the passage of federal
health care reform, the Affordable Care Act (ACA).
Covered California is charged with creating a new
insurance marketplace in which individuals and small
businesses can get access to health insurance who
previously did not have coverage available to them.
With coverage starting in January 2014, Covered
California will help individuals compare and choose a
health plan that works best for their health needs and
budget. The Health Benefit Exchange will release their
list of accepted QHPs by June 2013. If accepted as a QHP,
Valley Health Plan will position itself to provide
coverage for an estimated 2,000 Commercial members
in 2014, with a projected increase in membership
annually.
In addition to the anticipated participation under the
Health Benefit Exchange, VHP will also begin the
application process in FY 2014 to create a Medicare
Advantage (MA) Commercial product. VHP will begin
the application process in January 2014, with an
anticipated enrollment of active members by January
2015. Much like the work that is required to become a
QHP, such as researching an appropriate provider
network, determining plan designs and establishing
benefit interpretation, the MA implementation will
require extensive planning and development work.
Bringing on new products requires the collaborative
efforts of every VHP department and VHP’s many
partners as well as many hours of dedicated work to see
it through implementation.  Economic Changes Related to Healthcare
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center’s (SCVMC) patient
population is expected to continue to grow with the
changes occurring as a result of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act (ACA), as well as Realignment
from the State. Nearly 1 in 2 adult paneled patients has
at least one chronic illness and many of them has
multiple chronic diseases and social situations requiring
a greater intensity of service than the average resident of
Santa Clara County.
Despite the increased coverage under the Low Income
Health Plan (LIHP), many people will remain uninsured
in California. Based on a UC Berkley study, Californians
who are eligible under the ACA are expected to be
enrolled by 2019. In Santa Clara County, it is projected at
least 140,000 residents will remain uninsured in 2019 as
they do not qualify for insurance because of
immigration, financial status or other circumstances.
Changes to coverage effective January 1, 2014 are
further complicated because some people do not
understand the enrollment windows for LIHP and the
Health Benefit Exchange, resulting in continued
uninsured status. Thus, it is anticipated with the
increase in coverage and continuing numbers of
uninsured and underinsured residents, there will be
great demand for the services from the Santa Clara
Valley Health and Hospital System and SCVMC. As a
member of the Health System, SCVMC is focused on
helping residents focus on health and well-being by
improving access to primary and specialty care in the
ambulatory setting, reducing dependence on the
emergency department and, after hospitalization,
reducing the need for readmission to the hospital.
Health Care Reform
Health Care Reform remains a significant issue for the
County, the Health & Hospital System and the nation.
Coverage changes begin January 1, 2014 and many
challenges are anticipated. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ (CMS) Incentive Plan (known as
Delivery System Reform Incentive Payment Program)
has provided support to enable SCVMC to build the
necessary infrastructure to make changes to the system
to support this expansion.
SCVMC is committed to excellent care and currently
serves residents who have means to go elsewhere, but
come to SCVMC because they know they receive high
quality health care. However, other clients have fewer
options and come to SCVMC for the Ability to Pay
Determination program or charity care. With the
implementation of the ACA, it will be even more
important to ensure residents are satisfied with care
and service as they will have more choices. The
expansion of the Patient-Centered Medical Home will
provide the level of service required to move residents
on the path to a healthier lifespan and achieve the goals
of the ACA. There is now competition from other
providers in the county who are expanding to provide
access to primary care to these clients as they become
eligible to choose among health plans and providers. As
a result, ensuring timely, user-friendly access to primary
and specialty care is ever more important to ensure
SCVMC retains market share of existing patients and
gains newly eligible ones from the LIHP and Health
Benefit Exchange.
SCVMC is participating in the launch of a program to
enroll people who are eligible for both Medicare and
Medi-Cal (Dual Eligibles) into Medi-Cal managed care
in 8 counties, including Santa Clara, under a waiver
granted from the Federal Social Security Act Section
1115(a), to achieve care coordination, better manage
chronic conditions, and improve health outcomes. In
order to ensure coordination for this population and
remain within the to be determined per member per
month cost, planning is underway, with the program
anticipated to begin in October. This program will
require innovation and collaboration with the Social
Services Agency, advocates, and other community stake
holders.
Other financial risks related to health care reform
include the CMS Incentive Plan, Hospital Value Based
Plan (HVBP) and the Readmission Reduction Plan
covered under ACA. CMS is closely monitoring results
of the Incentive Plan across the state. Ongoing revision
to the plans will be required to ensure SCVMC meets all
milestones. The continued diligence that SCVMC has
committed to will help ensure the organization is well
positioned to manage the changes of Health Care
Reform. The HVBP will pay the organization based on
how well they perform on measures compared to
benchmarks and how much they improve on the
selected measures from the baseline period. These
measures are currently part of the public reporting of
quality measures for Medicare beneficiaries and the
shift is to pay hospitals for quality, not just quantity of
service. These measures include clinical process
measures as well as the Hospital Consumer Assessment
of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS).
Another pay for performance initiative under ACA is
the Readmission Reduction Program that requires CMS
to reduce payments to hospitals with excess
readmissions for three diagnoses, effective for
discharges beginning on October 1, 2012.
Customer Experience
With the current market competition for health care
services and the pay for performance incentive plans,
there is financial risk associated with ensuring the best
possible experience for customers across the
continuum of services from well-baby care to primary
care in a patient-centered medical home or if
emergency or hospital care is required.
The coming year will require enhancing the Medical
Homes with a full complement of team members to
ensure the patient’s needs are met. Nurses, pharmacists,
dietitians, etc. will work with physicians to meet the
varying needs and to provide as much care in the
community as possible. In FY 2013, ambulatory clinics
began collecting Clinician and Group Consumer
Assessment of Healthcare Provider Service (CG CAHPS)
survey to evaluate how well SCVMC is doing compared
to others, so SCVMC can remain competitive. As
mentioned earlier HCAHPS is currently a pay for
performance measure for the hospital.
The Labor Management Workgroup is launching the
Unit Based Team (UBT) model developed at Kaiser
Permanente, a performance improvement method for
empowerment of front line staff to improve service,
quality and growth. The first UBTs will focus on the
customer experience. In addition, SCVMC has been
participating in the Patient Experience Transformation
Initiative from the California Health Care Safety Net
Institute since last year and will increase participation
at additional ambulatory clinics to work on improving
service. HealthLink Electronic Health Records 2013
On May 4, 2013, SCVMC will begin the roll out of
computerized order entry and clinical documentation
in the hospital, Moorpark Clinic and Bascom Clinic. The
remaining clinics will implement the HealthLink system
beginning in the summer of 2013 and continue through
early 2014. The system will provide residents direct
access to a portal for communication with providers
and access to health information online. There will be
an improvement in service as records will be
immediately available and will improve the
management of patients across different areas of
SCVMC and with the acute psychiatric services as well.
In addition, SCVMC is exploring means to share data
(with the patient’s permission) across health care
systems (public and private) for the first time to benefit
the patient. The electronic data will also enhance the
organization’s ability to track, trend, and improve
patient care and improve patient safety with easier
access to information. The greatest benefit of this
service is reducing the risk for error since the system
has built in rules and alerts to prevent medical errors.
The secondary benefit will be improved efficiency that
will positively impact the patient and family experience.

Improvements to the Permitting Process
The Department of Planning and Development has
initiated a Center for Leadership and Transformation
(CLT) project to make improvements in the
development permitting process. Participants in the
project include the Roads and Airports Department,
Department of Environmental Health, and Information
Services Department as well as staff from Planning and
Development.
The Transformation and Modernization Project
(TM Project) is currently assessing customer needs
across a wide-range of customer types. The next stage of
the TMProject will be the re-design of the Department
of Planning and Development’s processes and
information technology to better meet customer needs.
Items for consideration include reducing processing
time, improving communication, and implementing a
more simple and transparent work flow. Once the
process re-design and development of information
technology specifications are complete, the
Department will be in a position to estimate the costs of
implementation. These costs, and the business case for
making an investment in the County’s permitting
services, will be presented as soon as cost estimates
have been completed. Based on the experience of
comparable planning and development departments,
the capital cost associated with this process
transformation and information technology
modernization effort may range between $250,000 and
$500,000. The TM Project does not presently have a
funding source but is supported by the County
Executive’s Office.
California Building Standards Code Updates
New editions of the California Building Standards Code
have been adopted by the State and will become
effective in all jurisdictions throughout the state on
January 1, 2014. One significant change in the code is
expected to be inclusions of Federal American’s with
Disabilities Act requirements into the accessibility
requirements of the California building standards. The
Building Inspection Office will review the new codes
when they become available and propose adoption by
the County Board of Supervisors with any amendments
that are necessary due to local conditions.
Economic Recovery and Increased Construction
The Planning and Development Department has seen
significant increases in construction activity in the
County, with increases to the number of customers
requesting departmental services and projections
indicate that this increase will likely continue through
2014 and beyond. Activity levels and staffing levels will
be monitored to ensure that the Department is capable
of providing necessary services to the public.
Clean Water Program Updates
The Clean Water Program exists to maintain the
County’s compliance with the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water
Discharge Permit and promote storm water pollution
prevention.
In October 2009, the Municipal Regional NPDES Permit
(MRP) was adopted for North County that includes
achieving 40 percent trash load reductions. The
Department has completed the plans for this reduction
and is in the process of implementing the plan. Plans aimed at reducing trash load by 70 and 100 percent
must be developed by February 2014, with
implementation of 100 percent trash load reduction
plans by 2022.
In February 2013, the State Water Resource Control
Board adopted the NPDES Phase II Small Municipal
Separate Storm Water Sewer System (MS4) General
Permit for areas of the southern portion of the County.
The new MS4 General Permit requires a comprehensive
inventory and mapping of storm drain inlets and
outfalls for commercial and industrial facilities in the
unincorporated areas of the watershed as well as all
municipal storm drain facilities. Similar to the MRP,
requirements for reductions to water pollution levels
will be systematically phased in during the term of the
permit, resulting in decreased water pollution in local
watersheds. Service Effectiveness and System Sustainability
The Parks and Recreation Department has embarked
on a Center for Leadership and Transformation effort
titled Strategic Teams for Action and Results (STAR).
The STAR initiative was launched in January with 30%
of Department staff expressing interest in serving on a
STAR team.
Given the large response, and the significance and
amount of work involved, five teams were created with
staff from all levels and disciplines within the
Department to take a strategic look at the organization
and develop recommendations for ensuring the Park
system is effectively meeting the needs of county
residents and visitors, and positioned to steward the
Park system for long-term sustainability. The five teams
are summarized as follows:
¦ Customer Service & Communication This team will
identify who lives and works in our county, gain a
better understanding of their park wants, needs and
the services/activities they are willing to pay for, and
determine why other residents are not making use of
the Park system. In addition, the team will identify
any barriers to park users and provide recommendations
to remove or mitigate them. Areas of focus
include researching trends in the parks and recreation
business to inform the planning of future facilities
and park amenities, developing strategies for
building relationships with key stakeholders, and
communicating effectively to external audiences.
¦ Financial Sustainability – Efficiency & Financial
Strategy This team will take an in-depth look at the
Park system’s balance sheet and long range prospects,
evaluate and recommend efficiency strategies
to promote long-term fiscal sustainability, and
develop a five-year strategic financial plan.
¦ Financial Sustainability – Revenue Generation This
team will evaluate the State of the Department’s
current revenue generation practices, consider
options to optimize revenue generation, and recommend
strategies for significantly increasing future
revenues.
¦ Partnerships, Sponsorships & Volunteers This team
will consider opportunities to expand and enhance
the Department’s capacity to forge and support partnerships
and expand volunteer efforts throughout
the Park system.
¦ Performance Measurement This team will facilitate,
support, and monitor the process of developing at
least five performance measures for the Department.
Team members will research best practices in
performance measurement and provide training
and support to other teams as they develop their
performance metrics. The team will monitor the
Department work plan process and could also
consider other ways to improve performance
measurement.
Santa Clara Valley Habitat Conservation Plan
In 2001 and as part of the approval of a series of local
development projects, the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS) and the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW), required the
County of Santa Clara, City of San Jose, Santa Clara
Valley Water District, and the Santa Clara Valley
Transportation Agency to undertake development of a Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) for Santa Clara
County. The HCP was undertaken so that local agencies
could address the cumulative and indirect effects of
future private and public sector development and
maintenance and operations projects on federally listed
endangered species.
Six local agencies, known as the Local Partners
(County of Santa Clara, Santa Clara Valley Water
District, Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority,
and the Cities of Gilroy, Morgan Hill and San Jose),
have been working cooperatively with the USFWS
and the CDFW to prepare the Santa Clara Valley
Habitat Plan (Habitat Plan). The Habitat Plan is a
HCP under federal endangered species law and a
Natural Community Conservation Plan (NCCP) under
State law, intended to provide an effective mechanism
to protect, enhance and restore natural resources in
specific areas of Santa Clara County while improving
and streamlining the environmental permitting
process for impacts on threatened and endangered
species.
Finalized in August 2012, the Habitat Plan evaluates the
likely endangered species related impacts of future
public and private sector development including
County operations and maintenance work. Previously,
projects that need endangered species-related permits
from the State and/or Federal wildlife agencies would
undergo a lengthy review process to obtain required
permits to conduct the specific work. The Habitat Plan
provides a broad permit to allow specific covered
activities to take place over a 50-year term without the
need for individual project review and separate permits,
including projects such as bridge replacement, roadside
brush clearing, and park trail work.
The Department anticipates playing a major role in the
implementation of the Habitat Plan and will develop
plans for property proposed to be enrolled in the reserve
system. The Department will need to develop and
implement policies, standards, and procedures for any
scientific or technical work required for operational
enhancement to ensure regulatory compliance.
Maximizing Latent Resources
The Department initiated a pilot project to re-purpose a
significant portion of the Muriel Wright Center, located
within Santa Teresa County Park. The facility, which
once served as a juvenile detention center, is now being
used to house the Department’s volunteer program and
provide lodging for teams of AmeriCorps volunteers. Up
to 36 volunteers will be based out of the facility. The
AmeriCorps program will provide the County with up to
$1.5 million annually of assistance in park project
support and natural resources management services.
The facility also provides an improved base of operation
for the Department’s growing volunteer program. The
Muriel Wright Center will house program staff,
equipment and supplies, and serves as a training facility
for volunteers and staff.
Martial Cottle Park Development and Operations
As of the publication date, the Martial Cottle Park
development project is proceeding to bid and
construction should begin in June 2013. The full
opening of the park is scheduled for late summer 2014.
The Martial Cottle Park is a 250-acre property located in
south San Jose, bounded by Branham Lane, Snell
Avenue, Chynoweth Avenue and Highway 85. The
project site is comprised of three parcels, of which one is
owned by the State of California (136.52 acres) and two
are owned by the County of Santa Clara (120.12 acres). A
30.9-acre site located at the southeast corner of the
project site remains as private property under the prior
owner’s retained life estate, as described in the property
transfer agreement between the County and the donor.
In the future, the life estate will become part of the Park
as the fourth parcel, but this area is not currently
included in the project.
The donor’s vision for Martial Cottle Park is that it be
jointly developed, operated and maintained as a single
park unit. The establishment of Martial Cottle Park is
intended to provide recreational and educational
resources that honor the donor’s intent to preserve and
educate visitors about Santa Clara Valley’s agricultural
history. Martial Cottle Park’s agricultural uses will be a
component of educational and interpretive
programming about the agricultural history of the Santa
Clara Valley.
Martial Cottle Park will include approximately four
miles of multi-use trails, 35 acres of developed parkland
(picnic areas, passive-use areas, a children’s discovery
area, restroom facilities, parking, maintenance facilities,
and a visitor center), 22 acres of cooperative partner use
areas (UC Cooperative Extension Master Gardeners, 4-
H and research fields; urban forestry; and a community
garden), and almost 200 acres of active farmland. Martial Cottle Park will stretch the operating capacity of
the Department. The additional costs of operating the
Park under the current operating model are projected to
exceed available revenues. The Department is exploring
strategies to optimize the operation of the Martial
Cottle Park and find efficiencies and external resources
to support the ongoing operational needs of the entire
Park system.  Development of an Agency Structure
The Department of Agriculture and Environmental
Management (AEM), Department of Environmental
Health (DEH), and the Vector Control District presently
operate more as individual departments than as fullyintegrated
partners of an Agency with a shared mission.
A major goal for the recently-appointed Director of
Agriculture and Environmental Management is to
create a more cohesive Agency structure, to gain work
process efficiencies, and promote a more unified sense
of purpose for the many programs operated in these
three Departments. The Department will remain
cognizant of and vigilant in the separation of revenues
and services related to funds derived from fee payers
and those derived from the General Fund.
The first steps in recognizing efficiencies across the
organization are laid out in the FY 2014 Recommended
Budget with the consolidation of the Household
Hazardous Waste and Integrated Waste Management
Programs, and the consolidation of all accounting
functions under one Department Fiscal Officer. Both of
these changes are aimed at creating a more efficient
work environment where resources can be shared,
bench strength can be built, and staff can gain a new
understanding of broader programmatic aspects of the
Agency.
County of Santa Clara Animal Shelter
In September 2011, the Board of Supervisors approved a
project to construct a new animal shelter and to
establish a capital building campaign to raise donated
funds for its construction. With the help of benefactors
interested in funding the construction of a new shelter,
a modern, fully-equipped facility would enable the
County to provide residents a wide range of services at
affordable prices in a convenient location.
With an expanded new shelter, the County of Santa
Clara can explore partnership opportunities with the
cities of Gilroy and Morgan Hill to also provide their
residents with expanded animal care services. A new
facility can transform the County’s animal shelter into a
regional destination that makes a difference for the
residents and the animals in our community.
The “programming” phase for the new animal shelter
project was completed in January 2013. The
Department will begin work with the Administration
and the Board of Supervisors to kick-off the Shelter’s
capital building campaign starting with the formation of a non-profit 501(c)(3). County staff are working with
community stakeholders, such as local animal shelter
and rescue groups, interested donors, and others to
establish the Board of Directors, financial documents,
and legal documents necessary for the non-profit
organization. The Department will develop a feasibility
study in order to prepare for and plan the fund raising
campaign.
Integrated Waste Management Garbage
Franchise Agreements
The Integrated Waste Management (IWM) Division is
responsible for managing the garbage franchise
agreements in unincorporated Santa Clara County.
With the expiration of the existing franchise agreements
on June 30, 2014, IWM has begun the process to issue a
Request for Proposals, evaluate the submissions,
negotiate with the selected vendor(s) and work with the
vendor(s) through a transition period for the newly
established garbage franchise agreements. IWM will
combine the existing eight garbage districts into three
“geographically logical” districts.
Over the past year, staff conducted customer surveys
and outreach to research the diverse needs and
interests of residents and businesses in unincorporated
Santa Clara County. In order to obtain a greater
economy of scale in the upcoming franchise
agreements, IWM conducted focus groups in the
proposed new garbage districts to assess rate payer
priorities for their garbage, recycling, and yard waste
services. Additionally, IWM will consider adding new
services to the franchise agreements, such as
mandatory commercial recycling and curbside food
waste collection. The new franchise agreements would
become effective July 1, 2014.
On-Site Wastewater Treatment System Ordinance
The Department of Environmental Health (DEH), with
assistance of the Department of Planning and
Development, is in the process of completing a longterm
project to comprehensively review and update the
County’s On-site Wastewater Treatment System
(OWTS) Ordinance. Technical studies and GIS-based
analyses were completed, which form the basis for
recommendations for updates and improvements to
the OWTS Ordinance.
In March 2013, both Departments launched the public
comment period for the draft OWTS Ordinance,
General Plan and Zoning Amendments, and draft
Program Environmental Impact Report (PEIR), and
report back to HLUET and Board of Supervisors for final
approval in August 2013.
The associated PEIR evaluates the potential
environmental impacts of adopting and implementing
the revised Ordinance. Zoning Ordinance and General
Plan Amendments are needed to ensure consistency
with the revised OWTS Ordinance.
The County of Santa Clara’s existing OWTS Ordinance
and related General Plan policies allow only
conventional septic tanks and drain fields; they do not
allow the use of the alternative OWTS systems that
have been used successfully in other jurisdictions over
the past 20 years, nor have the requirements for
conventional systems evolved. These alternative OWTS
systems are more efficient and environmentally
superior to conventional septic tank and drain-field
systems, and would provide significant benefits to
property owners in unincorporated areas of the County.
Many older septic systems in the County are
approaching the end of their design life and will
significantly add to the need for efficient and
sustainable solutions for dealing with marginal or failing
systems. There are unincorporated communities (e.g.,
Holiday Lake Estates and Redwood Estates) where
residences have conventional septic systems that are
experiencing difficulties or are near the end of their
useful life. One of the chief purposes for undertaking
this process is to have a solution in place before an
emergency arises in which DEH would have to red-tag a
home for a failing septic system.
Site Mitigation Program - Local Oversight
Program (LOP) Certification
As of January 1, 2013, AB 1701 amended the California
Health & Safety Code Section 25297.1 and required the
State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) to
establish a certification program for local agencies that
want to continue to oversee corrective action from
underground storage tank releases beyond June 30,
2013. After that date, only a certified local agency may
continue to oversee these corrective actions. Several
criteria were established to evaluate local agency
resources and include ongoing state agency audits of
local programs.
DEH has served as a LOP through a contract with the
SWRCB for underground storage tank releases since
2005. DEH submitted its application for certification on January 8, 2013 and expects to be the primary oversight
agency in the County for underground storage tank
corrective actions. Maintaining a local program
provides enhanced oversight and enforcement efforts
for developers and responsible parties who are looking
for faster turnaround for clean-up of these sites.
On-line Reporting of Restaurant
Inspection Results
The DEH Consumer Protection Division (CPD) believes
that it is important for the public to have access to
information collected by its staff during routine and
non-routine inspections. SB 180 (Sher, 2000) mandated
a standardized approach to Internet posting of
violations, which CPD implemented in 2001.
Since then, the CPD upgraded this inspection
information portal by incorporating Google Maps to
facilitate searches by the public and has made some
modifications to the report on the website. In addition,
the website visibility is regularly modified to ensure that
when the public searches for “restaurant inspections in
Santa Clara County,” the CPD website is at the top of the
search results.
Significant changes to the presentation of the
information and the content displayed on the website
are planned for Summer 2014, following the completion
of an upgrade to the equipment used by CPD field staff
to document inspections. Portable, computerized
devices will streamline data collection by field
inspectors. The inspection data will be uploaded into
the upgraded database to facilitate data analysis,
improve on-line reporting of site-specific data, and
reduce redundancies by field and office staff with less
review and processing of paperwork by hand. With the
incorporation of electronic inspection information and
modifications made to the Department’s website, the
public will have access to more information in a more
user-friendly format.
Certified Unified Program Agency
The Department of Environmental Health (DEH) was
designated as a Certified Unified Program Agency
(CUPA) by the California Environmental Protection
Agency (Cal EPA) in 1997. The CUPA consolidates,
coordinates, and makes consistent the administrative
requirements, permits, inspections, and enforcement
activities for six environmental and emergency
response programs related to Hazardous Materials
Management. The State Agencies responsible for these
programs set the standards for their program while
local governments implement those standards.
Participating Agency agreements were developed with
the Santa Clara County Fire Department and the Cities
of San Jose, Palo Alto, Milpitas, and Mountain View for
continued implementation of CUPA elements within
their jurisdictions. The Cities of Santa Clara, Gilroy, and
Sunnyvale are also CUPAs and implement all of the
Unified Programs within their own jurisdictions.
As local cities continue to struggle with their service
levels, funding, and their need to meet State mandates,
they are turning implementation of their Hazardous
Materials Programs over to the County. In response,
DEH has successfully transitioned programs from the
Cities of Palo Alto, San Jose, and Morgan Hill. Under
State law, the County must implement these programs
and has worked closely with the cities to ensure that the
transition is seamless and supports the needs of our
business community.
The successful transition and implementation of the
CUPA in the Cities of Palo Alto, San Jose, and Morgan
Hill were recognized by Cal EPA and the California
Certified Unified Program Agencies, with DEH receiving
an award for “CUPA of the Year” in 2012. 