Resolving assessment appeals from 2012 will continue to be a priority for the appraisal staff.
Appeals require an appraiser to make an independent analysis of the market value of each
property, then present that value to the property owner for resolution or to the Assessment
Appeals Board at a hearing for consideration. All 2012 appeals are anticipated to be resolved
in the upcoming fiscal year.
In 2013-14, the Assessor will continue to work with the Auditor-Controller, Treasurer-Tax
Collector and Information Services to adjust and refine the new property tax system. The new
system will enable staff to produce an assessment roll more quickly and will computerize
processes currently done manually to provide additional reporting capabilities.

The Auditor-Controller will continue working on the fine tuning of the new Property Tax System in addition to starting the process to replace the County’s financial and procurement system which is the last significant system on the County’s IBM mainframe platform. The process of assessing the requirements of the system and searching for a vendor has begun, with an anticipated go live date in 2015. In addition, the Payroll Division will continue to work on implementing changes in response to changes in pension reform and health care reform.
Governor Brown’s proposed 2013-14 State Budget restores the department’s funding level to its 2011-12 levels. Annually, the State Department of Child Support Services sets specific performance goals for the local child support programs, reflecting the performance measurements incentivized by the federal Office of Child Support Enforcement. An overarching objective for 2013-14 will be to meet or exceed the State determined performance goals, with an emphasis on increasing the total dollars we collect.

Prior to 2011-12, 2.5% of collections on behalf of current and former public assistance recipients were distributed to the counties. In Fiscal Years 2011-12 and 2012-13 those funds were retained by the State. In Governor Brown’s proposed 2013-14 State Budget, these funds will no longer be retained by the State and distribution to the counties will resume. For 2013-14 it is estimated that $150,000 will be returned to Santa Cruz County for related services based on the County’s collections performance.

In 2013-14, Purchasing anticipates processing approximately 4,500 requisitions and purchase orders for county-wide expenditures of approximately $20 million. The focus of the division continues to be on management of processes and procedures including strategic purchasing to increase leverage in the County’s purchasing power; “Green Procurement” of environmentally friendly and energy-reducing products; and pursuing collaborative strategies to achieve more efficient and effective purchasing operations with both risk management and cost savings as top priorities.

The Purchasing Division plans to work actively with the Auditor’s Office and Information Services Department on the comprehensive process for soliciting, acquiring and implementing a new financial system which will include a new purchasing module.In 2012-13 the Service Center maintained 384 vehicles and completed approximately 1,500 work orders. The Service Center maintains a pool of 25 vehicles for daily use on an as-needed basis by all County departments. General Services’ fleet vehicles range from subcompacts to heavy-duty maintenance trucks, and include Sheriffs Office and Animal Services vehicles.

In 2012-13, Fleet Services was awarded $115,000 from the Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District for the purchase of five gas-hybrid vehicles. This has provided an excellent opportunity to achieve measurable reductions in motor vehicle emissions and a reduction of petroleum based fuel. The funding is being used to replace five high mileage older fleet vehicles (including two older hybrids) with current technology, gas-hybrid vehicles.

Staff is actively involved in the Monterey Bay Electric Vehicle Alliance, which is a regional collaborative whose purpose is to provide agencies with the infrastructure to support growth in the use of electric vehicles. In addition to the electric vehicle charging station at the Service Center, charging stations were installed at the Emetine and Freedom campuses in February 2013. All stations are available free to the public. Through March 2013 the stations have been used for 409 charging sessions, representing savings of greenhouse gas of 3,848 kg. and 453 gallons of gasoline.

The Service Center is responsible for the maintenance and operation of the County’s CNG (compressed natural gas) fueling station. The County currently has 12 CNG vehicles serviced by this station and provides CNG motor fuel to thirteen non-County agencies and businesses for approximately 13 vehicles. Since the station was installed in 2008, it has dispensed an average of 6,359 gallons of CNG per year. It is estimated that 8,740 gallons of CNG may be dispensed in 2012-13.

In 2012-13 the Service Center maintained 384 vehicles and completed approximately 1,500
work orders. The Service Center maintains a pool of 25 vehicles for daily use on an as-needed
basis by all County departments. General Services' fleet vehicles range from subcompacts to
heavy-duty maintenance trucks, and include Sheriff's Office and Animal Services vehicles.
In 2012-13, Fleet Services was awarded $115,000 from the Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution
Control District for the purchase of five gas-hybrid vehicles. This has provided an excellent
opportunity to achieve measurable reductions in motor vehicle emissions and a reduction of
petroleum based fuel. The funding is being used to replace five high mileage older fleet vehicles
(including two older hybrids) with current technology, gas-hybrid vehicles.
Staff is actively involved in the Monterey Bay Electric Vehicle Alliance, which is a regional
collaborative whose purpose is to provide agencies with the infrastructure to support growth in
the use of electric vehicles. In addition to the electric vehicle charging station at the Service
Center, charging stations were installed at the Emeline and Freedom campuses in February
2013. All stations are available free to the public. Through March 2013 the stations have been
used for 409 charging sessions, representing savings of greenhouse gas of 3,848 kg. and 453
gallons of gasoline.
The Service Center is responsible for the maintenance and operation of the County's CNG
(compressed natural gas) fueling station. The County currently has 12 CNG vehicles serviced
by this station and provides CNG motor fuel to thirteen non-County agencies and businesses for
approximately 13 vehicles. Since the station was installed in 2008, it has dispensed an average
of 6,359 gallons of CNG per year. It is estimated that 8,740 gallons of CNG may be dispensed
in 2012-13.
In 2013-14 the Service Center will continue to focus on increasing customer satisfaction and work efficiencies. Priorities include providing prompt maintenance and repair, reducing the
number of vehicles assigned to departments, increasing the efficiency of checking out vehicles,
increasing the ratio of alternative fuel vehicles in the fleet and increasing the number of
employee van pools.



Significant challenges and opportunities within HSA for FY
2013-14 include:
• Implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as
federal health care reform. Under the ACA guidelines, it is estimated that 9,000 to 11,000
County residents are expected to be eligible for Medi-Cal and approximately 11,000 to
15,000 county residents will purchase health insurance with a federal subsidy via the State
Health Benefits Exchange system.
• Continuing as a responsible provider for behavioral health, primary care and specialty care
services for low income residents, including Medi-Cal and indigent populations.
• Coordinating and providing the health care services to indigent adults as mandated under
Welfare and Institutions Code 17000.
• Collaboration and planning with the Central California Alliance for Health and other partners
to transition approximately 8,000 youth from the Healthy Families program into the MediCal
program by August 2013. HSA Children's Mental Health (CMH) will be responsible for
providing access to medically necessary mental health services for this population.
• Planning and implementation of the Katie A Lawsuit Settlement will require the CMH team
to work closely with the County Human Services Department's Family and Children's
Services Division to identify the "subclass" population to receive intensive wrap around
services based on certain risk factors. The terms of the settlement agreement include
development of a shared model of practice and Core Practice Model (CPM) Guide that
counties will be expected to utilize.
• Completing construction and beginning operation of the Santa Cruz County Psychiatric
Health Facility (the new 16- bed acute inpatient center) and the Santa Cruz County
Behavioral Health Evaluation & Treatment Center (crisis stabilization unit) by January 1,
2014.
• Cessation of the Low Income Health Program (LIHP)/MediCruz Advantage (MCA) Program,
as contracted with State and federal entities, effective December 31, 2013. The clients in
this program will be prepared to transition seamlessly into the Medi-Cal program.
• Completing the Homeless Persons Health Project (HPHP) expansion into Watsonville with
plans to be operational and provide primary and dental care services at this location in
January 2014.
• Continuing to monitor services and costs related to the 2011 Realignment programs which
includes Mental Health Managed Care Medi-Cal, Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and
Treatment (EPSDT), and Drug Medi-Cal.
• Continuing to partner with the Probation Department, Sheriff's Office, other County
Departments and City Municipalities as well as community based organizations to
implement and evaluate the Public Safety Realignment/AS 109 progress.
• Continuing to promote staff training and development; and foster innovation in staff and
other partners to enhance cost effectiveness and service delivery efficiency to appropriately
maximize the leveraging of other funding sources.
• Continuing to coordinate efforts with community stakeholders regarding syringe services
program which minimizes the public health risks associated with the spread of blood-borne
diseases such as hepatitis C and HIV/AIDS transmitted through shared injection equipment.

Effective April 30, 2013, HSA revamped the syringe services program which is located in
various medical facilities with County staff oversight. This program includes new efforts to
conduct clean-ups and to increase training and education in the community. These
program changes will be closely monitored and adjusted as the program develops.

Complete pilot in Information Services Department of VoiP phone system.
• Release RFP, pending Board Approval and availability of funds for County General Ledger
and Purchasing software (FAMIS/APS), which will lead to the retirement of the mainframe.
• Develop vacation rental application in support of Sheriff Office's related activities.
• Design and develop permit application for use by Sheriff's Office and departments to register
and track County issued permits.
• Replace or enhance existing Sheriff's Beat Book.
• In partnership with Planning, upgrade Hansen Land Use system to version 8.2.3 or 8.3.
• In partnership with the Sheriff's Office, plan for moving to the new location.
• Develop plan for migrating off Windows XP when Microsoft support ends in April 2014.
• Increase bandwidth and speed of the County Internet connection.
• Conduct a County-wide GIS needs assessment and develop a five year strategic plan.
• Support Department of Public Works in developing a mobile road closure mapping
application.
• Update the County-wide contour and slope data based on the new Digital Elevation
Model.
• Deploy Microsoft Operations manager for proactive monitoring of critical applications
and systems.
• Install new integrated end point protection software to strengthen network and server
security.
• Consolidate Microsoft server licensing under a cost-effective Enterprise Agreement

	Assist the City of Watsonville to complete deployment of its Public Safety Mesh WiFi System.

•	Establish and implement support protocols for Santa Cruz Regional 911 new Dispatch Console.

•	Develop procedures for communication equipment installations for the new make and model of patrol cars for the Sheriff’s Office.

•	Complete upgrade to radio infrastructure for additional grant-funded 

The department will complete various policy efforts initiated in the prior year, and will continue to pursue amendments to County Codes to modernize, clarify and streamline land use regulations and permit processes. The key work plan items for 2013-14 include the following:


Complete the Draft Sustainable Community and Transit Corridor Plan funded by a Proposition 84 grant and initiate preparation of a Master Environmental Impact Report. Complete a Draft CEMEX Site Re-Use Plan funded by a CDBG grant, including proposed amendments to the General Plan and Local Coastal Program as appropriate.

•	Complete Code amendments of the Geologic Hazards, Coastal Bluff, Floodplain and Grading ordinances; and other tasks funded by a Disaster Recovery Initiative (DRI) grant, as well as an update of County Code Chapter 16.01 regarding CEQA Environmental Regulations.

•	Promote and encourage participation in Construction Legalization and Code Compliance Program, so that owners of unpermitted improvements understand the value of obtaining and completing building permits, thereby increasing public safety and property values.

•	Complete amendments to County Code Chapters 13.10 (Zoning Regulations) and 18.10 (Permit Processes) in order to consolidate information related to land use types, update use charts, amend certain development standards, and amend certain procedures to streamline permit processes as appropriate, and to expand rights of appeal.

•	Provide environmental review and permitting assistance services for important county projects including road and infrastructure repair and improvement projects, the Felton library project, the Live Oak Youth Center, and the Pajaro River floodplain projects.

•	Assist in the disposition planning for remaining Redevelopment Agency properties.


The Treasurer-Tax Collector will complete the first year of implementation of the new property tax
system which includes the following components critical to the functioning of the Tax Collection
Division:
• Secured and Unsecured roll maintenance and assessment
• Tax structure and liability
• Tax collection and apportionment