First District
? Continue to make customer service the primary
focus of County government while working to
enhance responsiveness, efficiency and
accountability including efforts to promote
diversity, expand outreach and enhance
partnerships.
? Maintain and work to enhance services
provided to the most vulnerable residents of
our County including continued funding of the
Children’s Health Initiative, implementation of
recommendations from the Poverty Study, and
outreach into underrepresented communities.
? Work to protect our open spaces, enhance
recreational opportunities, and maintain the
character of our neighborhoods and
communities through adopting the Mission
Canyon and Summerland Community Plans,
completing construction on the Franklin Trail
Project and finalizing design and permitting for
the Santa Claus Lane Beach Access
Improvements.
? Continue to work on the planning and
implementation of both regional and local
transportation enhancements and other public
infrastructure improvements.
Second District
? Continue to maintain a Second District office
that is responsive to and respectful of all
constituents.
? Continue to monitor the progress of both the
Goleta Valley Community Plan and Goleta Beach
environmental review processes.
? Remain engaged in the progress of the San
Marcos Foothills Park Management Plan.
? Monitor progress on the State St. /Hollister Ave
Corridor Improvement Plan.
? Meet and encourage partnerships with, and
among, individuals and organizations (public,
private and educational) committed to
expanding and enhancing recreational, cultural
and educational opportunities for youth and
adolescents.
? As the Board’s liaison to the Community
Corrections Partnership, remain engaged in the
progress and challenges posed by AB
109/Realignment, and advocate for adequate
funding for needed resources.
? Continue displaying school student art in the
Second District Student Art Gallery.
? Continue to advocate for the rights of our
County’s most vulnerable constituents.
Third District
? Continue to preserve public safety and make
sure resources are prioritized to keep our
community safe
? Continue to promote fiscal responsibility so
that we are using public resources efficiently
and effectively
? Continue to protect safety net services for our
most vulnerable community members Continue to provide timely, responsive, and
professional constituent service that responds
to issues important to constituents
? Continue to plan for the future by encouraging
strong neighborhood and environmental
planning
Fourth District
Supervisor Peter Adam’s priorities center on
financial responsibility. Supervisor Adam is
focused on returning Santa Barbara to pay-as-yougo
financing of public services. Deferred
maintenance on our roads, parks, and other public
infrastructure must be brought up to date. The
pensions for our county workers must be fully
funded. Our strategic cash reserves must be
replenished.
Supervisor Adam believes that California’s strict
environmental laws can be administered by the
County in a way that is swift and fair to everyone
involved.
Fifth District
The staff of the Fifth District has a singular focus,
regardless of which community you call home – to
provide you, the taxpayer, with outstanding
customer service. For more information, please
visit http://www.countyofsb.org/bos/lavagnino/
Board Support
Continue to provide outstanding customer support
to constituents, departments and Board offices.
County Management
? Continue participation in the California State
Association of Counties (CSAC) work group to
develop performance measures to allocate
future AB 109 funding.
? Initiate “Results First” effort to determine
Return on Investment (ROI) for public safety
programs. This information may provide the
basis to benefit from philanthropic loans via
Social Impact Bonds.
? Support greater cooperation between County
and businesses by participating in the Santa
Barbara Chamber of Commerce Government
Relations committee.
? Continue support of the Northern Branch Jail
project during schematic design of the project.
This includes weekly status briefings and
ongoing financial oversight.
? Fully implement a systems-transformation
process utilizing both consulting team services
and key County staff to address findings related
to ADMHS systems, services, facility, and
compliance issues.
? Lead effort and ensure Countywide readiness
for Health Care Reform as of January 2014.
? Continue to strengthen Inter Agency Policy
Council (IAPC) model to function as a virtual
Health and Human Services Agency and identify
and implement efficiencies.
? Review Health and Human Services Countywide
safety net of services and identify overlap and
gaps in services to address ongoing priority and
emerging health and human services needs
within the County.
? Continue to improve the visibility of deferred
maintenance and infrastructure so that we may
then develop a plan to address these issues.
? Extend efforts in Workers Compensation area
to stem and ultimately reduce the significantly
increasing costs of this program.
? Develop a 5 year forecast with relevant revenue
and expenditure detail and assumptions to
better predict future funding needs and
potential solutions.
? Facilitate the Legislative Program Committee,
including a revised timeline for the
development of the 2014 Legislative Platform to
include input of the entire Board into the draft
Platform.
? Establish and support Contract Compliance
Oversight Committee processes to improve the
quality and compliance of Board contracts.
Continue to increase the use of technology in
delivering training and development programs
to County employees to increase employee
access and reduce non-productive time
traveling to and from training.
Emergency Management
? Maintain a highly-trained workforce able to
anticipate and effectively respond to major
emergencies, disasters, and recovery efforts.
? In a culturally competent manner, have
residents knowledgeable in risk and
preparedness needs.
Human Resources
? Increase the efficiency of Human Resources
(HR) service delivery to all County departments
through the implementation of new
technology, such as electronic records,
workforce reporting, and online transactions.
In addition, HR will continue to review existing
operations with the intent to streamline and
improve HR service delivery.
? Support organizational effectiveness by
engaging with five of the County’s unions,
whose contracts are expiring in 2013 and
negotiate fiscally responsible successor labor
contracts while managing the County’s need to
attract and retain a quality workforce.
Risk Management & Employee Insurance
Revise the Insurance and Indemnity provisions for
County contracts and provide contractual risk
analysis and related consultation to all County
departments in determining the appropriate
insurance requirements for specific services being
contracted.
Advisory
? Provide legal support for development of the
Conversion Technology project at the Tajiguas
Landfill, to provide an alternative to landfilling
some solid waste.
? Provide the Board of Supervisors with options
within these draft land use plans and
amendments: Gaviota Coast Plan, Mission
Canyon Community Plan, Eastern Goleta Valley
Community Plan, and Summerland Community
Plan.
? Support legal issues arising from the Federal
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
? Continue intensive General Fund legal support
for the Northern Branch Jail Project and
Community Services Department’s compliance
improvements with housing programs.
Litigation
? Represent the County Assessor. This will
include California Supreme Court litigation
about valuing resident-owned mobile homes,
statewide, for property tax purposes, including
the Rancho Goleta and Silver Sands Village
Mobile Home parks. Defend against challenges
by Breitburn Energy of its enrolled property
value; the amount of property tax disputed
exceeds $1 million per year.
? Continue to pursue recovery on two bail bonds
totaling $1 million by opposing surety’s appeal
of trial court’s denial of its motion to vacate the
forfeiture of the bonds.
? Continue to reduce County Workers’
Compensation (WC) costs by:
o Supporting Risk Management’s transition of
claims administration to an outside
contractor; and,
o Maintaining prior year reduction in the
number of attorneys fully dedicated to
workers’ compensation litigation from 2 to 1,
while at the same time,
? Continuing to handle in-house all new workers’
compensation litigation from injuries before
7/01/10, when the County converted its WC
coverage from self-insurance to first-dollar
coverage by CSAC-EIA.
? Provide legal support to the County’s
processing of Santa Maria Energy’s application
for production from over 100 new oil and gas
wells through the use of steam injection from
generators.
Administration & Support
Implement an electronic interface with law
enforcement agencies in order to share case filing
data. This efficiency will eliminate duplicative data
entry of reports and case referrals, thus saving
staff time and resources.
Criminal Prosecution
Collaborate with the Superior Court and Probation
to initiate a new system of enforcement and
collection of victim restitution orders for all criminal cases. This new system would involve
efforts by the District Attorney to obtain earlier,
sum certain, victim restitution orders and enlist the
aid of Probation and the Courts to rigorously
enforce these orders until the victims are paid in
full.
Work with the Santa Barbara Police Department
and the Santa Barbara City Attorney to obtain and
enforce a Gang Injunction if the Court deems it
appropriate. Perform outreach at the local
elementary, middle and high schools by educating
young people about the negative consequences
inherent in gang association.
Civil Prosecution
Collaborate with the Weights and Measures
Division of the Agricultural Commissioner’s Office
to initiate a new system for investigation and
enforcement of false and misleading advertising
and unlawful business practices in commercial
transactions.
Administration & Support
Focus Area: Providing Quality Information and
Technology Systems Support for Departmental
Operations
? Increase operational efficiency by automating
juvenile monthly reporting through the use of
kiosks and develop web based reporting for
adult probationers
Focus Area: Providing Quality Staffing for
Departmental Operations
? Develop and implement a Leadership Training
Program for supervisors and managers ? Develop a quality assurance training module for
Motivational Interviewing to ensure long term
fidelity with the model
Focus Area: Providing Quality Support Services and
Financing for Departmental Operations
? Increase the annual collection of restitution,
fines, and fees by 10%
? Update the Administrative Manual and develop
process to ensure periodic review on an
ongoing basis
Institutions
Focus Area: Operating Quality Juvenile Treatment
and Detention Facilities and Programs
? Increase rehabilitation of approximately 156
juvenile probationers committed to Los Prietos
Boys Camp and Academy by ensuring that 90%
will graduate from the program
? Through the effective use of alternatives to
detention, maintain an average daily population
of the juvenile detention and treatment
facilities at or below staffed capacity
? Review the booking criteria and process to
ensure that the use of maximum security beds
is appropriate and that community safety is
maintained
? Ensure that the Camps and Juvenile Halls
remain compliant with the requirements of the
Prison Rape Elimination Act
Juvenile Services
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and
Effective Programs and Services for Juvenile
Offenders and Their Families
? Assess the effectiveness of programs at
reducing gang violence and involvement by
implementing a program that shares
knowledge of the risks and assets, program
involvement, and outcomes attained of youths
on probation with gangs terms and conditions
or who have been identified as gang
affiliates/associates
? Evaluate criminogenic factors as contained in
the Santa Barbara Risk Assessment (SBARA) to
assist in better informed individual case
planning of youth with the goal to further
reduce recidivism and to further assess the use
of detention in aiding in the rehabilitation of
clients
Adult Services
Focus Area: Providing Evidenced Based and
Effective Programs and Services for Adult Offenders
? Oversee the local implementation of the
Transition from Jail to Community (TJC)
initiative which involves the development,
implementation, and evaluation of a model for
jail to community transition
? Implement a violation sanction matrix that is
responsive to offender risks and needs and
which allows for intermediate sanctions as well
as the use of evidence-based programs
Administration & Support
? Expand use of volunteers to meet non-core
functions, freeing support staff to focus on
high-priority matters
? Continue to implement and adapt to the 2011
Criminal Justice Realignment (AB109), including
assessing need and securing funding for fulltime
staffing
? Continue upgrading our case management
system to more efficiently store and file data
electronically in a way that is easily accessible
either over our network or electronically
through the internet
Adult Legal Services
? Expand the Volunteer Attorney program to
enable staff attorneys to focus on higherpriority
core tasks. These volunteers help
mitigate the financial challenges faced by the
Department by providing valuable and cost
effective legal expertise to the County.
? Expand use of outside speakers and experts on
various legal, ethical, and trial practices topics
to provide high quality training to the attorney
staff at minimal cost to the County
? Continue to collaborate with the Courts, Mental
Health, Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney,
and various community organizations to
improve the functioning of the Therapeutic
Courts. These court programs have proven to
be successful at rehabilitation, reducing
recidivism, enhancing public safety, and helping
individuals to become productive members of
the community. This helps reduce jail
overcrowding and saves the County money.
? Work with Justice Partners to prepare for the
expected increased workload accompanying
the transfer of parole revocation hearings to
the Courts as of July 1, 2013
? Assess the resources required to represent
inmates petitioning for resentencing pursuant
to the Three Strikes Resentencing initiative
(Penal Code § 1170.126)
? Evaluate the work done by our Rehabilitation
Services Coordinators, and if appropriate and
feasible incorporate the positions within our
department
Juvenile Legal Services
? Institute a Volunteer Attorney Program in the
Juvenile Courts to generate efficiencies and
cost savings similar to those experienced in our
Adult Services. This will allow staff attorneys to
focus on higher priority core tasks and assume
additional case related responsibilities for
minors in the Juvenile Courts
? Work with school districts to identify areas
where outcomes in the juvenile court can be
improved by increased collaboration between
the two agencies
? Work with the Truancy Program to encourage
both minors and parents to recognize the
importance of participating in school programs.
Grand Jury
Functions of the Civil and Criminal Grand Jury
The Santa Barbara County Grand Jury will continue
its three predominant functions:
? Government oversight, as well as,
? Investigation into citizen complaints by the
Civil Grand Jury, and
? Determination of whether evidence presented
by the district attorney is of a sufficient nature
to warrant a person to stand trial in court
when a Criminal Grand Jury is impaneled.
Court Special Services
Enhanced Collections
Court Special Services will begin development of a
written Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with the County that implements and enhances the
collection of court-ordered debt and other monies
owed under a court order.
Conflict Defense Representation
Conflict Defense for Indigent Defendants
The Conflict Defense Program will protect the
rights and liberties guaranteed by the
Constitutions of California and the United States by
providing defense of indigent defendants when
the Public Defender has determined there is a
conflict of interest.
Administration and Support
? Review and update all AB1600 – Development
Impact Fees and Fire Prevention Fees.
? Implement a data analysis tool that will enable
the Department to measure response times
and implement the Citygate Associates
(Citygate) emergency response time
recommendations.
? Use the Citygate recommendations to
establish an efficient resource deployment
model to address the County General Plan
build-out and reassess current Fire
Department resource deployment.
Fire Prevention
? Implement and manage the Arson Dog
Program. The arson dog will respond to all
suspicious fire causes in the Santa Barbara
County Fire jurisdiction and be available upon
request to respond to all fire departments
within Santa Barbara County.
? Develop and implement an ongoing Fire
Prevention Training and Education Program
for all fire station personnel. This will ensure
timely and accurate inspections of all
properties and businesses that require
inspections and permits.
? Review, amend, and adopt the 2013 California
Fire Code as the fire code for the Santa
Barbara County Fire Protection District. This
will reflect national and State standards and
will also consider the unique composition of
Santa Barbara County.
? Review and analyze Inspection Services to
improve customer service and ensure full cost
recovery for these services.
? Review and update Chapter 15-Fire Prevention
of the Santa Barbara County Code.
Emergency Operations
? Participate in the County’s Emergency Medical
System redesign to conform to the Affordable
Healthcare Act.
? Update the Santa Barbara County Operational
Area Response Plan to ensure consistent
communications and timely emergency
response.
? Obtain “Type” certification from the California
Emergency Management Agency for the
Hazardous Materials Response Team and the
Urban Search and Rescue Team.
Administration & Support
? Identify and replace the existing Records
Management System to conform to updated
technologies.
? Replace radio consoles in the Emergency
Dispatch Center to provide for a more stable
communication environment.
? Upgrade to Windows 7 computer operating
system. This upgrade will be necessary to
promote efficiency and maintain a stable
environment for our technological resources.
Custody Operations
? Complete schematic design for the Northern
Branch Jail and maintain timeline for design
and construction documents for
groundbreaking in spring of 2015.
? Complete a sewer upgrade and kitchen
remodel project in the Main Jail. Through a
partnership with County General Services, the
upgraded jail sewer system and kitchen
remodel will improve the infrastructure of
these vital services in the custody facility.
? Collect and analyze data to review current
alternative-to-custody programs, and identify
and implement new strategies to mitigate the
effects of jail overcrowding through
alternative sentencing programs.
Countywide Law Enforcement
? Obtain necessary certification for all
helicopters utilized by the County Air Support
Unit to allow for reimbursement for
firefighting operations in the State
Responsibility and US Forest Service areas.
? Complete the installation and upgrade of
COBAN video technology in all patrol vehicles
for evidentiary purposes.
? Enhance coordination and enforcement
efforts with Homeland Security and other
partnering agencies in the interdiction of
“Panga” boat smugglers along the Santa
Barbara County coastline.
? Review and revise, as necessary with the
Probation Department, the policies and
procedures of the Public Safety Realignment
(AB109) Compliance Response Teams in order
to effectively utilize our resources as we
continue to work under State Public Safety
Realignment (AB109).
Administration and Support
? Evaluate the Department’s practice
management system and determine feasibility
of merging General Electric’s (GE) Centricity
Practice Solution with the current GE Centricity
Electronic Health Record.
? Implement International Classification of
Diseases 10 (ICD-10) diagnosis coding by the
mandated federal deadline of October 1, 2014.
The project will include software installation,
staff training, workflow changes, and testing.
? Participate in Health Information Exchange
program to provide patient access to records
and exchange health information among
providers. Continue to meet federal
requirements in order to receive Medi-Cal
financial incentives.
Health Care Centers
? Develop a needs analysis for the County Health
Care Centers to assess patient levels and
needs so that the Department is staffed
appropriately. The plan will include assisting
patients with Medi-Cal enrollment process,
patient education, staff customer service
training, and expanded access at network
pharmacies.
? Respond to demographic changes in Santa
Maria by assessing the potential for adding a
geriatric specialty clinic and a pediatric
program. This would improve the continuity of
care for families and better meet the needs of
the changing population.
? Fully implement the Patient Centered Medical
Home (PCMH) standard by integrating
behavioral health services into primary care in
all County Health Care Centers and promoting
the use of the patient portal.
Indigent Health Programs
? Continue to work with Alcohol, Drug and
Mental Health Services (ADMHS), the
Department of Social Services (DSS), and other
partners in navigating the new health care
environment after implementation of
Affordable Care Act (ACA). Identify and
respond to gaps in services and oversee
outreach and enrollment of eligible residents
to facilitate access to healthcare.
Disease Prevention & Health Promotion
? Expand the North Santa Maria Women,
Infants, and Children (WIC) service site to
better meet the needs of participants.
? Evaluate the employee fitness promotion
program implemented at the Public Health
Department and two other organizations.
? Implement technology that will allow public
health nurses to observe patients taking their
required TB treatment medications by video rather than traveling to directly observe them
as is currently required.
Regulatory Programs & Emergency
Preparedness
? Activate the Medical Shelter Plan to test our
ability to respond in a disaster. This will involve
providing shelter and medical care for patients
in partnership with local healthcare providers
and Medical Reserve Corps volunteers.
? Implement safety program to reduce the risk
of injury to Animal Services staff at animal
shelters and in the field.
? Draft regulations for the implementation of a
Local Area Management Plan for onsite
sewage system for consideration by the Board
of Supervisors. New standards from the State
Water Resources Board require the County to
develop such a plan in order to permit local
septic systems.
Tobacco Settlement Health Services
? Re-assess Tobacco Settlement allocations in
response to potential funding changes to
community partners resulting from the
Affordable Care Act.
Administration & Support
? Implement effective policies for providing
services to clients with private insurance and
improving the collection of revenues from all
payor sources.
? Work with State and local agencies to
streamline and assist in the enrollment
processes for ADMHS clients who may be
eligible as part of the Affordable Care Act’s
(ACA) Medicaid Expansion. The expansion goes
into effect on January 1, 2014.
? Working with the Consumer and Family
Member Subcommittee, the Department will
analyze the recently developed consumer
satisfaction survey results to develop
recommendations and monitor future surveys
for continued quality improvements.
? Pending direction from the Board of
Supervisors, ADMHS in conjunction with the
Tiger Team, will implement plan regarding
recommendations from consulting teams
retained in 2012 to review Department systems.
Mental Health Inpatient Services
? The duration of hospitalization is determined by
a combination of factors related to both inpatient and outpatient services, as well as
community resources. The inpatient factors will
be closely examined and amended where
possible to reduce the lengths of inpatient
hospital stays.
? Expand the electronic health record system to
include the inpatient setting. This will result in a
seamless clinical integration of inpatient and
outpatient services.
? Pending direction from the Board of
Supervisors, implement recommendations as
appropriate from inpatient consulting team to
improve clinical inpatient services.
Mental Health Outpatient Services
? As part of the Children’s Process Improvement
Project (PIP), ADMHS will identify and review
high utilization cases. Based on the continued
goal of keeping children in their community in
the least restrictive setting, ADMHS teams will
develop focused treatment plans.
? Evaluate opportunities for more cooperation
between Mental Health, ADP, and Primary
Health Care to provide cost-efficient and high
quality services.
? Improve mental health care of children who
have been evaluated by Child Welfare Services.
Mental Health Community Services Programs
? Use the FY 2014-15 MHSA Plan Update process
to align the annual MHSA expense budget with
projected annual recurring MHSA revenues.
? Train at least 30 Law Enforcement Personnel in
Crisis Intervention Training annually.
? Conduct a two-day Benefits Acquisition Training
for at least 40 staff from ADMHS, Community
Based Organizations (CBOs), or interested
community members.
Alcohol & Drug Programs
• Develop pilot programs pending additional
benefits approved through the Affordable Care
Act, such as Screening, Brief Intervention, and
Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) and Medicated
Assisted Treatment (MAT).
? Sustain and expand treatment services for drug
court in South County and for adolescents
throughout the County.
Administration and Support
? Develop a transparent and credible budget.
? Provide training on the funding rules and
regulations of the Department of Social
Services.
? Provide support to the Department’s priority of
a smooth implementation of Health Care
Reform.
Public Assistance and Welfare to Work
Activities
? The redesign of CalWORKs due to the reduction
of time on aid from 48 months to 24 months.
? Reduce the number of audit exceptions.
Medi-Cal Eligibility
? Reduction of backlogs in the Benefit Service
Center.
? Reduce the number of audit exceptions.
? Ensure a smooth implementation of the
Affordable Care Act (ACA).
Protective Services for Children, Adults,
Disabled
Implementation of the Katie A. lawsuit settlement.
The suit is intended to improve the provision of
mental health and supportive services for children
and youth in, or at imminent risk of placement in,
foster care in California.
? As outlined in the Child Welfare System
Improvement Plan, implement and utilize best
practice models such as SOP (Safety Organized
Practice), Trauma Informed Practice, Father
Engagement, and increased Team Decision
Making (TDM) meetings to facilitate timely
reunification.
? Reduce the number of audit exceptions.
Case Management & Collections
Continue to improve in Federal Performance
Measures by exceeding goals set by the State. This
will be accomplished by continuing ongoing efforts
to analyze impediments to performance and
prioritizing efforts on Federal Performance
Measures where the greatest impact can be
achieved; as well as assessing annual State goals
while setting higher internal goals when feasible.
Create a framework for evaluating current
business processes with the goal of becoming
more effective and efficient. The Department will
more fully utilize the recently developed crossfunctional
process improvement team (“PIT
Crew”). They will identify tasks, processes, and
procedures that can be done more efficiently. PIT
will also conduct analyses and recommend
solutions. Input is solicited from the organization
to facilitate open communication, ideas, and
ensure that different perspectives are presented.
To date, this has been an effective forum, with
productive results.
Continue to identify emerging trends in technology
developments and work organization. Then assess
how these changes can be employed to improve
the organization’s performance through:
? The introduction of Fox-it, an electronic tool
that eliminates the need for a typewriter to fill
in computer generated forms;
? Enhanced use of virtual files;
? Increased usage of Sharepoint for work-flow
processes and calendaring; and
? Implementation of electronic transfer of cash
child support payments to the State
Participate in educational outreach to help
customers who do not have medical insurance
understand resources available to them through
the Affordable Care Act.
Respond to Court budget issues by creating more
efficient processes to reduce demand for court
resources.
Administration & Support
Ensure a high level of fiscal accountability and
oversight in relation to the granting of funds for
program purposes and reporting on outcomes to
ensure the effective and efficient use of tax payer
dollars; compliance with state, local, and other
accounting and reporting requirements; and
adherence to the will of California voters and
Proposition 10.
Create a new strategic plan that identifies specific
goals, objectives, outcomes, and the particular
activities, plans and strategies that will be
employed to achieve them.
Create a new fiscal strategic plan/business plan
that ensures long-term stability and identifies
specific investment strategies to achieve results.
Program Evaluation and Research
Provide greater access and transparency to
interested parties by publishing data, results, and
outcomes on an ongoing basis on the
Commission’s website and other direct
communications venues.
Revise current set of program indicators that track
results so that they are easier to gather and better
communicate, and more accurately reflect, the
desired results that are hoped to be achieved.
Research and present various alternative
strategies for funding in preparation for the 2014
Commission Strategic Plan.
Children's Wellness and Support
Increase First 5 staff knowledge, strategies, and
skills in meeting funded scopes of work as well as
overall program and agency performance, staff will
participate in trainings on the following topics:
digesting data, using evaluation within contracts,
and the use of our Contract Monitoring Guide.
Increase First 5 funded agency knowledge,
strategies, and skills in meeting funded scopes of
work as well as overall program and agency
performance funded partners through technical
assistance and training.
Oversee and facilitate consortia of early care and
education stakeholders in establishing a Quality
Rating and Improvement System funded through
the federal Race to the Top Early Learning
Challenge grant in order to improve access to
quality early care and education, especially in high
need communities.
Administration & Support
Administrative staff will assume primary
responsibility for data entry and updating the
Department’s new weights and measures
database. Internal procedures will be
implemented that will shift this workload from
inspectors to Administrative Office Professionals
(AOPs), allowing inspectors to increase time spent
on activities requiring licensing. This shift will also
allow the Department to provide better customer
service by having business profiles and invoices
updated in a more timely manner.
Administrative staff will train agriculture
businesses in the use of two online systems:
CalAgPermits for pesticide use reporting and the
Phytosanitary Certificate Issuance and Tracking
(PCIT) system for requesting Phytosanitary
certificates. Administrative staff will contact
interested businesses and will conduct training
either over the phone, at the Department’s
facilities, or at the business location. The trainings
will allow the agriculture industry to take
advantage of more efficient technologies while
allowing biologists to increase time on activities
requiring licensing.
Agriculture
The Department will review the fees it charges for
Phytosanitary certification and recommend any
adjustments to achieve full cost recovery. This
review is necessitated by the continued need for
inspections to certify exports of agricultural
products to Canada and Mexico. These activities
were previously funded by a contract with the
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Federal support for this program has been
eliminated, but the workload and its importance to
the agriculture industry continues. The industry’s
increased use of the PCIT program to submit
certification applications will result in efficiencies
to the department that will help minimize any fee
increase.
The Department will look for opportunities to
partner with the Public Works Department with
regard to the control or eradication of specific
noxious weeds on County-maintained property.
The Department’s weed management specialist
will communicate with Public Works staff to
identify areas where a combined effort would
benefit both departments. Efficiencies in the use
of staff and equipment are expected.
Weights & Measures
Pursue developing a working partnership with the
District Attorney’s office in the area of weights and
measures violations. The weights and measures
deputy will regularly communicate with staff from
the District Attorney’s office to explore serious
consumer protection violations that might lead to
prosecution. Often, these are situations that are
found to occur Statewide and involve several
counties working together to develop a case.
These cases result in a more effective and efficient
use of County resources with far-reaching impacts.
Administration & Support
? Develop Public Records Act (PRA) request
process that will streamline research and
response, and document all requests.
Responding to PRA requests often requires
extensive staff time with a short turnaround.
The Department will evaluate its records and
create a more efficient process.
? Continue development of mobile office tools to
enhance productivity for field staff in building,
grading, petroleum, and permit compliance
inspections. These tools leverage smart phone
and other mobile technologies now common in
the market.
? Provide comprehensive workload and
management tools for planning and
telecommunications permit compliance
activities. Planning and telecommunication
projects are often approved with both shortand
long-term construction and operation
monitoring requirements. This project will
streamline this work and increase staff
efficiency.
Permitting
? Review and update the procedures and
oversight mechanisms for the permit
compliance program countywide. This will
ensure projects are built according to approved
plans and that conditions implementing the
County’s Comprehensive Plan are completed.
? Assist Public Works Clean Water Division in
developing procedures to implement the hydromodification
regulations adopted by the
Regional Water Quality Control Board. This will
assist project applicants in compliance with the
new regulations.
? Conduct simulated disaster training sessions to
test current procedures and update current
documentation for conducting damage
assessments following natural disasters. This
project will ensure the Department remains
ready to assist its constituents in the postdisaster
recovery process.
? Complete the regulatory audit of the oversight
of the County’s onshore petroleum operations
and address any gaps or overlaps in regulations
through ordinance amendments and process
changes. This project will ensure complete and
efficient handling of onshore petroleum
operations.
Coastal Mitigation
? Administer the Coastal Resource Enhancement
Fund Grant Program by conducting the
competitive grant cycle process. The grants
fund acquisition of coastal properties for
recreation and conservation purposes as well as
various coastal projects.
? Oversee grants funded through the Coastal
Resource Enhancement Fund to ensure that the
projects comply with their contracts and
provide expected public benefits.
Code Enforcement
? Update the Administrative Fine Ordinance and
Codes to streamline code enforcement
procedures. The changes would make rules for
code enforcement, liens, fines, and appeals
consistent for building and planning. These
changes will simplify the code process for both
property owners and staff.
Long Range Planning
? Complete adoption of the Summerland
Community Plan that addresses visual
resources, design guidelines, and circulation;
the Mission Canyon Community Plan that
addresses design guidelines, fire protection,
and transportation; and the Isla Vista Master
Plan that addresses mixed use zoning,
recreation, and transportation. These projects
update the land use plans for the respective
communities.
? Complete adoption of the Energy and Climate
Action Plan to reduce the County’s greenhouse
gas emissions consistent with State Law.
? Complete the update of the winery ordinance
to streamline the permitting process through
the clarification of standards and addressing
neighborhood impacts.
? Complete the environmental review for the
Gaviota Community Plan and the Eastern Goleta
Valley Community Plan.
? Pursue grants to fund additional long range
planning work prioritized in the work program.
This will potentially provide for additional funds
to work on Board and community priority
projects.
Administration & Support
? Complete organizational issues associated
with the disaster recovery process and Public
Works disaster response.
? Re-assess duties and structure for Department
safety program.
? Explore outreach opportunities to the various
target audiences in the community such as
Facebook and other social media outlets.
? Streamline and improve Board letter process
and quality control.
Transportation
? Continue to work on addressing deferred
maintenance backlog and long term funding
stability.
? Create coordinated disaster response process
following Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) reimbursement
guidelines.
? Develop and begin implementation of
strategies for all Transportation Improvement
Programs (TIP) updates.
Surveyor
? Continue developing field surveying reference
guide to achieve consistency and
interoperability between field crews using
different equipment.
? Increase number, completeness, and
consistency of dataset available to the general
public and professional surveyors using an
interactive Geographic Information System
(GIS) as the primary customer service tool.
? Complete Flood Control Right of Way
Application to increase efficiency of right of
way determinations.
Water Resources/Flood Control
? Secure 10 Year Maintenance Regional General
Permit to allow creek and debris basins
maintenance, reducing flood hazards.
? Develop application for Public access to
rainfall network.
? Integrate new Flood Control Property
Database / Viewer into Division Operations.
? Provide access to Flood Control District’s
historical aerial library on the internet for
public use.
Resource Recovery & Waste Management
? Continued project/process management of the
development of the Resource Recovery
Conversion Technology (CT) project at Tajiguas
including preparation of necessary documents,
review of financial and technical information,
and completing environmental review.
? Review and implementation of food waste
collection program, if feasible, to be offered to
large commercial generators of food waste.
? Preparation and distribution of more
comprehensive education campaign of the
County’s solid waste management programs.
? Construct the Tajiguas Landfill Hydrogen
Sulfide (H2S) Treatment System.
Administration & Support
In the next fiscal year, the Administration and
Support division will complete projects and
explore new opportunities for increasing revenues
for the Department.
• Complete the development of a management
plan for habitat conservation at the San
Marcos Preserve.
• Explore the feasibility of establishing revenue
generating special events similar to the annual
Trout Derby at Cachuma Lake.
Parks & Open Spaces
The Parks division will improve public access and
user experience at County Parks.
• Expand the online reservation system to allow
campers to plan further in advance and secure
a camping facility of their choice.
• Work with Vandenberg Air Force Base and the
Pacific Railroad to obtain permits, design and
replace the only fresh water supply line to the
Jalama camping park.
• Design and upgrade Arroyo Burro restrooms
with input from affected parties to better
serve the public.
• Replace showers at Live Oak camp ground.
• Update Jalama Beach Park Master Plan to
include accommodations (either cabins or
yurts) to provide additional facilities for the
public.
• Implement Countywide safety inspection
program for County parks and open spaces to
ensure health and safety of park visitors.
Housing & Community Development
The Housing and Community Development division
will continue to administer various federal, state,
and local funding sources to provide public
services for eligible populations, including
homeless services, affordable housing, public
infrastructure development and renovation, and
community-wide building energy efficiency
services.
• Initiate new affordable housing monitoring
program using contract services to enhance
staff’s data collection and inspection circuit of
HOME units as required for U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
regulatory compliance.
• Continue implementation of Countywide
Homeless Management Information System
(HMIS) software to collect data and evaluate
the quality of service provided to
homelessness assistance and prevention
programs.
• Continue to collect data regarding homeless
needs and services that will benefit the
Continuum of Care Program; provide analysis
to decision makers and stakeholders and begin
early planning for next biennial homeless
count in 2015.
• Improve public Notices of Funding Available
(NOFA), technical assistance provided to
applicants, and selection of projects for
funding for the Action Plan which comply with
federal regulations, including the timely
expenditure of federal grant funds as required
by HUD.
• Continue emPowerSBC outreach/education,
workforce development, energy advising, and
financial incentive services beyond August
2013 grant deadlines and expand services to
Tri-County pending Board’s acceptance of new
funding contracts.
Community Support
Arts
• Complete Percent for Art Project historic
painting installation for the Public Defenders
building in the County Courthouse lobby by
June 2014.
• Complete updated Santa Barbara Public Art
DVD in High Definition and Blu-ray format to
include significant public art projects
completed since 2009 such as the Santa
Barbara New Airport Terminal.
• Organize and promote an exhibition for 2014 in
memory of the late Barry Berkus, showcasing
the County’s Berkus Family Collection
juxtaposed with new artists from the Tri-
Counties.
• Continue to partner with the Bowl Foundation
to promote arts outreach to rural and
underserved communities and institute a grant
reporting system to measure the direct impact
of Community Arts Grants on communities.
• Continue to promote and increase community
support and engagement in the programs
such as Poetry Out Loud and Pianos on State
Street project.
Libraries
• Establish quarterly budget reports from all
three County library zones.
• Explore the development of a marketing
identity for the County library system.
? Manage the A-C office effectively by submission
of timely budgets that:
o Include the resources necessary to carry out
the duties of the office
o Recruit and hire well qualified staff
o Encourage staff performance
o Support staff training
o Provide modern technology
o Promote employee health, wellness, and
quality of life
Audit Services
? Focus on completing mandated audits, training
staff, and provide enhanced reporting to the
Board of Supervisors.
? Assist the County Executive Office in the
implementation of the contract monitoring
policy including countywide training and
deployment of automation tools.
? Complete the forensic audit of Lompoc Housing
and Community Development Corporation
(LHCDC).
Accounting Services
Applications Development and Systems
? Implementation of the GRM Property Tax
System will be the division’s top priority.
? Maintain and enhance the 65 applications in the
A-C that serve multiple departments and county
agencies.
? Automate the County operating budget plans.
? Provide oversight and development of a web
based countywide time capture system.
Property Tax Administration
? Complete implementation of the RDA
dissolution process.
? Distribute $690 million in property taxes to
cities, county, schools, special districts, and RDA
successor agencies.
? Provide subject matter expertise for the GRM
Property Tax System project.
Payroll Operations
? Make timely, accurate, and efficient payments
of payroll and related benefits to our
workforce.
? Provide subject matter expertise for the multiyear
conversion of the time capture system,
Employee Self-Service and Department
Employee Network.
? Update policies, procedures, and incorporate
an active training program to assure full
compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
? Develop a succession plan to build a division for
the future.
Financial Accounting and Customer Support
? Validate, process, and record all annual general
ledger accounting transactions including a high
volume of deposit entries, journal entries, and
over 125,000 claim payments.
? Respond to customer service requests in a
timely and efficient manner.
Advanced and Specialty Accounting
? Provide on-going accounting, grant compliance,
and claiming for the new Northern Branch Jail
project.
? Support and enhance the County’s contract
review process.
? Assist departments and agencies in the
complex allocations of inter-agency revenues
and taxes.
Financial Reporting
? Prepare timely and accurate financial
documents that include the County’s
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report,
County Budget, Cost Allocation Plan, and a
variety of financial reporting and compliance
documents to State Agencies.
? Provide the Board of Supervisors, CEO, and
management with the financial information
necessary to make decisions that impact
services to the community.
? Implement significant new GASB reporting
pronouncements.
? Transform the budget process away from a
single year budget to a multi-year focus;
incorporating a financial planning cycle that
includes:
o a long term strategic plan
o a five year financial forecast
o a two year operational plan
o a single year legally required adopted
budget
Administration & Support
? Prepare, monitor, and execute a FY 2013-14
Budget in support of the Department’s FY 2013-
14 goals and objectives.
? Provide administrative support in the timely
recruitment of new staff as attrition occurs to
minimize impact on service levels and ensure
business continuity.
Elections
? Conduct the election canvass and certify the
election results by the 28th day after each
election for the June 2014 Primary and the
November 2014 General Elections. Through
voter outreach and support, materially maintain
or increase the voter turnout rate in the last
comparable election.
? Implement the electronic submittal of Fair
Political Practice Campaign Statements,
Campaign Financial Disclosure Filings, and
Statements of Economic Interest Filings
allowing filers to access and modify their
previous filings for the current year and
creating efficiencies for the Department in
processing the filings.
? Continue monitoring the availability and
certification of new vote tabulation and vote by
mail processing systems, with the goal of
testing and acquiring new systems for
implementation and use in June 2016.
Clerk-Recorder
? Manage the increased number of document
recordings and record 100% percent of the
documents within the same business day.
? Expand the number of electronically recorded
documents using the electronic recording
delivery system known as SECURE by
outreaching to existing customers and
expanding on the type of documents able to be
processed through the system, which is a more
efficient process of recording documents and
creates same day return of documents to
customers.
Assessor
? Complete 97 percent of all secured and
unsecured assessment work items by close of
the annual tax roll (July 1) to create the
assessment roll which is the basis for property
tax revenue collected to fund public services.
? Implement and go-live on the new Colorado
CustomWare vendor developed property tax
assessment and valuation system known as
RealWare and Matix, by June/July 2014.
Central Services
? In an effort to enhance the Local Vendor
Outreach Program, perform additional
outreach training to educate local vendors on
how to do business with the County.
Capital Improvements
? Complete the revised Space Policy and update
the 2006-2011 Space Utilization Study.
Establish a Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) requirement (i.e. a minimum level of sustainability features that
are incorporated into the design) for new
County buildings and remodels of County
space over a certain size.
? Complete the schematic design of the new
North County Jail to be funded primarily by an
AB 900 Grant.
Facilities & Land Management
? Through the Deferred Maintenance program,
begin phase 3 of the Historic County
Courthouse heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC) upgrades. Replace Health
Care Services Building 4 cafeteria roof and
install roof coating on Building C of the Santa
Maria Government Center.
? Facilities Division will begin converting from
paper printed work orders to handheld
devices.
Fleet Operations
? Work with County departments to further
improve fleet “Right Sizing”:
o Reduce the total of vehicles owned by
the organization.
o Ensure that vehicles being used by our
employees are the appropriate size
for the job being performed.
Information & Communications Technology
? Complete a five year plan for the
communications network covering: the
planned use of fiber, leased lines, wireless,
microwave, and radio technologies.
? Complete the upgrade of the phone system to
utilize Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
technologies.
? Upgrade the voicemail system and implement
a Unified Communication and Collaboration
strategy to support instant messaging,
desktop sharing, audio and video
conferencing.
? Redesign the County internet site to provide
enhanced mobile device support.
Administration & Support
The TTCPA will analyze the feasibility of refunding
prior year debt issuances. Potential savings from
this refinancing would be achieved through lower
interest rates.
Treasury
County revenues are currently processed utilizing
paper deposit tickets which are manually entered
into the TTC cashiering system. A file is then
created and uploaded to the Auditor-Controller
financial system. The Treasury Program will
evaluate and analyze the cost/benefit of
developing an electronic deposit ticket. This
enhancement will serve County departments and
agencies. It will also facilitate the recording of
revenue into the County’s financial system in a
timelier manner.
Tax & Collections
In early FY 2013-14, the TTCPA will complete
preparations for implementation of the new
property tax system including: data conversion,
systems interfaces, functional design and user
testing. It will take a significantly longer period for
full system implementation to maximize the
efficiencies and outcomes of a new system. This
project will also need to interface to the new
Property Tax Assessment Systems to be installed
by the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor.
Public Assistance
A detailed study of the operating costs of the
Public Guardian will be performed to revise base
fees. Compensation for the Public Guardian is
based on reasonableness commensurate with the
value of the service provided which include: the
costs of referral, investigation and assessment,
charges for conservatorship of the person and
conservatorship of the estate.
Support: Other Governments & Organizations
Continue the current level of support of $1 million
to the Children’s Healthcare Initiative.
Reserved & Committed Funds
? Continue to fund the New Jail Operations fund
in the amounts of $3.3 million in FY 2013-14 and
$4.6 million in FY 2014-15.
? Fund necessary capital/infrastructure projects
based on identified needs, priorities, and
available funding sources.
? Identify County deferred maintenance projects
in the General Services, Public Works, and the
Parks Division of Community Services
Departments and develop a long term funding
plan to address these needs.
? Continue to build the County’s Strategic
Reserve.
Ancillary Services
? Continue to support the Central Coast Coalition
on Homelessness and the South Coast Gang
Task Force projects at the current level of
funding.
Northern Branch Jail Project
? Complete the development of the Architectural
Program and Design Schematics for the
Northern Branch Jail.
? Begin the construction award process for the
Northern Branch Jail.
? Refine the Northern Branch Jail operating cost
estimates after the design phase is completed
and update the adequacy of the cash flow in
the existing New Jail Operations Fund plan.
Discretionary Fund Balance Components
The information below describes the fund balance
accounts on the following page:
Capital: Provides one-time funds to support
unexpected and unbudgeted capital projects that
arise during the fiscal years.
Roads: This fund balance account supplements
other Roads revenues for additional maintenance
funding. As identified in the Public Works Road
Maintenance Annual Plan, additional funding is
needed to prevent further deterioration of our
road infrastructure. These funds provide only a
portion of what is needed and a comprehensive
long term funding plan for deferred maintenance,
including the Roads fund, is planned to be
developed in FY 2013-14.
Litigation: This contains funds for potential
litigation settlements not covered by the County
Liability Self-Insurance Fund, giving the County the
ability to address unforeseen settlements without
negatively impacting the adopted Operating
Budget.
Salary and Benefits Reductions: Contains savings
set aside from FY 2011-12 concession savings which
are anticipated to be needed to balance FY 2014-15.
Deferred Maintenance & Repair: Designated for
the backlog of deferred maintenance and repairs
at County buildings and parks.
Audit Exceptions: This reserve was originally
established in FY 2007-08 to address potential
audit exceptions in the Alcohol, Drug and Mental
Health Services (ADMHS) Department associated
with Cost Report Settlements and subsequently
was increased to include the non-General Fund
portion of the Public Health Department’s Multiagency
Integrated System of Care (MISC) program.
The projected balance of $2.2 million at June 30,
2013 represents the remaining reserve for these
estimated prior liabilities, primarily covering FY
2006-07 through FY 2008-09 MISC program. The
Strategic Reserve has been identified as the source
for the General Fund portion of the MISC liability,
currently estimated at $2.8 million. ADMHS is
subject to audit and potential adjustments for FY
2006-07 through the most recently completed
fiscal year, as these audits have not yet occurred.
New Jail Operations: This fund was established in
FY 2011-12 to set aside General Funds for the
ongoing operations of the new jail, estimated to
complete construction in 2017. Each year an
increased amount of General Funds will be set
aside so that when the jail is operational, the
ongoing annual cost of operations will be fully
funded with a combination of established annual
General Fund Contribution and use of funds from
this New Jail Operations fund.
Program Restoration: Designated to fund
departmental programs which are a priority for the
Board of Supervisors that would otherwise be
reduced or eliminated.
Contingency: Used to cover additional unforeseen
financial situations during the fiscal year that
cannot be covered by a department’s existing
budget.
Strategic Reserve: In FY 1997-98, the Board
established a goal of a $25 million Strategic
Reserve. Subsequently, a Budget Policy was
established to have an amount equal to
approximately 30 days of operating revenue or
about $28 million. The FY 2012-13 year end
Strategic Reserve is projected to be $26.2 million,
after the transfer of $5.3 million to the New Jail
Construction Fund. This balance will be adjusted
based on the FY 2012-13 year end results.

Continue to provide outstanding customer support
to constituents, departments and Board offices.
