Jail Diversion and Behavioral
Health Services Programming
The Board of Supervisors approved the creation of a Jail
Diversion and Behavioral Health Subcommittee of the
Re-Entry Network to consider best practices and
programs that would divert individuals from being
detained at the County's jails. This effort will identify
strategies for preventing individuals with mental health
Accessing Education, Employment, Family
Reunification, Health & Well-Being, and Legal
Services
136
Enrolled in Housing Programs 83
Accessing Faith-Based Reentry Resource Centers 106
SERVICES
NUMBER OF
UNIQUE
CLIENTS
24
Introduction County of Santa Clara
Public Safety Realignment Program (AB 109) & Reentry Services FY 16-17 Recommended Budget
needs from becoming offenders and identify gaps and
strategies for community based treatment solutions for
individuals with mental health and substance use
problems who have a history of, or are at risk of
offending. Establishing this Subcommittee and
highlighting the progress that the County has made
through Reentry, the County gained the opportunity to
participate in a national initiative called Stepping Up
initiative convened by the National Association of
Counties, the Council of State Governments Justice
Center and the American Psychiatric Foundation to
help our efforts to reduce the number of adults with
mental and co-occurring substance use disorders in
jails.
Diverting low-level nonviolent offenders with mental
illness and/or substance abuse away from jails toward
more appropriate community-based mental health
treatment enhances public safety by addressing repeat
offenders, provides judges, prosecutors, and law
enforcement agencies with alternatives to
incarceration.
In order to ensure that the County implements an
effective Jail Diversion Program, planning must be
extensive and will rely on examining the potential
points of intercept for diverting persons with serious
mental illness and/or chronic substance dependencies.
Setting aside $2 million in AB 109 funding is the
County's first initial investment towards this effort and
will provide funding to support recommendations from
the Jail Diversion and Behavioral Health Subcommittee
and lessons learned from the Stepping Up initiative. In
FY 16-17 it is anticipated that the County will pilot new
diversion programs that will target specific mentally ill
individuals at key criminal justice intercepts such as at
the pre-arrest stage and jail booking.
Reentry Programming at Elmwood and Main Jail
On February 9, 2016 the Board of Supervisors approved
five service agreements to support in-custody reentry
services in the area of job readiness and employment
development training, family reunification and support,
and health and well-being for custodial adults. Services
are in place and will continue through June 30, 2018.
The Department of Correction and the Probation
Department will identify and refer individuals to incustody
reentry services and programming. The target
population for services focuses on inmates in minimum
and medium security level housing units identified by
Rehabilitation Officers. In the minimum security level
housing unit, the target is to provide services to a
minimum of 240 females and 1,200 males annually. In
the medium security level housing units, the target is to
provide services to a minimum of 240 females and 800
males annually.
The Office of Reentry Services (ORS) and the
Department of Correction worked collaboratively to
negotiate the scope of services, deliverables, and
performance standards with selected agencies. ORS will
monitor and track agencies for compliance with
contractual requirements, quality of services,
operational capacity, number of participants enrolled in
programs, demographic information for participants,
and timely submission of reports. ORS will work with
the Department of Correction and selected vendors to
evaluate the capacity to expand in-custody reentry
services to the Main Jail.
Muriel Wright Residential Treatment
Nationally, jails are becoming some of the largest
available mental health facilities in the country.
Currently, an overwhelming majority of inmates in
Santa Clara County jails suffer from mental health and
substance use problems and, in many cases, their
criminogenic behaviors are a consequence of their
mental illnesses and/or substance use problems. In a
recent study, 24% of the jail population were identified
as seriously mentally ill, with the most serious charge
being a misdemeanor. A safer, and a more dignified and
sustainable option for helping mentally ill offenders is in
community based treatment which would, in turn, also
reduce the costs of incarceration and improve offender
outcomes.
The Administration recommends the conversion and
utilization of a portion of the Muriel Wright Center to
establish a residential treatment facility. The Muriel
Wright Center, built in 1963, served young boys and girls
committed by the Juvenile Justice Court. Due to
declining census at the Muriel Wright Center, the
Probation Department transferred the remaining
clients to James Ranch and ceased operations in
FY 12-13. The recommended action will provide
supervision and services such as mental health and
substance abuse use treatment, motivational
interviewing, cognitive behavioral therapy, medication
evaluations, crisis intervention services,
employment/vocational training, and provision of aftercare
services. The program will serve adult male and female offenders ages 18 and over that are residents of
Santa Clara County with chronic mental health illness
and substance abuse conditions that are recently
released from jail.
Reentry Housing
One of the goals of AB 109 and the County's Adult
Reentry Strategic Plan is to fund short and long-term
affordable housing for formerly incarcerated individuals
who are at risk of recidivating in Santa Clara County.
The FY 13-14 Budget allocated $4 million from the
FY 12-13 AB 109 Fund Balance towards housing
projects for reentry clients. In February 2016, the Board
of Supervisors approved the transfer of the remaining
funds from the AB 109 Reserve to fully fund the existing
reentry housing programs for the remainder of FY 15-16
and FY 16-17. These funds are not sufficient to meet the
demand of clients. In order to meet the needs of clients
in mental health or substance abuse treatment centers
who need permanent supportive housing, an allocation
of $1,500,000 is recommended to develop additional
housing capacity. Specific housing projects will be
developed during FY 16-17 and brought back to the
Board of Supervisors. Examples of housing projects are
tenant-based rental, acquisition of housing units,
supported shelter beds, and specialized housing
programs for individuals currently enrolled or existing
County diversion programs.
In FY 16-17, the Office of Reentry Services will continue
to implement the housing plan and work with reentry
stakeholders to enhance existing strategies for
permanent supportive housing and identify new
housing slots.
Community and Peer Navigators
for Reentry Clients
Community and peer navigators are critical to improve
the continuity of care between jail and the community
and offers an unparalleled opportunity to foster
collaboration between law enforcement agencies, faithbased
organizations and direct service providers.
Community health workers provide case management
services, home visits, chronic case management
education, medication reconciliation, and make
primary care and specialty medical appointments. Peer
support workers provide support and navigation to
community services for reentry clients by providing
peer assistance and mentoring on a one-to-one basis,
assist with pre-release support and linkage to
community resources. The FY 16-17 Recommended
Budget adds an additional two community health
workers to support the Valley Homeless Healthcare
Program's Medical Mobile Unit at the Reentry Resource
Center and an additional two peer support workers to
support and link individuals released from custody to
Faith-based resource centers and other community
resources. Effective community peer support will be a
priority as the County expands treatment and program
services.
Audio Visual Renovation Project
During FY 16-17, renovations will begin to the Board
Chambers Audio Visual (AV) control room and storage
area, as well as upgrades to the audiovisual systems
located in the Issac Newton Senter auditorium, and
Room 157. The renovations will bring the Board
Chambers and the sound room into compliance with
the 2013 California Title 24 Building Codes, the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the
industry's best practices and standards. The upgrades to
the sound room equipment will bring units and
connections up to current standards, and installation of
an uninterrupted power supply (UPS) system will
ensure the equipment continues to operate in the event
of power outage. As part of the renovation is the
creation of a dedicated space for translators, which is in
adherence with the Board of Supervisors’ Language
Access Policy. These renovations and upgrades will
ensure that the increased demands placed on the
audiovisual functions at meetings taking place in the
Board Chambers as well as in the Issac Newton Senter
auditorium and Room 157 will be successfully met.
Assessment Appeals
An ongoing challenge for the Department is to finalize
the Assessment Appeals Automation contract and to
begin implementation. The project started in 2010, after
a series of release delays and other issues, the vendor
selected to develop both the Assessor's new property
assessment computer system and the Clerk of the
Board's module for management of assessment appeals
opted to terminate its contracts with the County. This
left both the Assessor and Clerk of the Board projects on
hold pending determination of appropriate options and
course of action. Since the Clerk of the Board's relatively
small appeal system is an extension of the Assessor's
larger property assessment system, no decision on
strategy for automating the appeals process will be
made until the Assessor determines a course of action
for their system. At the beginning of 2015, both the Clerk
of the Board and the Assessor learned of and explored a
potential vendor who would be able to support both
departments with an automated appeals system. The
Clerk’s Office and the Assessors Office consulted with
Information Services Department and the Procurement
Department to determine the best strategies moving
forward. A Request for Proposal is expected to finalize
with a selected vendor by the end of FY 15 -16, with
implementation beginning in FY 16-17.
Reconfiguration
The ongoing reconfiguration of the Department’s office
space is to maximize functionality and create additional
work space. During FY 15-16, the space-saver filing
system was removed, with the flooring beneath repaired
and carpet tiles installed, creating additional office
space and alleviating some of the work space issue.
Process Improvement
During FY 15-16, the Department, working with
consultants, identified multiple process improvement
projects. Based on a thorough review, three process
improvement projects emerged as the first to be
addressed: Macro - mapping of the Department, a
redesign effort in building the Board of Supervisors' (BOS) agenda and documentation within the
Department, and a cross - departmental process
project.
The Macro - mapping entailed the creation of a graphic
map of the work processes within all four individual
Units, including management and support activities
within the Department that enables the core work
activities. This allowed for an objective analysis to
determine the areas most in need of process
improvement. Documentation within the Department
exists in a wide variety of formats, ranging from flow
charts to binders of loose leaf notes. With the guidance
and coaching of the consultants a new template for
documentation is being used by all of the staffed areas.
This effort will continue as staff time permits, and the
Department will continue to implement this new
strategy as new processes and procedures occur.
The consultants worked with the Board Operations
Unit to map out the current agenda -building process,
locate the flaws in the design and identify missing
components required for a more robust process. This
process is extensive, affecting every department in the
County in varying degrees, with the overall complexity
of the process being commensurate with the scope.
Thus, the process improvement project for building the
BOS agenda has the Board Operations Unit partnering
with various stakeholder departments throughout the
County, under the Center for Leadership and
Transformation. They are addressing the agenda
process along two tracks, the first is the creation,
refinement, and distribution of internal training
materials. This is primarily to create and disseminate
training materials in order to improve and enhance the
creation of the BOS Agenda. The second track is the
review of roles and responsibilities of those involved in
the process, from beginning to end. The overall
outcome being increased collaboration of process
partners, as well as opportunities for process
improvement.
Homelessness
The CEO plays a leadership role in developing a
supportive housing system that prevents homelessness
or makes episodes of homelessness rare, brief and nonrecurring.
From a policy perspective, the Office has
supported the Board of Supervisors in establishing that
housing the special needs populations is a County
service and therefore the County must take an active
role in developing, financing and supporting various
types of affordable housing for the populations that we
serve. The County's priorities are to increase the supply
of housing that is affordable to extremely low income
populations, increase the scope and breadth of
supportive housing for the special needs populations,
and to improve coordination and collaboration among
the County, the cities, other governmental agencies and
the affordable housing community.
The Office maintains its strategic leadership role
through the Office's participation on the Destination:
Home Leadership Board and the local Continuum of
Care Board. The Office marshals the County's resources
to support the Community Plan to End Homelessness,
the goal of creating 6,000 housing opportunities for
homeless persons and the commitment to end veteran
homelessness.
In FY 16-17, the Office of Supportive Housing (OSH) will
complete its transition from the Behavioral Health
Services Department to the Office of the County
Executive. From an organizational perspective, the
transition solidifies OSH’s role in ensuring that
departmental and inter-departmental programs and
policies are mutually reinforcing and support the
County's housing priorities.
Operational Area Emergency Management
Planning
This year, under the direction of the County Executive,
the Office of Emergency Services played a pivotal role in
helping to prepare for Super Bowl 50. At the direction of
the County Executive, the Op Area Emergency
Operations Center was activated to support Super Bowl
related events in the City of San Jose, City of Palo Alto,
and City of Mountain View. The Op Area EOC was
staffed will over 100 personnel representing County,
State and Federal agencies prepared to support
incidents Countywide. The County continues to take a
proactive approach to the adherent challenges of
emergency management with efforts under way to
better address community outreach communications,
social media, public information and warning. This
specific area of emergency management continues to
be a challenge nationwide for communities during
emergencies and disasters. Widely available technology
in the hand of the public often out paces the verification
of credible and timely information dissemination during
the first critical hours of the emergency. Developing and
implementing day to day joint information systems are vital to preparing in advance of emergencies and
disasters. Practicing, evaluating and maintaining our
joint information systems is essential every day to the
safety of the community. The Office of Emergency
Services continues to develop strategies to address the
challenges of community outreach communications,
social media, public information and warning
throughout the County.
Unaccompanied Minors and Immigrant Relations
The Board of Supervisors has recognized the
humanitarian crisis currently in our nation's border. The
Board allocated funding to provide legal services in
immigration cases and proceedings involving
Unaccompanied Minors and Families with Children.
The Office of Immigrant Relations partnered with
community partners to provide legal representation to
Unaccompanied Minors and Families. Reports recently
released indicate an increase in the number of
unaccompanied minors being released to sponsors. The
County of Santa Clara ranked fourth in California
counties where minors are being released, highlighting
an increase in the number of children and families
needing legal assistance. The County continues to
support its partnership with these legal providers in
FY 16-17 so these agencies can continue to be
responsive and serve the increasing levels of this
population and thereby minimize the number of new
children and families appearing in Immigration court
without legal representation.
The California Legislation enacted AB 90, which
expands eligibility of the Immigrant Juvenile Status
program to youth under the age of 21. The program
prior to the enactment of AB 90 only covered those
under the age of 18. This expansion allows for a higher
number of youth to receive a permanent immigration
status under this program which positively impacts this
population, however it creates a higher level of need as
demand for legal representation increases.
County Civic Center Master
Planning and Development
With the County's acquisition of the former San Jose
City Hall site and the no-cost Public Benefit Conveyance
of the former Private George L. Richey U. S. Army
Reserve site from the Federal Department of Defense,
the County continues its master planning process to reevaluate
the Civic Center Campus and its relationship
to the communities it serves.
The Civic Center encompasses 55 acres and includes
County operations, administration, judicial and
correctional uses. Over half the building stock is more
than 40 years old, and many of those buildings are in
need of significant upgrades. Despite some of the Civic
Center site's constraints, the size of the site and its
proximity to downtown San Jose, shopping, and access
to transit provides a good opportunity for the County to
create a sustainable, mixed-use, transit-oriented
development that will reshape the function and feel of
the Civic Center as well as benefit the surrounding
neighborhoods.
The County is working with Anderson Brule Architects
to assist in the development of a new service plan,
operational plan, adjacencies and program needs and
will be working collaboratively with Lowe Enterprises,
their consultants and other stakeholders to prepare a
comprehensive plan for a proposed new Law and
Justice Center as part of the first phase of the Civic
Center Master Plan.
Fairgrounds Master Planning
During FY 16-17 the Administration and the Board will
continue the process of master planning the future of
the County Fairgrounds. The County will evaluate
strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities that currently
exist at the Fairgrounds, as well as future development
potential. The Fairgrounds will be assessed against
current and best practices of fairgrounds management,
as well as promoting a discussion of benefits and tradeoffs
of alternative uses of its underutilized areas. The
process will continue the County's extensive
community and stakeholders' engagement process.
Discovery
It is critical that the Assessor's Office continually
discover businesses, homeowners, and charitable
organizations who have not been properly assessed. In
the coming fiscal year the Assessor's Office will be
launching several new tools to further enhance our
current extensive discovery efforts. Funded in part by
SCAPP, these efforts include:
¦ Creating an electronic system for incorporating
business license data directly from cities and sales
tax data from the BOE, so that new businesses are
made aware of their property tax filing responsibilities.
¦ Deploying current aerial photography with critical
orthographic photography and oblique images of the
entire county to locate properties that have unreported
new construction.
¦ Canvassing businesses to update our taxpayer databases
and improve our outreach activities. Working
with every city in Santa Clara County to electronically
receive building permits and associated documents.
¦ Utilizing skilled exemption investigators to perform
field inspections of properties owned or leased by
organizations that claim exempt status.
¦ Scrutinizing unrecorded changes of ownership by
legal entities, including corporate mergers and
acquisitions, to determine whether transactions are
re-assessable.
Appeals
The number of residential assessment appeals has
dropped 74% from 2009, the height of the great
recession. The Assessor's Office is working closely with
the Clerk of the Assessment Appeals Board (AAB) to
dramatically rethink the entire processes for managing
the appeals system and utilize new technologies. An
RFP was published in early February and both the Clerk
of the Board and the Assessor's Office will be jointly
evaluating potential vendors. Implementation of this
project during this period of reduced appeals will be
instrumental to providing better customer service,
especially for residential owners. We also anticipate
significant increases in efficiency and productivity for
both departments. Additional funding will likely be
required to implement a new appeals system.
Legislation: Maintaining Fair and Equitable
Assessment of Machinery and Equipment
(Business Personal Property)
Santa Clara County has the second-largest assessment
(behind Los Angeles County) of unsecured business
property. In 2015 the assessed value of unsecured
business property ($27.4 billion) was greater than the
total unsecured value in San Francisco, San Mateo and
Contra Costa counties combined. For these reasons, the
County is actively involved in addressing legislation
designed to hamper the Assessor's ability to assess
machinery and equipment.
Legislation: Commercial Aircraft - Maintaining
the Centralized Lead County Program
The current process for assessing and valuing
commercial aircraft was codified by an agreement
between assessors and the airline industry in 2005. The
agreement has been essential in maintaining uniform
valuations and audit processes of commercial aircraft
across several counties. The agreement includes a
125
County of Santa Clara Section 1: Finance and Government
FY 16-17 Recommended Budget Office of the Assessor
Section 1: Finance and
Government
centralized audit process designed to reduce the cost of
compliance by both airlines and assessors. The current
agreement is due to sunset at the end of 2016.
The California Assessors' Association (CAA)
recommends continuation of the existing process, and
Santa Clara County has supported its efforts to assess
airlines like all other business personal property, in a fair
and equitable manner. Unfortunately, the airline
industry's objective is to reduce their property taxes
even more than the current temporarily-reduced values
per the 2005 agreement.
Our CAA lobbyist has informed us that the airline
industry is seeking a special legislation to effectively
allow Trial de Novo for their industry. In 2001 and 2013
the County successfully stopped legislation known as
Trial de Novo, which would have enabled taxpayers to
appeal the valuation decisions of the AAB, de novo, to
Superior Court to be heard by judges with no valuation
experience. Judges are typically ill-equipped to hear
these disputes and by training are oriented toward
finding a compromise that may have no relationship to
the constitutional mandate to enroll market values.
Currently, only legal disputes arising from AAB
decisions can be heard in Superior Court.
Legislation: Timely Notification of Below-Market-
Rate (BMR) Homes
Assessors are required to consider the effect of
enforceable restrictions on a property's value. In the
case of low-income housing properties (also known as
below-market-rate, or BMR, properties), government
agencies execute contracts that restrict the use of the
land to owner-occupied housing that must be sold or
re-sold at affordable housing costs.
During the past several years, it has been increasingly
difficult for assessors to properly assess these belowmarket-
rate properties because property owners do not
always disclose the existence of a BMR contract on the
Preliminary Change of Ownership Report (PCOR) at the
time of transfer. The County Assessor has proposed, and
the CAA has adopted as a priority for passage,
legislation to require governmental agencies to notify
assessors by recording the contracts and providing
copies to assessors. Since many cities contract this
service to nonprofit agencies, this added requirement
should not pose a significant imposition. Moreover, it
will help the cities achieve their objective of assisting
low-income families with affordable housing.
The County currently has a hybrid model structure with
both centralized and decentralized procurement and
contracting. The centralized procurement processes are
conducted and managed by the Procurement
Department. The decentralized procurement processes
are conducted by the individual County Departments,
with policy oversight by the Office of Countywide
Contracting Management (OCCM) in the Office of the
County Executive. In addition, depending on the type of
contract, dollar value and the term of the contract,
contracts are executed by (1) the Board of Supervisors;
(2) the Director of Procurement, who acts as the
Purchasing Agent for the County; or (3) if there is a
delegation, a Department Head. The County's book of
business for contracting is extremely diverse. As an
example, the County's current active expenditure
contracts, which often span multiple years, total over
2,000 contracts and $2.3 billion.
The centralized process involves the procurement of
goods and related services, and non-professional
services for all County departments. The decentralized
process involves the procurement of professional
services and public works, as well as revenue
agreements, intergovernmental agreements, and other
contracts. The Board approved the creation of OCCM,
which is a unit within the Office of the County Executive
devoted to Countywide Contracting. The interim
purpose of OCCM is to focus on analytical work and
scoping activities related to bringing forward a more
comprehensive proposal for contracting compliance,
governance, and implementation activities, including
those related to Board policies and initiatives such as
the Living Wage Policy and Wage Theft Prevention
Policy.
The County is also currently implementing Ariba, a
cloud-based procure-to-pay software solution
Countywide, including purchasing, contracting, and
accounts payable functions. The core modules have
already been technically implemented and the
Procurement Department is in the process of rolling out
to the departments in a phased approach. As part of the
Ariba implementation, a top-to-bottom review of the
County's practices and workflows related to contracting
is required to ensure that the County incorporate best
practices into the Ariba workflows. The Ariba procureto-
pay system will ultimately affect all County
departments, and it will require changes in the daily
practices for staff who engage in the soliciting and
contracting functions.
Code Enforcement
Currently, the County faces a backlog of approximately
2,000 code enforcement cases, in addition to the
estimated 800 new cases added each year. As a result, a
unified approach in the development of more effective
procedures by the Department of Planning and
Development (DPD), County Executive, and other
County departments and agencies have been proposed
and adopted in the pursuit code violators.
Jail Related Issues
As a result of recent events within the Department of
Correction, the Office the County Counsel is
experiencing an overall increase in workload,
specifically in the following areas: Litigation, Labor and
Employment, Health and Hospital, Law and Justice,
General Government. As related legal issues arise,
staffing and resources will continue to be imperative to
ensure adequate representation of the County, and
various its various Departments. Of equal importance
will be the continued service of advising the Board of Supervisors regarding liability issues and resulting
implementation of systemic changes that are
determined.
Health and Hospital System
The implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
in January 2014, the numerous issues related to the
Health and Hospital system, recent issues involving
Custody Health, the provision of mental health services
to incarcerated individuals, and other Behavioral Health
matters have resulted in additional challenges for the
Department to effectively serve these clients. The
potential impact to the County, and its safety net for its
neediest and most vulnerable residents, resulting from
the sale of O'Connor and Saint Louise Hospitals is
another key issue that has involved and will continue to
involve significant staff resources. Other ongoing issues
include: operation of the Healthlink system, Medicaid
expansion under ACA, and issues surrounding the
County's 340B drug program. During the FY 15-16 Mid-
Year Budget an additional 2.5 FTE staff positions were
added to facilitate the increased workload demands of
this Unit.
California Public Records Act and
Electronic Discovery Requests
The County continues to experience a significant
volume of complex and extensive records requests,
under the California Public Records Act (CPRA),
California Government Code sections 6250 - 6270,
related to this is litigation discovery, particularly
requests for electronic records such as emails and other
documents. Most discovery requests involve assembling
and reviewing hundreds if not thousands of documents,
which is extremely time consuming and labor intensive.
The CPRA requires copies of most County records to be
provided to the requestor as soon as practicable. In
addition, the law requires public agencies to assist
members of the public to “make a focused and effective
request that reasonably describes an identifiable record
or records.” Complex CPRA requests have been made by
legal counsel involving current and potential litigation,
bargaining units in negotiations, political campaigns
and advisors, media outlets, vendors in competitive
situations, as well as the general public. A significant
amount of attorney and support staff time and
resources are allocated to compile and review records
and redact information that is not disclosable under a
variety of CPRA exceptions.
Office Technology
The Office of the County Counsel is a very technologydependent
environment, with attorneys, paralegals, and
support staff using computers for legal research,
preparation and electronic filing of court documents,
client and collaboration, case management, billing, as
well as other aspects of the Office's operations. The
increasing number of complex CPRA and Electronic
Discovery requests, which are very labor-intensive and
time-critical, has made the acquisition of additional
technology, software, and services to leverage staff
resources for the efficient processing and analysis of
data and documents a top priority. Over the past two
years, there has been major improvements to the
information technology infrastructure and systems.
These include installation of new computers, migration
to the County's active directory and cloud-based
Microsoft Outlook, and deployment of an upgrade to
the ProLaw case management and billing software.
Public Guardian
Key issues include the administration of mental health
conservatorships under the Lanterman-Petris-Short
Act (LPS), decedents' estates, and other estate matters.
The Office's Public Guardian/Administrator workload
has increased recently, due to media and Grand Jury
reports, homelessness, elder abuse issues, and the
increased number of accountings related to decedent
estates and conservatorships that must be filed with the
court. County Counsel staff is working with the client
department to address these concerns and to improve
services to affected individuals and families.
Child Dependency
The past two years has seen a significant increase in the
number of hearings, trials, and appeals in the juvenile
dependency courts, resulting in a major impact on the
Child Dependency Unit’s ability to provide legal support
to the Social Services Agency and Department of Family
and Children’s Services. In response to this, additional
staff was provided in FY 15-16, which increased the
Child Dependency Unit’s ability to adequately represent
the client.
Labor and Employment
Over the past few years there has been an increase in
the number and complexity of labor negotiations,
grievances, and arbitrations; Public Employment
Relations Board (PERB) and other administrative
hearings; Personnel Board hearings; discrimination complaints; labor related lawsuits, writs, and appeals;
and advice and training provided to County
departments and employees.
California Redevelopment Agency (RDA)
Dissolution
The Office of the County Counsel provides legal advice
and support to the Finance Agency, Controller-
Treasurer in carrying out legal responsibilities
associated with the dissolution of each of the nine
Redevelopment Agencies in Santa Clara County.
Additionally, the Office provides legal counsel and
representation on several related cases currently in
litigation, including appellate matters. It is anticipated
that Redevelopment dissolution will continue to require
a substantial amount of attorney and support-staff time
for the foreseeable future to ensure that the interests of
local taxing entities, including the County, are fairly
addressed. As the dissolution process continues and
evolves to include property management and
disposition issues, the County's legal obligations and
financial interests related to the dissolution of
redevelopment agencies remains.
Whistleblower Program
In April 2010, the County launched the 24/7
Whistleblower Program to provide the public and
County employees the ability to submit a confidential
report regarding suspected fraud, misuse or waste of
County resources or funds, or any perceived improper
activities by County officials, employees, and
contractors.
The Office of the County Counsel administers this
program and manages the receipt, acceptance,
investigation, documentation, and monitoring of
reported complaints. The Whistleblower Program
accepts reports 24 hours per day, 7 days a week, and 365
days per year. Many complaints are also investigated by
attorneys in the Office. If a complaint is sustained, the
Office may provide legal advice regarding actions
required to address issues identified in the investigation
of the complaint, including any changes that are
designed to prevent a recurrence of the event In
addition, the Office submits semiannual status reports
to the Board of Supervisors.
Administration of the Whistleblower Program requires
allocation of a substantial amount of departmental
resources to receive, process, and respond to the
complaints in a timely manner.
Impact Litigation and Social Justice
The Office of the County Counsel has been leading the
appellate team defending the $1.15 billion judgment
awarded by the trial court in December 2013 against
three lead paint manufacturers. Substantial staff time
and resources have been devoted to the appellate
process. In FY 15-16, the Office worked closely with
Administration and various County Departments to
implement the Pay for Success program, dedicating
considerable staff time in support of this and other
initiatives as they emerge. Recent initiatives that have
been on the forefront are: pay equity, wage theft, human
trafficking.
Process Improvement
The Social Services Agency & Child Dependency Unit
has formed a team specific to Child Dependency to
focus on process mapping, developing modified
procedures and deploying electronic court filings and
reporting. This is essential to meeting the new
requirements, going into effect the summer of 2016,
when the Family Court moves into its new facility. The
goal is to have a paperless system for documents related
to juvenile dependency matters. The process
improvement team is tasked with developing a
foundation and framework which the Office of the
County Counsel will emulate when implementing
similar electronic filing requirements in other practice
areas as determined by the Superior Court.
Legislation
New legislation implemented in 2015 and 2016
expanded opportunities for Santa Clara County voters
to participate in the election process. These expanded
opportunities are accompanied with state-mandated
increases in support and funding that the ROV must
provide.
Assembly Bill (AB) 683 requires counties providing
online Sample Ballot and Voter Information Pamphlets
(SBVIPs) to make documents accessible to voters with
disabilities, particularly those voters who are visually
impaired. The ROV is currently working with its SBVIP
vendor to implement this accessible format for the June
7, 2016, Presidential Primary Election.
Senate Bill (SB) 29, allows vote-by-mail (VBM) ballots to
be counted if they are postmarked on or before Election
Day and arrive within three days thereafter. AB 477
allows for VBM ballots received without a signature to
be deemed eligible to count if the voter signs the
identification envelope at the ROV Office before 5 p.m.
on the eighth day after the election. These new laws
together expand the vote tallying period and could
delay results in close races, given that the exact
numbers of outstanding ballots may remain uncertain
until these post-election deadlines have passed.
AB 363, a new law to be implemented in Santa Clara
County for the June 7, 2016, Presidential Primary
Election, allows the ROV to dispatch courier teams to
targeted polling places to retrieve ballots prior to the
close of the polls, in order to begin processing and
tallying ballots earlier on Election Night.
AB 554 authorizes students who are not U.S. citizens
but are lawfully admitted for permanent residence
status to serve as election officers at polling places. This
law expands the County’s ability to provide services to
voters requiring language assistance by expanding the
pool of eligible bilingual election officers.
VoteCal Statewide Voter Registration Database
The County of Santa Clara has successfully deployed
VoteCal, the system that will provide a single, uniform
registration database for the entire State. When fully
implemented, VoteCal will replace the 58 county
registration databases currently in use throughout the
State. A requirement of the federal Help America Vote
Act, VoteCal is part of a larger effort to help modernize
and reform the nation's voting processes. VoteCal will
improve service to the voters of California and the
County by allowing transfer of records between
counties, enable voters to find their polling places
online and check the status of their VBM and
provisional ballots. VoteCal is expected to become the
official system of record for voter registration in
California by June 30, 2016.
Same-Day Voter Registration
State law provides for conditional voter registration
(CVR), commonly known as same-day registration, to
take effect after the Secretary of State certifies that
VoteCal is online throughout the state. CVR will lead to
an increase in the number of provisional ballots cast,
which in turn will impact the post-election canvass
because every vote will need to be verified and
reconciled with election records. This change may
necessitate increased staffing and technological process
innovations in order to certify election results within the
statutory 30-day period.
158
Section 1: Finance and Government County of Santa Clara
Registrar of Voters FY 16-17 Recommended Budget
California New Motor Voter Act
The California New Motor Voter Act - AB 1461 -
provides for automatic voter registration from the
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV), while giving
citizens the choice of opting out. The DMV will
electronically provide the ROV records of each citizen
who receives an original, renewal of a driver's license or
state identification card. In 2017, the ROV will begin to
receive the first voters automatically registered using
this method.
Voting System
Santa Clara County's voting system, purchased in 2003,
is now over 12 years old and has reached its end of life
cycle. Because the voting system uses a central count
design, which requires all ballots voted at the polls to be
returned to the ROV's office to be tallied, the County of
Santa Clara regularly posts elections results later than
other counties using precinct count voting systems. The
County is currently preparing for the acquisition of a
new, modern system. This new system will facilitate
precinct scanning of ballots and make polling place
results available to the public at the close of polls, but
will also require additional warehousing space, voter
education, and staff training.
Just Culture/Process Improvement Program
The Registrar of Voters (ROV) continues to advance its
process improvement program designed to empower
staff at all levels and identify opportunities that improve
day-to-day operations. Every division within the
department is asked to brainstorm ideas for improving
the operation of its own division. From this list of ideas,
each division prioritizes one or more items to become
action items, and members of the division volunteer to
take ownership of these action items individually or in
teams.
Projects that have been successfully completed by
divisions include: compiling and updating employee
desk reference guides, revising petition checking
procedures to include second-level reviews, updating
outdated polling place survey information, reorganizing
work spaces to redesign workflows, revamping election
material storage systems and labeling, creating an
online shared precinct mapping system to reduce
reliance on printed maps, refreshing translation
glossaries to improve the quality of bilingual voting
materials, replacing disposable plastic bags used in
precinct supplies with durable reusable bags, and
preparing training and orientation materials for
temporary seasonal workers.
At the same time, the ROV's administration team has
been working with ROV divisions to improve outdated
processes and fill gaps in procedures, particularly with
regard to the candidate nomination and ballot layout
processes. This review has included meeting with ROV
staff to identify issues and solutions, reviewing existing
procedures and documentation, and reviewing best
practices in use in other jurisdictions. Inspired by the
workgroups formed to tackle issues through the
County's Center for Leadership and Transformation, the
ROV has created a multi-division Nomination-to-Ballot
Process Committee to map and revise the entire
process from the moment a candidate seeks an office to
the point where the candidate's name is placed on the
ballot. This committee has identified numerous
potential improvements to this process, has prioritized
the solutions to apply those with the greatest impact,
and has begun implementing these new process fixes.
Among the new improvements is an online tracking
tool to ensure that all ballot revisions required by court
orders, candidate complaints, or local jurisdiction
requests are completed promptly and accurately. This
tool will be implemented and used for the first time
during the June 7, 2016, Presidential Primary Election.
The ROV's administrative staff has also been working to
collect all of the Department's existing internal
processes and procedures and begin organizing them
using the County's internal Connect Sharepoint system.
The ROV now has its own Connect presence, where it
can host all of these procedures, disseminate
information quickly to all staff, and obtain feedback
from divisions. The processes and procedures for
several divisions have been revised and uploaded, and
progress is continuing on this lengthy project.
Additionally, with the ROV's Connect site, ROV
divisions now have a much more efficient and secure
platform to share information and collaborate on
Department-wide projects. Several cross-divisional
teams have been using Connect to track progress on
tasks, schedule meetings, share documents, and
collaborate more effectively.
Talent Acquisition
As Santa Clara County continues to be one of strongest
job markets in the nation, recruitment of Information
Technology (IT) professionals is especially challenging.
In the first eight months of FY 15-16, the Information
Services Department (ISD) filled 59 permanent and ten
unclassified positions. However, nearly half of these
positions were filled by internal candidates, thus
creating new vacancies. And finding qualified external
candidates has been difficult. As of February 2016, 39
positions had entered into a second recruitment cycle
while another five positions required a third
recruitment cycle.
ISD remains committed to achieving better employee
recruitment and retention results through collaborative
efforts with the Employee Services Agency (ESA) such
as the IT Career Compass, exploring non-traditional
recruitment strategies and designing new approaches
to workload management. To aid these efforts, in
January, ISD began funding an extra help ESA Analyst
that is dedicated to supporting IT recruitment activities.
Furthermore, it was recently agreed that all
recruitments for HHS-IS and ISD will be centrally
managed by one team within ESA. To help ensure this
change is effective, bi-weekly meetings among HHS, ISD
and ESA commenced March. ISD intends to pursue
more opportunities to pilot creative alternatives to
foundational processes in coming months.
Project Management
Since its inception three years ago, ISD's Project
Management Office (PMO) has focused on establishing
standards and a framework to support the consistent
execution and delivery of IT projects. And recently, the PMO began extending this model through the
establishment of a community of practice that provides
training, tools and mentoring for project managers
countywide. Next steps include:
¦ Formal project reporting for all technology projects;
¦ Improved capacity planning;
¦ Formal change management processes including
methods for developing standards; and
¦ Explicit inclusion of privacy and information security
designs in project plans.
While these processes are being put in place, the PMO
will begin shifting its focus toward managing ISD's
technology projects. Recent history has shown that
ISD's ability to deliver projects has not kept pace with
demand; eleven (40%) of the IT projects funded in FY
15-16 are not yet underway, principally due to a lack of
resources to manage them. This discrepancy will be
addressed by redirecting the work of existing project
managers (one of whom is presently engaged full-time
in procurement-related tasks), by acquiring additional
project management resources and the use of tools to
help us more accurately forecast ISD’s capacity to
deliver projects.
Forefront Identity Management (FIM) and
System Center Configuration Manager (SCCM)
Centralized identity and access management is
essential in protecting County data and applications.
This functionality serves to create a single source of
truth for identity that facilitates single sign-on, selfservice
password resets and enhanced capabilities such
as shared mailbox, group and distribution list
management. As one might expect, the full
implementation is a complex multi-step process
requiring the consolidation of several large SCCM
environments into the core SCCM environment,
PeopleSoft data cleansing in preparation for integration
with FIM, as well as migration of remaining
departments to the central directory and Office 365.
IT Asset Management (ITAM)
ISD is in the process of implementing an IT asset
management program that governs the lifecycle of IT
assets from an inventory, contractual and financial
point of view. An ITAM program requires crossfunctional
governance as it considers impacts on
security, infrastructure, and software licensing
agreements. Current asset data is disparate, incomplete
and spreadsheet-driven. A mature ITAM function
produces reliable hardware replacement schedules, as
well as tools and processes to monitor licensing
compliance, prepare for software audits and optimize
software investments. In late 2015, many ISD managers
attended a half day strategy workshop which clarified
ITAM's strategic mission and produced high level goals.
In addition, extensive market research on ITAM tools is
now complete. The ITAM steering committee is
scheduled to complete an ITAM charter and strategic
roadmap, and publish a Request for Proposal (RFP) for
ITAM software by the end of the fiscal year.
Mobility
The proliferation of mobile devices provides increased
efficiency but adds complexity to technology demands.
As the demand for mobility continues to grow so, too,
does the management overhead to ensure the devices
are used in a secure manner consistent with County
policy. The key benefit of mobile platforms is the ability
to access County information anytime and anywhere,
increasing overall productivity for County employees
and citizens.
IT Career Compass (ITCC)
The IT Career Compass Program is focused on
transforming how the County develops its workforce,
skills, and services and how it adapts to meet the
changes ahead in the IT industry. The program has
three main goals:
¦ Develop a more customer-focused, efficient, and
effective IT service delivery organization
¦ Conduct a job classification study in order to better
understand the duties, tasks, responsibility, and
career path for each IT class
¦ Improve retention and recognition of IT personnel
to meet the County's business needs
Gartner Consulting recently completed a short
assessment of County IT functions and is now working
with ITCC to help define the future vision of ISD by
clarifying the County's IT vision, defining the County IT
operating model and designing a high-level functional
and detailed IT organizational structure.
The County has also entered into a partnership with
AON Radford for assistance in developing a modern
system of IT job classification families and job levels.
Working with ESA, the study of the first group, Help
Desk, is underway.
Learning Organization
The County is challenged to modernize its legacy
criminal justice and public safety systems. A program of
significant scope and effort is underway to revolutionize
the way County agencies deliver public safety and
justice services to residents. As part of the Public Safety
& Justice Systems Program (PSJSP), the Justice and
Public Safety Information Exchange (JPSIE) team
launched the Rapid Start Transformation Project in late
2015. JPSIE, a secure and robust information exchange
and management system-allows local, State and
Federal agencies to seamlessly share pertinent and clear
information, insuring that critical information arrives to
the right place at the right time to the right person. The
team looks to May 2016 to have the JPSIE hardware
infrastructure in place. By late 2016, the soft layers
applications, flow process fine-tuning, security policies
integrated will be complete. Leveraging the Center for
Leadership and Transformation (CLT) change model,
the team is working in 90-day sprints, focusing to
achieve one or more transformation technology
changes during each 90-day period.
In March 2016, the Department launched two
additional CLT teams: one to examine the on-boarding
process for new employees from a technology
perspective. There are many interfaces throughout this
process, and the team's initial efforts will focus on
processes internal to ISD. Future efforts will look to
involve additional cross-system partners. The other
team, representing emergency management systems,
also has a multi-phased project approach to enhancing
the group of applications that support 9-1-1
communications and dispatch of first responder
resources ( fire, medical and law enforcement). In the
first phase, the team is concentrating its efforts on
ensuring systems accurately reflect business needs, by
validating that business rules, terminology and
definitions are programmed correctly. This work
supports the sharing of critical dispatch, resource and
event information between different 9-1-1 call centers,
to speed up response times and allow agencies to
automatically request assistance from neighboring
jurisdictions if needed.
Recruitment and Retention
Dispatching Operations has had an increasing reliance
on overtime to maintain adequate coverage of 24/7 post
positions. The continued need for mandatory overtime
over an extended period of time has significantly eroded
employee morale, co-worker relations and the quality of
the workplace environment. County Communications
is working on measures to address issues to achieve full
staffing, such as gaining approval for additional staff
dedicated to recruitment, training and staff
development, hiring a recruitment and training expert
to provide interim support, and instituting continuous
recruiting and hiring procedures. The Department is
also renewing focus on training procedures and
retention factors, and obtaining funds to purchase
specialized records/learning management software to
significantly increase training record keeping accuracy
and efficiency.
New Technology
County Communications is procuring new 9-1-1 system
equipment that will make it possible to receive reports
of emergencies via Internet, telematics (On-Star), text
messaging, email, video and photo feeds. New multimedia
information will include face-to-face
communication and possibly the viewing of real time
images of crimes, fires and medical emergencies while
in progress. An unavoidable consequence of the new
system is the emotional impact of viewing these images.
This will require new and enhanced training to mitigate
their potential adverse effect.
Regional Interoperable Communications
Beginning in 1998, there has been a regional effort to
achieve communications interoperability, with the
County acting as a leading participant. As a member of
the Silicon Valley Regional Interoperability Authority
(SVRIA), the County continues to be involved and is
giving technical and administrative expertise in
managing the Silicon Valley Regional Communications
System (SVRCS) project on behalf of SVRIA. SVRCS is a
shared 700 MHz digital trunked radio system designed
to enable interoperable communications between all
public safety agencies in Santa Clara County. The
SVRCS design includes one master site, 3 prime
controller sites, 25 radio sites and 6 standalone repeater
sites. Since the project began in September 2012, only
the master site, two prime sites, and 10 radio sites have
been installed and fully operational. This is due to the
dependence on diminishing Homeland Security grant
program funding. In June 2015, the Board of Supervisors
approved County participation in a three-year plan for
SVRIA and SVRCS users to jointly purchase the
remaining infrastructure needed to fully implement the
SVRCS, as well as providing for its ongoing
maintenance through 2029.
Learning Organization
FAF continues efforts to incorporate the
communication, problem solving, and employee
empowerment elements of Just Culture into the work
place. New employees are introduced to this process as
part of the FAF on-boarding process, and staff meetings
and communications reinforce the principles. The latest
Countywide survey showed that, as a department, FAF
had a higher response than the previous year. There
continues to be opportunities for additional
communication, but overall employees feel empowered
to create change and a sense of synergy.
Facilities Planning
¦ County Civic Center and County Fairgrounds: The
Division of Asset and Economic Development in the
Office of the County Executive and the Facilities and
Fleet Department are collaborating to tackle two
major facility master planning and reuse efforts
involving the County Civic Center and the County
Fairgrounds. This is discussed in more detail Office
of the County Executive's section of the Recommended
Budget.
¦ Jail Needs: FAF continues to support the Offices of
the County Executive and Sheriff to address jail
needs. FAF will play a principal role in the design
and construction of the new Main Jail East, and is
planning a variety of projects to enhance monitoring,
access, and management of custodial populations
within detention facilities. Recommendations
for specific projects have been incorporated into the
Five-Year Capital Improvement Plan.
¦ Other Master Planning: While there has been a high
level of productivity related to the Civic Center and
Fairgrounds Master Plans, additional focus is
needed towards creating SCVMC and County
Health Master Plans as well. In addition, the County
needs a team dedicated to strategic and long range
comprehensive planning for departments' facilities,
to proactively plan for growth and changing needs
versus reacting to unexpected changes. This team
would match departments' needs to County real
estate holdings and work space, and strive to maximize
the development or use of the County's portfolio
of property. It will also act as the liaison
between departments and Capital Project
Managers, to ensure a smooth transition from
programming and funding, to construction and
delivery.
Utilities and Energy Management
¦ Water: Despite 2016's El Nino rains, drought conditions
are predicted to worsen over the next few
years, with no immediate relief currently predicted.
Water companies are increasing their rates to
encourage conservation and cover maintenance
costs. FAF is expecting a 14 percent increase in
water costs in the next Fiscal Year (FY), a trend likely
to continue. It will therefore be important to
resource water conservation projects to control
costs. FAF is working with the Office of the County
Executive to recommend water saving projects,
including the possibility of on-site water recycling.
Electricity: PG&E is expected to continue to add
tariffs to the utility rates to fund their infrastructure
modernization projects. FAF is expecting a four
percent increase in the cost of electricity in FY 16-17.
Thus, it continues to be important to resource
energy conservation, maintenance, and renewable
energy generation projects.
¦ Renewable Energy: FAF has began construction at
five sites that will ultimately produce 10 megawatts
of renewable solar power that will directly feed the
grid and result in credits for the cost of electricity to
operate County facilities. The estimated cost savings
to the County is estimated to be greater than $35
million over 25 years.
Real Estate
¦ Leased Property: It continues to be difficult to find
commercial properties to lease within areas where
there are concentrations of the public seeking
County services. Lease costs will therefore continue
to increase for County departments, particularly in
the north County area where the Valley is experiencing
significant economic success. FAF is working
to competitively identify brokers that have specific
areas of focus aligned with the Board of Supervisor
priorities, including Affordable/Supportive Housing
and Health and Human Services.
¦ Affordable Housing: FAF continues to work with the
County Executive, the Director of Homeless
Systems, and the Office of Asset and Economic
Development to address the goal of implementing
affordable housing solutions. In the meantime, the
County is experiencing increased levels of homeless
encampments at vacant and occupied Countyowned
properties.
Facilities Maintenance & Repair
¦ Maintenance Program: The average County building
is nearly 40 years old, and the estimated maintenance
backlog is roughly $500 million. The Board's
policy for investing in its own infrastructure is two
percent of the current replacement value of the facilities,
but for the past 10 years the County has
invested in the maintenance of its facilities at a rate
of slightly above one percent.
Construction Marketplace
¦ Workforce: With the improvement in the local
economy engineers, architects, building tradesmen,
and qualified managers are less willing to move to
government jobs because of voter-approved statewide
pension reform. In addition, building trades in
general are attracting fewer people into those
careers because of comparatively low wages in this
area. Thus, FAF's strategy is to try and hire just
enough qualified staff to perform preventive maintenance,
minor repairs, and address facility casualties,
while outsourcing major repairs and sizeable
unplanned work.
¦ Cost of Materials: FAF continues to see higher costs
for materials and labor for public works jobs. Many
Engineer cost estimates that were developed over
the past year are short of low bid responses by more
than 15 percent.
2008 Measure A Program
In late FY 2012, FAF was assigned oversight and
construction management of the Measure A projects,
including the Seismic Safety Program at the Santa Clara
Valley Medical Center (VMC) and the new Downtown
San Jose Health Center. The new Downtown San Jose
Clinic is on track to be open and providing services in
June 2016. The New Receiving and Support Center at
the SCVMC Campus is also scheduled to open by then.
The New Bed Building, Energy Plant, and North Utility
Loop projects are currently scheduled for completion in
the summer of 2017, with projected openings for service
by the end of that calendar year.
Fleet Management
If the FY 17-18 vehicle purchases are approved as part of
the Recommended Budget, the County will achieve the
goal of having 25 percent of the Fleet being alternatively
fueled vehicles. With a diverse portfolio of vehicles that
includes ones powered by compressed natural gas and
electric fuels, development of the infrastructure needed
to support these vehicles is important in order for
County departments to adopt and use the vehicles.
Emergency Preparedness
FAF continues work to put appropriate contracts in
place to address planning and mitigation of disasters.
These contracts include ones to handle debris
management, donations management, and initial
facility assessments.
Digital Shift in Information Technology
The dramatic shift from print to digital formats has
changed collection development, purchasing,
ownership, and lending practices for public libraries.
Virtual library visits now equal in-person visits. Not only
does library staff need new technology skills, but the
public needs new skills to stay competitive in the job
market and to navigate the surplus of information that
is now on the Internet. SCCLD has added a variety of
free technology training options for the public and a
suite of subscription services that are available online
24/7. SCCLD continues to be a trusted source of
information.
Income Disparity
Income and wage disparities continue to be an issue in
Silicon Valley. In response to the loss of discretionary
income in many households, free services delivered by
SCCLD help children learn to read, succeed in school,
and promote life-long learning for all ages regardless of
income. In July 2015, SCCLD removed its $80 library fee
for non-Santa Clara County residents offering free
library cards to everyone, regardless of residence, thus
allowing all to utilize library services, databases and
programs for free.
Foreign Born Residents
A large share of residents currently live in Silicon Valley
are foreign born (37.4%), with more than 50% of the
population over the age five exclusively speaking a
language other than English at home. By serving as a
gathering place for youth, seniors, families and others,
SCCLD brings together the diverse populations within
its communities. Last year library materials in 15
languages were borrowed over 670,000 times. Further
response to these needs, the SCCLD is offering free
ongoing English as a Second Language (ESL) classes,
Conversation Clubs and Citizenship classes.
Early Learning is Critical
Early literacy is critical for all children to begin school
ready to learn. SCCLD offers programs and materials for
children and families focused on school readiness skills
and supports formal learning in schools which directly
relates to future success. Research from Growing Young
Minds shows that children who start behind will stay
behind and in many cases continue to lose ground,
making it more likely they will need costly remediation,
be retained, or even drop out of school. Last year
SCCLD's children's library materials were borrowed
more than 4.5 million times. With an emphasis on
enhancing early literacy and youth education, SCCLD
recently introduced its “1,000 Books before Six”
initiative, urging families to read more than 1,000 books
to their children before they reach the age of six.
Human Resources
Competitive compensation is emerging as a concern
with the Classification Unit conducting an increased
number of compensation surveys. Assessment work is
expected to be continued regarding the compensation
assigned to specific classifications to ensure appropriate and competitive wages, especially for classifications
where it is difficult to attract qualified applicants and
retain existing employees. Recruiting for high demand
positions in the Social Services Agency, Information
Services Department, County Communications
Department, and certain Health and Hospital System
classifications continue to be a challenge and high
priority. Recent challenges include staffing the new
Downtown Clinic and increasing staff in Custody
Health Services. As County departments continue to
implement operational efficiencies that result in
organizational changes, Human Resources continues to
receive classification study requests to properly classify
positions with modified or new duties. HR has
completed 56 classification studies in the first six
months of the fiscal year. Over 150 employees or groups
of employees were reclassified to the appropriate
classification and compensation level. The continued
growth in retirement and improvement in the local
economy, coupled with the reduction in pension
benefits, presents additional challenges for the County
in competing with the private sector for qualified
candidates.
In FY 15-16, HR implemented the HR Service
Improvement Initiative to improve services to
customers. This initiative resulted in changes to the
Merit System Rules to improve the hiring process. HR's
goal is to create a one-stop-shop for departments.
Towards that effort, Human Resources Analysts now
provide both recruitment and classification-related
services to their assigned departments. Previously, HR
Analysts provided either recruitment-related services or
classification-related services to departments, but not
both, thus requiring departments to go to different HR
Analysts, depending on their needs. Another goal of the
HR Service Improvement Initiative is to ensure that HR
Analysts possess comprehensive expertise in the HR
needs of their departments, which will enable HR to
respond more efficiently and timely to those needs with
a full understanding of both the department's job
classifications and the recruiting market for those
positions. It will also provide departments with a
streamlined point of contact within HR.
Executive Recruitment Services
The number of vacancies is expected to increase due to
the demographic of the current executive leadership
group. In order for Executive Recruitment Services to
meet its goals of generating viable candidate pools for
current and future vacancies, it is important that the
current technologies and operating systems be
enhanced in order to advertise and create extensive
outreach to attract candidates to the County. Executive
Recruitment Services also anticipates an increase in the
number of reclassification and realignment requests as
a result in the change in the way the County does
business. The high cost of housing and living in the Bay
Area has created a need for expanded labor efforts
required per recruitment in order to attract and secure
qualified individuals.
Labor Relations
Labor Relation's record keeping system is a combination
of hard copy files, Access, Excel and File Maker Pro, a
data program that is outdated and no longer supported
by the Information Services Department. A new case
management system (CRM) has been purchased and is
in the testing phase.
Equal Opportunity
The Equal Opportunity Department (EOD) continues
the implementation of a new case management system
that will incorporate prior case records from all three
Equal Opportunity Office locations into one centralized
database to maximize data integrity and minimize data
redundancy. Sustaining the centralization of all Equal
Opportunity and Reasonable Accommodation data will
aid in maintaining data that is as accurate and
consistent as possible and enhance data reliability.
The Department plans to launch the Conflict
Resolution/Alternative Dispute Resolution Program in
FY 16-17. EOD believes that a conflict resolution
program could reduce the number of unnecessary
investigations and/or improve morale and productivity.
In addition, through the implementation of a conflict
resolution program, EOD can devote more resources
toward high-risk cases and reduce the turn-around time
for resolving these cases.
Learning and Employee Development
In the next 18 months, LED will be implementing the
following new programs and services:
¦ Implement training for SEIU employees interested in
teleworking
¦ Assist EOD with the implementation of Sexual
Harassment and Discrimination Prevention and
Anti-Bullying Training to all County employees ¦ Support the Information Services Department in the
development and implementation of an Information
Security program
¦ Expand the number of Continuing Education Units
(CEU) for LED instructor-led courses for professions
with CEU requirements
¦ Implement the New Employee Orientation 2.0 midyear
2016 to include a new online component to
increase access to key information and just-in-time
training as part of the onboarding efforts
¦ Further develop the executive development
program, including creating a qualified list of executive
coaches for professional development purposes,
creating a competency model for executives, and
providing customized training tied to the competency
model
¦ Expand training courses/programs including topics
related to data and metrics, manager competencies,
retirement and financial well-being
¦ Provide more Organizational Development services
including intact team building, team conflict resolution,
off-site retreat design and facilitation, change
management efforts, conferences, and competency
studies
¦ Rollout of sccLearn Team Dashboard allowing
managers to monitor mandatory training and assign
training to employees
¦ Maintain and expand web-based training content in
sccLearn
¦ Implement and launch (in partnership with ISD) a
new Learning Management System if the current
system is not selected as a result of the RFP.
Employee Benefits
Increasing employee benefit costs continue to put a
considerable strain on the County's budget. Employee
Benefits continues to work towards implementing cost
control measures to contain the rising cost of
healthcare for the County. Employee Benefits has
committed to periodically market the County's existing
medical plans to ensure that the plans remain
competitive and provide the best value for the County
and its employees. The County will also continue to
explore trends in the health insurance market to
recommend modifications to the current health
benefits provision when appropriate and develop
alternate health plan options.
The population of retirees continues to increase due to
the retirement of baby boomers. The average annual
number of retirements has been 500 for the last three
years. The growing population of active employees and
retirees contribute to the increase in processing
hundreds of manual transactions that can be tedious
and time consuming. Employee Benefits will continue
to research and work towards implementing necessary
benefit platform tools that will streamline the
enrollment process, simplify plan configuration, and
empower employees.
Workers' Compensation
The Workers' Compensation Department continues to
experience the positive impact of Senate Bill 863, which
was enacted January 1, 2013. The overall industry has
experienced a decline in medical costs and the
implementation of several key administrative
requirements are proving to expedite the medical
treatment for injured workers. The State Division of
Workers' Compensation continues to monitor the
impact and is hopeful for continued streamline of
benefit delivery to injured workers and reduced costs.
The Workers' Compensation Department targets
FY 16-17 for the implementation of a new claims system
that will meet the needs of both the Workers'
Compensation and Liability/Property Claims
operations to reduce preventable risks. One of the key
tools the Departments needs with the new risk
management system is the ability to track timely
contact with the injured employee, the department, and
the medical provider within 24 hours (3-point contact).
The tracking mechanism will ensure the claims
adjusters are contacting employees timely to explain
the workers' compensation benefit. Another key
technical tool the Departments hopes to acquire is the
ability to create a comprehensive claims payments
dashboard, which tracks all costs paid on the claim file,
including allocated costs.
Liability/Property Insurance
The County is seeing some stabilization of property
insurance rates over those from last year even though
catastrophic property losses continue to occur
nationally and internationally. This stabilization has
been supported by the County's participation in the
CSAC Excess Insurance Authority (EIA) and the group
purchase of the County's property insurance through
this joint powers authority.
Occupational Safety and Environmental
Compliance (OSEC)
There are three new OSEC initiatives to improve the
quality and effectiveness of the County safety program.
They include enhancing the safety training curriculum
for Safety Coordinators and employees, increasing the
effectiveness of comprehensive ergonomic services
provided to County departments, and improving
workplace violence and active shooter response
training programs.
Learning Organization
Human Resources has incorporated Just Culture in its
operations by including it in the HR Quarterly meeting
with all HR staff and HR bi-monthly meeting with all
administrative professionals in the County. Supervisors
are assessed based on their ability and success in
implementing Just Culture into the workplace to create
an enjoyable and productive work environment. Just
Culture is also used to assess employees in promotional
recruitment to ensure they have the skills, abilities, and
willingness to embrace and put Just Culture into
practice.
The Learning and Employee Development Department
will continue the implementation of the Countywide
organizational change effort of Just Culture in
partnership with the Office of the County Executive,
particularly through the creation of unit-based teams
(UBT) and the development of a web-based training on
Just Culture for employees new to the County.
Assurance of Accountability
The Controller-Treasurer Department protects County
financial resources and ensures adequate fiscal
responsibility within the County government. The
Department is challenged to keep up with this
important mission due to competing priorities and
increased mandates. It is refocusing efforts to
strengthen the control environment, increase control
activities, and serve as a leader in transparency and
fiscal integrity.
Financial Policies
Demonstrating this commitment towards fiscal
accountability and leadership, the Department will
initiate a top-to-bottom review of accounting, payroll,
and other financial policies and procedures. The
purpose of this effort is to ensure that our existing
policies are current, but more importantly, to identify
functional areas where new or expanded policies are
needed to ensure public funds are administered with
the highest standards of safekeeping, professionalism,
and in accordance with all government accounting or
other standards. As of this writing, an inventory of all
existing policies is being conducted. Additionally,
meetings with the County Executive's Policies and
Procedures Administrators have been held to ensure
the Department's efforts are aligned with the
Countywide related efforts. In the coming year, the
Department will benchmark its policies and procedures
against other similar jurisdictions and governmental
organizations.
Web-Based Procurement and Payment System
Over the past year, the Procurement and Controller-
Treasurer Departments implemented the Ariba System.
Ariba is a web-based procurement and payment system
designed to streamline procurement processes and
drive compliance. Ariba is a phased implementation
and in upcoming months, Ariba Procure to Pay (P2P)
module will be rolled out to multiple County
departments. Both the Procurement and Controller-
Treasurer Departments will lead and provide necessary
training, support and assistance to departments and
County suppliers. As part of this effort, the two
departments are also attempting to increase the
County's receipt of purchasing discounts in exchange
for accelerated invoice payment. Using the Ariba
Discount Professional module, the County is
automating the early-payment discounting process
from initial offer through final payment.
In addition to Ariba P2P and Discount Professional
module implementation, the Department will also
participate in implementation of the Spend Visibility
module of Ariba. This module will assist the County to
optimize sourcing activity and manage spend efficiently.
Banking Automation
The Department led the implementation effort to
change the County's operational banking service
provider to Wells Fargo Bank. Changing to Wells Fargo
will save the County 43% compared to retaining its
former bank. In just two months, the Department
transitioned 31 County Departments, 42 School
Districts, 12 Special Districts, and 357 individual users.
Controller-Treasurer leadership brought together staff
from the Finance Agency, Information Services
Department, department/district fiscal and
information technology staff, and Wells Fargo
implementation professionals. This team met with all
departments and districts to develop customized
transition plans including analysis of current banking
functions, technical coordination to ensure proper
check printing and transferring of electronic payment
files, equipment and supply needs, and most
importantly training for the several hundred people
performing banking operations.
Although the formal banking transition is complete,
there are other efforts planned to further reduce costs
and increase efficiency. These include a top-to-bottom analysis of all department-level banking operations to
automate processes further, automation of tax receipt
processing in the Office of the Tax Collector, and
possible automation of the patient payment and
medical document management at Valley Medical
Center
Building Bench Strength
The audit completed by the Board's Management Audit
Division identified inadequate staffing levels and the
lack of sufficient leadership positions. With this in mind,
the Department requested and was approved for the
deletion of two existing positions, replaced by two
positions in Central Payroll and the General Accounting
Unit during the mid-year process. Additional positions
will be coming before the Board for approval as part of
the FY 16-17 Recommended Budget.
Learning Organization
Over the past two and a half years, the Finance Agency
(Agency) has held open discussions on an individual,
work group, department, and Agencywide basis to
review the outcomes of the organizational assessment
and determine where to improve and focus its efforts to
implement the County Executive's vision of a Just
Culture environment. Based on the feedback received
from employees, the Agency identified career growth as
the main priority with communications, manager and
supervisor relationships, and respect, trust, and morale
as secondary priorities.
To meet employee needs, the Agency held a Career
Conference in May 2015 at the Corinthian Club in
downtown San Jose. In partnership with the Employee
Services Agency (ESA) and the Training for Office
Professionals Program (TOP), the program included a
very full day of inspiration and learning about how to
succeed in the four identified career paths - Accounting,
Collections, Administration and Information
Technology. Conference participants were subsequently
provided with an opportunity for one-on-one review of
resumes, qualifications and career advice from Analysts
at ESA; and TOP staff put on a special program just for
the Agency, covering interview and resume skills.
The Agency used the Just Culture framework to address
how to deal with quality control. It encompasses the
importance of respectful, supportive and nurturing
relationships between co-workers, between leaders and
line staff and between staff and our customers. The
Agency also held classes on Building and Repairing
Trust exclusively for supervisors and managers. Over 60
Agency supervisors and managers attended the classes.
The Department continues to make progress with its
Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT)
project related to the ePayable Program. The goal is to
improve services to County vendors who choose to be
paid with a pre-loaded debit card instead of Electronic
Funds Transfer/ACH or County warrant. The project
focuses on addressing program effectiveness, cost
savings, timely payments, reducing the County's
exposure, and increasing rebate revenues to the County.
In FY 14-15, the County realized revenue in excess of
$500,000 and expects to generate additional revenue in
the future.
Tax Collection and Apportionment
System Steering Committee
The initiative to stabilize and enhance the Tax
Collection and Apportionment System (TCAS) was
scheduled to be completed in September 2015.
However, this part of the project was deferred by the
TCAS Steering Committee, to address higher priority
functions needed by the business. This change was
made possible by the fact that the critical stabilization
functions have been delivered and only the less critical
functions remain. Almost all of the stabilization items
have been completed and now the focus is on
enhancements and support.
Through association with the California Association of
County Treasurers and Tax Collectors, the Department
is continually checking with other counties who are
looking to replace their legacy systems in order to stay
abreast of ongoing projects, developments, and the
state of the market.
TCAS Improvements
The system stabilization and enhancement initiative
that was launched in late FY 11-12 to focus on the
critical needs that were not addressed in the initial
deployment of the TCAS system is nearing completion.
The Steering Committee has now embarked on a threeyear
plan to enhance the TCAS system to provide
additional functionality to support the business. The
plan extends into FY 17-18.
Developing Today with an Eye to the Future
The Department is planning with Wells Fargo, the
County’s banker, to implement an external lockbox
service that will handle the payment processing tasks.
Preliminary research shows that tax collectors in other
California counties of similar size report high
satisfaction in outsourcing this service to third party
providers. The plan is to start in phases, utilizing the less
voluminous supplemental tax-bill roll as a proof of
concept. Thereafter, the much larger annual tax bill and
the payment processing tasks will be migrated to the
lockbox by summer 2016. Despite this plan towards a
lockbox service, the Department will still need to
support the current Remittance Processing System for
some period of time in order to handle exception
activities.
Due to the need to support the current Remittance
Processing System, BancTec, it was recently upgraded
to comply with the County’s initiative to migrate from
Windows XP to Windows 7. The current version of the
BancTec system was not certified for and is not
compatible to Windows 7, and therefore, the upgrade
was approved.
The current online payment system, implemented in
2003 was re-written in a joint effort involving the
Department, Information Services Department, Official
Payment Corporation, and Gorilla Logic, Inc. The
number of payments received during the December
2015 collection period increased 72% over December
2014, increasing from 45,269 to 77,967. The payment
amount increased 79.7% from $221.8 million to $398.6
million. The new system handled the volume without
any downtown. As the online payment system
continues to be stabilized and becomes more robust,
two new features will be implemented: 1) the ability to
pay utilizing multiple credit cards simultaneously; and
2) a shopping cart concept for taxpayers who own
multiple properties.
The Department is also in the early stages of developing
and obtaining a document management system, which
should streamline work processes, as well as work
towards the County's goals of being environmentally
conscious. The Board approved resources for this
document management system. The Clerk-Recorder's
Office, the Department’s sister department, is
coordinating this project to meet legal requirements
regarding document retention policies. The system is
anticipated to interface with the other property taxrelated
Departments like the Assessor's Office and the
Controller-Treasurer Department to share and
exchange appropriate data and documents.
Proposal to Merge the Department of Revenue
and the Office of the Tax Collector
The Finance Agency proposes to bring together the two
sister departments of Department of Revenue (DOR)
and Office of the Tax Collector into a single Department
of Revenue and Tax. This is a strategic way to maximize
the strengths of both departments. As examples, by
sharing resources in IT, administration, or other areas,
the County will be able to enhance these services.
Another key goal is to provide a stronger career path for the employees in both departments by providing career
growth opportunities through cross-training and
expanded promotional opportunities. Dovetailing with
this effort is the anticipated relocation of DOR closer to
the County Government Center at Hedding Street. It is
important to emphasize that this proposal is not a
budget reduction exercise, and the Agency does not
expect to reduce any positions. Both departments are
working very hard with existing resources, and the goal
is to assist in keeping up with the already heavy
workload borne by the employees.
Learning Organization
The Department continues to make significant progress
with its Center for Leadership and Transformation
(CLT) projects. The Department is continuing efforts to
create efficiencies, modernize operations, and reduce
costs while maintaining its commitment to taxpayer
services.
¦ Building and Expanding Services Tools (BEST): The
goal of BEST is to improve the customer service
delivery to taxpayers through face-to-face assistance,
telephone assistance, and via the Tax
Collector’s public website. The Department’s phone
script was upgraded to allow the public a faster
access to the appropriate unit in the department.
¦ Procurement of CUBS Collection System: The
project focuses on streamlining collection processes
by organizing, processing, and tracking delinquent
accounts in conjunction with TCAS for collection
pursuit and enforcement protocols. CUBS produces
timely releases of liens, and increases revenue collection
of Unsecured property delinquent tax. This is
now completed.
¦ Document and Management System: The goal is to
improve operations of the document management
system and maintain excellent customer service.
This is now underway.
Eagle Recorder System
In July 2015, the Clerk-Recorder's Office completed the
procurement process for the replacement of its legacy
records application. The main goal of this system
replacement was to migrate off an aging hardware and
software platform and move to a more modern solution
that meets today's needs for managing and accessing
records. In addition to implementing a robust and
scalable solution, the Department will also benefit from
enhanced features from the new application that allow
for improved service to the public and operational
efficiency. The Department is currently working on
project implementation with its new system vendor,
Tyler Technologies, Inc. This project includes the
migration of records from 1981-present, a reengineering
of business workflow and processes, and
the design of new self-service offerings for online and
walk-in customers. The targeted go-live for this new
application is November 2016.
Learning Organization
The Department continues to make significant progress
with its Center for Leadership and Transformation
(CLT) projects from FY 2016 related to the AS400
Replacement (Eagle Recorder System), Website
Redesign, and Queuing System Upgrade. The goal of
these projects is to improve the service delivery to
customers by providing technological enhancements to
strengthen system efficiency and effectiveness. The
Department is in the process of developing the new
records application to boost interface improvements for
both internal and external customers. The
implementation date is November 2016.
The Department recognizes that with any new system,
the staff will have to adapt to the new changes in
procedures and workflow and modify their thought
processes. Managing those changes then becomes an
integral component of any learning organization. An
essential element of change management is involving
the employees in the improvement of work processes
and system solutions. The Department's staff has taken
an active role in the development of the system by
meeting with the vendor during the business analysis
phase and making suggestions. Attaining the staff's
support will make for a smoother transition of the new
system once it is implemented.
In addition to the CLT projects, the Department is
spearheading a customer service initiative for the
Finance Agency that aligns with the County Executive's
plan to create and sustain a learning culture throughout
the County. The Department is working closely with
Learning and Employee Development to create a
customer service training program designed specifically
for the Finance Agency. The goal of this program is to
provide the necessary skill set to the staff in delivering
exceptional customer service. With these initiatives and projects, the Department is
dedicated to promoting the County Executive's vision
for the County as a learning organization and building
upon themes of employee involvement in
improvements to work and customer service.
Proposal to Merge the Department of Revenue
and the Office of the Tax Collector
The Finance Agency proposes to bring together the two
sister departments of DOR and the Office of the Tax
Collector into a single Department of Revenue and Tax.
This is a strategic way to maximize the strengths of both
departments. As examples, by sharing resources in
information technology (IT), administration, or other
areas, the County will be able to enhance these services.
Another key goal is to provide a stronger career path for
the employees in both departments by providing career
growth opportunities through cross-training and
expanded promotional opportunities. Dovetailing with
this effort is the anticipated relocation of DOR closer to
the County Government Center at Hedding. It is
important to emphasize that this proposal is not a
budget-reduction exercise, and the Agency does not
expect to reduce any positions. Both departments are
working very hard with existing resources, and the goal
is to assist in keeping up with the already heavy
workload borne by the employees.
Justice System Technology Changes
Large changes for the Countywide criminal justice
service system - both County and Superior Court - are
already underway as departments and IT teams work to
design and build replacements for longstanding legacy
computer systems that serve the justice system. These
systems provide distinct and specialized functions that
must also be connected and integrated across many
organizations. As a collection partner for the Law and
Justice community, DOR has joined efforts with its
partners, and anticipates being fully engaged in these
large IT projects.
DOR Onsite Presence at the Probation
Department - Victim Restitution Cases
In FY 15-16, the Board approved a collaborative pilot
program between the Adult Probation Department and
DOR for Victim Restitution (VR) case monitoring and
collections. One unclassified collector position was
approved to provide on-site collector expertise at the
Probation Department regarding selected VR cases. The
goal was to improve both the collections and case
management efforts.
Since May 2015, this collaboration has resulted in
integrating early financial assessment, planning and
enforcement of VR debt payment, within the context of
probationary requirements, responsibilities and
rehabilitation. The program has been successful for
both collection improvements and probationary
compliance.
DOR Space and Facility Improvements -
Relocation
DOR has been at its current Berger Drive location since
1998. Since that time, the Department has grown
significantly as the result of new collection programs
and increased account volume, which has increased the
visits of clients to the office. For several years, DOR has
pursued efforts to expand and reconfigure its space at
the Berger Drive campus. Concurrently, other Berger
Drive departments have also grown and face serious
space deficiencies.
Accordingly, the Facilities and Fleet Department will
conduct a comprehensive study of Berger Drive
occupants' space needs, and develop a master plan that
addresses the best possible solutions for departmental
services at this location. There may be a need for some
service element to relocate.
DOR is an ideal department for relocation. Moving to
larger quarters and to a site closer to public
transportation networks would be beneficial for both
the public and the department. The County has been
conducting a search for viable potential locations that
are available for lease or purchase. Discussions are
ongoing regarding a possible location for DOR near the
County Government Center at Hedding.
Security at Berger Drive Campus
DOR continues to take a lead role in coordinating and
collaborating the security measures and safety
awareness at the Berger Drive campus, especially in the
evening hours. DOR oversees the shared-cost evening
patrol and Sheriff ’s Deputy presence at Berger Drive. In
FY 15-16, DOR hosted the third annual campus-wide
training and awareness presentation by the Office of the
Sheriff. The Sheriff's Office will be conducting a walkthrough
for all DOR staff on active shooter precautions
and steps to take. The County is assessing and
developing a facility security plan for all County
facilities, including the Berger campus.
Learning Organization
The Department of Revenue continues to make
significant progress with its Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) projects with the focus of
improving customer service and employee engagement.
¦ Emergency Response: This project aims to
increase employee confidence, comfort, and awareness
that effective workplace safety measures are in
place. Because DOR is committed to serving a widerange
of citizens that can be under severe stress, it is
important for the Department to generate and
maintain an atmosphere of workplace safety and
employee confidence. This is no longer a segregated
CLT project, as it has been folded into the department's
(and Agency's) ongoing Safety and Emergency
Response program. For recent DOR activities,
see above (Security at Berger Drive Campus).
¦ Paperless 4G (Go Green Get Green): The goal of
the 4G is to improve efficiency and effectiveness of
DOR collection processes by providing back-up
documents to collectors in an electronic format. The
project is now completed and DOR has accomplished
paperless 4G as a routine function.
¦ Web Portal: With the successful launch of its public
portal site, DOR planned to create a well-designed
SharePoint Intranet site in FY 15-16. However, this
extended scope is on temporary hold, pending
development of a larger umbrella, to include Finance
Agency sister departments.
¦ Acumen Account Scoring: The goal of this project
is to improve collections and control costs by
scoring debtor accounts for collectability and
optimum collection strategy. The desired outcome
will also improve and streamline processes and
workflow by reducing duplication and maximizing
automation of existing manual processes in order to
free up collector and support staff for direct collection
activities. In FY 15-16, numerous manual
processes have been streamlined through automation,
a performance metrics model has been developed,
and the account packeting feature has been
extended to two out of four collection units. This
CLT team continues to work on a myriad of projects
that use data analytics and workflow studies to
improve collection processes.
Victim Witness Services
As of October 2015, the DA's Office and Silicon Valley
FACES agreed that victim services would be provided
directly through the Office. The move of these services
to the West Wing has resulted in a significant increase
in the number of victims seeking services from our
Office. In comparing the first six months in the West
Wing as compared to the same six months of the prior
year, new clients served increased by 65%, court
accompaniments of victims increased 71%, and total
services provided more than doubled, from 11,500 to
more than 25,000.
This significant increase in the level of services to
victims has also been accompanied by improved
collaboration between victim advocates and
prosecutors, and improved efficiency for the Victim
Services Unit as a result of having direct access to the
Office's case management system and easier access to
various colleagues and partners in the criminal justice
system.
Advancing Technology
Nearly every crime committed in Santa Clara County
now involves elements of technology that were not
present just a few years ago. From electronic police
reports, text exchanges, cell phone videos, and with
body-worn cameras on the near-term horizon, the
amount of technology necessary to perform the work of
the District Attorney's Office is in a period of explosive
growth that shows no signs of slowing.
This phenomenon has resulted in the need to improve
internal technology systems, improve the ability to
analyze digital and multimedia evidence, and improve
the capacity to transmit these new forms of evidence to
the defense as part of discovery. It also drives our efforts
to make the Office less reliant on paper. As a whole,
325
County of Santa Clara Section 2: Public Safety and Justice
FY 16-17 Recommended Budget Office of the District Attorney
Section 2: Public Safety and
Justice
these changes represent tremendous opportunities to
improve processes and systems to ensure justice in
every case filed.
Criminal Investigation
The Office's Bureau of Investigations (BOI) has made
significant efforts to uphold public safety in the wake of
the shrinking capacity of San Jose Police Department.
Investigative referrals within the Office are up more
than 60% compared with two years ago, largely because
of the need for more investigations of cases that
originated in San Jose. In addition, nearly all
investigation responsibilities for fraud cases, particularly
in the areas of elder fraud and environmental
protection, have been taken on by the BOI.
AB 1352 (Super Expungements)
Assembly Bill 1352, also known as the Super
Expungement bill provides that individuals who have
successfully completed Deferred Entry of Judgment
(DEJ) are eligible to withdraw their guilty pleas and
enter pleas of not guilty in order to completely clear
their records for immigration purposes, as well as
licensing and other collateral consequences. The
Probation Department provided the Public Defender’s
Office with a list of 9,500 clients who have successfully
completed DEJ. Thus, PDO will need to reach out and
contact all of these individuals to see if they are eligible
and interested in availing themselves of this relief. The
Department is currently meeting with the Court and
District Attorney to discuss best processes to expedite
these petitions.
Death Penalty Costs
The office of the Alternate Defender (ADO) currently
has three death penalty cases. Defending these high
profile cases is extremely expensive. The number of
DNA exonerations, among other types of exoneration,
demonstrates how critical it is to thoroughly investigate
death penalty cases. The November ballot is expected to
contain dueling initiatives that will: 1) repeal the death
penalty, or 2) speed up executions. Depending on how
the voters respond, costs may increase or decrease for
handling these cases.
Mental Health issues
The County is well aware of the lack of community
mental health beds as well as the high needs of the
increasingly large mentally ill population inside and
outside of the jail. The Public Defender’s Office hopes to
increase resources for identifying, managing and
assisting this population. The addition of a social
worker to the Public Defender’s Office has begun this
process. The social worker gives dedicated attention to
clients who need assistance with jobs, housing and
mental health needs. The County has also been selected
to participate in Stepping Up, a National gathering in
Washington D.C. in April 2016 to discuss systems-level
plans to reduce the number of adults with mental
346
Section 2: Public Safety and Justice County of Santa Clara
Office of the Public Defender FY 16-17 Recommended Budget
illnesses and co-occurring disorders in their jails. PDO
will participate in the County delegation in Washington
D.C. in April.
Homelessness and High Users of County
Resources
High users of County resources are beginning to get
well-deserved attention related to interventions that
may decrease their need to be hospitalized,
incarcerated or processed through the court system.
Homelessness, chronic alcoholism and associated
health risks all take an enormous toll on the entire
County infrastructure. The Public Defender’s Office is
working to identify repeat offenders who are arrested
and incarcerated for low level crimes, in order to work
toward service provision with an aim toward
stabilization and housing. Justice partners are already
working on this in North County at the Palo Alto Review
(PAR) calendar. Much of this work will be centralized
through the Reentry Subcommittee on Jail Diversion
and Behavioral Health.
MOU with Superior Court
Since 2002, the Department has had a MOU with
Superior Court in which the Department provides
criminal background record checks to Family Court.
The impact the State budget will have on the Court's
ability to continue to fund this MOU is unknown at this
time. Revenue from this agreement fully supports four
FTE positions within the Department. This is a nonmandated
function for the Department and if the Court
determines they must either reduce or eliminate
funding, the Department may be required to delete up
to four FTE's; two Pretrial Service Officers and two
Justice System Clerks. All of these positions are currently
filled. The Judges who receive services through this
agreement are very supportive of the program due to
the increased information they receive which assists
them in their decision making. The agreement has
always been year-to-year because the Court generally
does not know until May whether they will have the
funding to support this program. The total amount of
funding for FY 15-16 was $480,364 and will be
approximately $503,788 for FY 16-17.
San Francisco Lawsuit
In late 2015, Equal Justice Under the Law filed a class
action lawsuit in San Francisco County alleging that
detaining people in jail based on money bond is
unconstitutional per the 14th Amendment of the U.S.
Constitution. Equal Justice Under the Law has been
very successful with these types of lawsuits in other
jurisdictions across the United States. If successful in
San Francisco County, the lawsuit has the potential to
reduce or eliminate the use of money bail in California.
Any reduction or elimination of money bail in California
could drastically increase the use of pretrial supervision
during the adjudication stage of the criminal justice
process.
Pretrial Diversion
Currently the Department is involved with several
different stakeholder groups in the county looking at
expanding diversion opportunities for criminal
defendants. Several of these expansion options include
the Office of Pretrial Services providing case
management services to diversion defendants. The
Department may need to additional resources to
provide case management services if these efforts come
to fruition.
Learning Organization - Just Culture
After training all department staff in Just Culture during
FY 14-15, the Department took the approach of
sustainability in FY 15-16. One effort undertaken was to
incorporate Just Culture training, updates and real life
355
County of Santa Clara Section 2: Public Safety and Justice
FY 16-17 Recommended Budget Office of Pretrial Services
Section 2: Public Safety and
Justice
examples in monthly operational unit meetings. The
Department Just Culture Champion, Director, and Unit
Supervisors often lead these 10-minute flash trainings.
Also during FY15-16, the Department instituted Just
Culture situational type questions into its hiring and
promotional interviews. Also, all new Department staff
were required to complete a one-on-one, hour-long
orientation and training with the Department
Champion. During FY 15-16 six such orientations and
trainings took place with newly hired staff. The Just
Culture Initiative was also incorporated in the
Department's Policy and Procedures Manual.
During FY 15-16 the Department was also involved in
the Just Culture Initiative on the County level. In
November 2015, the Director presented on the
Department’s Just Culture efforts as part of a panel at
the Just Culture Train-the-Trainer Reunion. And, the
department Champion has had ongoing involvement in
the on line Just Culture discussion group.
Finally, in early 2016 the Department received positive
feedback from employees as part of the second
organizational assessment survey.
Training for Implicit Bias and Crisis
Intervention Team
The Office of the Sheriff has increased training on
implicit bias. Selected staff have completed the trainthe-
trainer course on Fair and Impartial Policing,
known as Implicit Biased training, and the Department
is working to secure Peace Officer Standards and
Training (POST) certification for the course. The course
will include classroom instruction and a scenario-based
curriculum.
The Sheriff's Office, in collaboration with the County's
Behavioral Health Services Department, has been
providing Crisis Intervention Training to deputies and
peace officers throughout Northern California for
approximately ten years. In the past, the 40-hour
intensive format training course was provided two
times per year, and the Sheriff's Office has increased it
to approximately four times per year. It gives peace
officers, dispatchers, and other public safety personnel
the skills and knowledge to recognize individuals with
mental illness. There is also a focus on identifying
potential disorders, in order to minimize escalations in
contacts with the mentally ill. The program is now
being offered as part of the standard Basic Academy and
Correctional Academy curriculum at the Santa Clara
County Justice Training Center. Every new basic peace
officer recruit and correctional peace officer recruit who
attends this training center will graduate with the
additional knowledge and expertise generated by this
CIT program.
Recruitment and Retention
Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. As of May 2016, the number of
Deputy vacancies is approximately 80, and vacancies
are an ongoing challenge for the Department. With an
aging workforce, the Department is anticipating many
retirements in the next few years. The Office of the
Sheriff continues to develop new and innovative
methods to recruit top applicants, and is targeting
significant resources at recruiting and backgrounding
many applicants. The Administration is supportive of
the Sheriff ’s additional enforcement academies that are
being held to fill vacancies within the Department, and
will address the issue during FY 16-17 if additional
funds for academies are necessary.
Public Safety Realignment
Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) transferred a
number of services previously provided by the State, to
the local government. The most significant impact on
the Department of Correction is a result of sentencing
changes that make offenders without any current or
prior serious or violent or sex convictions the
responsibility of the local jails. This shift of inmates
continues to increase the jail population, lengthen the
sentences of some inmates, and impacts the jail’s ability
to accept voluntary revenue-generating inmates from
other jurisdictions. This has also resulted in a significant
change in the demographics of those inmates eligible to
be housed on the Elmwood Correctional Complex
minimum camp. The criminal sophistication of these
inmates has caused increasing concerns regarding
escape prevention, organized inmate disturbances,
emergency response, and staffing plans.
Actions Taken to Address Issues in the County
Correctional System
During FY 15-16, a great deal of focus was placed on
Santa Clara County's Correctional system, and many
actions were taken by the Department and County. It is
important to start with the recognition that the
Department of Correction, along with every other
department within Santa Clara County, faced a
continuing set of resource challenges between FY 02-03
and FY 11-12. Over that time frame, Santa Clara County
faced gaps between revenues and expenditures totaling
over $2 billion with ongoing solutions accounting for
closing over $1.4 million of that gap. It was during these
times that resources were reduced for every operating
department within the County, including the
correctional system. Staffing levels and management to
line-staff ratios fell below desirable standards as the
County attempted to maintain minimum levels of
service.
Beginning in FY 12-13, the Administration has been
focused on rebuilding service delivery systems and
correcting problems throughout the County that arose
during this particularly difficult time. In the case of the
Correctional system, AB 109 Criminal Justice
realignment created an interesting dichotomy of
providing additional resources that allowed the County
to accelerate building back staffing levels within the
correctional system, but also presented the difficulty of
introducing a more challenging population of inmates
that required additional and varied services.
Through AB 109 funding, the County was able to add
back 78 positions and $13 million in appropriations to
stabilize the Department of Correction. As the
Department gained more experience with AB 109, it
became clear that additional changes would be needed
to address gaps in service as the jail population was
shifting and other changes were impacting the system.
With this in mind, the Board approved the use of
general fund resources in FY 15-16 to add an Assistant
Sheriff for Custody Operations, jail investigation staff,
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and compliance
staff, Lieutenant positions for jail facility oversight, staff
to increase visiting hours at Main Jail South, and
funding to support additional beds for acute mental
health inmates and women's vocational programs. In
addition, funding was approved for training,
compliance, ADA software, the expansion of chaplaincy
services, classification software, increased vocational
training, and funding to help fill Correctional Deputy
vacancies.
Even with the approval of these additional resources, it
was clear that additional action was necessary to
address the changes taking place within our system.
While the Department has taken some time to analyze
each problem, the goal has been to respond quickly and
at a level commensurate with the magnitude of the
problems we face.
In December 2015, the Board approved the addition of
59 custody health staff to immediately improve services
to those with mental health and substance abuse issues.
This $17 million ongoing investment in services for inmates is a significant step to implement the kinds of
changes that immediately impact inmates throughout
our correctional system.
The Department has hired consultants and experts to
help implement these changes. This move was
necessary to providing the external view of what is
necessary to assist in the move from a County Jail to a
hybrid jail/prison with the implementation of AB 109.
This additional expertise is necessary to assure the
changes recommended will take place in an expedited
manner.
Aging Jail Facilities
Both Main Jail South and Elmwood have very old
facilities that are in need of renovation or replacement.
The annual maintenance and repair cost for these
facilities continues to increase. In addition, the
population of AB 109 inmates is continuing to increase.
These inmates have longer lengths of stay and add wear
and tear to these facilities.
The County has taken steps to create long-term
solutions in the form of the Jail Needs Assessment
commissioned in 2014 and pursuit of State Jail financing
that the County was awarded in December 2015 that
will result in a new facility that will dramatically
improve services to inmates suffering from mental
illness and will offer increased programming
opportunities as well.
On February 23, 2016 the Board adopted a Resolution
authorizing the application for Senate Bill (SB) 863 Jail
Construction Financing. This is a multi-year project
with an estimated build completion of spring 2020. The
Department has been an active participant in this
project to ensure the County is building a facility that
incorporates modern jail operations and allows for
housing inmates of a new population that have both
longer stays and more complex needs. The new facility
will allow for both direct and indirect supervision of
inmates and will have increased spaces for treatment
and programming.
Issues with Recruitment and Retention
Recruitment and retention of high-caliber law
enforcement professionals is a challenge, both in the
County and regionally. As of May 2016, the number of
Correctional Deputy vacancies is approximately 86,
which is an ongoing challenge for the Department. With
an aging workforce, the Department is anticipating
many retirements in the next few years. The Office of
the Sheriff continues to develop new and innovative
methods to recruit top applicants, and is targeting
significant resources at recruiting and backgrounding
many applicants. This included having 3 custody
academies during FY 15-16. The Administration is
supportive of the Sheriff ’s additional correctional
academies that are being held to fill vacancies within
the Department, and will address the issue during
FY 16-17 if additional funds for academies are
necessary.
Adult Development and expansion of
Electronic Monitoring Program
The Department is continuing to develop a continuum
of services for adults involved in the criminal justice
system, are committed to infusing evidence based
practices throughout the operation, and ensuring that
service delivery models and programming efforts are
based on best practices that will provide positive
outcomes for our clients.
The Department is using these principals to enhance
and improve the Electronic Monitoring Program which
serves as an alternative to incarceration for adults who
would otherwise serve custody in the County Jail.
Clients in this program are able to maintain their
employment in the community, attend school or
407
County of Santa Clara Section 2: Public Safety and Justice
FY 16-17 Recommended Budget Probation Department
Section 2: Public Safety and
Justice
vocational programs and participate in counseling or
rehabilitation programs in the community. The
Department is exploring ideas to expand the program
to have more coverage throughout the day and on
weekends, to employ the use of an assessment tool, to
implement the use of cognitive tools and programming,
and to provide more face to face supervision and the
appropriate supervision and response to match the risk
level of the client. The Department will also collect
important demographic and program data to be able to
report out on program outcomes and use data to
continually improve the program.
Adult Commercial Sexual Exploitation Program
Adult Services has recently added a new deputy
probation officer position to work closely with our
partners to help develop local protocols and
appropriate responses and services for adult sexual
exploitation victims. These victims that have found
themselves involved in the adult criminal system and
are in need of intensive support services. This
probation officer will be providing subject matter
expertise, supervision and support to sexual exploited
victims under supervision and act as a resource to other
probation officers throughout the division who may
have clients who are at-risk or suspected of being
victims of sexual exploitation. The Probation
Department will also be partnering with community
based organizations to ensure the needed services such
as mental health counseling, substance abuse
treatment, job training and educational support are in
place. An important piece of this work is the continued
communication and collaboration with our partners in
the community as well as participation in committees
and workgroups pertaining to commercially sexually
exploited transition youth or adults.
Adult Services Collaborative DFCS Caseload
Adult Services has recently added a new deputy
probation officer position to work closely with our
partners in the Department of Family and Children's
Services (DFCS) in serving clients who have children
involved in DFCS as a direct result of their criminal
involvement. DFCS commonly intervenes when a
parent is arrested and unavailable to care for their
children. This probation officer will be working in
collaboration with DFCS to motivate clients to accept
services, increase the chance of reunification, and
reduce the duplication of services. Probation is
developing policies and procedures to identify clients
who have open DFCS cases and will assist with
successful reunification, and create a safety plan for the
client's children in the event the client is arrested again,
identify best practices for serving this population,
implement strategies, and create communication
expectations between departments.
Juvenile Hall Assessment and
Orientation Unit (A&O)
New admits to Juvenile Hall are housed in the
Assessment and Orientation (A&O) Unit. The goal of
the A&O unit is to minimize the exposure of high risk
and/or repeat offender youth with the first-time
offenders detained in Juvenile Hall. With their assigned
counselors, youth review their Title 15 rights and rules
within Juvenile Hall. youth learn about phone call rules,
visiting hours, appeals, and grievance procedures. They
also receive medical, educational, mental health and
drug and alcohol assessments. Programs such as Fresh
Lifelines for Youth (FLY), Food Service, Mental Health,
Medical, and the Chaplaincy explain their services. The
daily structured activities are clearly outlined and
communicated.
Upon leaving the unit they complete an exit survey. All
assessments and orientations are documented in a
youth services plan, which is transferred with the youth
to another unit if the youth is to remain in custody after
their detention hearing.
Although this a very preliminary proposal, several
California Counties are exploring the possibility of
housing certain young adults in this age group, who
meet specific requirements, in Juvenile Hall instead of in
the County Jail. Senator Hill is co-sponsoring a bill with
the Chief Probation Officers of California outlining the
requirements to participate. The Probation Department
has provided input regarding the bill and is excited
about the proposal, if the details can be crafted in a
manner that allows operation of Juvenile Hall safely and
without compromising the litany of services the youth
now receive. The existing staffing pattern can support a
pilot of up to 30 young adults.
William F. James Ranch Construction
The William F. James Ranch construction is a Senate
Bill 81 Local Youthful Offender project funded in part
through grant dollars and a County match of general
408
Section 2: Public Safety and Justice County of Santa Clara
Probation Department FY 16-17 Recommended Budget
fund dollars. The Board of State and Community
Corrections (BSCC) is responsible for managing the
grant funding of this project.
In August 2006 the Probation Department redesigned
its rehabilitation programs at the Muriel Wright Center
and the William F. James Ranch. The redesign moved
operations from a correctional model to a therapeutic
model. Included in the redesign was extensive training
of staff in cognitive behavioral approaches for group and
individual processing. Additionally, the physical plant
was modified to provide for a more homelike
environment. The military style barracks with long rows
of metal bunks was transformed into makeshift pod
type units created with the use of temporary partitions
in an effort to create individual spaces to support the
smaller group counseling processing of the new
program. Although the 50 year old facility had been
modified, its general structure no longer met the needs
of the new program. The new construction will include
a new dormitory, which will allow for improved risk
classification separation of youth, as well as a new
gymnasium, kitchen and dining facility.
James Ranch Security
The James Ranch is a fenced, minimum-security county
rehabilitation facility for juvenile males and females,
ages 14 to 18 years. The James Ranch operates 24/7 and
has a capacity of 72 youth (60 males and 12 females).
The James Ranch lies within the limits of the City of
Morgan Hill on 27 acres of land adjacent to the eastern
foothills. The minimum-security design of the James
Ranch is dated and has resulted in challenges in
providing safety and security. Probation is re-evaluating
internal security measures.
The Probation Department has procured professional
services for a security needs assessment of the James
Ranch facility. The assessment shall include internal
security measures, a security systems study, and a
security related architectural needs.
Assembly Bill 403 - Continuum Care Reform
In January 2015, Assembly Bill 403 (AB 403) was
implemented which outlines recommended revisions
to the state's current foster care rate setting system,
services and programs serving children and families in
Foster Care eligible placement settings. Research
indicates that foster youth who live in congregate care
settings are more likely than those who live with families
to suffer a variety of negative short- and long-term
outcomes. Such placements are associated with the
creation of lifelong institutionalized behaviors, an
increased likelihood of being involved with the juvenile
justice system and the adult correctional system, and
low educational attainment levels. AB 403 mandates a
new rate structure for all foster care placements,
redefines congregate care (group homes) to Short Term
Residential Treatment Centers and emphasizes the
need for probation and providers to engage the child,
youth and family and their formal and informal
supports in the assessment, placement and service
planning through a teaming process. While Probation
has reduced the number of youth placed in congregate
care significantly since 2011, this reform will greatly
impact probation and its placement process and use of
various levels of foster care for juvenile justice youth.
In October 2014, the County of Santa Clara, jointly with
the Department of Family and Children's Services
(DFCS) entered into a 5 year, Title IV-E (Foster Care)
California Well-Being Project. The Well Being Project is
a federal program that provides a capped funding
allocation to participating counties that are contingent
upon an approved submitted Title IV-E Waiver Plan.
Plans are approved and funds are monitored by the
California Department of Social Services. The capped
allocation is in lieu of the quarterly fluctuating
administrative funding stream. The overall goals of the
project are to improve the array of services and
supports available to children, youth and families
involved in the child welfare and probation systems,
engage families through more individualized casework
with an emphasis on family involvement, increase child
safety without an over-reliance on out of home care,
improve permanency outcomes and child/family wellbeing,
and to decrease recidivism and delinquency for
youth involved with probation. Currently, the plan
submitted includes a subset of higher risk youth,
regardless of their legal status, to receive wraparound
services. The Well Being Project includes a required
evaluation component of wraparound services, which
was identified by all the participating probation
departments as a primary intervention of the project.
The Project has provided wraparound services to
approximately 180 juvenile justice youth annually, many
of whom were diverted from being placed in foster care.
Dually Involved Youth Initiative
The Courts, Probation Department and the
Department of Family and Children's Services (DFCS)
have partnered to implement new programming to
address the needs of youth involved in both the juvenile
justice and child welfare systems. This process has
included on-going leadership by a robust group of
stakeholders who have met monthly for over two years.
A Dually Involved Youth Unit, consisting of probation
officers, social workers and a youth advocate, was
established in FY 13-14 in an effort to create an
environment in which staff from different disciplines
work together to understand and serve the family unit
as a whole and respond effectively to the complex needs
of the youth and family. This team is empowered and
encouraged to develop non-traditional solutions to
meet specific needs. The initial group of youth and
families served by this model are showing very
promising outcomes. Additionally, many other
jurisdictions nationally are attempting to replicate this
strategy in their own systems. Many more youth and
families could benefit from this unique approach, but
the unit reached full capacity. As a result, in FY 15-16 the
Dually Involved Youth Unit expanded to serve more
youth and families in this holistic manner, anticipating
to serve 32 youth annually.
Commercially Sexually Exploited Children (CSEC)
Pursuant to Senate Bill 855, the Welfare and Institutions
code has been amended to clarify that “commercially
and sexually exploited children whose parents or
guardians failed or were unable to protect them may be
adjudged dependents of the juvenile court.” Additionally,
counties can participate in a state funded county CSEC
Program administered by the California Department of
Social Services (CDSS.) As part of this program, the
Department of Family and Children's Services (DFCS)
with the participation of the Probation Department and
other mandated partners, developed a local protocol
pending implementation. In support of DFCS’s efforts to
appropriately respond to the unique needs of this
population, Probation has designated a probation
officer in each Division, Adult and Juvenile, to
specifically supervise this population. Other elements to
be in compliance with the agreed upon Protocol are
pending implementation with the assistance of a
technical assistance provider.
Facility Improvements
There are numerous facility improvements in process.
The Board approved an office renovation as part of the
FY 15-16 Adopted Budget. The facility improvements
will allow for more office space for the Forensic
Technician staff and toxicology processing. Also, space
is being added for the Investigators’ office to allow for
more workspaces and a processing work station that
will accommodate more than one person. Other
improvements include re-flooring the intake area and
cameras to monitor the back parking lot and intake
doors.
Mobile Mass Casualty Autopsy Station
The Department is exploring the possibility of securing
homeland security grant funds to support a Mobile
Mass Casualty Autopsy Station. This would be part of
the initial processing of decedents after recovery and
scene documentation. Grant funds are being sought for
a four-walled temporary structure, a wastewater and
biohazard collection system, mobile gurneys, and a
scale to weigh decedents.
Section 2: Public Safety and Justice County of Santa Clara
Medical Examiner-Coroner FY 16-17 Recommended Budget
Records Management
The Department is looking at solutions for
management of files, including a filing system and the
conversion of old x-rays. A file management system
would allow for faster document retrieval, and the
conversion of old x-rays to digital.

The Department of Child Support Services is facing an
unprecedented fourteenth year of flat funding from the
California Department of Child Support Services. The
Department's budget allocation from the State is
approximately $37 million for FY 16-17. The
Department is projecting a budget deficit of
approximately $2.8 million for FY 16-17. This deficit
equates to 7.5% of the Department's total funding. This
historical flat funding, combined with recent increases
in negotiated labor and operating expenses, has
continued to fuel this projected deficit.
Last year the Department developed a mitigation plan
to methodically address the then $5.3 million deficit
over the next 2-3 years by implementing sustainable
solutions in a strategic manner. FY 16-17 represents the
second year of this long term plan. As part of this plan to
address the Department's ongoing structural budget
deficit, a comprehensive Operational Assessment was
completed in December 2015 by an independent team
of child support experts. This six month project was
focused on reviewing our current operational structure,
staffing, policies, and procedures in order to maximize
program performance, streamline business processes,
and transform the organization to better align with
state mandates relating to the more efficient delivery of
child support services. This assessment, funded by the
California Department of Child Support Services,
provides clear strategic direction through the
identification of key recommendations and changes to
the Department and has guided the development of the
Department's budget proposal for FY 16-17.
Implementing the findings from the completed
Operational Assessment will ensure the effective and
efficient use of resources while improving customer
service. Employee engagement and stakeholder
participation were critical elements of the assessment.
Additionally, the assessment included a comparative
analysis of other local county child support agencies
that are similarly situated and sized. This analysis
identified proven best practices that are in place in high
performing child support agencies, not just across
California, but also throughout the nation. The
Assessment recommended key organization and
staffing changes to bring DCSS in line with other
comparable and similarly sized local county child
support agencies across the State. The California
Department of Child Support Services has reviewed the
completed Assessment and provided their clear
direction regarding the implementation and
prioritization of key recommendations.
The key findings from the completed Operational
Assessment include: (1) expanding early intervention to
improve case resolution efforts, (2) empowering child
support officers through training and development, (3)
increasing stipulations and reducing default judgments
through collaborative negotiations, (4) establishing
right sized orders with an emphasis on a parent's actual
income, (5) the appropriate use of contempt through an
escalated enforcement model, and (6) the
implementation of caseload stratification to allow staff to target similarly grouped cases for better results.
Additionally, the Assessment identified staffing areas
where the Department is over staffed and also where
significant staffing voids exist compared to other child
support programs. The Department has already begun
to implement critical recommendations that
significantly improve operations and bring the
organization more in line with State and Federal goals
and objectives. This organizational change effort,
rooted in evidence based practices, will continue
through FY 16-17 with updates on progress reported
out to key stakeholders, the County, and the Board of
Supervisors.
Staffing Strategy & Budget
The Department has been in chronic cost cutting mode
for over a decade. Since 2004, the Department has cut
approximately 234 positions, which represents about a
50% reduction in staffing to date. During this time, the
caseload has also declined to about half of what it was
in 2004. Previous reductions were made through
necessity, so that the budget could be balanced and the
deficit could be addressed. The approach to determine
which positions to cut was primarily based on attrition.
As staff left, retired, and promoted out, most, if not all,
vacant positions were deleted. With this primary
approach to reducing costs, year after year, for well over
a decade, the organization has suffered significant long
term consequences. This has led to many significant
staffing voids that are both critical to the success of the
Department, and detrimental to the organization's
ability to move forward with the implementation of key
recommendations as identified in the Operational
Assessment. The Department has taken a measured
and balanced approach to addressing the ongoing
structural budget deficit.
Beyond reducing costs and bringing staffing in line with
other comparable counties, the Department also has an
obligation to begin to rebuild and fill key positions to
ensure the organization is properly structured and
staffed to weather additional reductions, while still
working hard to improve the operational model and
ensure the Department meets the needs of families that
rely on critical child support services. The FY 16-17
Recommended Budget takes a balanced approach,
rooted in the recommendations from the recently
completed Operational Assessment, to begin to address
key staffing voids that return tremendous value to the
organization and support its mission. In order for the
Department of Child Support Services to implement
many of the recommendations documented in the
Operational Assessment and become more efficient,
key positions must be added so the Department can
concurrently streamline operations and better position
itself to function in a more cost effective manner in
subsequent years.
IHSS Maintenance of Effort
Beginning July 1, 2012, as part of the 2012-2013 State
budget, the Legislature and Governor approved major
policy changes within the Medi-Cal program aimed at
improving care coordination, particularly for people on
both Medi-Cal and Medicare. Also approved as part of
this Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) are a number of
changes to the IHSS program, including State collective
bargaining for IHSS, creation of a County IHSS
Maintenance of Effort (MOE), and creation of a
Statewide Authority.
Effective July 1, 2012, counties have a MOE requirement
in lieu of paying a share of the non-Federal costs for
IHSS services and Public Authority administration. The
County IHSS MOE base was calculated based on
FY 11-12 actual expenditures on IHSS services and
FY 11-12 allocation for IHSS program and Public
Authority administration.
The FY 12-13 MOE base for Santa Clara County was
calculated at $58.8 million. The County IHSS MOE base
is adjusted annually to include increases in provider
wages and health benefits that are locally negotiated. In
IHSS Caseload and Provider Health Benefits
Clients/Providers 2015 2016 % Change
# of Clients 20,081 21,290 6%
# of Providers 19,028 20,288 6.6%
Health Benefit # of Enrolled Providers % Change
Valley Health Plan 9,377 9,866 5.2%
-IHSS Classic Plan 8,535 7,186 -15.8%
-IHSS New Pref. Plan 842 2,680 218.3%
Liberty Dental Plan 9,976 10,476 5%
Vision Service Plan 9,976 10,476 5%
441
County of Santa Clara Section 3: Children, Seniors and Families
FY 16-17 Recommended Budget In-Home Supportive Services Program Costs
Section 3: Children, Seniors,
and Families
addition, starting July 1, 2014, the County MOE base is
adjusted by an inflation factor of 3.5 percent. The
estimated IHSS MOE base/County share of cost for
FY 16-17 is calculated to be $70.6 million, $68.4 million
of which is budgeted in IHSS and $2.2 million in the
Department of Aging and Adult Services (DAAS).
The IHSS MOE may become inoperative if the CCI
demonstration project and the responsibilities of the
Statewide Authority become inoperative. If the MOE
becomes inoperative then the prior county share of
non-Federal cost would again become effective.
Federal Overtime Regulations
Due to the Federal passage of the Fair Labor Standards
Act (FLSA) regulations, the California Department of
Social Services (CDSS) announced on November 1,
2015, that payment for overtime for IHSS providers
would begin on February 1, 2016. The regulations
require payment to domestic workers for time worked
over 40-hours per week. In addition, the regulations
require payment to providers traveling between
multiple recipients, wait time that is associated with
medical accompaniment, and time spent in mandatory
provider training.
On February 1, 2016, CDSS began sending the required
forms to recipients and providers. These forms are now
being returned to IHSS with required information for
data entry. There will be a three-month grace period in
which providers will be permitted to make errors
(violations) on their timesheets claiming overtime.
Following this three-month grace period, IHSS is
expected to track each violation committed by each
provider because there will be consequences imposed,
such as suspension from provider status, signing an
acknowledgment form sent by CDSS, and termination
from provider status. The State continues to deliver
instruction regarding administration of the new
requirements.
Statewide Authority Update
In 2015, the State IHSS Services Authority (also known
as the Statewide Authority) began assuming collective
bargaining responsibilities for wages and benefits for
some of the first counties (Riverside, San Bernardino,
San Diego, and San Mateo) enrolled in the Statewide
Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI). Changes were made
in union representation pursuant to consolidations and
mergers that took effect in 2015.
On January 1, 2016, Santa Clara County's bargaining role
with SEIU Local 521 shifted to the Statewide Authority.
The County's MOU with Local 521 is set to expire
February 1, 2017.
Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT)
As part of the CLT program, SSA continues to
collaborate with the Office of Cultural Competency,
Clerk of the Board, and the Office of Budget and
Analysis on two efforts with significant impact.
SSA is partnering with the Office of Cultural
Competency on process improvements aimed at
reducing entry of children of color into the child welfare
and juvenile justice systems. The CLT is focused on
referrals for General Neglect in Child Welfare, and
Misdemeanors and Infractions for Juvenile Justice.
Through that lens, the CLT has identified five specific
zip codes that represent the largest proportion of these
type of referrals to target interventions. SSA has begun
to engage system partners, families, and youth to
leverage resources, while developing education,
prevention and diversion strategies.
SSA is also participating in the Agenda Review
Committee (ARC) CLT project to improve the processes
by which County departments report-out to the Board
of Supervisors. Working in close collaboration with
stakeholders from the Clerk of the Board, Office of
Budget and Analysis, and other departments, SSA is
engaged in definition of roles and responsibilities,
development of training materials, and an online
resource portal.
Communication
Building upon a previous CLT in support of the Agency's
strategic plan, SSA has implemented communication
tools to improve Agency-wide collaboration and
effectiveness. These tools include monthly postings on
the Agency intranet, a newsletter that is released every
other month, and real-time announcements that
highlight staff projects and accomplishments
showcasing the Agency’s vision to serve, engage, and
transform. Contributions from staff and management
are regularly solicited for intranet content, with
headlines distributed Agency-wide at the end of each
business day. In addition, direct communication with
the Agency director is ensured through an existing staff
question box posted on the home page.
Just Culture
The Department of Employment and Benefit Services
(DEBS) has consistently sought out innovative
strategies to improve processes and develop an open,
collaborative environment. Leadership training for
supervisors and managers has allowed DEBS to
implement Just Culture. DEBS executive staff host open
brown bag meetings, and district office managers are
attending unit meetings. Additionally, when new
projects arise, line staff members from district offices
participate in workgroups to explore improvements to
service delivery and workflows to better serve clients.
As a result, client wait times have declined in all DEBS
offices for all benefit services, and a growing number of
clients are receiving same-day services.
Unit-Based Teams
In the most recent labor contract negotiations, the
Service Employees International Union (SEIU) and SSA
established a contractual agreement to initiate the use
of Unit-Based Teams (UBT) to establish and build
collaborative engagement in programmatic and
organizational improvements. The foundation of the
UBT method is joint labor/management planning,
analysis, and improvement of barriers to quality client
service. Dialogue was initiated between SEIU and SSA
leadership in the fall of 2015. Since then, SEIU and SSA
leadership have made gains building the ground work
for the development of collaborative agreements to
guide the initiation of this team-based approach to
improvement work.
Workgroups
The Department of Children's and Family Services
(DFCS) has convened a social worker retention
workgroup to better understand on-the-job challenges.
Suggestions around visitation processes and social
worker administrative needs are key areas being
addressed. Additionally, Information Systems is
supporting DFCS workers by automating work
processes in the Child Abuse and Neglect reporting
center and Emergency Response unit.
SSA continues to participate in the County Welfare
Directors Associations' (CWDA) Customer Experience
work group. This initiative, created to address changes
in the application process for benefits coverage driven
by Health Care Reform, is tasked with laying the foundation for customer service principles and
approaches across 15 participating counties. The group
has developed a statewide definition for customer
experience, which was approved and adopted by
CWDA. The group is now creating a customer service
toolkit to be used by counties Statewide and available
on the CWDA website.
Innovation and Technology
A mobile application for social work case management
has been piloted in DFCS and new mobile equipment
has been provided to case workers in Adult Protective
Services, DFCS, and IHSS. Given successful adoption in
the pilot trials, the Agency is developing a mobility
project plan to improve working conditions for social
workers. An additional pilot group of IHSS social
workers is successfully teleworking with a target of 10%
time in the office.
Social Worker Recruitment and Retention
In FY 15-16, DFCS operations were impacted by the
continual loss of experienced social workers and the
ongoing challenge to recruit bilingual, specifically
Spanish-speaking, candidates. Despite hiring 69 new
social workers in 2015, the Department had 40 current
social worker vacancies as of February 2016.
Although the majority of social worker vacancies in
DFCS are in continuing services units, the number of
vacancies has been increasing in Dependent Intake and
in the South County Bureau. In 2015, The Department
partnered with the Employee Services Agency to
implement new recruitment strategies and convene a
social worker retention workgroup. The workgroup
identified a number of key areas the Department is
addressing, including visitation, Social Worker I
resources, clerical support, and the challenges
associated with the increasing frequency of
international and other out-of-county travel. A staff
satisfaction survey is planned for 2016.
Disproportionate Representation of Children of
Color in the Child Welfare System
Disproportionate representation of children of color in
the child welfare system is not unique to Santa Clara
County - it is an issue that exists in child welfare
jurisdictions across the country. Nationwide, the
disproportionate representation is among African
Ancestry and Native American children. In Santa Clara
County, the disproportionate representation is for
African Ancestry and Latino children. This
disproportionate representation is a reflection of larger
issues across a variety of systems, as it is also reflected
in the juvenile justice system and the adult criminal
justice system.
DFCS has made disproportionality a primary issue and
area of focus for the current System Improvement Plan
(SIP). Specific goals and actions steps targeting
elimination of disproportionate representation by the
end of FY 17-18 are being coordinated with the current
SIP.
468
Section 3: Children, Seniors and Families County of Santa Clara
Department of Family and Children’s Services — Social Services Agency FY 16-17 Recommended Budget
Self-Assessment and Systems Improvement
Process
AB 636, the Child Welfare System Improvement and
Accountability Act of 2011, required counties to
undertake an extensive self-assessment of the local
child welfare system resulting in the development of a
multi-year System Improvement Plan (SIP).
In FY 15-16, DFCS and the County have proactively
engaged in the following efforts related to SIP and the
Disproportionate Representation of Children of Color in
the Child Welfare System:
¦ The California Partners for Permanency (CAPP), a
Federal project focused on reducing long-term foster
care and increasing permanency for children and
youth. This project evaluates Santa Clara County's
over-representation of children of African Ancestry
in long-term foster care. A second element of the
project was the implementation of a child and family
practice model focused on developing greater
consistency in child welfare practice and to more
effectively engage and involve children and families
in addressing issues and safety.
¦ The Latino Child Welfare Equity Project (LCWEP), a
review related to the over-representation and higher
rates of entry into the child welfare system of Latino
children and families. This project holds community
forum meetings with community partners, social
workers, youth, and families.
¦ The Children of Color Task Force, a group comprised
of community partners, DFCS, and Social Services
Agency staff, that conducts monthly reviews of
County efforts to ameliorate disproportionality.
Continuum of Care Reform
In October 2015, Governor Jerry Brown signed AB 403,
which is focused on reforming the service delivery
continuum for children and youth requiring out-ofhome
placement. Some of CCR's core values are
permanency for all children; access to individualized
services regardless of where a child is placed;
collaboration through child and family teams; and a
departure from congregate care (except for very specific,
short-term, therapeutic interventions).
This policy shift changes how placements are
categorized, approved, and ultimately how rates are
structured. Under CCR, relatives, non-related extended
family members, and foster parents will go through the
Resource Family Approval Process (RFA) to be approved
as a resource home. This will replace the current
licensing and relative approval process, and requires all
counties to implement it by 2017.
Receiving Assessment and Intake Center (RAIC)
The Children Seniors and Families Committee (CSFC)
directed the DFCS to initiate a stakeholder process to
obtain input for the development of an action plan for
the RAIC's future location and operations. The DFCS
retained Anderson Brulé Architecture, Inc. (ABA) to
facilitate the development of a new service delivery
model for the functions of the RAIC. During the
planning process, ABA facilitated various meetings
including the Regulatory Review meetings, Core Team
meetings, Service Partners meetings, and Advisory
Committee meetings.
Three site options were considered during the RAIC
Planning Process, including the sites at Valley Health
Center (VHC) East Valley Clinic, St. John Street Parking
Lot, and Park & Go Lot at Camden Avenue/Almaden
Expressway. The VHC East Valley Clinic site was
ultimately selected because it offered the best option to
fulfill the requirements of the RAIC. Additionally, the
site provides the potential to offer adjacent services,
such as pediatric clinic services. The DFCS submitted
the final RAIC Strategic Operational Plan and Feasibility
Study to the CSFC on October 1, 2015, and the Board of
Supervisors on November 17, 2015. A decision will likely
be made on the plan in calendar year 2016.
Dave Thomas Foundation Grant
For the third consecutive year, the Department was
awarded $84,000 from the Dave Thomas Foundation to
support and strengthen efforts to address the safety,
permanency, and well-being of children and youth in
foster care by implementing the following efforts:
¦ Enhanced foster care recruitment; and
¦ Targeted recruitment to overcome the scarcity of
adoptive family homes for older youth through
education of prospective families.
In 2016, the funding will support one classified termlimited
position to work on finding forever homes for
those children who are legally freed for adoption and
those in Permanent Plan Living Arrangements.
Foster Parent Recruitment and Support
In January 2016, the Department was awarded $270,000
from the California Department of Social Services
(CDSS) for foster parent recruitment, retention, and
support. DFCS will utilize the funding to create a more
robust and sustainable resource family program. The
vision includes ensuring available resource homes for all
children, youth, and non-minor dependents who need
placements.
Commercially Sexually Exploited Children
DFCS has led and engaged in multi-agency
collaborations for the last several years to improve
support and services to commercially sexually exploited
children and youth. An allocation was granted to the
County in FY 15-16 to augment CSEC activities and add
positions. Currently, DFCS is developing and
implementing policies and procedures based on the
protocol approved by the California Department of
Social Services (CDSS), and building upon the existing
infrastructure.
DFCS is responsible for developing and implementing
multi-disciplinary teams (MDTs) when there are reports
of criminal sexual exploitation of children. The purpose
of these MDTs is to ensure the specialized needs of
exploited children and youth are met in a victimcentered
and collaborative approach. After MDT
procedures have been finalized, training will be
developed and offered to all social worker staff.
The DFCS CSEC Committee is working jointly with San
Mateo County to put on the third annual Youth
Empowerment Conference. This conference targets
young girls and women in the child welfare system who
are vulnerable to, or victims of, commercial sexual
exploitation.
Structured Decision Making
Structured Decision Making® (SDM) is an evidence and
research-based system that identifies key points in the
life of a child welfare case, and uses structured analyses
to improve the consistency and validity of each
decision.
The objectives of SDM are to 1) identify critical decision
points; 2) increase consistency in decision-making; 3)
increase accuracy; and 4) target resources to those
families with the greatest need. The SDM system has six
components - a Hotline Tool; Safety Assessment Tool; a
Risk Assessment Tool; a Family Strengths and Needs
Assessment (FSNA) Tool; a Risk Reassessment Tool, and
a Reunification Reassessment Tool. The use of SDM at
key decision making points will be required in Santa
Clara County. The SDM system aligns with Safety
Organized Practice (SOP) and the Child and Family
Practice Model (CFPM) as it uses similar concepts
(harm, danger, complicating factors, family strengths,
protective capacity) and is focused on safety, well-being,
and permanency.
The Department of Family and Children's Services
(DFCS) is planning to transition from the use of the
Comprehensive Assessment Tool (CAT) to the
Structured Decision Making (SDM) System and Tools.
Originally, the DFCS adopted the CAT as it included
factors and considerations that SDM did not include,
such as cultural considerations. However, over time,
SDM has been updated to include many of these factors
and the other CAT counties have gradually transitioned
over to SDM. In addition, the California Department of
Social Services (CDSS) is in the initial stages of
developing a new child welfare computer system and
will be requiring that all 58 counties utilize the same
risk assessment tool as part of the new computer
system. The DFCS will be working with the CRC and
CDSS to develop a training and implementation plan
with a target date of June 30, 2016 for full
implementation.
DEBS has worked to streamline processes in order to
serve clients as quickly and efficiently as possible. As a
result, client wait times have declined in all DEBS office
locations for all benefit services and a growing number
are receiving same-day services.
In FY 14-15, DEBS implemented the Telephonic
Signature recertification process for CalFresh and
CalWORKs clients. What began as a pilot project in a
few offices is now in nearly every DEBS office, allowing
clients to complete their periodic reporting over the
telephone in a few simple steps. This new system has
proven to be accurate, easy-to-use, and efficient,
eliminating the need for lengthy paper forms and office
visits.
Medi-Cal redetermination has also been streamlined,
with an increasing percentage of clients eligible for an
automatic renewal through the Federal Hub. A
verification of income and other eligibility requirements
is run behind-the-scenes, allowing Medi-Cal benefits to
continue uninterrupted.
CalWORKs Housing Support Program
Family Stabilization is a component of the CalWORKs
program that provides intensive case management and
services aimed at stabilizing families. The stabilization
services provided to each CalWORKs family focuses on
the immediate housing crisis and long-term stability. In
the first six months of FY 15-16, 49 families received
services which allowed them to avoid eviction and
homelessness.
In partnership with Abode Services, the CalWORKs
Housing Support Program (HSP) provides homeless
CalWORKs families with a variety of services and
assistance to secure, stable permanent housing. Ongoing
State funding has allowed DEBS to continue to
provide these vital services, assisting a total of 322
families as of December 2015. In the coming year,
together with the Office of Supportive Housing, DEBS
and Abode will extend their reach with the Light Touch
Housing program, serving additional DEBS clients who
are ineligible for the CalWORKs HSP program.
Expanding Outreach Efforts and Strengthening
Partnerships
DEBS maintains a commitment to reaching the most
vulnerable residents of Santa Clara County by
continually seeking innovative partnerships. Over the
past year, DEBS has strengthened existing partnerships
with the local Emergency Assistance Network (EAN),
placing out-stationed Eligibility Workers at partner
agencies across the County. These workers process
applications and provide education about benefit
programs on-site, in the neighborhoods where clients
live and work.
Over the past year, DEBS has made significant strides in
reaching out to the homeless in Santa Clara County.
Staff are providing same day services in County offices,
482
Section 3: Children, Seniors and Families County of Santa Clara
Department of Employment and Benefit Services — Social Services Agency FY 16-17 Recommended Budget
as well as, direct services at emergency shelters,
community organizations and homeless encampments.
Eligibility Workers have taken an active role, partnering
with organizations including the Sunnyvale Cold
Weather Shelter, and the Breakthrough Outreach Hi-
Tech Rover, offering on-the-spot intake for those in need
of CalFresh and Medi-Cal. These partnerships have
quickly become an important part of DEBS' outreach
efforts, and staff continue to develop strategies to
further expand these services to additional sites.
Seniors Agenda
The accomplishments and collaborative efforts of the
Seniors Agenda has led to the next goal to achieving the
World Health Organization's designation of an Agefriendly
County and joining the international network of
cities and counties who are intentionally preparing for
two global demographic trends: the rapid aging
population and increasing urbanization. The goal is to
have all cities in Santa Clara County align with the
County to become a World Health Organization Agefriendly
county/city by 2017. In 2011, the towns of Los
Altos and Los Altos Hills became the first towns in
Santa Clara County to receive this award. The first cities
to begin the process are San Jose, Morgan Hill, Santa
Clara, Mt. View, Palo Alto, Sunnyvale, Los Gatos and
Saratoga.
With the technical assistance of the Center for Age
Friendly Excellence (CAFÉ) each city and the county
will assess their community for age friendliness using
the eight domains: 1) Transportation; 2) Housing;
3) Outdoor Space & Building; 4) Communication &
Information; 5) Civic Participation & Employment;
6) Respect & Social Inclusion; 7) Social Respect;
8) Community Support & Health Services. In
collaboration with the Department of Public Health,
there will be a county-wide survey to complement the
focus groups. The outcomes from the assessment will
be used to develop initiatives to make our cities and
county a more inclusive and accessible urban
environment that promotes active aging.
Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI)
The Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) was passed in July
2012 and marked an important step toward improving
California's Medi-Cal (Medicaid) care delivery system.
The CCI integrates delivery of medical, behavioral, and
long-term care services and provides a demonstration
pilot opportunity to integrate Medicare and Medi-Cal
for people in both programs, called dual-eligible
beneficiaries. A major component of the CCI is the IHSS
program. Under CCI, Medi-Cal beneficiaries, including
dual-eligible beneficiaries, are required to join a Medi-
Cal managed care health plan to receive benefits,
including IHSS. CCI is composed of three major parts.
¦ Long-Term Supports and Services (LTSS) as a Medi-
Cal Managed Care Benefit: CCI includes the addition
of LTSS into Medi-Cal managed care. LTSS includes
nursing facility care (NF), In-Home Supportive
Services (IHSS), Multipurpose Senior Services
Program (MSSP), and Community-Based Adult
Services (CBAS). This change impacts about 60,000
Medi-Cal only enrollees and up to 456,000 persons
eligible for both Medicare and Medi-Cal who are in
Cal MediConnect.
¦ Cal Medi-Connect Program (CMC): A three-year
demonstration project for persons eligible for both
Medicare and Medi-Cal (dual-eligibles) to receive
coordinated medical, behavioral health, long-term
institutional, and home-based and communitybased
services through a single organized delivery
system (health plan).
¦ Mandatory Enrollment of Dual-Eligibles and Others
into Medi-Cal Managed Care: Most Medi-Cal beneficiaries,
including dual-eligibles, partial dual-eligibles,
and previously excluded Seniors and Persons with
Disabilities (SPDs) who are Medi-Cal only, are
required to join a Medi-Cal managed care health
plan to receive their Medi-Cal benefits.
The purpose and goal of CCI is to promote the
coordination of health and social care for Medi-Cal
consumers, and to create fiscal incentives for health
plans to make decisions that keep their members healthy and out of institutions; especially given that
hospital and nursing home care are more expensive
than home and community-based care.
Prior to CCI, dual-eligibles accessed services through a
complex system of disconnected programs funded by
different government programs (e.g., Federal, Medi-Cal,
IHSS-county based). This fragmentation often led to
beneficiary confusion, delayed care, inappropriate
utilization, and unnecessary costs.
As a pilot county, Santa Clara initiated the LTSS portion
of the CCI in 2014 and the Cal MediConnect (CMC)
Program in 2015. As of November 2015, the total
Statewide enrollment in CMC is 116,356. In Santa Clara
County, 12,423 have enrolled. In the county, the overall
opt-out rate is at 40 percent and for IHSS recipients, the
opt-out rate is 48 percent. Statewide, there was an
approximate 45 percent overall opt-out rate and 61
percent for IHSS recipients. These opt-out rates are
higher than the initial prediction of 33 percent and vary
by county.
Efforts to evaluate CMC, including how enrollees are
experiencing care coordination and its effects on health
care delivery, are progressing. CMS will have the first
annual California-specific evaluation report, with a
thorough review of utilization data, available in early
2017.
Federal Overtime Regulations
Due to the federal passage of the Fair Labor Standards
Act (FLSA) regulations, the California Department of
Social Services (CDSS) announced on November 1,
2015, that payment for overtime for IHSS providers
would begin on February 1, 2016. The regulations
require payment to domestic workers for time worked
over 40 hours per week. In addition, the regulations
require payment to providers traveling between
multiple recipients, wait time that is associated with
medical accompaniment, and time spent in mandatory
provider training.
On February 1, 2016, CDSS began sending the required
forms to recipients and providers. These forms are now
being returned to IHSS with required information for
data entry. There will be a three-month grace period, in
which providers will be permitted to make errors
(violations) on their timesheets claiming overtime.
Following this three-month grace period, IHSS is
expected to track each violation committed by each
provider because violations could lead to suspension or
termination from provider status. The State continues
to deliver instruction regarding administration of the
new requirements.
Health Equity
Promoting health equity is a key strategy for addressing
major population health issues rooted in
socioeconomic inequalities. Despite overall high health
rankings for Santa Clara County in recent years, due
partly to the relatively prosperous and well-educated
population, major disparities and inequities in health
outcomes persist. Social determinants of health play as
large or even a larger role in health outcomes than
medical care, and further perpetuate inequities that
result in negative health outcomes for many in our
county. Education, income, race, and discrimination are
critical social determinants of health. The Public Health
Department has embarked on an initiative to establish a
health equity lens across all of its programs, services,
policies and practices. Advancing health equity requires
diverse partnerships and deep community relationships
to eliminate avoidable inequities. The Department's
health equity initiative also encompasses strategies to
prevent violence, as the factors that contribute to
violence reflect inequities as well.
Epidemiology and Data Automation
A cornerstone of public health is epidemiology, the
practice of identifying and studying the distribution of
health conditions and their contributing factors across
the population. Epidemiology capacity is important for
the detection, control, and prevention of all public
health issues, especially for communicable diseases. In
fact, Healthy People 2020 calls upon federal, state, and
local public health agencies to provide comprehensive
epidemiology capacity to support essential public
health department functions. Information technology
offers great opportunity for the Department to increase
its access to data across multiple programs, institutions
and jurisdictions, resulting in a more systematic and
comprehensive understanding of the health issues
facing the county. Examples of such technologies
include health information exchanges and open data
portals. During FY 16-17, the Department will be laying
the foundation for greater access to and dissemination
of data to best understand and improve population
health.
Infectious Disease Prevention, Surveillance and
Response
A foundational capacity of all local public health
departments is the prevention and control of infectious
diseases. Over the past year, the Department has
responded to several outbreaks of communicable
disease, including Shigella, measles, flu, and
Meningococcal infection. The Department is focused
on increasing and improving its epidemiologic,
investigative, and response capability within the
infectious disease workforce to ensure effective
response to existing and novel infections.
Performance Management and Innovation
In December 2015, the National Public Health
Accreditation Board conducted a site visit as part of the
Department's application for accreditation. The site
visit results were highly favorable with 96% of the
accreditation measures evaluated as fully or largely met.
In March, the Department was notified by the Public
Health Accreditation Board that it had achieved
accreditation. Two key components of accreditation
include a departmental strategic plan and a
comprehensive performance management/quality
improvement program. In July 2015, the Department
launched a strategic plan and has established a
performance management system to monitor and
report progress on the plan's objectives over the next
three years. Quality improvement continues to be a
high priority for the Department, and the effort has been formalized with a departmental Quality
Improvement Council and a Quality Improvement
Training Program. The Department is working to create
capacity across all of its branches to identify and
address improvement needs and build a culture of
learning.
Chronic Disease and Injury Prevention
Improving healthy life years and decreasing the burden
of disease through the efforts of community
transformation remains a leading effort of the
Department. This work is founded in the concept that
our health is a direct reflection of the attributes of the
environments and communities in which we live, work,
play and learn. Hence, community transformation is
about creating environments that are more conducive
to health, from school and work place wellness to
jurisdictional and organizational policy. The
Department has successfully implemented the first year
of a large Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
grant, Partnership to Improve Community Health. The
grant focuses on creating communities and
environments that promote healthy eating and physical
activity and reduce tobacco use and exposure-through
changes to policy, systems and environments. The
Department continues to expand its work in the active
transportation arena, particularly in its partnerships
with schools to increase walking and bicycling to school
through Safe Routes to School programs.
Clinic-Community Transitions
Public Health Department efforts to improve
population health remain a highly relevant aspect of
health care reform. Several initiatives are underway that
further highlight the value of an integrated health
system where key staff across multiple SCVHHS
departments are collaborating to address the whole
person health care needs of patient populations.
Transition care teams, the Nurse Family Partnership
and the diabetes prevention initiative are examples of
improving population health by supporting individuals
as they move from the clinic setting to the community.
Emergency Medical Services
The Board of Supervisors approved the first three-year
extension to the agreement with Rural/Metro to
continue to provide paramedic and emergency
ambulance services to the County Exclusive Operating
Area. In addition, the Board requested a report from the
EMS Agency that will identify various 911 EMS system
service delivery options for consideration. A request for
proposals will continue to be refined and released when
directed.
In FY 15-16, the EMS Agency began to transition from a
unit within the Public Health Department to an Agency
within the Santa Clara Valley Health and Hospital
System. The transition will continue in FY 16-17 to
better position the EMS Agency to function as a
regulatory authority as well as to provide leadership
through the continued development of integrated
health system opportunities with focuses on the
continuum of care for patients within Santa Clara
County.
Quality Improvement and Just Culture Efforts
To enhance teamwork and collaboration at the Santa
Clara County Public Health Department, the
Department has expanded the use of unit-based teams
(UBTs). Using two process improvement models-the
Rapid Improvement Model (RIM) and Lean Six Sigmateams
have completed 9 quality improvement (QI)
projects; two of the 9 were part of the SCVHHS UBT
cohorts. Completed projects focused on improving the
timeliness of prescription refills; streamlining birth
registration; improving Salmonella case investigations;
simplifying the travel request, approval, and
reimbursement process; increasing the safety response
for departmental facilities; advancing the use of QI tools
in the Department; promoting breastfeeding practices
in the Nurse Family Partnership program; and,
improving CCS medical, residential, and financial
eligibility. Current and ongoing projects include
reducing no-show rates in the WIC clinics and
increasing patient compliance visits at the SCVMC
endocrine specialty care center.
These projects coincided with a Center for Leadership
& Transformation (CLT) project in the Communicable
Disease Prevention & Control (CD) program. Through
the CLT project, teams mapped the current state of
various processes in the CD program, and identified
areas of the processes needing the most improvement.
Based on changes identified by CLT project team
members and further analyzed and implemented by Six
Sigma project team members, the CD program cut the
time to investigation for Salmonella cases in half.
As part of its efforts to promote Just Culture, the
Department provided trainings to support manager and
staff behaviors for fairly addressing mistakes and putting systems and processes in place to prevent
mistakes in the future. The Department provided a
mandatory online training for all staff on basic
Performance Management/Quality Improvement
(PM/QI) concepts, resources, and departmental policy,
and conducted a new employee orientation on the
PM/QI program. In addition, the Department offered bimonthly
trainings for staff on basic and advanced QI
tools, such as process maps, affinity diagrams, fishbone
diagrams, Gantt charts, run charts, and Pareto charts.
The Department also started to build the capacity of its
employees in Lean Six Sigma, having trained 72 Yellow
Belts, 29 Green Belts, and 6 Black Belts. Tools and
training materials were disseminated via the intranet to
all staff. The Department updated its performance
management system to an online database in 2015,
which it has since begun using to monitor, evaluate, and
report progress on strategic and program objectives.
Based on performance data, the Department will be
able to identify additional opportunities for
improvement for UBT and CLT projects.
As a result of the Public Safety Realignment AB109 Plan
(AB109) that became effective in October 2011, some
inmates who were previously sentenced to the State
Prison system are now sentenced to local County jail
facilities to serve their period of incarceration. Due to
the longer lengths of time which these inmates are
sentenced, CHS has been reassessing clinical operations
and developing reasonable plans to ensure that inmates
receive all medically necessary preventive, episodic, and
chronic care services. To this end, CHS has brought in
nationally-renowned experts to advise on any gaps in
the health care services provided to jail inmates, and
how to fill any such gaps.
The population in the County's jail facilities with a
serious mental illness has swelled to approximately 18%
of the population. This has strained the ability of the
Department of Correction and CHS to provide safe
housing for mentally ill inmates. Housing mentally ill
inmates in units that are not best suited for the inmates'
mental condition can potentially deteriorate their
mental status and could subject them to victimization
by other inmates. CHS is working closely with the
Department of Correction to find appropriate housing
for all mentally fragile inmates.
In addition, due to the increased number of inmates
who are older than 55 years of age and the increased
number of inmates with several medical pathologies
and physical disabilities, there has been a strain on the
number of infirmary and Special Housing beds available
for inmates who require such treatment and beds. The
Medical Infirmary, as well as the Special Housing Units,
must be triaged every shift to accommodate inmates
who need these beds. The AB109 inmates have placed a
further strain on the availability of these beds as they
may need a specialty housing unit for the entire period
of their lengthy incarceration.
Additionally, in response to the longer lengths of stays of
inmates and the increased census, CHS will provide
urgent Dental Services to augment the emergent
services which are currently provided and will reduce
the time that is needed by inmates to access these
services.
There continues to be an increased demand for
comprehensive discharge planning for inmates released
from Custody Facilities to ensure that both the
medically fragile inmates as well as the mentally ill
inmates are provided continuity of care upon their
release to the community.
The women's inmate population has significantly
increased since 2011, reaching an Average Daily Census
of approximately 450 inmates. The mentally ill female
population has also risen, with female inmates utilizing
30% of the acute mental health beds on a daily basis.
Due to the increase in the number of the mentally ill
inmates in the Jails, particularly those inmates who
suffer from serious mental illnesses and substance use
disorders, in December 2015 the Board of Supervisors
approved funding for the hiring of additional staff to
provide behavioral health services, including mental
health clinicians, substance use treatment clinicians,
and custody staff, to provide enhanced treatment for
this population of inmates throughout the Jail system.
These services will be deployed throughout the Jails
over an extended period of time to ensure their success.
Behavioral Health Integration
In FY 15-16, the Behavioral Health Services Department
(BHSD) focused on the specific operational changes
required to fully integrate the new department, which
included four key areas: infrastructure, shared space, a
new, integrated budget unit, and a new BHSD brand.
Working with the County's Employee Services Agency,
BHSD leadership identified the need for administrative
infrastructure and career pathways for clinical and
quality improvement staff.
The BHSD management team participated in a space
planning process with the Facilities and Fleet
Department to determine current and future space
needs. The planning process resulted in a BHSD Space
Assessment, which will guide and support
administrative integration and other growth needs. The
Office of the County Executive has identified a potential
County facility space for BHSD Administration and
initial planning is underway.
A new integrated budget unit for the Behavioral Health
Services Department will be rolled out at the start of the
new fiscal year to allow for better integration of the
fiscal relationships between the former SUTS and
Mental Health Departments.
In December 2015, an online branding selection process
was launched for BHSD staff. Staff reviewed three
possible brands, and voted for their favorite. The BHSD
brand with the greatest staff support was selected and
brand design and development is underway, with a
planned release in spring 2016.
Integration of the treatment system will occur in phases
over the next couple of years in partnership with staff,
community-based providers, and community
stakeholders. BHSD leadership will continue to focus on
engaging staff and managers in a collaborative effort to
implement effective administrative practices and
integrated services that are of value to clients, achieve
meaningful and measurable outcomes, and are cost
effective. Drawing from the Behavioral Health Unit-
Based Teams, Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT) improvement strategies, and
rapid cycle process improvement initiatives, BHSD will
move towards implementation of a state-of-the-art
delivery system for those with mental health, substance
use and co-occurring conditions.
Affordable Care Act and the 1115 Medi-Cal
Waiver Plan
The Affordable Care Act (ACA), and specifically,
expansion of Medi-Cal benefits to new populations such
as single persons, came into effect in January 2014.
Consequently, the revenue stream for SUTS started to
shift as more clients became eligible for Drug Medi-Cal
funding. Although ACA expanded the eligible
population to include single persons, it did not
substantially alter the services funded by Drug Medi-
Cal, which are mainly for pregnant and parenting
women and opioid treatment. Most substance use
treatment continued to require other funding sources,
such as block grants and County General Fund monies,
even after the ACA became effective.
The California Department of Health Care Services
(DHCS) decision to apply for the 1115 Medicaid Waiver
specific to a substance use treatment services allowed
the State to change to substance use treatment delivery
system and make it more like other Medi-Cal services.
SUTS submitted a waiver plan that proposes
fundamental changes in the Medi-Cal framework for
delivery of and reimbursement for services, under the
rubric of an Organized Delivery System (ODS). Several
key changes are proposed under the SUTS 1115 Waiver
proposal:
¦ Integrated call center: by creating a single point of
entry into the Behavioral Health system, it will be
possible to create a common point of entry and
referrals for clients with co-occurring disorders,
substance use disorders and mental health disorders.
An integrated call center will have enhanced
technological capacity to handle more calls and
improve client access to services.
¦ System-wide use of American Society for Addiction
Medicine (ASAM) criteria for level of care placement:
ASAM will more precisely match client treatment
intensity to treatment needs, ensuring that
clients receive the right services at the right time in
their recovery.
¦ Addition of new levels of care in the adult and youth
systems: the Medi-Cal Waiver plan proposes to add a
Clinically Managed Low Intensity Residential
Services level and Partial Hospitalization - Day
Treatment to the adult continuum of care and Clinically
Managed Medium/High Intensity Residential
Services and Intensive Outpatient to the youth
continuum of care.
¦ Post discharge monitoring and case management:
post-discharge recovery services will be enhanced to
include a client relapse monitoring program and an
evidence-based relapse prevention program. Case
management services will be restructured to align
with the requirements of a Medi-Cal reimbursable
service.
¦ Authorization or residential treatment: residential
treatment placement and capacity management has
been managed by the SUTS Quality Improvement
(QI) Division for many years. The Waiver requires
utilization management of the newly reimbursable
Residential Service Levels, and the QI Division will
need to authorize medically necessary residential
treatment services at the appropriate ASAM level of
intensity.
¦ Robust quality monitoring and performance
measurement: as the expanded system will be
considerably more complex to operate, a more
comprehensive Quality Improvement Plan will be
required. The enhanced plan calls for measuring (i)
access to the system, (ii) engagement in services, (iii)
client outcomes, (iv) care coordination, and (v)
communication.
¦ A cost-based pricing model for reimbursement
rates: SUTS proposed to create service bundles for
adult and youth treatment. Examples of proposed
adult and youth service bundles include individual
treatment, family treatment, recovery services and
psycho-educational groups. Each bundle consists of
a specific number of services for a specific duration
for the initial length of stay of 90 days.
The proposed changes in the delivery system (if
accepted by the State and the Center for Medicaid and
Medicare) will produce significant changes in substance
use treatment and billing practices. This new system
will function as an ODS and will follow the current
managed care system that Santa Clara County has
operated for the past 20 years. Santa Clara County will
be among the earliest wave of counties in California to implement the 1115 Waiver. The new system will also
be able to provide higher quality care as it will become
possible to more precisely match client treatment
intensity to treatment needs.
Quality Improvement and Contract Outcomes
The BHSD has been working to develop performance
targets, metrics, and improvement objectives toward
improvement of client outcomes for all clients served.
Current system quality improvement objectives include
the following:
¦ Reduce the number of clients who access services
more than 14 days from initial request to no more
that 20% of total new clients;
¦ Increase the number of clients who are engaged in
the recovery process within 30 days to 70% for adults
and 75% for children;
¦ Increase the penetration rate for service to the
community by at least one percentage point for each
ethnic group;
¦ Increase to at least 35% the number of clients who
successfully discharge, as measured by their score at
discharge on the MORS (Milestones of Recovery
Scale) for adult clients and Child and Adolescent
Needs and Strengths (CANS) for children; and,
¦ Reduce the number of clients receiving inpatient
hospital services who are readmitted within 30 days.
The performance targets, metrics, and improvement
objectives were included in all of the BHSD contracts
beginning January 1, 2016. Mechanisms for collection
and reporting of this data have been developed and will
be disseminated through a performance learning
management dashboard and monitored during
quarterly program review meetings with BHSD and the
contractors.
Need for Transitional Housing Units
The influx of newly insured clients will tax the current
SUTS capacity in specific modalities, such as residential
treatment. Given the relative scarcity of residential
treatment beds in the Adult System and a very small
capacity in the Youth System, there is a possibility of
lengthy wait lists developing if there is a significant
influx of new clients. Because the system operates as a
continuum of care with each level of care interconnected,
a similar capacity shortfall is occurring in
the Transitional Housing Units (THU). THUs are
treatment-linked housing that support shorter
residential stays by providing stable transitional
housing to out-patient Adult Treatment consumers.
Electronic Health Record
The BHSD has been involved in overhauling and
implementing an electronic health record system and
creating an integrated record for both substance use
and mental health clients. The BHSD has decided to
implement HealthLink to integrate care management
through a single care plan across the SCVHHS. Using
HealthLink will allow the development of a common
BHSD portal into treatment and seamless care for
clients between the two specialty treatment systems.
The cost for this project is included in the FY 16-17
Recommended Budget.
Critical Workforce Needs
One of the greatest challenges facing BHSD is the
recruitment and retention of professional staff,
including psychiatrists, licensed Master Social Workers
and Marriage and Family Therapists, and counselors
certified by the California Association of Alcohol and
Drug Abuse. With the ACA's significant expansion of
behavioral health services, public and private health
providers, managed care plans, and hospital systems
across the greater Bay Area and the State are recruiting
behavioral health clinicians. With limited licensed staff
available and significant salary differentials for
psychiatrists, BHSD faces stiff competition for a
relatively small pool of candidates. In addition, Santa
Clara County's cultural and ethnic diversity of clients,
families and communities and high proportion of
mono-lingual speaking clients, necessitates culturally
and linguistically competent providers.
Working with the SCVHHS and the County's Employee
Services Agency, BHSD is identifying creative
approaches to recruitment that will increase the
number of licensed clinicians employed in Santa Clara
County.
Children's Acute Psychiatric Inpatient Facility
In June 2015, the Board of Supervisors requested a
recommendation on the feasibility of developing a
Santa Clara County children's acute psychiatric facility.
All children's inpatient services have been provided in
out-of-county hospitals, requiring families to travel to
see their children in a time of crisis.
BHSD convened a work group that included clinicians,
psychiatrists, family members and hospital
representatives. The group analyzed data on hospital
admissions and utilization patterns and identified the
essential services and family supports needed in a new
facility. As part of this process, staff conducted a focus
group with local private hospitals that treat children
with psychiatric needs and solicited their feedback and
recommendations. The recommendations were
consistent among all stakeholders, emphasizing short
inpatient stays, transitional services, and family
supports.
The Request for Proposals has been released, with
services anticipated to be provided beginning FY 16-17.
Adult Community-Based Crisis Services
A critical need for the BHSD Adult System of Care is the
expansion of community-based crisis services. Mobile
crisis teams are the highest priority, and a Request for
Proposals for these services has been released and
services are planned for Fall 2016. BHSD is also
exploring Psychiatric Emergency Response Teams
(PERT) teams, which include behavioral health
clinicians and law enforcement officers.
With a $3.9 million grant from the California Health
Facilities Financing Authority for community-based
crisis services, BHSD is developing a 24/7 adult crisis
stabilization unit (CSU) and two adult crisis residential
facilities. These services are designed as alternatives to
psychiatric emergency room visits and hospital stays,
with the goal of reducing hospital visits and addressing
crisis needs in the community. The County is in the
process of renovating two facilities to house these
programs. The East Valley Pavilion property, the site of
the Central/East San Jose Project, will house both the
CSU and a crisis residential unit. The Madrone property
will serve as the South County Crisis Residential project.
Construction on both projects is expected to be
completed by July 2016 and services are planned for
October 2016.
Involuntary Psychiatric Hold Planning Process
BHSD convened a cross-system stakeholder group to
review Santa Clara County's current Involuntary
Psychiatric Hold (5150) Policy and practices and to
update the 5150 Protocol and training process. The
group includes psychiatric and hospital emergency
room physicians, crisis clinicians, Emergency Medical
Service (EMS) leads, a local law enforcement leader,
Patient Rights Advocates and hospital representatives.
Focus groups have been held with consumers, family
members and EMS teams to gather feedback and
recommendations. The group has reviewed the current
5150 psychiatric hold evaluation policy and processes,
and 5150 data from three sources: the County's
Emergency Psychiatric Services (EPS) data, EMS
transport data, and local law enforcement data to
identify those geographic areas with high rates of
involuntary holds. The final 5150 Protocol will be
completed in FY 16-17.
Pay for Success Acute Mental Health: Frequent
Users Care Coordination Project
The Pay for Success (PFS) Acute Mental Health:
Frequent Users Care Coordination Project is designed
to reduce crisis and inpatient readmissions through
more effective care coordination, care transition, and
procurement strategies. The County team is working
closely with Telecare Corporation and the PFS partners
to identify the target population, service delivery, and
financial model.
The community-based care provided through this
project will be designed to improve the overall wellness
of these clients, measured by the reduced utilization of
emergency room and inpatient hospitalizations. This
project aims to better meet the needs of these clients in
the least restrictive setting and to avoid costs to the
County by reducing bed days purchased from contract
psychiatric hospitals, reducing utilization of Emergency
Psychiatric Services (EPS), and improving the efficiency
of bed use in the Barbara Arons Pavilion (BAP). Service
delivery is anticipated to begin Fall 2016.
Criminal Justice Outpatient Services
In FY 15-16, BHSD created and filled a new Division
Director for Criminal Justice Mental Health Services.
This position was designed to partner with the Division
Director for Adult Services in SUTS. Working together,
and in partnership with the County's Re-Entry Resource
Center, Behavioral Health Courts, and Custody Mental
Health, the BHSD team plans to expand outpatient and
residential services to meet the needs of the growing,
post-custody behavioral health population. In addition,
BHSD participates in the Re-Entry Network's Jail
Diversion and Behavioral Health Subcommittee,
identifying services that will support individuals and
reduce time in custody.
Residential Care Facility Capacity
Santa Clara County faces a shortage of Residential Care
Facilities (RCFs), which provide assisted living
environments for individuals with mental health
disorders and related conditions, often including
physical health needs. In addition to housing, these
individuals may require additional services to support
living in the community. BHSD currently has contracts
in place for a total of 234 RCF beds, under which it
partially subsidizes the cost of RCF care for certain
severely mentally ill clients through patch payments.
These patch payments are designed to be short-term in
nature, are not an entitlement, and are not provided by
most counties. Even though BHSD provides these
funds, there is an acute shortage of beds at licensed
RCFs, due in large part to the high cost of housing in the
County. To address this need, BHSD released a Request
for Proposals and will secure enhanced services in
FY 16-17.
Unit-Based Teams
The Behavioral Health Call Center (BHCC) UBT
identified workflow issues created by system capacity
demands and launched a UBT to address these needs.
The current improvement focus is to develop tools to
identify capacity in real time. A second component of
this UBT is to train Gateway staff on recognizing and
handling crisis calls. The first BHCC UBT identified the
need for a unified referral form, which staff developed
and is currently testing for widespread implementation.
The Sunnyvale Primary Care Behavioral Health (PCBH)
Center recently completed a UBT project focused on
creating care pathways to ensure patients received the
appropriate level of care and service. The UBT's focus
was to implement care pathways between Adult
Medicine and Behavioral Health to assure appropriate
levels of service based on diagnosis and treatment
needs. The medical and behavioral health teams
worked together to analyze patient data and agree on
care pathways that would guide returning patients to
primary care for ongoing health support. High acuity
patients were tracked and successfully transferred to
specialty mental health.
A new UBT is currently underway and will continue to
strengthen the relationships between the various
working units within PCBH, with the overall aim of
providing seamless care to clients. A second aim is to
engage additional direct service providers in the UBT
and invite them to identify areas of improvement.
Performance Improvement Projects
The State's External Quality Review Organization
(EQRO), a quality review body for County Mental Health
Plans, requires BHSD to implement two performance
improvement projects (PIPS) and to track improvement
over time. BHSD identified the following PIPs:
Improving Access for New Level 1 Clients This PIP's goal
was to develop a process to ensure that new Level 1
clients are engaged in follow-up outpatient services
within five working days or seven calendar days. This
project was designed to identify system changes that
would assure that these clients received initial
outpatient services in a timely manner. This standard is
both clinically appropriate to assure all new Level 1
clients do not experience set-backs in their mental
health status, as well as to meet Mental Health Plan
contractual requirements. Early and timely access is a
critical aspect to beginning work with clients and
assuring they receive beneficial services when they are
most in need of them. Launched early in 2015, this PIP
was completed and its goal was met in January 2016.
Demand, Capacity and Census Management The second
PIP is focused on increasing and managing capacity.
The Mental Health System is currently serving over
18,000 individuals in outpatient services, or
approximately 6% of the County’s Medi-Cal
beneficiaries. The current capacity of the system is
estimated to be 12,000 individuals at any given time.
Since the system capacity is not static, it is difficult to
determine actual capacity on an ongoing basis, creating
a challenge of matching services to needs with
appropriate language, culture, geography and
timeliness. The aim of this project is to develop:
¦ Routine use of demand, capacity and census data
(by category of need) to support management of
referrals and system-wide capacity.
¦ Improved tracking of call volume to predict demand
based on historical trends/patterns.
¦ A standard communication approach regarding
available capacity to support referrals.
¦ An online method to track demand, capacity and
census that all providers can access in real-time.
¦ A method to track the number of clients that were
referred to each particular program.
¦ Improved tracking of clients that are in an acute care
setting and their discharge disposition.
PACE Clinic - HIV/AIDS and Infectious Disease
Management
The PACE Clinic has had Ryan White HIV/AIDS
Program funding for more than 20 years. The Program is
administered by the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS), Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA), HIV/AIDS Bureau. Over the
years, the Program has become much more stringent in
reporting requirements and reduced in funding. There
is an increase in co-infection with TB, syphilis, and
Hepatitis C among PACE Clinic patients, all of which
negatively impact maintenance of optimal health for
those infected with HIV. The Clinic has implemented
standard protocols to aggressively screen for these
diseases and identify comorbidity early.
During the past few years, over 300 Ryan White
Program eligibility patients have either transitioned to
Medi-Cal with Affordable Care Act, or obtained regular
health care coverage through Covered California. These
changes have reduced the Ryan White Program funding
to the Clinic.
The epidemic continues to rise in the county, with a
year-to-year increase of over 3% in the combined
number of people living with HIV/AIDS. Similar
increase is also seen in new cases reported in the last
few years. PACE Clinic routinely revisits workflows to
improve efficiency and access to care. Another care
barrier that the Clinic experiences is the
disproportionate impact of HIV on the homeless
population. To address this issue, PACE clinic partners
with the Valley Healthcare Homeless Program (VHHP),
and designates a medical social worker on-site to assist
patients.
Since its operation, the Infectious Disease clinic has
seen growing demand. It is currently is staffed with
multiple providers to continue improve access and
health outcomes.
Performance Improvement/Unit Based Teams
There are a couple of teams in various stages of their
performance improvement activities.
The PACE Clinic revised various workflows to improve
efficiency and ensure MyHealthOnline messages are
followed up in a timely manner.
The PACE Clinic staff works closely and collaboratively
with medical staff to continue to improve patient care.
Last year, Valley Health Plan was granted full
accreditation for the next three years from the National
Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA). Covered
California Issuers must have NCQA accreditation in
order to participate in the Exchange market. There are
many requirements to maintain this accreditation
including compliance and regulatory thresholds that
must be met. In an effort to maintain this accreditation
and to seek out potential additional opportunities for
recognition through accreditations with other
affiliations, VHP will be seeking additional operational
support.
VHP has recognized the need for new resources in both
technical and organizational areas and will continue to
request staffing to better align with industry
benchmarks. The Core System Implementation is
already creating benefits and efficiencies. As VHP
continues with the optimization phase of the Core
System Implementation project, there are current
resource gaps due to the transition of resources from
one phase to the next. It is anticipated that positions for
configuration and business operations will be requested
in the future as these positions will continue to address
resource gaps once the final phase of the
implementation is completed.
The Employee Wellness Department has been a part of
Valley Health Plan for the last four fiscal years and it has
experienced growth and program development under
VHP’s wing during that time. For FY 16-17, Wellness will
be experiencing stabilization efforts in order to sustain
the current program by creating a more robust
employee program. These developments will pave the
way for future sustainability of the Employee Wellness
Department, if this program were to move out of Valley
Health Plan.
Finally, development of Medicare Advantage products
and/or Medicare risk delegations from other health
plans remain under consideration. The experience VHP
has gained through implementing Covered California
has given us many reasons to look forward to another
new venture with a new product. The lessons VHP has
learned thus far from Covered California will be
applicable to the implementation of Medicare
Advantage and other products in the future.
California's Medicaid Waiver Renewal
California's "Medi-Cal 2020" Medicaid Waiver presents
new opportunities as SCVMC moves forward over the
next 5 years. SCVMC's focus for FY 16-17 and beyond
will be to protect the gains already made, utilizing better
information, delivering more integrated care, making
smarter investments, and delivering higher
performance.
Public Hospital Redesign and Incentives in Medi-
Cal (PRIME)
Projects include:
¦ Outpatient Delivery System Transformation
¦ Targeted High Risk or High Cost Population
Management
¦ Resource Utilization Efficiency
To succeed in accessing these funds and succeed in
transforming the way healthcare is delivered will require
SCVMC to:
¦ Become patient-centered, data-driven, and teambased
¦ Provide high-quality, integrated care across the
continuum
¦ Improve health management of the populations
served
¦ Strengthen our ability to thrive under risk-based,
value based, and alternative payment models
(APMs)
Global Payment Program (GPP)
GPP combines the Disproportionate Share Hospital
(DSH) allotment and Safety Net Care Pool (SNCP) and
will continue to shift funding support for the uninsured
populations towards value, not volume of care provided,
focusing on outpatient interventions, and utilization of
the most cost effective care approaches. Emphasis will
be on providing the right care, in the right place, at the
right time.
Whole Person Care
Integrated community based care for targeted
vulnerable high utilizing populations.
This will require:
¦ Improved integration between county agencies and
community based organizations, health plans, and
providers
¦ Reduction in high cost emergency department and
inpatient utilization
¦ Improved data collection and data sharing across
the care delivery system
¦ An emphasis on managing the population's health
SCVMC FY 16-17 strategic priorities address these
issues and help position the system for continued
growth and innovation in the years ahead.
Economic Changes Related to Healthcare
Most of the changes associated with the Affordable Care
Act (ACA) implementation which includes Medi-Cal
Expansion (MCE) and participation in Covered
California have taken place.
SCVMC's goal is to grow covered lives to 400,000, retain
current market share as well as grow market share in
commercial, Medicare, and other third party payer
populations.
Reimbursements from all sources will continue to
decrease over the next 5 years, and will require
significant effort by SCVMC to improve the system efficiency to reduce costs, while challenging SCVMC to
provide better customer service, and the highest quality
care to continue to grow market share in today's
competitive market.
Access to Care
Healthcare consumers will continue to have greater
choice in determining where and how they receive their
healthcare, and competition for these healthcare
consumers will continue. Focus for the coming year will
be on ensuring existing members, who now have a
choice in selecting a provider, retain SCVMC as their
provider.
To maintain growth in this competitive market, it will
be critical to grow our referral base and build our
network by expanding SCVMC’s primary care capacity,
specialty services, and inpatient hospital capacity, both
through internal workflow and efficiency
improvements, and through increased partnerships,
both within the Health and Hospital System and with
community based organizations and providers.
Infrastructure
Building the necessary infrastructure to allow SCVMC
to grow its healthcare delivery network is integral to
expanding capacity to meet our healthcare consumers'
needs. A number of initiatives are underway that will
provide expanded infrastructure in FY 16-17 which are
discussed below.
Downtown Clinic
The Downtown Clinic is expected to be operational in
June of 2016. This 60,000 square foot clinic will offer a
comprehensive approach to community care by
offering:
¦ Primary Care and Behavioral Health services,
addressing mental health, as well as drug and
alcohol programs across the continuum of care.
¦ Specialty access, designed to meet the needs of a
community significantly impacted by chronic
disease
¦ Diabetes management, expanding the program
supported by advanced practice providers
¦ Pediatric specialties including Psychiatry, Pediatric
Healthy Lifestyle Center, and Medical Legal Partnership
The Downtown Clinic will also include an innovative
Downtown Community Resource Center (DCRC) in
collaboration with Gardner Family Health Network. The
DCRC was created to promote the development of
patient centered point of access through a patient
navigation model.
Women's and Children's Health (WCH).
Focus on this service line began in FY 15-16, and during
this time SCVMC has seen an increase in births of about
1.5% over prior years, and a 2% increase in acute
pediatric admissions. Efforts for FY 16-17 are targeted to
continue these growth rates. Pediatric rehabilitation
patient census has increased 200% over prior years, and
the focus for FY 16-17 will be to maintain this higher
census.
An early part of the WCH service line focus was the
organization's commitment to support breastfeeding
mothers and to become a designated Baby Friendly
(BF) hospital through Baby-Friendly USA. The BF
initiative validates SCVMC's commitment to families
who choose to breastfeed their newborns and strives to
improve optimal infant nutrition through education
and lactation support. SCVMC has progressed rapidly
through the four phases of becoming a BF designated
facility and is now in the 3rd phase. Focused efforts to
help ensure that SCVMC primary care clinic maternity
patients deliver at SCVMC Hospital, has resulted in a
sustained improvement in retention of patients from
85% to 98%.
Service line focus for FY 16-17 includes continued work
to enroll prenatal patients in Comprehensive Perinatal
Services Program (CPSP). This Medi-Cal carve-out
provides additional funding support for at least 10 extra
prenatal visits for education and risk assessments.
Ninety percent of the approximately 3,400 mothers who
delivered at SCVMC last calendar year qualified for
CPSP; however, only 512 women completed this
program, so there is significant opportunity to enroll
more patients.
Work is also underway for FY 16-17 toward
Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation
Facilities (CARF) certification for the Pediatric
Rehabilitation program. This will align with the adult
rehabilitation program which is currently CARF certified. CARF recognition is important to distinguish
the program's quality and is an important designation
for many payers.
Sobrato Pavilion - Bed Building 1
Construction continues on the Sobrato Pavilion, which
will provide 168 replacement beds including intensive
care, rehabilitation and transitional/acute-care units.
The Pavilion is expected to open during the second half
of calendar year 2017.
Additional Infrastructure Projects:
Emergency Department: Expansion plans are in the
design phase and will nearly double capacity to more
than 50 beds.
Burn Center: Expanding capacity from currently 8 beds
to 12 beds with 4 step down beds.
Urgent Care Expansion: Urgent care services will be
expanded at the Gilroy, Sunnyvale, and East Valley
clinics, providing improved access for patients in these
communities.
HealthLink Electronic Health Records: In January 2016,
SCVMC was recognized as having achieved Stage 6 of
the Healthcare Information and Management Systems
Society (HIMSS) Analytics Electronic Medical Record
(EMR) Adoption Model, a designation held by only 27%
of hospitals in the United States. It is SCVMC's intent to
reach HIMSS Stage 7 in early calendar year 2017. This
achievement will result in the true sharing, information
exchange and immediate delivery of patient data to
improve process performance, quality of care and safety.
The SCVHHS Information Services' HealthLink
implementation staff is moving towards
implementation of the HealthLink 2015 upgrade that
will improve the reliability, productivity and efficiencies
of HealthLink, which will provide more flexibility to
increase services to meet the ongoing needs of staff,
clinicians and our patients.
The HealthLink Team will be launching many new
projects to enhance our HealthLink implementation,
and is actively working on HealthLink Wave 3, which
will be delivered in two phases. Phase 1 includes
OpTime (Surgery), Anesthesia, Radiant (Radiology),
Clinical Case Management, Infection Control (IC) and
Kaleidoscope (Ophthalmology). Each of those modules
are in various stages of implementation but are on
target to all go live in February 2017. Phase 2 includes
Nurse Triage and Wisdom (Dental). Those projects have
not launched yet and are targeted to go live in May 2017.
Center for Leadership and Transformation (CLT): The CLT
continues to play a strong role in the ongoing work to
improve the hospital's inpatient flow and capacity, as
well as improving specialty access, care coordination,
quality of care, and population health.
Since the inception of the CLT Rapid Transformation
process, the Patient Flow team has achieved a number
of milestones to help manage a growing patient census.
Primary focus has been in the Med/Surg patient areas
where SCVMC has experienced a 66% rise in the
Average Daily Census (ADC) since 2012, contributing to
an overall increase of more than 18% for all service lines
during that same period. A few notable achievements
include:
¦ The initiation of Multidisciplinary Rounds (MDR) in
January 2013.
¦ A decrease in physician admit turnaround times
from 120 to 70 minutes from 2014 to 2015.
¦ Improvements in therapy services turnaround
times.
¦ Promoting a culture of mobility, including training
nearly 200 staff in Safe Patient Handling.
¦ Promoting the seven days a week hospital model, so
that case management coverage is available on
weekends and holidays.
¦ An increase in discharge orders written before noon
from 15% to 40% from 2013 to 2016.
¦ The median discharge time for patients physically
discharged from units is between 2:30-3:00 p.m. from
a median of 5 p.m. in 2013.
¦ The creation of a Health and Hospital System (HHS)
Connect site with monthly data available for all HHS
members to view. Weekly data is shared with all
team members and other interested stakeholders.
¦ The development of a Flow Accelerometer, where
every inpatient is assigned a color indicating
expected time to discharge with non-medical needs
(e.g., therapy services, case management, social services) delineated. This will be a critical tool for
the new Logistics Center, which is due to open
Spring 2016.
The five-year goals for the inpatient flow transformation
include increasing covered lives from 180,000 to 400,000,
creating a fully operationalized Logistics Center with
the Flow Accelerometer implemented, continuing to
refine interdisciplinary communication, continuing to
decrease MD turnaround time to the national average
of about 60 minutes, establishing patient cohorts,
decreasing avoidable days and tackling the barriers to
discharge, including housing, skilled nursing facilities,
and the conservator process.
The Specialty Care Access CLT formed four teams to
charter a clear path forward to improve access, care
coordination, quality of care, and population health:
¦ The eConsult team recommended a new system
that leverages the electronic health record to
improve communication and collaboration between
primary care and specialists, triage referrals, provide
faster and more standardized dissemination of
specialized knowledge, and streamline the referrals
process flow. eConsult pilots began in Urology,
Hematology, and Rheumatology in late March 2016.
The pilot groups have also begun proactively scheduling
patients as part of Active Referrals Management.
By proactively reaching out to patients,
appointments can be scheduled as part of an orderly
and systematic approach, and patients have a better
experience. This process reduces telephone wait
times for patients.
¦ The HealthLink Referrals and Information Technology
(IT) Build Team built an IT infrastructure to
effectively manage, organize, and triage referrals.
Referrals are now grouped into three categories:
Consults, Follow-ups, and Procedures. The team
also developed automated methods to identify
patients without coverage and route them to Patient
Access for financial screening and enrollment. Similarly,
a technological build in HealthLink was
completed to pend referrals for Out-of-County individuals.
As part of the pilots, the Referrals IT team
created warnings that have been built into Health-
Link to inform schedulers if a service is not covered
by the patient's insurer.
¦ A collaborative team of primary care providers
(PCP), specialists, and patient experience leaders
drafted language that can be incorporated into the
existing IT infrastructure and readily applied to
ensure standardization and ease of use for transitioning
patients back to primary care after discharge
from a specialist. The addition of a button in Health-
Link and the ability to copy the patient's chart
ensures that the loop is closed with Primary Care on
every Specialty encounter. This is a key metric in
PRIME. For this to be possible, the system needs to
know who the primary care provider is. Effective
January 1, 2016, all new Santa Clara Family Health
Plan (SCFHP) Medi-Cal Members receive a specific
PCP assignment. The improvement means better
care coordination and follow-up for approximately
3,000 new members each month. Additionally, the
team mapped all established Gardner Clinic patients
with SCFHP and SCVMC member rosters, helping
to provide better care coordination for 15,000
patients. Indian Health Clinic is scheduled for May
2016 (11,000 members), and the team will coordinate
and align the PCPs for another clinic each
month until all SCFHP members have a PCP. The
team intends to have all 140,000 SCFHP members
assigned to a specific and accurate PCP by July 1,
2016.
¦ The Referrals and Authorizations team is developing
a coordinated registration error reduction strategy.
The goal is to create processes that ensure clean
referrals. There are new reports and dashboards
available as part of recent upgrades to HealthLink,
and this team is working to empower managers and
supervisors to leverage reporting capabilities to
address, coach, and prevent registration errors that
occur on the frontlines. This in-turn reduces denials
and speeds up the end-to-end referral process. A
clean referral with all the necessary documentation
flows through the system much faster than a referral
with incomplete patient information.
Unit Based Teams (UBT): SCVMC has many
performance improvement initiatives, including UBT,
where labor and management co-lead projects
implementing rapid tests of change. Eight teams from
SCVMC made huge strides in their projects, including:
¦ After the Moorpark Pharmacy team exceeded its
goal of improving its on-site wait time for prescriptions
filled within 30 minutes ( from 46% to over 90%
of prescriptions ready within 30 minutes), the team
shared their learning to help the East Valley and
Tully Pharmacies work towards the same goal.
¦ The Health Information Management (HIM) Team
set a goal of reducing its document scanning backlog
from 7 feet to 36 inches. Team members came up
with a process to cut down the backlog and streamline
the scanning process in its file room. The team
is now looking for ways to reduce the amount of
unnecessary scanning.
¦ The Emergency Psychiatric Services (EPS) team
focused on the recognition and disposition of nonadmitted
(low acuity) patients in EPS. The team set a
goal of a 10% reduction in the average length of stay
for patients discharged to home or self and achieved
a 30% reduction. The average length of stay for these
patients has been reduced by 2.7 hours.
Several more improvement projects were launched in
the fall of 2015. To improve the patient experience, the
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) UBT committed to
a goal to discharge its patients more smoothly by
completing four state-required screens (Critical
Congenital Heart Disease screen, car seat challenge,
hearing screen, and Hepatitis B vaccine) earlier by two
days with a 70% success rate by March 2016. The team
was able to meet its goal for three of the screens, and is
nearing its goal for the hearing screen. The unit is
looking at sustaining these improvements and
identifying its next project.
The Operating Room (OR) UBT is testing different
communication practices and staging to increase
SCVMC surgical room turnover. Communication via
white boards provide staff the opportunity to make
suggested changes to collaboratively solve challenges.
The same white board approach communicates OR
needs to better prepare for the next case, along with
simple request tags to inform the Room Prep Team
(RPT) exactly what is needed. The Patient Access
Emergency Department/Express Care Clinic UBT aims
to decrease standing wait times. The team is presently
gathering data to better understand current wait times.
Customer Service is focusing on ensuring personalized
response to phone calls during business hours, and the
Cardiology Department is working to reduce the
patient no-show rate.
Another wave of teams is expected to launch in May
2016. Through the UBT process, staff and managers are
able to jointly address issues, which helps improve the
work environment and brings a level of excitement to
tackling difficult issues.
Transformation and Modernization Project
In FY 15-16, the Department completed its permit
process reengineering project, completed construction
and staffing of a new Permit Center, consolidated the
Building, Fire and Engineering offices into a single
Development Services Division, and initiated a
Department-wide staff development and training
program. The primary focus of the Transformation and
603
County of Santa Clara Section 5: Housing, Land Use, Environment & Transportation
FY 16-17 Recommended Budget Department of Planning and Development
Section 5: Housing, Land Use,
Environment & Transportation
Modernization Project in FY 16-17 will be the
Department's configuration and switch over to an
integrated software platform to manage permit
processing and customer relations. The software will
support the reengineered permit process and the
operational goals of the TM Project to decrease overall
permit processing time by 40% and increase customer
satisfaction scores 20% over baseline levels.
Sustainable Agricultural Lands Strategy
At the December 15, 2015 Board of Supervisors’ hearing,
the Board accepted a $100,000 Sustainable Agricultural
Lands Conservation grant award from the Department
of Conservation to prepare a Sustainable Agricultural
Lands Conservation Framework for Southern Santa
Clara County. The County was one of five jurisdictions
in the state to receive this competitive grant.
The proposed Framework is intended to create a new
regional approach for preserving agricultural lands and
sustaining a strong farming industry in Southern Santa
Clara County. Preparation of the Framework will be a
two year process starting with mapping of agricultural
lands most at risk, followed by collaborative
development of a Draft Framework identifying new
policies and programs to preserve agricultural lands
and finishing with the preparation of a Final Framework
for adoption by the County and other local agencies;
such as, the Cities of Morgan Hill, Gilroy, San Jose,
LAFCO, and the Santa Clara County Open Space
Authority.
The Santa Clara County Open Space Authority is a
partner on this project and will assist in preparation of
the Framework.
Code Enforcement
The Department is engaged in a two-year plan to
improve the County's Code Enforcement Program.
The Department is transitioning from a predominately
Investigate and Notice code enforcement model to a
Compliance, Enforcement and Abatement model.
Under this new model, staff will no longer simply
document violations and send Notices of Violation, but
will actively seek and incentivize compliance through
the use of fines, recovery of costs, Administrative
Citations, Compliance Orders, Compliance Agreements,
and civil action, if necessary. The program will reward
compliance and incentivize voluntary correction of
violations at the earliest, lowest-cost levels; however,
uncooperative violators will be faced with escalating
financial and civil consequences until abatement is
achieved. By presenting code violators with simpler, less
expensive paths to code compliance while
communicating all potential enforcement options and
costs, it is anticipated that the majority of code violators
will opt for voluntary compliance in lieu of larger fines,
penalties and civil action. This framework will
ultimately result in improved compliance rates and a
more manageable workload for the Code Enforcement
Division and County Counsel.
As envisioned, the program would consist of three tiers.
The Compliance Program tier would be the first tier
where the emphasis would be identification of
violations and promotion of voluntary compliance.
The Enforcement Program tier would be the second tier
reserved for violations that could not be successfully
abated in the first tier. At this tier, the emphasis would
be abatement of violations through the application of a
series of escalating consequences commensurate with
severity of the violation and degree of non-cooperation.
The Abatement Program tier would be the third tier
reserved for violations that represent immediate or
emergent threats to public health or safety and could
not be abated through the first two tiers.
To implement this new model, the Department is
consolidating the Building, Zoning and Grading code
enforcement staff into a central Code Enforcement
Division to improve consistency, quality and efficiency.
The Employee Services Agency is reclassifying Zoning
Investigator positions to Code Enforcement Officers to
reflect new roles. The Department has added two
Permit Technicians to Code Enforcement and is
requesting two new Code Enforcement Officer I/II
positions in the FY 16-17 budget. Finally, working with
the County Counsel's Office, the Department is
preparing a set of ordinance revisions to create the tools
necessary for an abatement oriented program.
Plan Check and Building Inspection Services to
County Departments
In FY 15-16, the Facilities and Fleet Department
implemented permitting, plan review and building
inspection for County facility and capital building
projects. Under this program the Department of
Planning and Development reviews County projects for
compliance with building construction and fire codes.
The program is now in full operation and will continue
through FY 16-17.
Green Buildings and Infrastructure
Recently adopted State legislation requires the County
to develop and pass an ordinance that streamlines the
permitting process for electrical vehicle charging
stations similar to the County ordinance adopted in
FY 15-16 which streamlined the permitting process for
photovoltaic solar panels. The Department will develop
and present the ordinance before the due date of
September 2017. In the meantime, permit applications
for electric vehicle charging stations and photovoltaic
solar panels will be processed in an efficient and time
sensitive manner.
California Building Code requirements that protect the
public and the environment become more in-depth and
comprehensive with each code edition as a result of
lessons learned from earthquakes, storms, floods, fires
and other natural or man-made disasters. The 2016
edition of the California Building Codes becomes
effective on January 1, 2017 requiring new training for
staff so they can continue to provide precise, effective
application of the California Building Code, Green
Building Code, Energy Code.
The Development Services Division is investigating the
potential for onsite treatment and reuse of greywater at
private properties. By collecting water from lavatories,
showers and washing machines, treating it onsite,
storing and reusing the water to flush toilets or for
irrigation, potable water use by most households can be
reduced by up to 25 percent. It's important that all
greywater treatment and reuse systems be
environmentally safe and compliant with codes and
recognized national standards. The Division will
continue to investigate available new products and
technologies in this emerging industry and will remain
involved with the development of a model water
conservation ordinance while looking for ways to
encourage the use of code compliant greywater
treatment and reuse systems.
Earthquake Preparedness
An important responsibility of the Development
Services Division is the rapid evaluation of buildings to
identify and placard buildings that are unsafe, and just
as importantly, to get residents and business owners
back into safe buildings expeditiously after a significant
seismic event.
Development Services staff continues the development
of a department earthquake preparedness plan which
includes inter-departmental professional and technical
staff. Licensed County engineers, architects and
geologist have undergone training and are certified to
the same standard that is required for licensed
professionals and building inspectors to participate in
mutual aid across the state. These certified professional
staff will evaluate County owned buildings after a major
earthquake, reducing the time to evaluate County
owned buildings which support essential services and
reducing the wait time for Development Services
inspectors to evaluate private properties.
Historical Heritage-Certified Local Government
Program
The Department will be re-applying for grant funding
from the State Office of Historic Preservation to
conduct historical surveys of County neighborhoods.
Permit Streamlining Ordinance Revisions
The Department is preparing ordinances for Board
consideration that would streamline the review process
for Administrative Permits and Subdivisions, and relax
development standards for second units.
Planning for Service Effectiveness and System
Sustainability
The County's regional park system encompasses an
incredible array of 29 parks comprised of approximately
50,000 acres of rich park land with natural, cultural,
historic, and scenic resources. The system continues to
grow and age; both factors drive increasing demands for
investment in park development, rehabilitation, and
operating resources.
If the amended and extended Park Charter measure is
approved by voters, the Department will have
approximately $72 million over the next decade to use
for purchasing additional parkland. The Department
will work with the Board and partner organizations to
clarify land acquisition priorities, identify the operating
impacts of the expanding system, coordinate strategic
partnerships to leverage investments and maximize
outcomes related to acquisition, development and
operation.
The Department currently owns approximately 12,000
acres of parkland that has not yet been opened to public
access and use. The ten year financial projection
identified park development and rehabilitation projects
totaling at least $183 million. Assuming the passage of the Park Charter measure, the Department will have
approximately $69 million in dedicated resources for
park development and rehabilitation over the next ten
years. The Department will seek to develop a long range
capital plan that will, within limited resources, balance
competing priorities of rehabilitating aging
infrastructure, updating visitor serving amenities to
meet the needs of our increasingly diverse and urban
community, and opening parkland to public access. The
capital plan will also identify the operating impacts of
proposed capital projects to ensure the Department can
sustainably operate the park system over the long term.
As the Department develops these long range plans, the
time is right to embark on the process of updating its
2003 Strategic Plan with the intent of splitting the
document into two plans, one a long range vision plan
that will consolidate the policy framework and long
range goals described in other planning documents,
including the General Plan, the current Strategic Plan,
the Parkland Acquisition Plan, the Countywide Trails
Master Plan (including the 2014 Prioritization and Gaps
Analysis study), and the Santa Clara Valley Habitat Plan.
The vision plan will also seek to coordinate County
Parks' goals with those of partner agencies including the
Santa Clara Valley Habitat Agency, the Open Space
Authority, and the Mid-peninsula Regional Open Space
District. The Department will also develop a three to
five year Strategic Plan that is focused on actions the
Department will need to take to achieve the goals
described in the long range vision plan.
Habitat Conservation Plan Implementation
The Santa Clara Valley Habitat Agency has been
operating for a couple of years; 2015 saw the first
enrollment in the reserve system, Coyote Ridge. The
Department has been working with the Habitat Agency
in anticipation of bringing the first potential County
parkland for enrollment into the reserve system to the
Board for consideration. Increasing staff resources will
likely be required to support the Department's
commitments to enrolling lands and operating reserve
lands once they are enrolled. The Habitat Agency is also
interested in sharing staff where doing so is beneficial to
both agencies.
Martial Cottle Park Development, Operations and
Life Estate Area Planning
The County's newest park, 287-acre Martial Cottle Park,
opened in late 2014. The County and State-owned
agricultural park, located at Snell Avenue and Branham
Road in San Jose, includes approximately 4 miles of
multi-use trails, 35 acres of developed parkland (picnic
areas, passive use areas, children's discovery area,
restroom facilities, public parking, staff/maintenance
building and visitor center), 22 acres of Cooperative
Partner use areas (UCCE Master Gardeners, 4-H and
research fields; urban forestry and a community
garden), and almost 200 acres of active farmland. With
construction of Phase 1 complete and open to public
use, additional resources will be required to support the
operation of the park. Later in 2016 the department
expects to begin the planning process for including the
life estate, which includes the historic homestead and
active agricultural uses, into the broader park.
Adapting Facilities to Meet Changing Needs
As the County's population has grown increasingly
urban and diverse, and as technology has advanced, the
recreational desires of our residents have diversified and
expectations for convenient access to information and
customer service have increased. Benchmarking and
best practice research show that the department has
the opportunity to provide enhanced visitor amenities
that will meet the evolving needs of residents, such as:
shorter loop trails that are easy to access, adding small
reservable picnic areas and small group campsites that
cater to our changing demographics, exciting and
engaging nature oriented play areas with water features,
and expanded alternative camping facilities including
yurts or cabins. Each of these amenities are likely to
expand park visitorship and provide enhanced revenue
to offset operating costs of the Department.
Leveraging Community Support through
Volunteers and Partnerships
Support for the park system is strong among county
residents and businesses. The Department will
continue its efforts to provide opportunities for those
who care about their parks, natural areas, cultural and
historic resources and who want to get involved and
give back via a variety of opportunities to volunteer as
an individual, or part of a community or employer
group. The Department will focus on continuing to
expand and enhance its capacity to provide training and
support to our valued volunteers and will seek to
expand strategic partnerships with organizations that
share in our mission.
In 2013 the County allowed the Department to
repurpose a significant portion of the Muriel Wright
Center. The facility, which once served as a juvenile detention center, is now being used to house the
Department's volunteer program and provide lodging
for AmeriCorps Teams. Following two years of
successful partnership with AmeriCorps, in 2015 the
Department requested the County consider
transferring ownership of the Muriel Wright Center to
the Parks Department for adaptive reuse of the facility
as a base of operations for the Department's growing
volunteer program, to accommodate the growing
Department staff compliment. At this time it appears
the Muriel Wright facility will be used for other social
service programs; therefore, the Department is
exploring options for relocating the Parks Volunteer
Program, including AmeriCorps, to an alternate facility.
Leveraging Technology for Enhanced Customer
Service and Operating Efficiency
Technology offers the potential for residents and
visitors to access information about our parks, to
reserve campsites and other facilities, and to obtain
interpretive information from the comfort of their
home, car or while at the park using smart phones and
tablets. The department will continue to enhance its
website and on-line reservation system. It will expand
into providing interpretative information to users of
mobile technology. Providing connectivity to the
internet while in our parks is another important request
from our visitors that the department will endeavor to
meet. The Department is exploring strategies for
providing increased bandwidth to park sites as a first
critical step to being able to access these web-enabled
resources. The Department is also seeking information
technology solutions that will enable us to more
effectively manage our key assets and interactions with
park visitors.
Organizational Development Update
The Santa Clara County Parks and Recreation
Department is engaged in an ongoing comprehensive
organizational development effort supported by the
Countywide initiatives stemming from the County
Executive’s Office.
The Department is shifting its organizational
development efforts from focusing on implementing
Just Culture principles into everyday job responsibilities
to seeking systems and process improvements. Three
project teams will assess three core areas where process
improvements could lead to significant benefits. One
team will address park visitation and park usage data,
seeking better methods for estimating attendance and
use potentially through an update of existing processes,
ensuring effective use of the reservation and registration
software, and incorporating the use of trail or vehicle
counters. The goal of the second team will be to match
Department accounting processes and methods to data
analysis needs. The third team's scope involves
connecting the various planning and budgeting
processes used by the Department. Additionally, the
Department is analyzing its data collection and data
usage efforts for possible improvement, consolidation,
increased efficiency and effectiveness.
With foundational training provided through the
Countywide Center for Leadership and Transformation
(CLT) effort, another project team is dedicated to
improving the effectiveness of the Department's
Volunteer Program. The project team will work over the
next year to determine needs and opportunities for
volunteer projects in Parks and match these needs and
opportunities with knowledge, skills, and abilities
offered by existing volunteers and potential new
volunteers. The team will also coordinate the
introduction of the new volunteer program software
that will be used to register volunteers and record their
hours, evaluate metrics useful for assessing the success
of the volunteer program, and promote recognition for
park units that effectively utilize volunteer assistance.
The Department's current organizational development
efforts address the Department's strategic theme of
fostering a nimble learning organization with engaged
and empowered employees by further developing a
systems approach, allowing employees to innovate and
work on improvements together, accessing front-line
knowledge, learning from mistakes, and becoming more
data driven.
Clean Water Program
During FY 2017, the Clean Water Program (CWP) will
focus on implementing a new version of one of its two
State-issued storm water permits. The CWP will
continue to collaborate with other departments,
including Planning and Development, Roads and
Airports, Facilities and Fleet, and Parks and Recreation,
to ensure compliance with the State permits. CWP will
also explore potential funding sources to satisfy the
increasing State-mandated requirements and perhaps
reduce the current level General Fund obligation to the
CWP.
The Municipal Regional Stormwater National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater
Permit (MRP) that regulates stormwater discharges in
the North County/San Francisco Bay watershed was
reissued in late 2015 and became effective January 1,
2016. The new MRP carries over trash reduction
requirements from the previous permit, including a
mandated 70% reduction by 2017 and a 100% reduction
by 2022, necessitating the installation and maintenance
of trash capture devices. The MRP also includes new
requirements for planning and implementing Green
Infrastructure projects to capture, treat and infiltrate
runoff from existing buildings, streets and parking lots.
Additionally, the permit seeks to reduce polychlorinated
biphenols (PCBs) and Mercury in the San Francisco Bay
by establishing numeric limits on their discharge. To
date, only pilot-level projects to control PCB and
Mercury in urban runoff have been tested in the Bay
Area. The technical feasibility and potential cost of
meeting PCB and Mercury limits during the five-year
permit term are unknown and potentially substantial.
The County is currently in its third year of
implementing the NPDES Phase II permit that regulates
discharges in the Pajaro River/Monterey Bay watershed.
The State Water Board recently adopted statewide
trash reduction requirements similar to those of the
MRP that will be added to the existing Phase II permit.
This will require additional resources for implementing
trash controls in the South County area in coming years.
Recycling and Waste Reduction Division
The Recycling and Waste Reduction Division issued an
RFP for a Food Rescue Coordinator on behalf of the
Recycling and Waste Reduction Commission. The
selected Coordinator will coordinate with a myriad of
agencies and organizations (government, non-profit,
faith-based, food kitchens, etc.) to create a Regional
Food Rescue Working Group that will create and
implement a Community Action Plan to address food
waste reduction, food waste diversion and food
insecurity while also creating solutions to feed those in
need.
Household Hazardous Waste Program (HHW)-
Closure of Sunnyvale Facility
In June 2015, the Countywide HHW Program closed its
permanent facility located in Sunnyvale. The City of
Sunnyvale needed the facility back because of the expansion of its water treatment plant. To meet the
ongoing need of residents, the program will be holding
four temporary collection events per year in Sunnyvale.
Household Hazardous Waste Program (HHW)-
Safe Drug Disposal Ordinance
In June 2015, the County adopted the Safe Drug
Disposal Ordinance requiring drug manufacturers to
design, operate, and fund a program to safely dispose of
County residents' unwanted drugs. This new program
will replace the existing County-run drug disposal
program and create more medicine drop-off locations
throughout the county. The Countywide HHW Program
is working on the implementation of the ordinance, and
will be working with manufacturers to develop systems
throughout the county for the appropriate geographic
coverage needed to serve the needs of County residents.
County of Santa Clara Animal Shelter
Over the past three years, County of Santa Clara Animal
Care and Control has participated in Maddie's Fund Pet
Adoption Days, a two-day event during which Maddie's
Fund sponsors adoption fees for all animals adopted. In
2015, 129 dog and cat adoptions were completed, which
resulted in $51,600 in contributions to the shelter's trust
fund. These funds are used to provide life-saving
medical care and enhancements that increase the
adoptability and welfare of shelter pets. It is more than
likely that Maddie's Fund will not be sponsoring this
event going forward. This event will be missed not only
for the funding source, but the event typically clears the
shelter at a time of year (kitten season) when space is
crucially needed.
The Animal Shelter is looking to expand community
partnerships and programming. We are working on a
program that would pair at-risk youth with shelter dogs
to train the dogs and improve their quality of life. We are
exploring ways to reduce animal surrenders by helping
to increase visibility of pet-friendly housing options in
the county. We also continue to work with the Humane
Society of Silicon Valley to offer the Kind Kids Program
to underserved schools in the county. The program
teaches elementary school children about responsible
pet ownership and the role shelters play in our
community. Animal Control Officers (ACOs) provide a
positive presence by teaching dog bite prevention and
talking about the role ACOs play in helping animals and
the community.
This year, a fifth Animal Control Officer will be hired,
which will help increase programming, provide
outreach by way of proactive interactions and
education of pet owners, and provide an additional
resource dedicated to investigations of animal cruelty
and neglect cases. In addition, we will soon see the
opening of our new veterinary surgery suite. This
modular facility will bring our veterinary services up-todate
and will allow for increased in-house spay/neuter.
With this new facility, we will be exploring the
possibility of adding a low-cost public spay/neuter
service which may, in turn, decrease the community's
homeless pet population.
Agriculture Division - Pesticide Use Near Schools
and Childcare Facilities
Many California schools have been built on prime
agricultural land next to farm operations and
increasingly, teachers, parents and the public want to
know what chemicals are being applied around them.
The California Department of Pesticide Regulation
(DPR) is preparing statewide regulation concerning
agricultural pesticides that are applied close to schools
and childcare facilities. The regulation will include a
school/childcare facility notification component, and is
intended to give children an additional level of
protection from potential exposure to pesticides used in
surrounding agricultural fields. Within Santa Clara
County, more than 100 school and childcare facilities
are located within ¼ mile (the distance likely to be cited
in the regulation) of agricultural production sites.
Growers will be required to notify the schools/childcare
facilities in advance of applying pesticides to
agricultural production sites. The regulation may also
include restrictions which may potentially limit the use
of particular pesticides, the method in which the
pesticides are applied, and the proximity of pesticide
applications relative to schools/childcare facilities. DPR
anticipates the regulation will become effective in 2017.
The Agriculture Division anticipates the new regulation
will result in a significant increase in investigation
activities as pesticide application notifications are made
available to the public.
Agriculture Division - Medical Marijuana
Oversight
The City of San Jose is the only city within the County
that created an ordinance and issued operating permits
to medical marijuana dispensaries. The City now has 16
approved dispensaries that will require regulatory
oversight by the Agriculture Division, Weights &
Measures Division, and the Department of
Environmental Health (DEH). The Agriculture Division
proposes to issue each approved dispensary operation
that cultivates cannabis an Operator Identification
Number to track the pesticides used on the plants
during production; contact each grow operation and
review their employee training records for employees
who handle pesticides; inform these businesses that we
can help them properly identify pests, which is the first
step for integrated pest management of grow sites; and
continue to work with the California Department of
Pesticide Regulation to explore how other jurisdictions
are approaching the issues with respect to local medical
marijuana production. Bills chaptered in October 2015
require writing of new regulations, and the California
Department of Food and Agriculture to license medical
marijuana operations. The Division will closely monitor
these developments.
Weights and Measures Device Inspection
Program
The Division of Weights & Measures (W&M) inspects
weighing and measuring devices used commercially for
accurate performance. Technological advances have
challenged W&M to continually adapt to new methods
of weighing or measuring products and services. The
traditional taximeter is being replaced with a mobile
application installed in a smart cellphone and utilizing a
GPS signal to measure distance. This new business
model has enabled hundreds, and possibly thousands,
of casual drivers to be in the transportation business.
Specifications, tolerances, and testing procedures are
being developed by members of the United States
National Working Group on Taximeters (USNWGT).
USNWGT members consist of W&M officials including
Santa Clara County W&M, industry, manufacturers, and
other stakeholders from around the nation, who are
working together to gain consensus and develop
uniform requirements.
Advances in electric and hydrogen fuel technologies
also challenge W&M to adapt to new methods of
testing. Electric and hydrogen vehicles now on the road
require different devices for fueling them. Tentative
requirements and testing procedures for electric vehicle
and Hydrogen fueling devices have been developed by
working groups that consisted of W&M officials
including Santa Clara County W&M, California Division
of Measurement Standards, industry, manufacturers,
and stakeholders from around the nation. As more
information is gathered, both work groups continue to
further develop the requirements.
Healthy Nail Salon Recognition Program
Santa Clara County is one of the most diverse counties
in the state, with a large Asian-American population
(35%) and the second largest Vietnamese-American
population outside of Vietnam (2010 U.S. Census Data).
Approximately 80% of all licensed nail technicians in
California are Vietnamese-American and immigrant
women (California Healthy Nail Salon Collaborative
Report, April 2010). Workers endure prolonged
exposure to low levels of toxins and, as a result,
experience numerous health issues, including
headaches, respiratory problems, miscarriages, and
birth defects. Because symptoms can take years of
exposure to exhibit, new health risks associated with
nail salon work continue to be uncovered.
The Board of Supervisors requested the Agency to
create a Healthy Nail Salon Recognition Program to
promote the health and well-being of a potentially
vulnerable workforce through a voluntary recognition
program. The Santa Clara County Healthy Nail Salon
Recognition Program is modeled after a program
developed by the California Healthy Nail Salon
Collaborative. Through training and educational
brochures, the program reaches out to owners and
technicians of nail salons and provides education as to
alternatives to the toxic trio of chemicals currently in
use. Salons must meet strict program standards for the
use of less toxic chemicals and ensure a safer
environment for workers and patrons. Visit our website
at www.sccgov.org/healthynails for updates on salon
certifications or for more information on how to
participate.
Online Reporting of Restaurant Inspection
Results
On October 1, 2014, the Placarding and Scoring
Program, along with the new website, was officially
launched. DEH continues to inspect food
establishments and post the colored placard at the food
facility, and the inspection report and compliance score
online. Food facilities are assigned a Green, Yellow, or Red colored placard and the results of the
environmental health inspection is posted online. These
placards alert diners to whether or not a facility is in
compliance with food safety laws. The facilities are also
assigned numeric compliance scores from 0-100 based
upon their overall compliance with food safety laws.
The most recent food facility inspection results and the
list of restaurants closed for serious food safety
violations during the past six months are online at:
www.sccgov.org/SCCDineOut
In September 2015, the Department released a new app
(SCCDineOut) - available for Apple iOS devices that
makes access even easier. Features of the new
SCCDineOut app enable you to view inspection results
for thousands of food facilities within Santa Clara
County; search by food facility name or those near your
current location; sort inspection results by compliance
score; view contact information for food facilities; easily
view closure information for food facilities that are
immediately closed due to a major violation; obtain
more information about the placard color and
compliance score; and submit feedback to the
Department
Site Mitigation Program - Local Oversight
Program Contraction
The Department of Environmental Health is certified by
the State to implement a Local Oversight Program
(LOP), which oversees the cleanup of leaking petroleum
underground storage tanks (USTs) in Santa Clara
County. UST leak rates have been on the decline for
nearly 20 years due to significant improvements in UST
design, construction and monitoring technologies.
Additionally, case closure rates have significantly
increased since the State established criteria to identify
and expedite closure of lower-threat cases where
residual contamination is unlikely to harm human
health or the environment.
Local Oversight Program (LOP) - Voluntary
Cleanup Program Growth
In Fiscal Year 2010, the Site Mitigation Program
launched a Voluntary Cleanup Program through which
Site Mitigation Program staff may provide oversight to
responsible parties for the assessment and cleanup of
sites outside of the LOP program. Contamination of
shallow soil and groundwater is not uncommon in
Santa Clara County due to agricultural, commercial and
industrial operations that utilize chemicals such as
pesticides, fuels, oils, solvents, and heavy metals.
Lending institutions, property developers, and local
municipalities have become increasingly aware of the
liabilities associated with contaminated properties.
Some local municipalities have become unwilling to
approve redevelopment projects on contaminated
properties without regulatory oversight, and have
required responsible parties to enter the Voluntary
Cleanup Program. To reduce risk, responsible parties
turn to qualified regulatory agencies for the oversight of
site assessment, cleanup, and hazard mitigation
projects. Upon the completion of work, authorized
agencies provide written documentation confirming
that no further action is needed.
The Voluntary Cleanup Program is a viable, efficient,
and cost-effective option for these sites. As economic
conditions improve and awareness of the Voluntary
Cleanup Program increases, the number of responsible
parties requesting entry into the Voluntary Cleanup
Program has grown.
Vector Control District - West Nile Virus
FY 15-16 was yet another above-average year for West
Nile virus activity. In FY 16-17, outreach on mosquitoborne
disease prevention and control will be expanded,
including outreach to groups such as the homeless in
fogging zones. The District will continue to seek out and
address backyard breeding sources. The District will
also continue to test dead birds for West Nile Virus,
monitor mosquito-breeding areas, and respond to
citizen requests for assistance and information.
Vector Control District - Invasive Mosquitoes
In addition to West Nile Virus, the District continues to
face the possibility of two new invasive mosquito
species entering the County. Aedes albopictus, or Asian
Tiger Mosquito (ATM), is established in southern
California, and is a very efficient carrier (vector), and
Aedes aegypti, or Yellow Fever Mosquito, expanded its
range in the central valley and continued its presence in
San Mateo County (notably, in Menlo Park, just north of
the border of Santa Clara County). Both of these species
are efficient vectors of Dengue, Chikungunya, and Zika
viruses, which are significant human pathogens. Both
species, if established here, would significantly alter the
operational burden on the District because they are
small container breeders and can successfully breed in the water filling a bottle cap. They are also day-biters
and will have a significant impact on quality of life for
County residents. The District will continue its intense
surveillance in order to detect these container-breeding
mosquitoes should they enter Santa Clara County.
Learning Organization
In FY15-16, CEPA continued the cross-training and
streamlining of the Administrative and Accounting
Units withing DEH and AEM. These consolidations were consistent with the principles of the County’s
Center for Leadership and Transformation, and were
designed to remove silos and foster cross-functional
collaboration. As the consolidations continue to move
forward, the work streamlining/efficiencies and the
opening of career opportunities for staff are developing.
