The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget attempts to address potential harm from State takebacks.
The County could receive significantly more or less than projected upon State budget
amendments. As evidenced in the Governor's Budget proposed to use the revenue from
temporary tax increases to pay down debt, save for a rainy day, and increased spending for
education, the environment, public safety, public works, affordable health care, and CaiWORKS.
The Governor's "May Revise" Budget was released on May 13, 2014. Some of the key
components of the May Revision are: shoring up teacher pensions, approximately $450 million
in 2014-15, with the goal to eliminate the deficit by 2020-21; implementing Federal Health Care
Reform, an additional $1.2 billion; increased money for drought relief, $142 million; and most
significantly, paying down debts and liabilities, $11 billion in 2014-15. Included is an additional
$100 million to repay a portion of state mandate costs owed to counties since 2004.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget relies on use of fund balance carryover ($10.0 million)
which results from a combination of spending reductions and revenue growth. Absent growth in
our major discretionary revenues, future spending plans may require reductions in the level of
General Fund support to Central Government and benefitting departments outside the General
Fund.

The Auditor Controller is a central service department that provides support services to county
departments and select special districts. The A-87 Cost Plan is the mechanism to recover expenses
incurred two years in arrears. The recovery of costs through the Cost Plan is reduced by the Board's
decision not to charge Special Districts for the Auditor's costs, which reduces the Auditor's recovery by
$226,398. Several agencies, such as the schools, are also exempt from A-87. The Board recognized that
Special Districts had limited resources or ability to raise rates to cover these charges.

The California Assessor's Association, the California Department of Finance and the State legislature
have been working with legislature to reconfigure appropriate funding for property tax administration.
With the State's current budget concerns there is uncertainty as to when such a program would become
available. The 2014-15 Governor's budget proposes a modest pilot program to study potential
improvement to the current property tax administration system.The County's Personnel Director, the HHSA Director, and the CSS Director have been working with the
CaiHR for the past several years to negotiate the County's conversion to ALMS. The Board approved
three new Personnel Assistant-Confidential positions in the Personnel budget (and deleted one from the
HHSA Health Services budget) on February 25, 2014. The formal date of conversion is July 1, 2014. The
transition (which will be seamless to county departments) will require additional work such as, but not
limited to: staff informational sessions (Unions will be encouraged to attend); policy review and updates;
grandfather of seniority process; review, addition, and deletion of job classification specifications; review
of in process Merit Systems recruitments and eligible lists transition. There will be no harm or negative
impacts experienced by any county employee due to this conversion. The overarching result of this
conversion is that Shasta County will have one personnel system, one set of rules and policies with the
sole purpose of adhering to the six Federal Merit Principles.Similar to the County's SB 81 Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility, the ARC is funded with state lease-revenue
bonds. This funding program is complex and requires the County to comply with several state tasks and
state-county agreements, in a timely manner. The Ground Lease sets forth the terms and conditions
under which the County will lease the project site (real property) to the California Department of
Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) for the purposes of making the County eligible for the state's
lease-revenue bond financing program. The Right of Entry agreement sets forth the County's
authorization from CDCR (with the consent of the State Public Works Board (SPWB)) to use the project
site in order to construct the new facility. When construction of the ARC is about 90-95% complete the
state Department of Finance issues the lease-revenue bonds. After the ARC is built the SPWB leases the
ARC to CDCR via a Facility Lease in order for CDCR to pay the annual lease-revenue bond payments to
the SPWB (State General Funds allocated annually by the Legislature and Governor in CDCR's operating

budget). After the Site Lease and the Facility Lease is executed (the County will not be a party to either of
these agreements). the County enters in to the Facility Sublease with CDCR (with the consent of the
SPWB) in order to occupy and operate the ARC. The Facility Sublease is subordinate to and the term
runs concurrently with the Facility Lease. After the state lease-revenue bonds are paid in full/fully retired
then the Ground Lease, Facility Lease, and Facility Sublease all terminate and ownership of the ARC
reverts to the County. The term of the outstanding bonds could be as long as 30 years.
Annual staff and operating costs are estimated to start at $3.9 million and projected to increase (by using
a simple three percent annual inflaUon factor) to $9.5 million 30 years from now. These costs are offset by
reducing the Jail budget by $1.1 million due to the transfer of the kitchen and laundry facilities, as well as
food costs for both facilities. Costs are further offset by transferring the Sheriff's current Work Release
budget, and related AB 109/2011 Realignment revenue ($734,000), as well. At this point in time, the
County plans to fund the net increase of $2.1 million per year from General Funds and Proposition 172
(Public Safety Augmentation) funds.

The cost to enforce the County's medical marijuana ordinance is contained in this budget unit. Included
are appropriations for legal services for nuisance abatement hearings, and clean-up of illegal grows. Not
included is the cost of the staff dedicated to the enforcement; those costs are included in the General
Fund Transfer Out in the General Revenue Budget Unit. All told, the FY 2014-15 Budget to enforce the
medical marijuana ordinance totals $364,082 (legal services, $70,000; clean-up, $15,000; Building
Inspectors and staff, $164,082; Sheriff Deputy, $115,000.)

The AOC's timeline to commence construction of the New Redding Courthouse has been delayed until at
least 2015-16. The County's holding over in the Public Safety Building was extended to December 31,
2015. Future budgets will be impacted by the need to provide alternative office space for both Probation
and Sheriff staff and operations during the construction of the new courthouse and the remodel of the
existing courthouse.


The timing of payments to and from outside agencies rnay result in negative cash within the Public Safety
Fund. Each of the departments has worked to stay current on billing for services and no grant funds are
disbursed to outside agencies prior to receipt of the offsetting revenue. The Auditor-Controller changed
the transfer-in of the General Fund contribution to the first of the month which has also helped improve the
cash flow in this fund.
Sales tax revenue from Public Safety Augmentalion (Proposition 172) is distributed to counties based on
their percentage of statewide sales tax collection. The County's pro-rata share of statewide sales tax for
public safety has declined in each of the last two fiscal years and it is currently 0.004734, the lowest it has
been since 2000-01. The final Prop 172 receipt is not received until August, but based on receipts to date
it is projected to just make our target budget. Year-to-date receipts are just over 1 percent ahead of the
prior year.

The CCPEC approved FY 2013-14 funding augmentations in the District Attorney's (and Public
Defender's) budgets as are responsible to staff nearly all revocation hearings beginning July 1, 2013 as
part of the continued transfer of state responsibilities to counties; this includes all Mandatory Supervision,
all Post Release Community Supervision, and most of state Parole's revocation hearings, as well as the
Probation revocation hearings they have always staffed. The CCPEC augmented this revenue because
the 2011 Realignment allocation the District Attorney (and Public Defender) receive from the state (which
is separate from the CCP allocation) is only about half the amount necessary to fund one full-time attorney
and does not include any funding for support staff, training, equipment, supplies, etc. The state and a
nine-member CEO workgroup are currently working on new CCP and DNPD funding allocation
methodology for FY 2014-15, as well as 2011 Realignment revenue growth allocations (however, the
state Department of Finance has the authority to make the final determination on the growth allocation
distribution). The Governor's 2012 November ballot initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety
Protection Act of 2012, included a Constitutional Amendment to protect realignment funding for counties
and was approved by !he voters on November 6, 2012. The Constilutional Amendment protects the state
funding source for 2011 Realignment revenue which comes from Vehicle License Fees (VLF) in the
statewide amount of $453.4 million ($300 million freed up by an additional $12 Vehicle Registration Fee
(VRF) and $153.4 million that was previously dedicated to cities and Orange County for general purpose
use) and 1.0625% of the state's sales and use tax (SUT) that would have ordinarily gone to the state
general fund. Both of these funding sources, though now constitutionally protected, are not stable, as
receipts are directly related to the health of the economy. The state has projected that the statewide
revenue for 2011 Realignment will decline in FY 2014-15, although the AB109 population has not
declined or stabilized as !he state originally predicted. The District Attorney and his slaff are to be
commended for working proactively towards difficult budget solutions that protect public safety and !he
fiscal health of the County during one of the biggest shifts in public safety responsibilities in recent history.

In less than five years, 28 percent of the department's staff have retired and another 10 percent have
made promotional transfers to other departments or left for other reasons, including employment outside
county government. Approximately 40 percent of the current staff have less than five years of experience
in the department. Transferring institutional knowledge and training new staff while addressing the needs
of families and meeting compliance and performance requirements is an ongoing challenge.
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act will have some impact on the Child Support
Program; however, the extent of the impact is still unknown. The stale DCSS and the California Child
Support Directors Association have formed a workgroup to analyze the effects of the federal health care
reform legislation.

The state and a nine-member CEO workgroup are currently working on a new AB109 funding allocation
methodology for FY 2014-15, as well as AB109 revenue growth allocations (however, the state
Department of Finance has the authority to make the final determination on the growth allocations
distribution). The Governor's 2012 November ballot initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety
Protection Act of 2012, included a Constitutional Amendment to protect 2011 Realignment funding for
counties and was approved by the voters on November 6, 2012. The Constitutional Amendment protects
the state funding source for 2011 Realignment revenue which comes from Vehicle License Fees (VLF) in
the statewide amount of $453.4 million ($300 million freed up by an additional $12 Vehicle Registration
Fee (VRF) and $153.4 million that was previously dedicated to cities and Orange County for general
purpose use) and 1.0625% of the state's sales and use tax (SUT) that would have ordinarily gone to the
state general fund. Both of these funding sources, though now constitutionally protected, are not stable,
as receipts are directly related to the health of the economy. The state has projected that the statewide

revenue for 2011 Realignment will decline in FY 2014-15, although the AB109 population has not
declined or stabilized as the state originally predicted. The Sheriff and his staff are to be commended for
working proactively towards difficult budget solutions that protect public safety and the fiscal health of the
County during one of the biggest and most challenging public safety changes in decades. 

Senate Bill (SB) 81, enacted in 2007, limits the type and number of minors that can be housed at the state
Division of Juvenile Justice (DJJ), and provided Youthful Offender Block Grant (YOBG) revenue of
approximately $300,000 annually. Therefore the JRF now houses more serious juvenile offenders for
longer periods of time. In FY 2013-14 the state began charging counties to house high-level juvenile
offenders at DJJ at $24,000 per ward per year.
Signed in to law on September 4, 2003, the federal Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA) requires
detention administrators to identify, prevent, intervene, and prosecute incidents of resident-on-resident
sexual assault and to ensure programs and services meet the complex needs of victims and perpetrators.
PREA requires the use of the Vulnerable Assessment Instrument screening tool that assists in identifying 

individuals who may be vulnerable or at risk for abuse or predation and related treatment and support for
victims, along with efforts to prevent, intervene, report, and prosecute offenders. Additionally, on October
1, 2017 PREA increases the minimum direct supervision staff ratios to 1:8 during waking hours (currently
1:10) and 1:16 during sleeping hours (currently 1:30). This will increase required staffing levels during
waking hours by about 33 percent and would double the required number of staff during sleeping hours. If
states do not comply with this new unfunded federal mandate, then the state risks losing five percent of
federal Department of Justice prions-related grant funds. PREA lacks any corresponding sanctions for
facilities that do not adopt or comply with the new standards. However, PREA standards may influence
standards of care that courts apply when considering legal and constitutional claims against detention
facilities arising from allegations of sexual abuse or accrediting agencies may also make PREA
compliance a condition of accreditation.

2012 November ballot initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act of 2012, which
was approved by the voters on November 6, 2012), the state and a nine-member CEO workgroup are
currently working on new county funding allocation methodologies for FY 2014-15 and beyond, as well as
2011 Realignment growth allocations (however, the state Department of Finance has the authority to
make the final determination on the growth allocations). The state had projected that the statewide
revenue for 2011 Realignment would grow, as the AB109 population grows, through FY 2013-14, and will
then decline slightly and stabilize in FY 2014-15 as the AB109 population stabilizes, should the realigned
programs be successful in reducing recidivism. However, the AB109 population is not now projected to
decline in FY 2014-15, although statewide revenue receipts will.
Additionally, on October 11, 2010, then Governor Schwarzennegger signed SB678 (California Community
Corrections Performance Incentives Act of 2009) which financially rewarded counties for reducing adult
felony probationer recidivism by using evidence-based practices (the state shares the savings they realize

from reduced prison commitments with counties). Our County Probation Department has been relatively
successful with this program, has received over $2.7 million to date. The original legislation included a
sunset date of December 31, 2014. However, the Governor signed AB105 (2013) which removed the
sunset date and made the program, and the revenue, permanent.
Finally, the federal and state governments have been negotiating new claiming parameters for Title IV-E
pre-placement services and the department, along with all statewide Probation Departments, will not be
allowed to claim reimbursement for as many services as they have in the past resulting in a loss of annual
Title IV-E federal funding.


In past years, MHSA has been a target of budget solutions at the state level. MHSA funds are volatile and
vary with economic conditions. MHSA revenues are distributed monthly as a percent of total income tax
receipts. MHSA currently has cash reserves in excess of $8 million.

The HHSA budget request for FY 2014-15 includes a proposal to transfer approximately $1.3 million from
Social Services 1991 realignment and $481,412 from Social Services 2011 realignment to Mental Health
to offset a shortfall in the hospitalization and institutional care areas of the Mental Health budget as well
as continued delays in receipt of cost settlement revenue. Since March 2012, costs for acute
hospitalization and Institutes for Mental Diseases (IMDs) have stayed at the higher levels. Costs in these
categories are projected to be approximately $1 million higher in the current year and $1.2 million higher
in the budget year than the FY 2012-13 actual expenditures. Most of the IMD cost is ineligible for
Medi-Cal reimbursement and, thus, must be supported within department realignment funds. Efforts to
curb costs in this area have been somewhat successful and will continue, but the number of people
presenting at local hospitals and the length of their treatment, due to seriousness of their illness, have
made costs difficult to control.
Of significant concern is the responsibility for those with mild to moderate diagnosed mental health
illnesses. Currently, services for this population are administered by health plans, while counties, through
managed care, are responsible for those diagnosed with severe mental health illnesses. With the State's
continuing efforts to divert costs to counties, discussions are occurring about shifting responsibility for 

those with mild to moderate diagnosed mental health illnesses to counties with no additional funding
attached. Shasta County is working closely with the County Mental Health Directors Association
(CMHDA) to participate in these ongoing discussions and ensure county mental health departments' are
represented.
The "Katie A." lawsuit sought to improve the provision of mental health and supportive services for
children and youth in, or at imminent risk of placement in, foster care in California. The court approved a
settlement agreement on December 2, 2011, seeking to accomplish systemic change in the provision of
mental health services to children and youth within the class by promoting, adopting, and endorsing new
and expanded service approaches for Medi-Cal covered services. Included in the settlement agreement is
implementation of Therapeutic Foster Care anticipated to begin later in 2014. Further, the provision of
these intensive services to children and youth is determined by eligibility criteria established in the
settlement agreement and address those foster youth that have significant needs. Some funding was
provided through 2011 realignment to support the cost of expanded services required by the lawsuit. The
Governor's FY 2014-15 "May Revision" includes a small placeholder of $2 million to be used for potential
statewide county administrative costs associated with semi-annual progress report requirements if the
costs are considered "new" relative to Proposition 30 (passed in 2012), which requires the State to
provide annual funding for newly required activities that have an overall effect of increasing county costs
in realigned programs. Further discussions will occur between State and counties as there are many
unanswered questions regarding funding the expanded services. HHSA is participating in and closely
monitoring these discussions which include the California State Association of Counties (CSAC), County
Welfare Directors Association of California (CWDA), and the County Mental Health Directors Association
(CMHDA). 

A pressing issue for Public Health has been the State's approach to funding services under the expansion
of Medi-Cal services as a part of health care reform and the changes to 1991 realignment with approval of
AB85. The growth formula in 1991 health realignment has been changed due to the State taking
responsibility for much of the indigent health care population through the Medi-Cal expansion which was
implemented January 1, 2014. It will not be clear until September 2014, when FY 2013-14 growth
calculations are released, how this change in the formula will impact growth payments into the future.
The Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) program plans to enter into a one-year contract with the State
for the period covering October 1, 2014 to September 30, 2015 (Federal Fiscal Year 2015) as federal
funding is passed through the State to Shasta County. Caseload and dollar amounts included in the
current contract will be utilized for this purpose. Effective October 1, 2015 (Federal Fiscal Year 2016),
California's contracting rules will require contracts be procured through a competitive process that
includes program standards and requirements. The State is in the process of developing the Request for
Application (RFA) for the competitive process, with the intent to award three-year contracts through the
RFA process. Essentially, HHSA could have to compete to continue to provide WIC services in
Shasta County. HHSA will work diligently to ensure WIC services continue and will closely monitor this
process as it evolves. 

With the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) on January 1, 2014,
many clients who were considered "medically indigent" qualified for Medi-Cal coverage paid for 100% by
the federal government. As of February 28, 2014, the number of Shasta County residents covered by
CMSP decreased from 5,000 to less than 100. A pressing issue for Public Health has been the State's
approach to funding services under the expansion of Medi-Cal services as a part of health care reform
and the changes to 1991 realignment with approval of AB85. Although, during the first three years of the
ACA expansion, the federal government pays 100 percent of the cost of services to the expanded
population, the State has diverted funds ($5.36 million) previously paid by Shasta County to CMSP to pay
for other State health care obligations (the requested budget does not include $5.36 million in
expenditures or revenues due to this diversion of funding). During the years following, federal matching
will fall to 95 percent and then decline each year ultimately to 90 percent. As a CMSP county, it is
anticipated that Shasta would continue to utilize their network to cover a residual population of individuals'
medical needs.

CCS operates under Public Health oversight and staff continues to closely monitor expenditures for both
administrative and diagnostic and treatment services. As in previous years, these costs are somewhat
unpredictable due to fluctuations in Medi-Cal client ratios and varying high-risk medical needs among
CCS children. Therefore, due to the possibility of additional medical care costs, increased Medi-Cal
caseload, particularly related to the implementation of Health Care Reform, and the decline in prior years
of 1991 realignment revenues, Public Health bears the risk for the additional costs.

Through the 2011 Public Safety Realignment, responsibility for Alcohol and Drug program activities
passed to the counties with a share of state sales tax to replace the state general fund contribution.
Among the programs realigned is responsibility for Drug Medi-Cal, a federal entitlement. Because this
entitlement can expand rapidly with health care reform and parity laws, it presents a financial risk to the
county in future years. Restricting access to drug and alcohol treatment due to limited treatment dollars,
on the other hand, may increase law enforcement costs, incarceration costs, losses to local businesses,
and medical treatment costs due to injuries caused by intoxicated individuals. The HHSA is advocating
for appropriate funding to support growing costs and will be monitoring how 2011 realignment will be
structured into the future to protect county liability.

Some issues surrounding 2011 realignment remain unresolved, including the impact of realigned
responsibility for Drug Medi-Cal services. Since Drug Medi-Cal was realigned to counties, the counties
have taken on a significant federal entitlement program, without guarantee that realignment funds will
grow commensurately with program costs. Funds may have to be diverted from Perinatal and other
mental health programs in future years to fund Drug Medi-Cal services should realignment revenues fail to
fully support services, which could potentially escalate costs in other programs such as mental health and
child welfare.

With implementation of 2011 realignment, which eliminated State funding to a number of programs and
replaced funds with dedicated sales tax revenues, counties were left with two months of previously state
expenditures to support while waiting for sales tax revenue to arrive. State funding was previously
received in advance to assist counties with the extreme nature of entitlement payments. With this policy
·change, counties are now 'floating' costs until revenue is received.

Statute implementing Realignment 2011 allows greater flexibility in allocating realignment revenues to
counties designated as an "integrated and comprehensive health and human service system" under
Welfare and Institutions Code §18986.86. Shasta County applied for this designation in 2006, but the
request was never finalized by the California Health and Human Services Agency (CHHS), and
Shasta County sent a new letter to the CHHS Secretary in July 2013. Subsequently CHHS determined
that, although the sunset date for designation as an integrated agency was removed from statute several
years ago, an anomaly in the statute currently inhibits CHHS from making any new designations. HHSA
is working with the California State Association of Counties (CSAC) and CHHS to revise the statutory
language and move forward with official designation.

Monthly maximum General Assistance payments are based on a statutory formula thai uses federal
poverty level, cost of housing in the geographical area, and adjustments to Aid to Families with
Dependent Children I CaiWORKs. The current maximum monthly payment is $312, as authorized by the
Board of Supervisors December 17, 2013 (effective March 1, 2014). This amount has been calculated to
be the appropriate amount for Shasta County.
With implementation of AB85, the 2011 realignment distribution to the Child Poverty & Family
Supplemental Support Subaccount provides for additional CaiWORKs grant increases as long as the
ongoing cumulative costs of all prior grant increases provided are fully funded. Counties will not be
required to contribute a share of cost to cover the costs of these grant increases. However, if changes to
the CaiWORKs payments occur, the GA maximum grant will be recomputed to ensure the appropriate
level of monthly support, the cost of which will be borne by the County General Fund.

The most significant threat to this budget lies in risk associated with growing caseloads in child welfare
programs as well as changes to foster care due to legislative and court decisions. In previous years,
group homes, foster family homes, and foster family agencies have received substantial, rate increases.
Court decisions established an annual determination of cost of living increases to these rates. Further, the
legislature has approved the extension of foster care and in some cases adoption assistance benefits to
families of adopted children up to 21 years of age. This increase is being phased in over a three-year
period, but it will add costs for care of young adults who would have otherwise "aged out" of the system.
Beginning in FY 2013-14, sales tax collected in excess of base allocations was directed, in part, to a $200
million statewide restoration of funding for child welfare services. With increased resources for program
services, more emphasis can be placed on activities to decrease the number of children placed in foster
care and/or adoptive homes while continuing to maintain their safety as well as services to support
children being placed in less restrictive settings, such as treatment services in foster care settings instead
of group homes.

IHSS provider wage and benefit costs in this budget are projected to remain stable through FY 2014-15.
IHSS program costs are subject to the IHSS Maintenance of Effort (MOE) established in FY 2012-13. The
MOE sets a capped annual county cost for IHSS provider wages and benefits, IHSS program services,
and IHSS Public Authority costs. The MOE will be increased in FY 2014-15 and beyond by 3.5 percent
annually when 1991 realignment revenue base is met. In years where revenue falls and base is not met,
the annual MOE increase will not occur. Any negotiated increase in wages and benefits would have to be
approved by the State and the MOE would be adjusted to reflect the County's share of the cost increase.
The MOE was implemented by the state in advance of approval by the federal Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) as part of a Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) to control the state share of
Medi-Cal costs for elderly and disabled adults. If CMS or the state declines to implement the CCI, the
MOE will become inactive and the county will revert to paying one-third of the non-federal costs in the
local programs.

The budget passed by Congress in January 2014 for Federal fiscal year 2014 requires HUD to continue to
undertund administrative fees earned by housing authorities nationwide. One vacant Housing Authority
position will remain unfilled pending passage of the Federal fiscal year 2015 budget. Management has
taken steps to curb controllable costs within services and supplies. Revenue allocations from HUD will be
monitored and expenditure levels will be adjusted accordingly.

On March 11, 2014 the Board of Supervisors adopted a resolution that raises the County's self-insured
Liability and Worker's Compensation risk management confidence level to 80 to 90 percent. Annually, in
compliance wilh requirements to participate in California State Association of Counties-Excess Insurance
Authority (CSAC-EIA) excess insurance programs, Risk Management contracts for an actuarial study of
reserves in the Self-Insured Programs. Insurance rates have been adjusted annually to Slrive to maintain
the eighty percent confidence level; however, due to many fluctuations in utilization the fund remains in
excess of eighty percent. The Auditor-Controller met with the department head to discuss rate setting and
a plan to reiUrn the reserves to an acceptable confidence level. Concurrent wilh the FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget the excess reserves will be reduced and offset by an additional contribution to the
OPEB Irrevocable Trusts. In addition, rate setting will be structured to maintain the fund wilhin a
confidence level between 80 to 90 percent. The Auditor-Controller will meet at least annually with Risk
Management to review the reserve level.

The Shasta Regional Transportation Agency is working with transit providers to consolidate services. In
FY 2014-15 Lifeline and Burney Express transit services may be absorbed by their respective transit
operator(s). Expenses for the Redding Area Bus Authority (RABA) joint powers authority will still fiow
through this fund.

On December 3, 2013, the IHSS Governing Board approved a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
between the Shasta County IHSS Public Authority and the California United Homecare Workers. The
MOU provides for wages of $9.64 per hour, a 3. 7 percent increase, to be provided to IHSS providers. The
MOU will expire on September 30, 2014, and negotiations for a successor MOU are expected to begin in
the summer of 2014. Other counties currently in negotiation with IHSS providers have reported that the
state's upcoming minimum wage increase has been a frequent topic at the bargaining table.
During FY 2011-12, the State began negotiations with Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
to adopt a Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) whereby the State would take over the Public Authority role in
counties as they came under Medi-Cal Managed Care plans. The intention was to use IHSS as a way to
further keep elderly and disabled clients safely in their homes and out of institutional care, resulting in
Medi-Cal savings for the State. As a part of the CCI, the State adopted a MOE level of IHSS county cost
in each county, regardless of whether the respective counties had come under Medi-Cal Managed Care.
The MOE is established as the county's share of the FY 2011-12 cost for IHSS provider wages and
benefits, program administration, and Public Authority, less the CMS authorized Community First Choice
Option (CFCO) retroactive savings. The MOE was implemented beginning in FY 2012-13 and continues
through FY 2013-14 without adjustment. In FY 2014-15, the MOE will increase annually by 3.5 percent,
provided that 1991 realignment funds grow. If realignment funds decline, the MOE is not adjusted in the
current year. CMS has approved the CCI in concept, but further State steps are necessary to fully
implement. The State is still considering whether the CCI is beneficial, as the State may have overprojected
CCI savings while capping counties' risk for cost increases. This would leave the State
vulnerable to unforeseen cost increases in the future, including responsibility for the cost of overtime if
new regulations eliminating provider overtime are not approved during the State budget process, as well
as other court-driven state and local IHSS financial responsibilities. Should the State decide that the CCI
creates too much risk, it could retract the MOE and reinstate the cost-sharing ratios in all three aspects of