The 2015-16 Recommended Budget relies on use of fund balance carryover ($10.9 million)
which results from a combination of spending reductions and revenue growth, and reduces the
General Purpose Fund Balance by $10 million for the transfer-out to Accumulated Capital
Outlay. Absent growth in our major discretionary revenues, future spending plans may require
reductions in the level of General Fund support to Central Government and benefitting
departments outside the General Fund.
The Auditor Controller is a central service department that provides support services to county
departments and select special districts. The A-87 Cost Plan is the mechanism to recover expenses
incurred two years in arrears. The recovery of costs through the Cost Plan is reduced by the Board’s
decision not to charge Special Districts for the Auditor’s costs, which reduces the Auditor’s recovery by
$216,803. Several agencies, such as the schools, are also exempt from A-87. The Board recognized that
Special Districts have limited resources or ability to raise rates to cover these charges.The California Assessor’s Association, the California Department of Finance and the State legislature
have been working with legislature to reconfigure appropriate funding for property tax administration.
With the State’s current budget concerns there is uncertainty as to when such a program would become
available. The 2014-15 Governor’s budget proposed a modest pilot program to study potential
improvement to the current property tax administration system to which eight counties have been
accepted.The fund balance available in Accumulated Capital Outlay after adoption of the CEO’s recommended
budget will be $12,287,314. Within the next five to ten years the County will undertake a number of
significant capital projects, including repurposing the old Courthouse and Courthouse Annex, the Justice
Center, and the old Juvenile Hall.Similar to the County’s SB 81 Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility, the ARC is funded with state lease-revenue
bonds. This funding program is complex and requires the County to comply with several state tasks and
state-county agreements, in a timely manner. The Ground Lease sets forth the terms and conditions
under which the County will lease the project site (real property) to the California Department of
Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) for the purposes of making the County eligible for the state’s
lease-revenue bond financing program. The Right of Entry agreement sets forth the County’s
authorization from CDCR (with the consent of the State Public Works Board (SPWB)) to use the project
site in order to construct the new facility. When construction of the ARC is about 90-95% complete the
state Department of Finance issues the lease-revenue bonds. After the ARC is built the SPWB leases the
ARC to CDCR via a Facility Lease in order for CDCR to pay the annual lease-revenue bond payments to
the SPWB (State General Funds allocated annually by the Legislature and Governor in CDCR’s operating

budget). After the Site Lease and the Facility Lease is executed (the County will not be a party to either of
these agreements), the County enters in to the Facility Sublease with CDCR (with the consent of the
SPWB) in order to occupy and operate the ARC. The Facility Sublease is subordinate to and the term
runs concurrently with the Facility Lease. After the state lease-revenue bonds are paid in full/fully retired
then the Ground Lease, Facility Lease, and Facility Sublease all terminate and ownership of the ARC
reverts to the County. The term of the outstanding bonds could be as long as 30 years.
Annual staff and operating costs for a 64-bed facility are estimated to start at $3.9 million and projected to
increase (by using a simple three percent annual inflation factor) to $9.5 million 30 years from now. These
costs are offset by reducing the Jail budget by $1.1 million due to the transfer of the kitchen and laundry
facilities, as well as food costs for both facilities. Costs are further offset by transferring the Sheriff’s
current Work Release budget, and related AB 109/2011 Realignment revenue, as well. At this point in
time, the County plans to fund the net increase of $2.1 million per year from General Funds and
Proposition 172 (Public Safety Augmentation) funds.

Only a portion of the cost to enforce the County’s medical marijuana ordinance is contained in this budget
unit; included are appropriations for legal services for nuisance abatement hearings, and clean-up of
illegal grows. Not included is the cost of the staff dedicated to the enforcement; those costs are included
in the General Fund Transfer Out in the General Revenue Budget Unit. A summary of the cost for FY
2015-16 code enforcement for the medical marijuana ordinance is $434,082: legal services, $100,000;
clean-up, $15,000; Building Inspectors and staff, $164,082; one full-time Sheriff Deputy and extra-help
Deputies as needed, $155,000.

The future of the Secure Rural Schools Act is unknown. The most recent authorization of the Secure
Rural Schools Act expired on September 30, 2013. On April 15, 2015, the Secure Rural Schools Act was
extended for two years; however, the future of the program is unknown after the two year extension.

The JCC’s timeline to commence construction of the New Redding Courthouse has been delayed until at
least 2016-17. The County’s holding over in the Public Safety Building was extended to December 31,
2015. Future budgets will be impacted by the need to provide alternative office space for both Probation
and Sheriff staff and operations during the construction of the new courthouse and the remodel of the
existing courthouse.

Criminal Sentences. Misdemeanor Penalties. Initiative Statute. (Prop 47), passed by the voters on
November 4, 2014, means criminal offenders who commit certain nonserious and nonviolent drug and
property crimes will be sentenced to reduced penalties (such as shorter terms in jail). State savings
resulting from the measure would then be used to support school truancy and dropout prevention, victim
services, mental health and drug abuse treatment, and other programs designed to keep offenders out of
prison and jail. Every offender (both sentenced and pending sentencing) whose crime(s) fall under Prop
47 became eligible for re-sentencing on November 4, 2014. In the 2015-16 FY Budget the Public
Defender’s Office will spend approximately $35,000 on processing re-sentencing petitions from offenders,
both in- and out-of-custody, by hiring extra-help staff (one Deputy Public Defender I/II/III, one Law Clerk,
and one Data Entry Clerk). Approximately 80 percent of those who request a re-sentence review will be 

eligible; some make numerous requests, some are not from Shasta County, and some will not be eligible
due to their crime(s). Some of those who are eligible, and even granted, will still remain in custody to
serve time related to non-Prop 47-eligible crimes. As of the first quarter of 2015, the Public Defender’s
Office has processed approximately 1,063 re-sentencing requests; the vast majority were for in-custody
offenders representing about 600 in-custody individuals. Of these 1,063 requests, the lion’s share were
from state prisoners. The Public Defender has a back-log of approximately 250 out-of-custody requests
and so they expect to process a total of 1,500 re-sentencing requests be the end of 2015.

The timing of payments to and from outside agencies may result in negative cash within the Public Safety
Fund. Each of the departments has worked to stay current on billing for services and no grant funds are
disbursed to outside agencies prior to receipt of the offsetting revenue. The transfer-in of the General
Fund contribution on the first of the month also helped improve the cash flow in this fund.
Sales tax revenue from Public Safety Augmentation (Proposition 172) is distributed to counties based on
their percentage of statewide sales tax collection. The County’s pro-rata share of statewide sales tax for
public safety is currently 0.004782, almost par with 2001-02. The final Prop 172 receipt is not received
until August; year-to-date receipts are just over eight percent ahead of the prior year.
The beginning fund balance in the Proposition 172 Reserve at June 30, 2014 was $3.4 million. The
estimated use of this reserve is $1.4 million, leaving a remaining balance of $1.9 million. The CEO’s
Recommended FY 2015-16 Budget includes the following use of the Prop 172 Reserve:

The Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee (CCPEC) continues to approve funding
augmentations in the District Attorney’s (and Public Defender’s) budgets as they are responsible to staff
nearly all revocation hearings beginning July 1, 2013 as part of the continued transfer of state
responsibilities to counties; this includes all Mandatory Supervision, all Post Release Community
Supervision, and most of state Parole’s revocation hearings, as well as the Probation revocation hearings
they have always staffed. The CCPEC augmented this revenue because the 2011 Realignment allocation
the District Attorney (and Public Defender) receive from the state (which is separate from the CCP
allocation) is only about half the amount necessary to fund one full-time attorney and does not include any
funding for support staff, training, equipment, supplies, etc. Even though 2011 Realignment/AB109
revenue is now constitutionally protected (due to the Governor’s 2012 November ballot initiative, called
the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act of 2012, which was approved by the voters on
November 6, 2012), the state and a nine-member CEO workgroup have recently decreased Shasta
County’s share of the statewide revenue and changed funding allocation methodologies for 2011
Realignment growth revenue to be more dependent on counties’ successes with realignment, such as
sending fewer offenders to prison and achieving better outcomes with successful adult probation
completion. This may also decrease Shasta County’s future share of growth revenue. As such, the
Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee voted to reduce AB109 expenditures beginning
in FY 2015-16 and continuing each fiscal year until budgeted expenditures match projected revenues.
Proposition 47, recently passed by the voters, makes several drug crimes now misdemeanors instead of
felonies, is in its infancy and its impact to public safety in Shasta County is still being analyzed.

In the past seven years, 44 percent of the department’s staff have retired and about 45 percent of current
staff have less than seven years of experience in the department. Transferring institutional knowledge
and training new staff while addressing the needs of families and meeting compliance and performance
requirements is an ongoing challenge.

The Governor’s 2012 November ballot initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act
of 2012, included a Constitutional Amendment to protect 2011 Realignment funding for counties and was
approved by the voters on November 6, 2012. The Constitutional Amendment protects the state funding
source for 2011 Realignment revenue which comes from Vehicle License Fees (VLF) in the statewide
amount of $453.4 million ($300 million freed up by an additional $12 Vehicle Registration Fee (VRF) and
$153.4 million that was previously dedicated to cities and Orange County for general purpose use) and
1.0625% of the state’s sales and use tax (SUT) that would have ordinarily gone to the state general fund.
Both of these funding sources, though now constitutionally protected, are not stable, as receipts are
directly related to the health of the economy. Even though 2011 Realignment/AB109 revenue is now
constitutionally protected the state and a nine-member CEO workgroup recently decreased Shasta
County’s share of the statewide revenue and changed funding allocation methodologies for 2011
Realignment growth revenue to be more dependent on counties’ successes with realignment, such as
sending fewer offenders to prison and achieving better outcomes with successful adult probation
completion. This may also decrease Shasta County’s future share of growth revenue. As such, the
Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee voted to reduce AB109 expenditures beginning
in FY 2015-16 and continuing each fiscal year until budgeted expenditures match projected revenues.
Proposition 47, recently passed by the voters, makes several drug crimes now misdemeanors instead of
felonies, is in its infancy and its impact to public safety in Shasta County is still being analyzed.

As the drought continues in California, it is anticipated that fewer people will be buying boats and the
average sales price of used boats may decline due to slower demand; this could decrease future receipts
of unsecured property tax revenue. Such reductions could eventually impact the level of General Fund
support or the level of services provided.

After the Sheriff’s Adult Rehabilitation Center (ARC) is built on Breslauer Way, currently scheduled to
open in December 2018, the Sheriff’s Work Release, and other alternate custody programs will move in to
the ARC.
The state Realignment Allocation Committee recently reduced Shasta County’s overall share of AB109
state revenue. In order to align budgeted expenditures with projected future year revenues the Community
Corrections Partnership Executive Committee voted to reduce FY 2015-16 expenditures.

Even though 2011 Realignment/AB109 revenue is now constitutionally protected (due to the Governor’s
2012 November ballot initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act of 2012, which
was approved by the voters on November 6, 2012), the state and a nine-member CEO workgroup are
recently decreased Shasta County’s share of the statewide revenue and changed funding allocation
methodologies for 2011 Realignment growth revenue to be more dependent on counties’ successes with
realignment, such as sending fewer offenders to prison and achieving better outcomes with successful
adult probation completion. This may also decrease Shasta County’s future share of growth revenue. As
such, the Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee voted to reduce AB109 expenditures
beginning in FY 2015-16 and continuing each fiscal year until budgeted expenditures match projected
revenues. Proposition 47, recently passed by the voters, makes several drug crimes now misdemeanors
instead of felonies, is in its infancy and its impact to public safety in Shasta County is still being analyzed.
However, it may eventually impact both AB109 and SB678 populations, services, and funding.
Additionally, on October 11, 2010, then Governor Schwarzennegger signed SB678 (California Community
Corrections Performance Incentives Act of 2009) which financially rewarded counties for reducing adult
felony probationer recidivism by using evidence-based practices (the state shares the savings they realize
from reduced prison commitments with counties). Our County Probation Department was initially very
successful with this program. However, this is the same population that has been realigned to counties via
AB109 and so the state is reviewing this funding methodology and the annual funding is expected to
decrease. Shasta County received $1.2 million in FY 2012-13 (high) but is projected to receive $846,243
in FY 2015-16. The original legislation included a sunset date of December 31, 2014. However, the
Governor signed AB105 (2013) which removed the sunset date and made the program, and the revenue
source, permanent.
175
Finally, the federal and state governments have been negotiating new claiming parameters for Title IV-E
pre-placement services and the department, along with all statewide Probation Departments, will not be
allowed to claim reimbursement for as many services as they have in the past resulting in a loss of annual
Title IV-E federal funding.

As previously mentioned, revenue received from clients is based on their ability to pay and can fluctuate.
HHSA will continue to monitor revenues and prepare a fee analysis to determine if a request to the court
will be made for a fee increase. For those mentally ill individuals who have been determined to be
“gravely disabled” due to their illness and who require specific care, placement, and treatment assistance,
additional resources are utilized in the Mental Health budget (BU 410) to provide necessary services.
HHSA is continuing to work on preventative actions in both the Public Guardian and Mental Health 

programs to reduce hospitalizations by placing clients in the lowest level of appropriate care.

This year, the Department lost approximately $2 million in funding from the reduction in State Highway
User Tax. The department is optimistic that the funding will be restored in the future; however, it is not
known when the funding will be restored.

It should be noted that every program that uses MHSA funding has to be part of the approved MHSA plan
and go through a stakeholder process. However, funding for the programs within MHSA and within
Mental Health needs to be considered from a holistic perspective. There are programs within MHSA that
overlap with programs in mental health. This allows us to utilize 1991 and 2011 Realignment, when
appropriate, to cover a portion of the costs of programs assigned to the MHSA budget. Intergovernmental
transfer (IGT) revenues may also be available to supplement programs assigned to the MHSA budget.

Since March 2012, costs for acute hospitalization and Institutes for Mental Diseases (IMDs) have stayed
at high levels. Most of the IMD cost is ineligible for Medi-Cal reimbursement and, thus, must be supported
within department realignment funds. Efforts to mitigate costs in this area have been initiated and are a
strong focus of the Agency, but the number of people presenting at local hospitals and the length of their
treatment, due to seriousness of their illness, have made costs difficult to control.
Medi-Cal Cost Settlements for expenses incurred as far back as 2009 are still pending and have not been
included as part of this budget. An estimated $1.5 million total is owed for prior years for costs above the
interim rate the state paid us (SMA). Payment for this is still held up by state negotiations with the federal
government regarding the State Plan Amendment that has a retroactive effective date of January 1, 2009.
2011 Realignment funding does not yet have a permanent base funding amount allocated to individual
counties, and the state hasn’t established permanent methodology for distribution growth to counties.
This has caused significant variations in funding from one year to the next to many counties. So far
Shasta has not been harmed, but this is a strong concern. HHSA is advocating for appropriate base
levels of funding to support growing costs and will be monitoring how 2011 realignment will be structured
into the future to protect county operations.

The Public Health Branch has started the process to achieve accreditation from the National Public Health
Accreditation Board. The accreditation process seeks to advance and standardize quality and
performance across public health departments. To receive accreditation a local health department must
meet a set of nationally recognized, practice-focused and evidenced-based standards. The development
of a Community Health Assessment, Community Health Improvement Plan, and specific Public Health
Strategic Plan, along with systems for Continuous Quality Improvement and Staff Development are
accreditation requirements.

With the commencement of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) in January 2014, many
clients who were considered “medically indigent” qualified for Medi-Cal coverage paid for 100 percent by
the federal government. A pressing issue for Public Health has been the state’s approach to funding
services under the expansion of Medi-Cal services as a part of health care reform and the changes to
1991 realignment with approval of AB-85. Although, during the first three years of the ACA expansion, the
federal government pays 100 percent of the cost of services to the expanded population, the state has
diverted funds ($5.36 million) previously paid by Shasta County to CMSP to pay for other state health care
obligations. During the years following, federal matching will fall to 95 percent and then decline each year
ultimately to 90 percent. As a CMSP county, it is anticipated that Shasta would continue to utilize their
network to cover a residual population of individuals’ medical needs.

CCS operates under Public Health oversight and staff continues to closely monitor expenditures for both
administrative and diagnostic and treatment services. As in previous years, these costs are somewhat
unpredictable due to fluctuations in Medi-Cal client ratios and varying high-risk medical needs among
CCS children. Therefore, due to the possibility of additional medical care costs, increased Medi-Cal
caseload, particularly related to the implementation of Health Care Reform, and the decline in prior years
of 1991 realignment revenues, Public Health bears the risk for the additional costs.

The Medi-Cal expansion population’s treatment services, and the state’s expanded treatment benefits,
are reimbursed 100 percent by the federal and state governments through 2017 with no county cost. The
HHSA staff will continue to monitor this revenue closely to ensure that it is sufficient to fund planned
activities and make expenditure adjustments if necessary.
2011 Realignment funding appears to be flowing consistently, although the state has not provided the
county specific growth allocation from FY 2013-14 yet. It is expected to be distributed by June 2015 and
will have the effect of changing FY 2014-15 base levels of funding by an unknown amount. Base funding
could go up or down depending on spending levels of other counties and the formula that the state
chooses to use for distribution.
The California Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) has applied for an 1115 waiver from the
federal government in order to realign some Drug Medi-Cal responsibilities to counties, increase benefits
by offering a residential and intensive outpatient benefit to all adults, eliminate a restriction on federal
participation in paying for treatment in residential facilities with more than 16 beds, and to allow regional
models for implementation. The existing Bridge to Reform 1115 Waiver expires October 31, 2015 and the 

DHCS will seek approval of the new waiver by November 2015 according to the DHCS website.

Some issues surrounding 2011 realignment remain unresolved, including the impact of realigned
responsibility for Drug Medi-Cal services. Since Drug Medi-Cal was realigned to counties, the counties
have taken on a significant federal entitlement program, without guarantee that realignment funds will
grow commensurately with program costs. Funds may have to be diverted from Perinatal and other
mental health programs in future years to fund Drug Medi-Cal services should realignment revenues fail to
fully support services, which could potentially escalate costs in other programs such as mental health and
child welfare.

The Social Services budget continues to tackle budget and programmatic challenges in FY 2015-16.
Sales tax realignment revenue is expected to continue to grow in FY 2015-16 due to an improved

economy, and the growth in revenue will fund partial repayment of the prior year’s caseload growth.
Under 1991 realignment, Social Services programs receive payment for the increasing cost of operating
entitlement programs by allocation of excess revenues to pay these costs before general growth
payments are made. These realignment revenues, as well as other county resources and state
allocations, are used to draw down federal matching revenues that sustain programs. For the realigned
programs, the county share is made up of a combination of realignment and County General Fund dollars.
For the non-realigned programs, the county share comes entirely from County General Fund. Under 2011
realignment, Social Services programs receive payment for costs previously paid for by the state general
fund, with growth payments distributed between protective services and behavioral health.
The ongoing implementation of the Affordable Care Act and a slow economic recovery have continued to
drive high caseloads in social services eligibility and employment programs and the associated need for
staff. The outlook for sufficient funding to cover proposed costs remains strong and Shasta County
continues to benefit from other counties under-expending their allocations.

The Agency continues to focus on development of sufficient reserves to ensure program sustainability. A
key threat on the horizon is the potential of another economic downturn. When this occurs, social service
and safety net caseloads will again grow and expand from this new higher-level plateau that we are
currently on. The agency is planning for this by focusing on building reserves to cover sustainable
operations in our key areas of service provision, as well as working to resolve structural budget deficits
which have affected us. It should be noted that there are no Realignment shifts proposed as part of this
budget.

The most significant threat to this budget lies in risk associated with growing caseloads in child welfare
programs as well as changes to foster care due to legislative and court decisions. In previous years,
group homes, foster family homes, and foster family agencies have received substantial rate increases.
Court decisions established an annual determination of cost of living increases to these rates. Further, the
legislature has approved the extension of foster care and in some cases adoption assistance benefits to
families of adopted children up to 21 years of age. This increase was phased in over a three-year period
(which just ended), but it will add costs for care of young adults who would have otherwise “aged out” of
the system. It is expected that in FY 2014-15, the $200 million statewide restoration of funding for child
welfare services will be completed as part of 2011 Realignment growth allocations. These increased
resources for program services, will allow more emphasis to be placed on activities to decrease the
number of children placed in foster care and/or adoptive homes while continuing to maintain their safety
as well as services to support children being placed in less restrictive settings, such as treatment services
in foster care settings instead of group homes.

Monthly maximum General Assistance payments are based on a statutory formula that uses federal
poverty level, cost of housing in the geographical area, and adjustments to Aid to Families with
Dependent Children / CalWORKs. The current maximum monthly aid payment (effective March 1, 2014)
is $312; however on April 1, 2015 this is increasing by five percent to $328, per the formula authorized by
the Board of Supervisors on December 17, 2013. These amounts have been calculated to be the
appropriate amount for Shasta County.

The budget passed by Congress for Federal fiscal year 2015 requires HUD to continue to underfund
administrative fees earned by housing authorities nationwide. Two vacant Housing Authority positions will
remain unfilled pending passage of the Federal fiscal year 2015 budget. Management has taken steps to
curb controllable costs within services and supplies. Revenue allocations from HUD will be monitored
and expenditure levels will be adjusted accordingly.

The County and municipalities supporting our Library System continue to face budget challenges. There
have been no State Public Library Fund contributions to counties since FY 2011-12. If non-governmental
resources cannot backfill any financial loss and/or increased expenses, library programs may need to be
cut and other cost savings strategies implemented.

The County’s Contingency Reserve is the source of funding for emergencies that may exceed amounts
built into the budget on a unit basis. This account is used exclusively as a fund of “last resort” when all
other options have been exhausted.

On March 11, 2014 the Board of Supervisors adopted a resolution that raises the County’s self-insured
Liability and Worker’s Compensation risk management confidence level to 80 to 90 percent. Annually, in
compliance with requirements to participate in California State Association of Counties-Excess Insurance
Authority (CSAC-EIA) excess insurance programs, Risk Management contracts for an actuarial study of
reserves in the Self-Insured Programs. Insurance rates have been adjusted annually to strive to maintain
the eighty percent confidence level; however, due to many fluctuations in utilization the fund remains in
excess of eighty percent. The Auditor-Controller met with the department head to discuss rate setting and
a plan to return the reserves to an acceptable confidence level. Concurrent with the FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget the excess reserves was reduced and offset by an additional contribution to the
OPEB Irrevocable Trusts. In addition, rate setting will be structured to maintain the fund within a
confidence level between 80 to 90 percent. The Auditor-Controller will meet at least annually with Risk
Management to review the reserve level.

Expenses for the RABA joint powers authority and Burney Express flow through this fund. The farebox
analysis for a third Burney Express trip places the farebox close to the 10 percent requirement making it
unreasonable to meet.

On December 3, 2013, the IHSS Governing Board approved a memorandum of understanding
(MOU) between the Shasta County IHSS Public Authority and the California United Homecare
Workers. The MOU provided for wages of $9.64 per hour to IHSS providers. The MOU expired
on September 30, 2014, and negotiations for a successor MOU are in progress.
• Overtime Provisions that were to be effective January 1, 2015, are suspended due to the US
District Court striking down the Fair Labor Standards Act regulations.
• The County MOE is currently set as per the CCI terms, however any negotiated wage or benefit
increase will increase the county MOE permanently.
Background on Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI)
During FY 2011-12, the state began negotiations with Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) to adopt a CCI whereby the state would take over the Public Authority role in
counties as they came under Medi-Cal Managed Care plans. The intention was to use IHSS as a
way to further keep elderly and disabled clients safely in their homes and out of institutional care,
resulting in Medi-Cal savings for the state. While counties still operate under the initial provisions
of the CCI, which established a county MOE instead of a share of cost for the IHSS program, the
state has strong concerns about the long term cost neutrality. If the state finds that its costs are
increasing beyond what its calculated savings projections level is, then it will unwind the CCI and
would reinstate the cost-sharing ratios in all three aspects of the program, thereby exposing the
county to unknown cost increases.