The FY2012/13 Budget for Supervisorial District 1 includes only half a year’s car allowance. The County Administrator
recommends the Board consider increasing the budget by $5,200 for the remaining 6 months of car allowance for the incoming
Supervisor.
The FY2012/13 Budget for Supervisorial District 1 also includes $2,500 in proposed funding for contributions to non-County
agencies. For FY2011/12, the Board had set a level of $2,500. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding
level for FY2012/13 for contributions to non-County agencies.
The FY2012/13 Budget for Supervisorial District 2 includes $2,500 in proposed funding for contributions to non-County
agencies. For FY2011/12, the Board had set a level of $2,500. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding
level for FY2012/13 for contributions to non-County agencies.
The FY2012/13 Budget for Supervisorial District 3 includes no proposed funding for contributions to non-County agencies. For
FY2011/12, the Board had set a level of $2,500. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for
FY2012/13 for contributions to non-County agencies.
The FY2012/13 Budget for Supervisorial District 4 includes $3,000 in proposed funding for contributions to non-County
agencies. For FY2011/12, the Board had set a level of $2,500. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding
level for FY2012/13 for contributions to non-County agencies.
The FY2012/13 Budget for Supervisorial District 5 includes no proposed funding for contributions to non-County agencies. For
FY2011/12, the Board had set a level of $2,500. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for
FY2012/13 for contributions to non-County agencies.
The FY2012/13 Budget includes the continued appropriations of $22,000 in contributions to non-County agencies for Travis
Community Consortium. The CAO recommends the Board affirm the non-County agency contribution for FY2012/13.
The elimination of Redevelopment Agencies on February 1, 2012 will have a tremendous ripple effect on economic development
activities throughout the county. The full scope of that impact, along with other budget reductions at the State and Federal level
affecting the Community Development Block Grant program, are not fully understood at this time. Various legislative remedies
are percolating in the State Legislature to provide new economic development tools, but their future is not certain at this time.
The County will continue to work with its city partners and Solano EDC as strategies to retain existing businesses and attract
new companies are developed and implemented.
General Fund costs in this department are a Constitutional responsibility. The County's General Fund exposure, represented by
the Court's appointment of private attorneys is driven by two factors: the availability of Public Defender and/or Conflict Defender
staff to provide that representation where appropriate, and the number of hours required by private attorney/investigator/special
witness/psychiatric evaluations/court reporter to properly represent indigent defendants. Cost exposures related to the number
of private defense hours and, by implication, the incidence of criminal activity and arrest rates, are beyond the County's control.
Because of the State’s continuing fiscal problems, there is a certain level of uncertainty as to what the Legislature will do with
the Governor’s inclusion of the $150,000 for planning/technical as additional funding for counties to continue planning for the
implementation of Realignment. Furthermore, as of this writing, CSAC is urging the Administration and the Legislature to also
include more funding for Realignment implementation start-up activities. It is anticipated the CAO will have possible
supplemental budget recommendations or separate staff reports for the Board to address the budget in the coming weeks.
The County has applied for $400,000 in business assistance program funding as part of the FY2012 Fiscal Year State
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program to conduct micro-enterprise and business assistance programs that
serve the non-entitled cities of Benicia, Dixon, Rio Vista and Suisun City and unincorporated Solano County. If the funding is
approved, budget adjustments and program implementation guidelines would be prepared and brought forward for Board action
by October 2012.
Federal funding for CDBG program beyond 2012 is unclear. Available funding for the program has declined in recent years and
continues to be a potential target in on-going congressional budget reduction discussions.
As mentioned above, in January 2008 the Board re-purposed MSA securitization proceeds, thus ending the revenue stream for
this budget. For the next three fiscal years, the Board appropriated $8.2 million from the General Fund to backfill this budget in
support of the Coalition’s Strategic Plan. A combination of General Fund funding from the General Expenditures budget (BU
1903) and the unspent balance of funding left in this budget (BU2390) financed the Coalition’s activities in FY2011/12,
For FY2012/13, this budget is essentially depleted. Continued support for the Coalition’s activities would need to shift to the
General Fund. The FY2012/13 Recommended Budget for General Expenditures (BU 1903) includes $1,027,668, an increase of
$164,668, or 19%, for contributions to non-County agencies when compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget.
The Recorder’s Office is moving forward with the implementation of the Electronic Recording Delivery System (ERDS) to allow
acceptance of electronic documents for recordation. This system will provide significant convenience to the public and will result
in greater efficiency and accuracy by more readily accepting documents for recordation.
The elimination of SB 90 funding for permanent vote-by-mail costs will reduce revenues and increase school district costs
by approximately 25%. Current law requires that counties submit SB 90 claims on behalf of school districts; however, with
state reimbursement ending, the districts will be charged by the County for those costs.
The Board of Supervisors has adopted a legislative position supporting acceptance of vote-by-mail ballots postmarked on or
before Election Day but received after Election Day. Several bills have been introduced on this topic. There is no
consensus among local election officials about the desirability of this concept other than the longer the period ballots are
accepted, the more election integrity is jeopardized, as is timely completion of the canvass.
 A county-initiated move to develop online voter registration before 2012 was successful but state implementation is not
targeted until July 2012 at the earliest. This will allow people with a California driver’s license to complete a registration
affidavit from a computer terminal. The DMV, if successful in finding the person’s record, would return the person’s
signature to the County. In states where online registration has been implemented and used during an election cycle, as
many as 85% of the people registering did so online. This holds great promise for offsetting staff reductions and ROV’s
reliance on extra-help during peak registration periods.
 On June 8, 2010, California voters approved Proposition 14, which created a “top two” or “open” primary election system.
The passage of this proposition changed how the primary election for state constitutional offices, state legislative offices
and U.S. congressional offices are conducted in California. These offices are now known as “voter-nominated” offices. All
candidates running, regardless of their party preference, will appear on a single election ballot for the June 2012 election.
The top two candidates receiving the most votes, regardless of party, will advance to the November 2012 election. The
Department’s FY2012/13 budget may need to be revisited once the Department has experienced this new process in
conjunction with the anticipation of a higher voter turnout for the November Presidential Primary.
 In 2011, the United State Post Office developed a cost-saving plan in an effort to cope with the rapid decline in mail volume
over the past ten years. The plan included the closure of several mail processing facilities nationwide, eliminating Saturday
delivery, slowing first-class mail delivery, and renegotiating union contracts. The Senate and Assembly Committees have
asked USPS to impose a six-month moratorium on the closures to ensure continued timely delivery of ballots through the
November general election. USPS is expected to make a decision on the closure plan soon. The closures may result in a
delay in the receipt of vote-by-mail ballots and election materials.
 A bill has been introduced in Congress that would eliminate the Election Assistance Commission (EAC). Created by the
HAVA in 2002, the EAC has funded the replacement of voting systems throughout the country. It was also burdened by
excessively high expectations and a lack of presidential and congressional support. Millions of dollars allocated for states
were not used by the states (California has received all funds allocated and applied for) and Congress wants to use those
funds to reduce the budget deficit. This will likely mean new voting systems are less likely to be developed as there are few
states and counties with funds available to buy new systems and equipment.
Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Act – On July 1, 2011, the informal bid limit prescribed by Section 22032 of Public
Contract Code increased to $175,000 effective for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2011. By contrast, the County’s current
informal bidding limit, which can range from $10,000 for most County projects to $20,000 for road projects, varies according to
applicable law. Solano County currently does not voluntarily participate in the Act. With the recently raised limit, staff is
internally evaluating the advantages and disadvantages to evaluate whether the County would benefit from participation in the
Act, which is voluntary. Currently, 35 of the 58 California Counties participate in the program.
With the projected completion of the William J. Carroll Government Center in August 2012, and with the construction of the new
County Jail being the last major project on the schedule, the County anticipates a major shift towards smaller, capital
maintenance-type projects in the foreseeable future. This is consistent with the current economic reality where the County can
only allocate limited financial resources towards capital renewal projects. With the appropriations included in the Recommended
Budget, the remaining funds in the Deferred Capital Renewal Reserve will be depleted.
The Department of General Services has been tasked to conduct a forward looking study to identify the critical capital renewal
projects in the next three years and prioritized those projects that can be undertaken with the limited resources available. The
Department is also being tasked to evaluate its existing model for project management to determine if this model provides the
most efficient model for the management and oversight of the types of projects that are identified in the analysis.
Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 51 requires that Fixed Assets be charged back to departments
based on standard depreciation schedules rather than on a cash basis when the expense is actually incurred. Also, software
(both purchased and internally developed) is now categorized as an intangible asset subject to the same depreciation and
expensing rules as hard assets. Since only the depreciable portion of an asset can be charged in any given year, this puts a
significant burden on the cash flow of the Department and may lead the Department to seek loans from the Treasury to act as
working capital. Interest charges for these internal loans will, in turn, increase the cost to be recovered from the user
departments.
Government Code requires that the County evaluate the premises of the PFF at least every five years. The last five-year
comprehensive nexus report was completed in 2007 (County of Solano 2007 Public Facilities Fee Update) with annual updates
in 2008, 2009 and 2010.
The State of California DCSS’s Strategic Plan includes aggressive goals to achieve a common vision – that children can rely on
their parents for the financial and medical support they need to be healthy and successful. Mission-critical components of the
Plan include improving performance in the five federal performance measures and increasing total distributed child support
collections.
Statewide goals are translated into FFY performance goals for each Local Child Support Agency. A Performance Management
Plan has been developed and approved by the State to achieve these goals through innovative strategies, improved efficiencies
and focused case management.
The Proposed FY2012/13 State Budget generally holds California’s Title IV-D Child Support Program to the previous year’s
expenditure levels. However, the Governor’s budget proposes to once again suspend the county share of public assistance
collections for FY2012/13. This is the second consecutive year the county share has been suspended. This equates to a loss of
approximately $390,000 of funding to Health and Social Services and is not included in FY2012/13 Recommended Budget. The
State is retaining these funds for their General Fund use.
Last year the Governor identified realignment of the Child Support Program as part of Phase II of a larger realignment process.
For the current budget, the Governor does not specifically mention what program might be realigned but links Phase II
Realignment to ongoing discussion of how California will implement federal health care reform. Consequently, the impacts, if
any, to the Child Support Program are unknown. The Department will continue to monitor the State budget situation and will
report to the Board as additional information becomes available.
Funding for the Title IV-D Child Support Program under the FFY2012/13 President’s Budget Proposal remains relatively
unchanged from past years. The Administration continues to promote strong families and responsible fatherhood by ensuring
that children benefit when parents pay support, promoting parenting time arrangements, and improving enforcement tools. The
proposal also includes funding specifically to encourage states to pass through child support payments received while children
are receiving public assistance directly to families. This represents a departure from existing policy, whereby the majority of
child support payments are returned to the federal and state governments for recoupment of public assistance.
Since the enactment of the Federal Budget Control Act, there has been legal ambiguity as to whether federal funds for child
support administration and incentives would be subject to sequestration or if it would continue to be considered as an
entitlement exempt from across-the-board cuts. There are conflicting provisions in prior budget laws containing a sequestration
option and how child support should be treated. Solano DCSS has prepared a contingency plan addressing possible outcomes
should the Department be subject to sequestration.
The latest projections from CSAC and the State for AB 109 funding indicate that the County should receive more funding than
currently included in the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget. New 2011 Realignment programs, as well as increase in
caseloads, will need to be financed through the increased AB 109 funding. If the State’s FY2012/13 Budget adopted by the
Legislature includes the additional funding, staff will return to the Board to adjust the FY2012/13 budget for the Department.
Absent supporting increase in State revenue, significant caseload increases would subject the County to concomitant General
Fund exposure.
In meeting its challenges, the Office has and will continue to minimize costs by reducing various services and programs
provided and aggressively seeking grants and other sources of funding to enhance revenue.
The latest projections from CSAC on AB 109 funding indicate that the County may receive more funding than currently included
in the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget. New 2011 Realignment programs may possibly be financed through the increased AB
109 funding. If the State’s FY2012/13 Budget adopted by the Legislature includes the additional funding, staff will return to the
Board at a future meeting to adjust the FY2012/13 budgets for the Department. Absent supporting increase in State revenue,
significant caseload increases would subject the County to concomitant General Fund exposure.
On May 14, 2012, the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) considered the Public Defenders and Conflict Defender’s
FY2012/13 budgets and made a recommendation for parity in the AB109 funding for the District Attorney and Public/Conflict
Defender Offices. The Board will be asked to consider the CCP’s recommendation and provide policy direction to staff.
The revenue contract with the AOC for Dependency Court representation expires on June 30, 2012; however, if the AOC
decides to continue to contract with the County for these services before the end of the fiscal year, the Department will submit a
Supplemental Budget request for Board consideration during Budget Hearings. This will include extending the limited term
position expiring on June 30, 2012.
The latest projections from CSAC on AB 109 funding indicate that the County may receive more funding than currently included
in the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget. New 2011 Realignment programs may possibly be financed through the increased AB
109 funding. If the State’s FY2012/13 Budget adopted by the Legislature includes the additional funding, staff will return to the
Board at a future meeting to adjust the FY2012/13 budgets for the Department. Absent supporting increase in State revenue,
significant caseload increases would subject the County to concomitant General Fund exposure.
On May 14, 2012, the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) considered the Public Defender’s and Conflict Defender’s
budgets FY2012/13 budgets and made a recommendation for parity in the AB109 funding for the District Attorney and
Public/Conflict Defender Offices. The Board will be asked to consider the CCP’s recommendation and provide policy direction
to staff.
The revenue contract with the AOC for Dependency Court representation expires on June 30, 2012; however, if the AOC
decides to contract with the County for these services before the end of the fiscal year, the Department will include it in their
Supplemental Budget submittal. This will include extending the limited term position expiring on June 30, 2012.
On October 1, 2012, the State of California implemented 2011 Public Safety Realignment, and in the process transitioned the
responsibility for managing low-level felony offenders to individual counties. Although first year program funding was received
from the State, the State’s commitment for continued funding of Realignment remains vague and is a matter of continuing
concern. The Governor has proposed a tax increase, a portion of which will be used to fund Realignment for future years. This
measure will go to the California voters for consideration on November 6, 2012. At this time, it is unknown if this measure will be
supported. Absent voter approval of the Governor’s proposed tax increase, there is no other viable funding source identified to
fund Realignment.
The executive voting members of the Solano County Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) decided that public safety is a
priority and authorized the use of state funding to support the needs of law enforcement (Sheriff and Probation) to provide
supervision of the new inmate population, and offset the cost attributed to incarcerating the Realignment offender population.
The amount of funding received from the State to support Realignment has proven insufficient to provide for all of the services
needed by the realigned offender population. The funds are insufficient to offset the expense of providing supervision and
incarceration of offenders while simultaneously providing for all of the programming needs of the offenders to reduce the rate of
recidivism. It should be noted that the CCP has provided some Realignment funds to support mental health and drug and
alcohol programming, but the amount available is only sufficient to serve a relatively small portion of the offender population.
As anticipated, as a result of Realignment, the County Jail population has experienced a significant increase in population. As
of this writing, approximately 224 offenders who would have been sentenced to a term of confinement in a state prison facility
are being housed in the County Jail. Realignment offenders currently represent approximately 30% of the total county jail
population. County jails were designed with the intention of housing offenders for a limited period of time, typically one year or
less. Realigned offenders are subject to terms of confinement that frequently exceed one year, and a sentence of 5 years is not
uncommon (Santa Barbara County is currently holding a realigned offender serving a sentence of twenty-three years). As the
jail population continues to increase as a result of Realignment, the Sheriff will continue to request state Realignment funds to
offset the expense of making available additional bed space at the Claybank Facility until all available bed space is utilized. It is
anticipated that at the current rate of growth, the jail population will utilize all currently un-used jail beds at approximately the
same time construction of the planned 362-bed jail is completed and the new facility becomes available for use.
The loss of redevelopment funding to the cities is a new concern for county law enforcement. The loss of redevelopment funds
is likely to result in a reduction of law enforcement resources at the city level. Cities will in turn look to the County (Sheriff) to
provide law enforcement assistance. This situation currently exists in the City of Vallejo. The City reduced their police force and
they are now unable to provide a level of law enforcement services sufficient to meet all of the needs of the community. For two
years the City of Vallejo has frequently relied on the Sheriff’s Office for support. As a result of County budget reductions, the
Sheriff’s Office has reduced staffing by 20% and currently is not well situated to provide for needs beyond those of the Sheriff’s
Office itself. As additional cities periodically request law enforcement assistance from the County, the ability of the Sheriff to
provide these resources is questionable.
The latest projections from CSAC on AB 109 funding indicate that the County may receive more funding than currently included
in the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget. New 2011 Realignment programs may possibly be financed through the increased AB
109 funding. If the State’s FY2012/13 Budget adopted by the Legislature includes the additional funding, staff will return to the
Board at a future meeting to adjust the FY2012/13 budgets for the Department.
The MOU between the County and the seven cities was set to expire on June 30, 2013. The County and the Parties to the
MOU developed a working group, composed of representatives from each City and the County. The group met monthly in early
2011 to discuss the programs and needs of the Animal Shelter. The working group representatives were to report back to their
City Managers informing them of the topics in the meetings. A goal for the working group meetings was to receive commitment
from each City to extend the Cities MOU for sheltering animals and work with the County on concepts and an agreement for
Animal Shelter facility replacement and cost sharing. During the January 2011 meeting the County and the Cities agreed to
secure an extension to the MOU a year until June 30, 2014 for the Cities to make a commitment to continue participating in the
MOU. On June 4, 2011 The First Amendment to the County Cities MOU was passed by the Board of Supervisors to extend the
Cities MOU until June 30, 2014. The Parties are required to provide written notice to all other parties of their intent to withdraw
from the MOU no later than two years prior to the expiration of the agreement. To meet this deadline, a withdrawing party must
now give notice by June 30, 2012.
In the January 2011 meeting, the Sheriff explained his plans and vision for Animal Care Services. The Sheriff commented he
would be looking to improving the Shelter at the current location with a less costly building which would be cost effective to the
cities and the County, in the range of $3-$5 million. The County began meetings with the City Partners starting in April 2012 to
discuss the MOU and the cities’ commitment to stay with the MOU, and present a concept plan and estimated cost of improving
the Animal Care Services Facility. The initial discussions have been well received, however, given the uncertainty of City
finances with the dismantling of redevelopment agencies, a request for a few more months was made by City representatives.
Discussions are anticipated to continue into the first quarter of FY2012/13 to allow Cities and County to arrive at a financing and
cost recovery plan for facility upgrades, and will be brought forward for Board consideration and action in FY2012/13.
Public Safety Realignment has significant implications for the Probation Department. Additional staff and operational changes
will be needed in the Adult Division to address the parole functions that have been transferred to Probation as well as to address
Probation’s role in supervising low level offenders that are no longer eligible for prison commitments.
The Governor’s proposal to close the Division of Juvenile Facilities (DJF) will have significant implications for the Probation
Department. If youthful offenders are no longer able to be committed to state custody, it will be necessary to locate or develop
alternative programs that will meet the long term intensive treatment needs of this population. Additional concerns for youthful
offenders include housing for those offenders who are sentenced in Adult Court and under the age of eighteen (18).
 The 2012 Federal Farm bill could have an unknown effect on support for California’s pest detection and pest exclusion
funding. Staff continue to monitor this issue and will bring forward a report to the Board of Supervisors when potential
impacts are quantifiable.
 There is a statewide effort to advocate for additional federal funding for the Wildlife Services program. Should additional
revenues be realized, the percentage of County General Fund expended for an existing Wildlife Services contract would be
reduced.
 On April 12, 2011, the Board of Supervisors approved the County Administrator’s recommendation to transfer the Parks
Division from General Services to Resource Management. The Department of Resource Management worked closely with
the General Services Department, County Administrator’s Office and the Parks Division manager to effect a smooth and
seamless transition of services that became effective July 1, 2011. Work to address budget shortfalls continue.
 Due to ongoing garbage service contract negotiations between the Cities and their respective solid waste haulers, the
County has had to delay opening its own contract discussions with existing providers to determine if a contract extension
would yield additional programs and improved services at reasonable rates for unincorporated constituents.
 AB 300 Safe Body Art Act has been adopted into law, requiring annual permitting of body art facilities and registration of
body art practitioners beginning July 1, 2012. This will require verification annually of compliance with code requirements,
which may have slight impact on delivery of services in other program areas.
 The State Water Resources Control Board anticipates adoption of the statewide onsite wastewater treatment system policy
in June 2012. This policy creates several tiers of management and oversight for onsite systems, depending on potential
impact to public health and the environment by their operation. As proposed in current draft form, the state policy will
require Solano County to have a Local Agency Management Plan approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board
within five years of the policy’s effective date to continue implementation of a local program for most onsite systems.
Existing Solano County Code regulating septic systems and water wells should meet the requirements for a Local Agency
Management Plan with minor amendments to strengthen State requirements for county-wide monitoring and reporting of
water quality and septic system operation. Failure to obtain a Local Agency Management Plan will result in the requirement
for owners of new and replaced onsite sewage disposal systems, or owners of existing onsite systems in sensitive areas
already impacted by septic systems, to obtain individual waste discharge requirements (permits) from the state in order to
operate their system.
 Disposed tons of solid waste continues to decline compared to previous fiscal years in part due to reduced waster
generation and in part due to the loss of an additional waste disposal contract at Potrero landfill. However, the inspection
and permitting requirements have not decreased proportionally. New diversion goals, including increasing food waste
composting, is placing additional demands on environmental health staff beyond traditional landfill inspection activity.
Currently the Environmental Health Services Division’s Local Enforcement Agency fee is based solely on tons of disposed
solid waste. This was established to promote waste diversion. As waste diversion practices become established within a
community, they are creating other inspection needs while reducing solid waste disposal revenue. It may be necessary to
expand the Local Enforcement Agency fee to include tons of material that is diverted, especially materials being composted
at landfills.
 State law requires all businesses with reportable quantities of hazardous materials to report electronically to the California
Electronic Reporting System (CERS) beginning January 2013. The state law also requires the County staff to begin
reporting its enforcement activity electronically to CERS by January 2013. Resource Management continues to work
closely with the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) and its data management service provider to develop the
necessary support structure to allow for this reporting in a cost-efficient manner.
 The State of California passed SB 1608 requiring building divisions to have on-staff individuals who hold a Certified Access
Specialist Program (CASP) Certification by 2014. The Building Division currently has one staff member certified and it is
anticipated that one additional staff member will be certified prior to the 2014 deadline.
There are potential legislative hurdles that will impact Solano County’s ability to protect its interests in the Delta over the next
three years. As of this writing, staff is monitoring several bills that may impact the Delta ecosystem, water quality and water
supply. A moratorium on Congressionally-directed spending has also been imposed and other federal funding opportunities will
need to be pursued to support water-related environmental infrastructure, resource protection and development projects in the
Delta. State legislation and policy changes as a result of the 2011 State Administration may also impact the availability of
funding for Delta infrastructure and emergency preparedness efforts. There is also a Water Bond proposed for the 2012 ballot,
which would provide $11.1 billion to fund water supply infrastructure. At this time it is uncertain whether this proposal, which
was approved by the Legislature in 2009, will go forward or whether a new, scaled down version of the Water Bond will be
introduced. In either case, the success or failure of a Water Bond will undoubtedly impact future resources to the Delta and to
Solano County.
No specific, federal or state policy considerations have been identified that will affect the Parks and Recreation Division budget
in FY2012/13. However, the unraveling of the Redevelopment Agencies will be monitored for possible impacts on future
Redevelopment Pass-through revenues.
In addition, possible changes in law enforcement and ranger public safety duties in the County Parks will be explored in
FY2012/13 and may require budget adjustments in FY2013/14.
The key issue facing Public Works is the continuing statewide underfunding of transportation. This is a long-term trend that has
been masked in recent years by the use of one-time sources of funding, such as Proposition 1B and federal stimulus funds. The
number of local roads in California that are in failed condition is expected to nearly quadruple by 2020, from 6% to 22%. This
means that nearly a quarter of all local roads in California will fail within 10 years unless additional sources of transportation
funding are developed. Solano County’s roads will be similarly impacted.
The Governor’s May 2012 Revised Budget includes a number of items which are likely to once again impact the H&SS budget.
Most of the funding reductions outlined in the May Revise were already included in the Governor’s Proposed Budget, released in
January 2012. The legislature has rejected nearly all of the funding reductions that could impact H&SS. The significant pending
issues are:
 Given that the State under 2011 Realignment will no longer be able to contract with PHC for services, since the
legislation effectively transferred the State funding for mental health services to the counties via the increase in sales
tax. The 2011 Realignment funding, along with the 1991 Realignment funding (temporarily replaced with Proposition
63 Mental Health Services Act funds) and County General Fund support, will provide the local match to draw down
Federal matching funds for services providing to Medi-Cal clients. As in the past, the County will be responsible to
provide and pay for indigent care under WIC section 17000, either through CMSP or the provision of direct services.
H&SS has had preliminary discussions with the State and PHC on transitioning to the new contractual arrangements,
effective July 1, 2012. At this time, it is unknown how the State will determine the allocation for Solano County. There
are a number of variables pending which make it difficult to determine the ultimate impact. Currently the County
Recommended Budget is proposed a status quo funding level.
 The H&SS Family Health Services primary care, dental, and integrated behavioral health care clinics are “Federally
Qualified Health Centers” (FQHC), and payment for services provided to Medi-Cal clients are based upon actual costs,
and generally exceed the normal fee for service rates, as well as the managed care capitated payment rates. The
County is paid a flat rate per billable visit. There are restrictions on the types of providers as well as limitations on visits,
but the revenue received is greater than would otherwise be received from Medi-Cal. The State has proposed
switching the FQHC reimbursement to a managed care capitated model, rather than fee for service which may affect
revenues. The State also proposes to loosen some of the restrictions, such as limiting the provider types that can bill.
H&SS has considerable experience operating in a managed care model, and still contracts on a per-member/permonth
basis with PHC for primary care. However, since the State’s goal is to reduce spending on FQHC payments, it
is highly likely that the capitated payment will be set at an amount lower than the current cost-reimbursement model.
Without any information regarding the setting of the rates, or the rules, it is not possible to determine the impact of this
change. The Department has just completed installing Phase 1 of the new Negev primary care billing system in the
clinics; however, this proposed change will require modification of the billing systems and revenue forecasting tools.
 The Governor’s May 2012 Revised Budget assumes that the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) caseload will
continue to be stagnant and will not increase more than 1.7% statewide, and Solano County caseload projections are
similar to the statewide assumptions. The May Revise proposals primarily impact the IHSS recipients and service
providers. The budget now proposes a 7% across-the-board cut to service hours in FY 2012/13. Because it replaces a
3.6% reduction that expires on June 30, 2012. The new proposal represents a net additional decrease of 3.4% over
the current level of reductions. The FY2012/13 County budget for provider wages does not assume this additional 3.4%
decrease to provider hours. If implemented, County General Fund savings may be generated by reduced required
General Fund match.
 The Governor’s May 2012 Revised Budget maintains the proposal to eliminate from IHSS Domestic and Related
Services to certain recipients who are living with others in a shared-housing situation effective October 1, 2012. This
change is not factored into the H&SS’ FY2012/13 budget and if implemented by the State would generate savings for
the County General Fund by reducing required match through reduced hours. There are exceptions allowed for
households consisting entirely of IHSS recipients and for IHSS recipients whose need cannot be met by a household
member due to a Medically-verified condition. These exceptions make it difficult to estimate any potential savings
should this proposal be implemented. For children receiving IHSS benefits and living with their parent(s), domestic and
related services would no longer be allowed under any circumstance. Moreover, the Coordinated Care Initiative
proposes to integrate the IHSS program into a Managed Care model for service delivery with pilot projects are
scheduled to start in March 2013 in a few Counties. If this initiative were to be expanded to all counties, it will make
significant changes to the delivery of IHSS services in Solano County.
 The Governor’s May 2012 Revised Budget continues to include the same grant cuts, and significant and complicated
programmatic redesign of CalWORKs as was seen in his January proposal, with several policy changes to the
redesign. The impact of these changes primarily impacts the CalWORKs recipients, and the change in proposed State
General Fund savings from the January proposal is relatively small. Significant changes in program design from the
January proposals include: a) additional allowable activities for meeting work participation requirements after the first
24 months on aid, in addition to unsubsidized employment; b) the temporary exemptions from work participation for
families with a young child are extended through September 2012, and these families will have a one year reengagement
phase-in process starting October 2012; and c) a 60-day transition period will be allowed for families
moving between the different CalWORKs programs (CalWORKs Basic, CalWORKs Plus, Child Maintenance).
The Administration Division provides key support functions so the Department can realize a high quality level of service. The
challenge for the Division is to meet and comply with various federal and state financial reporting demands in volatile economic times and the associated political realities at the State. Recent County-wide efficiencies in space allocations, reductions in
leases, and client self-service, have assisted to stabilize the Administration Division’s expenses. The implementation of two
major health records systems creates a significant and urgent need for the Division to evaluate the appropriateness of the
staffing structure and mix for the Patient Billing and Claiming Unit. As the implementation of these systems proceeds, there is a
need to ensure that this Unit meets the specialized demands and complexities of Medical billing, reporting, and compliance in
H&SS’ primary care and behavioral health programs.
2011 Public Safety Realignment and 2011 Realignment for Health & Social Services poses many challenges, however, it may
also provide opportunities to improve service delivery. Under 2011 Realignment, state general funded substance abuse
services, Drug Medi-Cal, Early, Periodic Screening Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) services and mental health Managed
Care responsibilities were realigned to the local level. In addition, AB109 realigned management of parolees formerly in the
care of the State to local law enforcement. As the fiscal details of 2011 Realignment are still being discussed at the State level,
the fiscal impact of 2011 Realignment on counties has yet to be determined. The latest projections from CSAC on AB 109
funding indicate that the County may receive more funding than currently included in the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget.
New 2011 Realignment programs may possibly be financed through the increased AB 109 funding. If the State’s FY2012/13
Budget adopted by the Legislature includes the additional funding, staff will return to the Board at a future meeting to adjust the
FY2012/13 budgets for the Department. Absent supporting increase in State revenue, significant caseload increases would
subject the County to concomitant General Fund exposure.
Compared to the January 2012 State Budget, the May 2012 Revise projects: a $4.3M or 0.23% net increase in Statewide
funding for the combined EPSDT (+$40.2M), MH Managed Care (+$7.9M), and Existing Community MH Programs (-$43.8M) as
well as a projected $3.9M or 2.17% increase in Substance Abuse Treatment.
One concern under 2011 Realignment is the realignment of Drug Media-Cal Services, specifically the Narcotic Replacement
Therapy service contracts which were previously programmatically and fiscally managed at the State. As these services are a
Drug Medi-Cal entitlement, the Department is now fiscally responsible for these services and will need to fund the nonfederal
share of them with 2011 Realignment money. At this time, it is unclear how funding for these services will be allocated under
2011 Realignment and if the funding will be adequate to cover service needs.
Mental Health Managed Care Realignment is another area of concern. Historically, Solano has worked with Partnership Health
Plan of California in a unique ‘carve-in’ situation, in contrast to other counties that are paid directly by the State to provide these
services as a part of their contract to deliver consolidated mental health services. Department of Healthcare Services has
determined that this arrangement is in conflict with Realignment 2011, and has notified the County of its intent to pay the County
directly to provide these services. Since Managed Care distributions have not been finalized at the time of this report, fiscal
impact, if any is uncertain.
There are a number of significant issues and policy considerations at the state and federal levels that may impact the Division
and Health Services. At the federal level, the U.S. Supreme Court is weighing arguments concerning the constitutionality of the
Healthcare Reform Act. If healthcare reform goes forward, largely unchanged, then a significant expansion of Medi-Cal will
occur in 2014, resulting in increased caseloads for a number of program areas in H&SS including Health Services. Recent
expansions in County clinic infrastructure, including the soon-to-open William J. Carroll Government Center in Vacaville, and
Board decisions to increase staffing of the County’s primary care, dental health, and mental health clinics, including mobile care
capacity, have positioned the County well to address these increased needs for Health Services. The full impacts of healthcare
reform remain uncertain, however. At the state level, the May Revised Budget contains language that would change funding for
Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), including the County’s clinics, from encounter-based reimbursement to capitated
managed care; this change would require federal consent, and it is unclear whether the State Legislature and the U.S. Health
Resources and Services Administration will concur with the proposal. If the change is adopted, the Family Health Services
clinics are prepared to implement the capitated managed care funding structure; it is not clear, however, whether the other
FQHCs in the County will be able to make this adjustment, and if they are unable to then additional clients may seek care at the
County’s clinics. The State Budget also calls for substantial reductions in First Five funding and in funding for programs that
may impact the Division; while acceptance of these proposals by the State Legislature and the potential impacts of these
proposals remain uncertain, the Division is preparing to address these cuts if implemented.
Federal/State/Local proposed legislation actions which may impact the County over the next fiscal years Include:
 Assembly Bill (AB) 12 is recent legislation that extends assistance to children in foster care until their 21st birthday. The full
impact of this legislative change cannot be determined as of yet and is pending an appropriation of funding. At a minimum,
however, it will increase the number of youth in care and the service demands that these youth place not only on CWS, but
on other County services/programs.
 2011 realignment for CalWORKs, Child Care, Foster Care, Adoptions, Child Protective Services, and Adult Protective
Services has yet to receive a dedicated funding source through a constitutional amendment. No State regulations have yet been issued to structure realigned programs. Cash flow problems for these programs may pose a significant risk to
counties.
 Ongoing Federal discussions regarding changing the funding contribution to block grants for Medi-Cal and CalFresh
services could have a significant impact on county residents and the administration of these programs.
 The State has submitted an application to the Federal Department of Medi-Cal Services to fund portions if the IHSS
program through the Community First Choice Option program. Should this application be approved, the Federal Maximum
Assistance (FMAP) may increase by 6% and reduce the County’s share of cost for IHSS Provider wages.
 The Governor’s proposals for reducing CalWORKs costs will impact both grants for clients and administrative funding if the
Legislature enacts the reductions. However, the Legislature has not taken any action on the proposals and this impact will
be assessed once more information is available on what reductions will be considered by the House and Senate
respectively.
 Foster Care: AB 12, approved in FY2010/11, extends foster care for youth between the ages of 18 to 21 on a voluntary
basis; however, State guidelines have been issued and are effective January 2012. The State anticipates that this will be
cost neutral to the Counties. The number of foster youth over 18 that will remain in foster care in Solano County is not
known, and there is no assurance that the County’s cost for foster care placements will not increase.
 CalWORKs: As a result of the FY2011/12 State program changes, CalWORKs caseload has declined by 12%, or
approximately 350 cases per month. This change has reduced the cost of aid payments to Solano County families by $8.5
million, primarily state and federal dollars. The Governor’s proposed FY2012/13 budget includes more reductions to
CalWORKs aid payments, but at present, the legislature has not accepted these proposals. Therefore, the impact of the
governor’s proposal has not been factored in the Recommended FY 2012/13 County budget.
 IHSS: Pending litigation regarding the FY2011/12 trigger cuts and on-going lawsuits regarding State’s ability to reduce its
share of cost for IHSS wages are factors that may impact the County’s cost for this program. The State submitted an
application to the Federal government to include the IHSS program in the Community First Choice Option (CFCO) program.
If this application is approved, the federal share of cost for IHSS wages may increase by 6%, having the net effect of
lowering the State and County share of cost.
Several proposals have been made in the Governor’s Budget and in the Assembly for reducing IHSS expenditures in
FY2012/13. In the event that any of these proposals reduce the number of paid provider hours, the amount of General Fund
share of funding required for IHSS care provider health benefits will also be reduced.
Several proposals have been made in the Governor’s Budget and by the Assembly for reducing IHSS expenditures in
FY2012/13. In the event that any of these proposals reduce the number of paid provider hours, that reduction may reduce the amount of funding for H&SS’ staff and operating costs for administration of IHSS PA activities. However, State funding for
administration of IHSS Pas statewide is now based on an allocation as opposed to a rate per paid provider hour, and reductions
for administration will be less impacted by reductions to service hours.
 Of its $5.7 million Recommended Budget, First 5 Solano currently holds contracts with Solano County Health and Social
Services (H&SS) amounting to about $1.2 million annually. Thus, significant changes at the state level to health and social
services programs could directly impact First 5 programs. There are also significant potential negative impacts for First 5
Solano’s direct-service contracts with many city, school district and community partners serving approximately 10,000
children annually.
 Solano County has three advisory boards for children’s issues: The Children’s Alliance, The Child Abuse Prevention
Council (CAPC), and the Local Child Care Planning Council. These councils’ memberships consist of experts in the field of
early childhood, education, child abuse prevention, incarceration, and health services. They provide recommendations to
the Board of Supervisors on children’s issues. On March 27, 2012, the Board of Supervisors merged the CAPC with the
Children’s Alliance, and transferred the responsibility for oversight and contract monitoring from H&SS to CAO/First 5
Division, effective July 1, 2012. Under this framework, CAO/First 5 Staff will work with Children’s Network, which provides
staff to the councils. A new set of By-laws reflecting the merger of the Children’s Alliance and CAPC will be drafted. It will
define appropriate membership categories designed to fulfill the mission of these groups and maximize their effectiveness,
while ensuring that legal mandates are addressed. The new By-laws will be brought forward to the Board of Supervisors in
the first few months of FY2012/13.
The FY2012/13 Recommended Budget for Children’s Network’s administrative support of these councils remains on par
with FY2011/12 levels. It is anticipated that once the By-laws have been revised, membership established, and a new
model for service delivery has been adopted, the merger of the Children’s Alliance and CAPC should result in a reduction of
the County General Fund support. A separate Budget Unit 1570 is being established to track First 5’s administration and
program costs related to the transferred responsibility of overseeing these councils.
The State eliminated all funding to libraries in FY2011/12 and the Governor’s proposed FY2012/13 continues this precedent of
providing no funding to libraries. The Library’s 1/8 of a penny local sales tax will sunset in October 2014. However, a measure
to extend the tax through September 30, 2030 is included on the ballot for the June 2012 election. If not renewed, the
Department’s revenues would be reduced by over $3 million which will require budget reduction actions that include possible
branch closures and a reduction of library hours in the remaining open library branches.
Consolidating the Solano, Yolo and Sacramento County UCCE offices into one administrative unit is anticipated in FY2012/13
which will create administrative efficiencies in program delivery and reduce overall space and operating costs. UCCE will
continue to offer the same suite of programs to Solano County residents including agricultural advisor, 4-H and Master Gardener
programs and will strive to re-establish the nutrition education program. The 4-H, Master Gardener and nutrition programs will
have staff located in a Solano County satellite office, while all other programs will operate from a central office located in Yolo County. This restructuring is expected to improve the delivery of existing programs and expand other programs to Solano
County. The UCCE is dedicated to develop a new structure that will be more efficient, adaptive to County needs and provide a
more stable program delivery model.
The County has an agreement with the City of Vallejo to provide fire protection services to the East Vallejo Fire Protection
District. The City is now out of bankruptcy, but continues to have financial difficulties. At this time the County doesn’t anticipate
significant changes in the current service level provided by the City to the District; however, property tax revenues have not yet
stabilized and remain at risk of further declines during the economic recovery.
There are two major federal deliberations which may affect the future status of, and activities of the WIB agency, as discussed
below. Within these two are growing signs of Congressional support for the WIA program’s funding and legislative
reauthorization.
The Congress and President continue debating efforts to balance the annual federal budget and reduce the federal debt
levels. The “Debt Limit” debates also have an impact. However, there is growing bipartisan support for the “public
workforce system” and a block grant effort to local communities, with a business-led board. Proposals for complete
elimination of the federal WIA program funding are not being suggested as were in FY2010/11, and proposals for “steady
state” or perhaps up to a 10-12% reduction are being discussed. This lays open a lot of uncertainty and a wide range of
possible options for the future; and
 Congressional authorizing committees are taking up WIA Reauthorization legislation, which would provide a continued
longer-term revenue stream for the program. This effort has been undertaken a number of times across the last 6 years,
only to be stalled. However, the current best projections are that WIA Reauthorization will not be passed by Congress, but
the growing support for the WIA program will foster positive Congressional actions in the near future years.
Furthermore, a number of new trends/initiatives are coming forth at the State level. These pose a greater current or potential
impact on the WIB’s operation. These include the following.
 Congress has removed the bulk of the Governor’s discretionary WIA funds, which the WIB routinely was able to access with
successful competitive grant applications. This has long-term implications for the WIB. Without this funding source, such
dedicated programs for veterans, ex-offenders, and certain targeted industries will likely have to cease.
 State legislative actions and/or staff-led initiatives are gradually impeding upon local decision-making (as
envisioned/afforded in the WIA legislation itself) and moving the public workforce system toward a more “one size fits all”
model for administration and service delivery. Some of these initiatives present unfunded mandates upon local
governments and WIBs.
 The challenge of day-to-day operation of the One-Stop Centers is compounded by continued reductions in State funding for
virtually every local agency that serves as a One-Stop Center partner. This includes annual reductions in staffing provided
by the State Employment Development Department (EDD). Either, more of the responsibility falls upon the WIB to support
One-Stop Center services, or major reductions in the range and/or availability of services may have to be implemented in
the near future.
The Solano County Fair Association faces major challenges in CY2012. Increasing revenue in a continuing slow economic time,
particularly with respect to discretionary spending, continues to be a significant challenge. Maintaining the current level of
activities while creatively attracting new events, activities and revenue, represents an even greater challenge as the SCFA goes
forward with limited staff and resources. Particularly in light of the loss of State funding and replacement revenue for live horse
racing in 2012, SCFA is even more mindful than ever of the need to discover new revenue streams and increase revenues from
existing sources.
The SCFA CY2012 budget anticipates year-end Reserves of $777,153, which is $140,443 or 22% more than budgeted at yearend
CY2011. The increases in Reserves resulted from unanticipated State revenue in CY2011 used to invest in revenue
enhancing efforts in 2012, and prior year revenue from Six Flags that was unanticipated when the CY2012 budget was
approved. The SCFA understands that ongoing operational costs cannot rely on the use of Reserves and will continue to strive
to expand its year-round revenue streams.
Maintaining and improving existing aging facilities with limited resources continues to challenge most fairgrounds in the United
States, including the Solano County Fairgrounds. SCFA must continue to maximize its limited resources for needed deferred
maintenance and capital improvements, while aggressively and creatively seeking and seizing new revenue opportunities.
Solano360, the redevelopment plan of the fairgrounds property and the “Fair of the Future,” was put on hold in March 2012 to
allow time to fully explore the ramifications of the end of the redevelopment agencies. The Solano County Fair has been an
active partner in the development of the redevelopment strategies, and enthusiastically supports the project. In the short term,
the Solano County Fair is challenged with developing new revenue streams that will not conflict with this long-term strategy.
