The FY2013/14 Budget for Supervisorial District 1 includes $2,500 in proposed funding for contributions to non-County
agencies. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for FY2013/14 for contributions to non-County
agencies.
The FY2013/14 Budget for Supervisorial District 2 includes $2,500 in proposed funding for contributions to non-County
agencies. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for FY2013/14 for contributions to non-County
agencies.
The FY2013/14 Budget for Supervisorial District 3 includes no proposed funding for contributions to non-County agencies. For
FY2012/13, the Board set a level of $2,500. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for FY2013/14
for contributions to non-County agencies.
The FY2013/14 Budget for Supervisorial District 4 includes $2,500 in proposed funding for contributions to non-County
agencies. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for FY2013/14 for contributions to non-County
agencies
The FY2013/14 Budget for Supervisorial District 5 includes no proposed funding for contributions to non-County agencies. For
FY2012/13, the Board set a level of $2,500. The CAO recommends the Board consider affirming a funding level for FY2013/14
for contributions to non-County agencies.
The FY2013/14 Budget includes the continued appropriation of $22,000 in contributions to non-County agencies for Travis
Community Consortium. The CAO recommends the Board affirm the non-County agency contribution for FY2013/14.
The housing market appears to be rebounding. It is anticipated that the number of assessment appeal applications filed will
increase in FY2013/14 as property values decreased as a result of Proposition 8 start to escalate. The Assessment Appeals
Board is anticipating four large cases to come before them in FY2013/14: Genentech, Syar Industries, Anheuser-Busch and
Shiloh wind projects. These complex hearings are expected to require multiple-day hearings.
The County will continue to work with its city partners and Solano EDC as strategies to retain existing businesses and attract
new companies are developed and implemented.
 The Board is asked to continue funding for Technology Automation Projects. The General Expenditures Recommended
Budget includes an appropriation of $500,000 refresh of the fund from General Fund cost avoidance from completed
automation.
 New one-time funding/contribution for County Match for a CARES dental program project event in 2014.
 Pending decision on LAFCo staffing and office location may change County’s share of costs.
To avoid increases in the General Fund’s share of the 2007 COP debt service payments, the General Services Director is
working on a Countywide Space Consolidation Program to reduce facility-related costs and effectively use County-owned
facilities. One of the goals of the program would include moving more non-General Fund units/divisions into the Government
Center so that these non-General Fund work units/divisions can contribute towards future debt service payments.
General Fund costs in this department are a Constitutional responsibility. The County's General Fund exposure, represented by
the Court's appointment of private attorneys is driven by two factors: the availability of Public Defender and/or Conflict Defender
staff to provide representation where appropriate, and the number of hours required by private attorney/investigator/special
witness/psychiatric evaluations/court reporter to properly represent indigent defendants. Cost exposures related to the number
of private defense hours and, by implication, the incidence of criminal activity and arrest rates, are beyond the County's control.
Adjustments may have to be made to this budget in FY2013/14 based on actual figures at year-end and what the State’s final
budget provides in funding.
Since the funds are depleted, continued support for the Coalition’s activities from this revenue source would need to shift to the
General Fund or other sources.
See the Recommended Budget for General Expenditures (BU 1903) for contributions to non-County agencies.
The Recorder’s Office continues to anticipate the implementation of the Electronic Recording Delivery System (ERDS), which
allows for the acceptance of electronic documents for recordation. This system will provide significant convenience to the public
and will result in greater efficiency and accuracy by more readily accepting documents for recordation.
The Department is anticipating two retirements during FY2013/14. The expected accrued leave payoff for these two retirements
is estimated at $201,200. This payoff is not reflected in the Department’s budget due to the uncertainty and timing of the
retirements.
Measure E Appeals Hearing is still ongoing but should not have significant monetary impact to future disposal fees. The
Governor signed AB845 in September 2012 which removes the existing voter-approved limits on waste importation effective
January 2013. The Appeals Hearing would still move forward to final resolution.
New disposal contracts by the active landfills within Solano County may assist in stabilization or improvement of disposal fees.
On May 2, 2013 the Napa-Vallejo Waste Management Authority (Authority) authorized negotiations with Potrero Hills Landfill for
disposal of their waste from January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018. A contract still needs to be developed and approved
by the Authority before waste can be provided to Potrero Hills Landfill, so the true impact of this authorization is not yet known
and will be evaluated at Midyear.
The County Clerk has requested fee increases of approximately $30,000 to fund the purchase and use of the Southtech suite of
County Clerk applications. The Recommended Budget includes the projected expenditures associated with the implementation
of the software applications, but the revenue from the projected fee increases are not reflected in the Recommended Budget as
they are subject to Board approval, which had not yet occurred as of this writing. The Department’s budget will be adjusted in
the Supplemental to reflect the Board’s decision regarding the Southtech purchase and proposed fee increases.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) mandates employer-paid health insurance for all employees working an average of 30 hours or
more per week. There are potential, financial exposures to provide health benefits to extra help employees; financial penalties
for non-compliance with ACA provisions; and possible departmental operational changes necessary to fulfill ACA requirements.
The County of Solano is facing a demographic change of an aging workforce. Within the next three years, senior and executive
managers will be retiring from the workforce, leaving a gap in the County’s talent pipeline. It is imperative to develop a pool of
talent that is able and ready to step into leadership positions at the middle, senior and executive level within the organization.
This budget reflects the funding of several training and staff development programs for FY2013/14. Additionally, the County
needs to identify strategies to recruit and retain the younger generation (millennials) that will be entering the workforce.
School districts continue to migrate toward election by districts vs. the previous at-large model. This will require more staff
time in maintaining the additional boundaries, potentially splitting precincts, require additional ballot types/styles, and
potentially require adjustments in the polling locations where citizens vote. Costs will continue to increase as more staff
time is necessary for proofing the sample ballot booklets and official ballots.
 The continued elimination of SB 90 funding for permanent vote-by-mail costs will reduce revenues and increase school
district costs by approximately 25%. Current law requires that counties submit SB 90 claims on behalf of school districts;
however, with state reimbursement ending, the districts will be charged by the County for those costs.
 The Board of Supervisors has adopted a legislative position supporting acceptance of VBM ballots postmarked on or before
Election Day but received after Election Day. Several bills have been introduced on this topic most focus on receipt of
ballots up to three days after the Election Day, some of which also extend the canvass period for the same amount of time.
 Additional language requirements are being implemented for facsimile ballots, and voting instructions at polling places. In
2014, Solano County will be required to produce these documents in Spanish, Tagalog, and Chinese which will increase
operational costs.
 Several Bills are proposing implementation of Election Day registration (also known as conditional voter registration) prior to
implementation of the statewide voter registration system (CalVoter). The ROV participates in both the business
requirements/implementation committee for CalVoter, and the sub-committee on implementation of Election Day
registration. This new procedure may cause additional technology costs, canvass costs, poll worker expenses, additional
polling locations and materials costs in high turnout elections.
 Bills at both State and the Federal level are requesting jurisdictions to look into increasing early voting opportunities. This
may include satellite locations and extensions of time to include Saturdays and possibly Sundays. This will increase facility
cost, staff cost, and potentially technology costs to provide ballots in all styles at remote locations.
 Several bills introduced in Congress focus on poll place performance and ensuring lines for voting are less than one hour.
These bills will impact our office in Federal elections as we work to provide more polling locations, with costs for staff,
equipment, and resources to ensure compliance across all polling places.
 The Affordable Care Act (ACA) will require employers to pay healthcare costs for those employees who work 30 hours per
week for 90 days. The ROV is working with Human Resources to determine the impact of the ACA on ROV’s extra-help
hiring policies. At this time, ROV does not anticipate the ACA to impact costs until calendar year 2015.
In the Airport’s Recommended Budget, revenues are expected to exceed operating costs. Opportunities for improving Airport
revenue are anticipated to continue to occur. A continued challenge facing the airport in the near-term will be to generate
additional revenue to meet the local matching funds necessary to implement FAA and State grants on airport improvement
projects.
The Airport will need to generate revenue in the future to provide for required local matches toward State and federal grants.
Three capital projects are recommended in FY2013/14 as noted below:
 The Western Grove Obstruction Removal Project was included in the FY2012/13 Adopted Budget; however, due to project
construction constraints and delays in the approval of habitat mitigation, the project was re-scheduled for fall 2013. The
project is 90% funded through a grant from Caltrans Division of Aeronautics. Habitat mitigation for the project is
recommended to be funded through the Airport Fund from the remaining General Fund loan balance from 2010.
 The Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the Airport Master Plan is expected to be completed in FY2012/13; however, the
report will require minor follow-up and close-out funding during FY2013/14. The EIR is being funded through the Airport
Fund from the remaining General Fund loan balance from 2010.
 The Airport Master Plan identifies a shift in the Airport runway thresholds to address an existing runway safety area issue.
Phase I (design) of the Runway Threshold Shift project is expected to take place in FY2013/14 followed by project
construction in FY2014/15. The FAA has indicated early support for the design and construction of the project. Addressing
runway safety area issues are of a high national priority for the FAA. The project is eligible for 90% funding through the
FAA Airport Improvement Program.
The IT services agreement with Xerox/ACS that has been in place since July 2006 was to expire on June 30, 2013. On May 7,
2013, the Board of Supervisors authorized the Chief Information Officer to negotiate and execute amendments to the
Information Technology Services Agreement (ITSA) with Xerox that extended the ITSA for up to 18 months, and approved an IT
outsourcing strategy to optimize infrastructure flexibility, provide a resilient and secure computing environment, and leverage
new technologies. The new IT sourcing strategy will include staff augmentation and use of Cloud technology and managed
services. The contract extension will provide a bridge for providing uninterrupted services until the new sourcing strategy is fully
in place.
The County has been using a new Electronic Health Records (EHR) information system for the Public Health and Dental Clinics
for the past year. In addition, a new EHR information system for Behavioral Health will be implemented in FY2013/14 and a new
system for Health Information Exchange (HIE) is expected shortly thereafter. It is understood by both DoIT and H&SS
management that the support structure is understaffed. Revenue shortfalls in H&SS have prevented the departments from
resolving the issue. Once the Behavioral Health EHR and the HIE are placed in service, the staffing issue may become critical.
Added to that are unknown impacts of the Affordable Care Act and the expansion of functionality required for the EHRs to
comply with “meaningful use” requirements of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH)
Act. The Department will work with H&SS, Human Resources and the County Administrator’s Office to develop a long-term
staffing plan with appropriate job classifications during the first quarter of the fiscal year.
The Affordable Care Act, in addition to potentially impacting staff support of the EHR systems, may impact infrastructure support
depending upon levels of service that need to be provided beyond the standard 8 to 5 hours of operation.
Vendor support for the District Attorney’s (DA) Case Management System is waning. The DA will need to search for a new case
management system in the next fiscal cycle and staff currently budgeted may not be sufficient to support implementation.
Although recently augmented by the addition of one Systems Analyst, the Law and Justice Division’s staffing faces a number of
workload challenges that may tax them beyond their capacity: implementing a new Inmate Management System, video
visitation, video arraignment; supporting mobile GIS for non-county users; adding support for cellular vehicle broad-band data
and multi-factor authentication; maintenance and support of the AB 109 data sharing environment; new data analysis and report
development; and, build-out and support of the public safety regional network.
County Space Consolidation/Utilization
In December 2011, the Department of General Services presented a status report to the Board on efforts to reduce expenditures
by consolidating space in buildings owned and leased by the County. The goals of the space consolidation effort, which will
span multiple fiscal years, are to a) fully utilize County real assets, b) dispose of underperforming real assets, c) reduce ongoing
costs associated with space, and d) increase revenue by leasing unused space within County facilities.
Future space consolidation efforts in the planning stages and significant capital projects under review include consolidating
space within the John F. Kennedy Branch Library in Vallejo, evaluating the feasibility of consolidating County Corporation Yards
in central Solano County, Department of Agriculture relocation to Cordelia, Probation Building concepts, Claybank remodel, U.C.
Cooperative Extension relocation and ADA Compliance Transition Update and Implementation. The Approved 5 Year CIP
identified $106 million in unfunded needs over the current year work. Staff will continue to identify potential funding sources to
fund these deferred maintenance needs, while looking for opportunities to leverage funding that has been set aside in ACO
contingencies in the amount of $1,695,687 for the purposes listed above. Projects will be brought forward for Board approval as
funding is identified.
Legislative Actions and New Legal Requirements
Adoption of 2013 California Building Code - California’s building codes (California Code of Regulations, Title 24) are published
on a triennial basis. The 2013 Code is scheduled to be published on July 1, 2013 and will become effective on January 1, 2014.
SB 1022 – This budget trailer bill, which was chaptered into law in June 2012 as California Government Code Chapter 3.13,
mirrors AB900, the legislation that enabled the design and construction of new Adult Detention Facilities, including the 362-bed
Claybank Adult Detention Facility that is currently under construction. The SB 1022 program, which will be administered by the
State of California Board of State and Community Corrections, will provide $500 million in adult local criminal justice construction
financing to finance the acquisition, design and construction, or renovation of jail facilities. Approximately $160 million will be
designated for medium-sized counties, including Solano County. An adult local criminal justice facility may include any custodial
housing, reentry program, mental health, or treatment space necessary to manage the adult offender population. If the facility is
under the jurisdiction of the Sheriff /Funding preference will be given to counties that are most prepared to proceed successfully
with this financing in a timely manner. The financing program requires a cash match that is a minimum of 10% of the total
project cost. Funding consideration will be given to counties that a) are seeking to replace existing compacted, outdated, or
unsafe housing capacity, or b) are seeking to renovate existing or build new facilities that provide adequate space for the
provision of treatment and rehabilitation services, including mental health treatment. The construction financing program allows
counties to utilize the design bid-build or design-build project delivery process. The program requires that counties operate and
maintain the improved facilities at county expense. Funding will be provided by the State of California through lease-revenue bonds approved by the State Public Works Board. This method of financing requires that existing facilities will be subject to
current seismic, fire and life safety standards and that the State own the adult local criminal justice facility for the term of bond
indebtedness, typically 30 years. County staff is preparing an application to renovate the existing Claybank Adult Detention
Facility in Fairfield and will present additional information to the Board of Supervisors at a future date.
SB 189 – While some provisions of this law took effect in January 2011, significant provisions of the law took effect in July 2012.
The law sets forth a series of changes to the California mechanics lien and stop notice statues to modernize and simplify the
Mechanics Lien Law. Both mechanics liens (private projects) and stop notices (private and public projects) are highly technical
tools used to secure payment for those who provide labor and materials to a project. Effective July 1, 2012, the existing
Mechanics Lien Law was repealed and replaced with new provisions relating to: 1) works of improvement generally; 2) private
works of improvement; and 3) public works of improvement. The new law alters the notification contents, procedures and notice
periods that affect the owner and labor/material providers. County staff has adjusted internal processes in order to conform to
the new law.
SB 474 – Beginning January 1, 2013, construction contracts which require a subcontractor to insure, indemnify, or defend a
general contractor, construction manager or other subcontractor from their: 1) active negligence; 2) design defects; or 3) claims
that do not arise out of the scope of work of the subcontractor are void and unenforceable. The new law effectively eliminates
“Type I” indemnity clauses in construction contracts. Under the new law Type I indemnity clauses are now prohibited in public
works projects and private commercial construction contracts, although as it applies to owners and public agencies, it only
restricts owners and public entities from requiring indemnity for their “active negligence” but applies broadly to contractors,
subcontractors and material suppliers. The new low does not apply to design professionals, has no effect on additional insured
obligations, and does not apply to owner controlled insurance programs. The new law also does not affect “Type II” indemnity
clauses in which a party is indemnified for their “passive” as opposed to “active” negligence.
Government Code requires that the County evaluate the premises of the PFF at least every five years. The last five-year
comprehensive nexus report was completed in 2007 (County of Solano 2007 Public Facilities Fee Update) with annual updates
in 2008, 2009 and 2010. A full analysis is currently underway and will include review and recommendations on the
appropriateness of the various indices used to establish rates.
The proposed FY2013/14 State Budget reflects a $14.7 million Local Administrative Funding increase; thereby, fully restoring
the 2.4% cut received last fiscal year. California DCSS reinstated the funding to each Local Child Support Agency (LCSA) by
the identical amount of last year’s reduction translating to a $286,613 funding increase for Solano DCSS.
The Governor’s budget also reversed the two previous year’s practice of diverting the county share of assistance collections to
the State General Fund. An estimated $29.8 million in child support collections recovered for periods of time when the child was
receiving public assistance will once again be forwarded to the counties. This equates to approximately $300,000 of increased
funding for the Solano County General Fund.
The California Child Support Program is actively learning more about the federal Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA) in an effort
to understand points of intersections between ACA and the Child Support Program. The Child Support Directors Association
(CSDA) has formed a workgroup to analyze federal and state law and DCSS policy to determine how the mission of the Child
Support Program lines up with ACA. Workgroup members consist of local, state, federal and court partners in addition to
consultants from Healthcare Management Systems, Inc. (HMS).
The federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB) determined that “Payments to States for Child Support Enforcement and
Family Support Programs” is a mandatory requirement and therefore exempt from the provisions of sequestration.
The ongoing implementation of Realignment on the 2011 Public Safety Criminal Justice System is expected to continue to
increase the number of parole violation cases. The Department will continue to evaluate the caseload impact and provide
recommendations for appropriate staffing levels going forward.
The ongoing implementation of 2011 Public Safety Realignment from the State to Counties and the local impact on the Criminal
Justice System is expected to continue to increase the number of clients appointed to the Public Defender due to the fact that
the Department must begin representing parolees charged with parole violations as of July 1, 2013. The Department and the
Solano Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) are recommending the addition of 1.0 FTE Public Defender I-IV and a 1.0
FTE Legal Secretary funded with AB109 revenues to address this increased workload. The Department will continue to evaluate
the caseload impact and provide recommendations for appropriate staffing levels going forward.
The Department seeks to change the name from Conflict Defender to Alternate Defender’s Office to address confusion from the
public and the clientele about the meaning of the name. This would also bring the name into line with the names of similar
offices around the state.
The ongoing implementation of Realignment in the Criminal Justice System is expected to continue to increase the number of
clients appointed to the Conflict Defender due to the fact that the Department must begin representing State parolees charged
with parole violations effective of July 1, 2013. The Department will continue to evaluate the caseload impact and provide
recommendations for appropriate staffing levels going forward.
The 2011 Public Safety Realignment, also known as AB109, continues to have a significant impact on the Sheriff’s Office budget
and operations. Since Realignment went into effect (Fall 2011), the Sheriff’s Office has added public safety capabilities to
address increased inmate population and longer sentences to be served in County Jail by reopening two housing with the
remaining unit anticipated to be reopened in Spring/Summer 2013. The Sheriff’s Office also initiated a dynamic compliance
capability establishing a Sheriff’s Enforcement Team (SET) to lead field compliance checks. Moving forward, these capabilities
will be critical in maintaining public safety as the County adjusts to both providing services and conducting enforcement on a
new criminal offender population.
Due to the timing of the State’s award process, the grant funds are not included in the Recommended Budget. The 2012 EMPG
funds are reflected in the FY2012/13 Working Budget. The Sheriff’s Office intends to submit the 2013 EMPG grant application
in the coming months. Once approved by CalEMA, the Sheriff’s Office will return to the Board of Supervisors to authorize the
execution of the grant agreement and to recognize unanticipated revenue and related appropriations.
The Sheriff’s Office received a 2009 COPS award for $300,000 in FY2011/12; however the Sheriff’s Office was delayed in
utilizing the funds due to restrictions in grant guidelines. Since receiving notice of the award the Sheriff’s Office has been
working with the grant agency and has submitted a request to modify the existing grants terms to allow for the funding of 40% of
a sworn position in the Narcotics Unit, funding for overtime in the Methamphetamine Enforcement Unit, and equipment, training
in operational readiness. If successful in receiving grantor approval for modification the Sheriff will bring forward separately a
Board report and budget appropriation request in FY2013/14.
The Sheriff’s Office is pursuing a 2013 COPS grant to fund community enforcement with the intent of reinstating the Resident
Deputy Program and dedicating a Deputy to a geographic area in the County that is experiencing high theft and property crimes.
The maximum award amount is $125,000 and requires a 25% match with a three year term.
With the continued federal budgetary impasse, it is unclear if the COPS federal awards will continue to have funding or will be
reduced further in the coming fiscal year. The Department continues to work to identify alternative funding sources to support
the County’s Narcotics Enforcement Team.
The Sheriff’s Office is reviewing guidelines for the 2013 JAG program and developing a plan for application. If successful in
receiving a grant award for the 2013 JAG program, the Sheriff will return to the Board of Supervisors to recognize the grant
revenues and appropriate the funds accordingly.
The 2011 Public Safety Realignment has significant implications for the Department, the Courts and the County as a whole.
Additional staff and operational changes have been implemented in the Adult Division to address the Post Release Community
Supervision functions that have been transferred to Probation as well as to address Probation’s role in supervising offenders
that are no longer eligible for prison commitments. Probation is also making staffing, assignment and process changes
necessary to address the changing role of the local courts also attributed to the 2011 Realignment.
In the Recommended Budget the Probation Department reflects a decrease of $298,448 in SB 678 funding due to a proposed
funding reduction by the Governor. This funding allocation for counties is largely based on the percentage of the population that
is not sentenced to state prison. The Department uses this allocation to provide supervision and services to 18-25 year-old
offenders. The proposed reduction in funding affects the Department’s ability to staff positions with grant funding. The proposed
funding reduction is still under evaluation by the Governor and updated information regarding the funding level will be provided
during budget hearings.
The Governor’s May Revise Budget proposal does not include an updated projection or proposed allocation/distribution formula
for AB109 for FY201/14. Additional information will be provided when it becomes available.
• The closure and demobilization of a years-long series of emergency projects, Vacaville Glassy-winged Sharpshooter
infestation, Sudden Oak Death, Dixon Medfly eradication, Light Brown Apple Moth infestation and European Grapevine
moth eradication and quarantine is resulting in a return to baseline for Solano Pest Prevention activities.
• Working with DoIT to develop an online payment method for licenses and registrations.
• USDA Wildlife Services has announced a dramatic reduction in federal cost share for the important Wildlife Services
Program for public safety and predator control in Solano County. Additionally, USDA will be phasing in an increase in
administrative costs over a ten-year period. The Agricultural Commissioner will work with the Legislative Committee to
advocate for a statewide industry contribution to offset cost increases to this program.
• Although the Net County Cost reflects an increase from the FY2012/13 Adopted Budget, the Department had incurred
general fund decreases since FY2008/09. This is due to the winding down of various emergency programs and their
attendant revenues, referenced above, which has created uncertainty regarding staffing and ongoing program needs.
During FY2013/14 an operational plan will be developed to address the Department’s ability to provide ongoing services
and emergency response.
• The Planning Division will work with California State Association of Counties to assist the legislature in its reform of the
California Environmental Quality Act.
• The State of California passed SB 1608 requiring building divisions to have on staff individuals who hold a Certified Access
Specialist Program (CASP) Certification by 2014. The Building Division currently has the Plan Check Engineer certified for
plan review and counter consultation, and it is currently training one field inspector in preparation to take the state
mandated test for certification prior to the 2014 deadline.
• AB 1616 The Homemade Food Act became effective on January 1, 2013. This act allows for cottage food operations to
prepare limited food items from home kitchens and sell to the public or other retail food facilities. The Environmental Health
Services Division must issue registrations or permits, depending on the type of food sales involved, for all cottage food operations. This will require verification annually of compliance with code requirements, which may have an impact on
delivery of services in other program areas.
• The State Water Resources Control Board’s statewide onsite wastewater treatment system policy becomes effective on
May 13, 2013. This policy creates several tiers of management and oversight for onsite systems, depending on the
potential impact to public health and the environment by their operation. The state policy will require Solano County to have
a Local Agency Management Program approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board by May 13, 2018 to continue
the implementation of a local program for most onsite systems. Existing Solano County Code regulating septic systems
and water wells should meet the requirements for a Local Agency Management Program with minor amendments to
strengthen countywide monitoring and reporting of water quality and septic system operation. Failure to obtain a Local
Agency Management Program will result in the requirement for owners of new and replaced onsite sewage disposal
systems, or owners of existing onsite systems in sensitive areas already impacted by septic systems, to obtain individual
waste discharge requirements from the state in order to operate their system.
• Disposed tons of solid waste continues to decline compared to previous fiscal years. However, the inspection and
permitting demands have not decreased proportionally. New diversion goals, including increasing food waste composting,
is placing additional demands on environmental health staff beyond normal landfill inspection activity. Currently the
Environmental Health Services Division’s Local Enforcement Agency fee is based solely on tons of disposed solid waste.
This was established to promote waste diversion. As waste diversion practices become established within a community,
creating their own inspection needs and reducing solid waste disposal revenue, it may be necessary for the Board to
consider expanding the Local Enforcement Agency fee to include tons of material that is diverted, especially materials being
composted at landfills, if the amount of disposed tons does not stabilize.
• New disposal contracts by the active landfills within Solano County may also assist in stabilization or improvement. On May
2, 2013 the Napa-Vallejo Waste Management Authority (Authority) authorized negotiations with Potrero Hills Landfill for
disposal of their waste from January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018. The Authority transported 135,800 tons of solid
waste for disposal from American Canyon, Napa and Vallejo, according to records from CalRecycle for 2011. A contract
still needs to be developed and approved by the Authority before waste can be provided to Potrero Hills Landfill, so the true
impact of this authorization is not yet known and will be evaluated at Midyear.
There are potential policy and legislative proposals that will impact Solano County’s ability to protect its interests in the Delta
over the next three years. As of this writing, staff is monitoring several bills that may impact the Delta ecosystem, water quality
and water supply. A moratorium on Congressionally-directed spending continues and other federal funding opportunities will
need to be pursued to support water-related environmental infrastructure, resource protection and development projects in the
Delta. State legislation and policy changes as a result of the 2012 and 2013 State Administration may also impact the
availability of funding for Delta infrastructure and emergency preparedness efforts. There is also a Water Bond proposed for the
2014 ballot (originally $11.1 billion, but is expected to be scaled down by the legislature) to fund water supply infrastructure. In
either case, the success or failure of a State Water Bond will undoubtedly impact future resources to the Delta and to Solano
County.
The key issue facing Public Works is the continuing statewide underfunding of transportation. This is a long-term trend that has
been masked in recent years by the use of one-time sources of funding, such as Proposition 1B and federal stimulus funds. The
number of local roads in California that are in failed condition is expected to nearly quadruple by 2020, from six percent to 22
percent. This means that nearly a quarter of all local roads in California will have failed within ten years unless additional
sources of transportation funding are developed. Solano County’s roads will be similarly impacted.
Affordable Care Act – MediCal Expansion
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) becomes effective in January 2014 and State’s have the option to expand their program to
Medicare to provide expanded health care coverage to eligible individuals. The Governor’s May Revise budget proposes
expanding the existing MediCal program, as administered by the State; however, the details of the funding are still being
debated. The Governor is seeking to recover $1.5 billion from counties for the counties’ existing responsibility for indigent
healthcare based on county-by-county experiences. Given California has one of the highest rates of uninsured individuals, the
ACA has the potential to benefit a number of individuals by providing no or low cost healthcare access. The Federal Plan
includes 100% reimbursement the first three years, followed by a permanent ten (10%) percent share of costs.
Employment and Eligibility
Covered California, the new health insurance exchange established by the State, will begin enrolling clients in October 2013.
The State, as a result, has indicated an expectation that County Eligibility and Employment Services will need to support the
State Exchange as well as develop sufficient capacity to serve anticipated clients. As a first step, the Board added 22.0 FTE in
May 2013 in order to augment staffing levels to meet and prepare for the initial additional workload. Counties will continue to
determine eligibility for clients; however, Employment and Eligibility be required to expand the hours of operations to accept calls
from Covered California during evenings and weekends.
Health Services
The ACA may also impact clinical services provided by the County. As referenced in the ACA presentations to the Board this
past spring, the expansion of MediCal under the ACA is expected to incrementally increase the demand for primary care
services in the Family Health Services clinics throughout the County. As a Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC), the clinics
are required to serve everyone who request services, regardless of ability to pay, so it is possible that many are already being
served by the County and/or community clinics. H&SS anticipates that through the ACA, the number of clients with a source of
payment/insurance will increase.
Behavioral Health
The impact of the ACA on the Department’s Substance Abuse and MH programs is two-fold: 1) an increase in demand for
service due to the increase in MediCal enrollees, and 2) expansion of the service delivery system in order to meet Federal
“parity” requirements to provide a level of service that is equal to the community standard of care.
As referenced above, under 2011 Realignment, the County became responsible for 100% of the non-Federal costs for both
mental health and substance abuse (previously, the County had no funding requirements related to Drug MediCal). For the first
three years of the ACA implementation, the costs for the “newly eligible clients”, according to the current legislation it is the
responsibility of the Federal government; eventually, the County will be required to cover 10% of the costs of these services.
Costs for new clients who are currently eligible for MediCal, but not enrolled, will continue at the current 50/50 sharing ratio. The
majority of patients served in the County’s mental health system are already covered by MediCal; however, it is anticipated that
most of the “private pay/indigent adults” currently served will become eligible for MediCal allowing the County to bill for these
services (currently only limited acute hospital costs and Psychiatric care is covered through CMSP. In the Substance Abuse
programs, the majority of clients are not currently eligible for MediCal, primarily because they are single, able-bodied adults,
many of whom are referred via the County criminal justice system. Under the pending ACA, many of the current substance
abuse clients will be eligible for the expanded MediCal program.
While the expansion of the MediCal program is anticipated to increase the number of clients served, it should also provide
payment for many of the current clients. The Department may experience a significant impact on the behavioral health system
depending on how the Federal parity rules are implemented or applied to the ACA. Regulations are still pending regarding the
community standard of care benchmarks, and the issue of whether or not the parity rules will cover only the “newly eligible” for
MediCal, or, both the newly eligible and those who are currently eligible but not enrolled in MediCal. The Department anticipates
that it will need to make changes in the existing behavioral health service delivery system in order to provide a continuum of
care and an integrated system of behavioral and physical health services and may need to expand service delivery system to
provide sufficient capacity to serve the anticipated increase in the number and types of clients seeking services.
The County substance abuse program is relatively small, and following the implementation of ACA may be inadequate to meet parity standards. Substance abuse relies on contracts with community based organization for most of the treatment services,
and is geared primarily to serving clients referred from the criminal justice system, or those who are homeless and/or those with
long term chronic abuse. The Mental Health Director, who is now responsible for oversight of the Substance Abuse Division’s
treatment programs, has undertaken a complete assessment of the current substance abuse delivery system, utilizing technical
assistance support from the State. Once the gaps in services and funding are identified, a plan will be developed for a
substance abuse service delivery system, similar in concept to the existing Mental Health system, which offers a continuum of
services, including primary care based assessment and brief intensive therapy, crisis intervention and stabilization, acute
inpatient service through contracted hospitals, outpatient/case management services offered in-house and through community
based partners, residential/supportive housing facilities, and a private individual provider network which serves those client with
less severe mental illness. Access to mental health services is authorized through a central intake 800 number and clients are
referred directly to a service provider or to the County’s Integrated Care Clinic for an assessment; it is likely that this process will
incorporate the substance abuse authorization process in the future.
Affordable Care Act – Performance Expectations
Current discussion on the ACA has revolved around the individual insurance mandate and the expansion of the MediCal
program. Once access to care is improved, the efforts under the ACA will focus on improving the quality of care to ensure that
clients receive the appropriate level of care when and where they need it and to improve health outcomes and reduce the overall
costs of medical care. Program regulations and financial incentives will be overhauled to align with the goals of the ACA. The
Federal Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) has initiated several of the new payment provisions, including
incentive payments for provision of preventative services and lack of payment for readmissions to a hospital within 30 days. The
fiscal realignment has already impacted H&SS in relation to implementation of an electronic health record (EHR) system in FHS;
the EHR is required under the ACA, and is an essential tool in improving health outcomes. Federal funds were made available
via the traditional mechanism, but the Department was able to earn a “bonus” for each provider actively engaged in using the
system as of December 2012. H&SS anticipates that both the FQHC financing system for primary care services as well as the
existing State “Short Doyle” system for mental health services will be overhauled. H&SS will also need to develop a plan to
integrate substance abuse outpatient services within Family Health Services as part of the overall redesign of the substance
abuse program and establishment of a “medical home”. H&SS will update the Board on these emerging issues and their impact
on department operations as information becomes available.
Program Compliance Plan
H&SS receives approximately 75% of the County’s federal funding, and is responsible for monitoring and reporting on the use of
the funds. The Department is also involved in some of the most complex types of Federal financing structures, including
integrated behavioral healthcare, Intergovernmental Transfers (IGT), managed care and Federally Qualified Health Centers
(FQHC). Federal funding has always required a high level of accountability. The Deficit Reduction Act of 2005, as well as the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA), significantly increased Federal reporting requirements. H&SS
established a small compliance program in the late 1990s, however, portions were assumed into the countywide compliance
program and over the past few years, budget cuts have eliminated most of the program.
The Department has been challenged to develop the infrastructure necessary to support the service delivery systems to ensure
compliance with regulations and maintain adequate fiscal controls. As an example, in order to implement the behavioral health
integrated care clinics to achieve anticipated revenues and ensure compliance with the complex regulations associated with
these services, H&SS engaged outside consultants to assist in developing the necessary compliance and fiscal oversight
structure. Due to lack of internal staff resources, H&SS will also engage the consultants to be on site for a number of months
and assist the department in implementing the compliance program for the 9 FQHC sites. H&SS has requested internal staff
resources necessary for the development of a department-wide compliance plan. As the Department develops new systems
that are more efficient and offer comprehensive services to improve client outcomes, the Department intends to use outside
experts in concert with development of an in-house compliance team. At Third Quarter the Board approved the allocation of an
H&SS Compliance Officer, which is currently in the recruitment process. The FY2013/14 Recommended Budget also includes
four new positions for compliance and oversight to work with each of the major operating Divisions within the Department. To
begin the process, the Department, County Counsel and the CAO concur that it is necessary to engage outside consultants to
conduct a department-wide risk assessment. While this is in progress, Human Resources will develop the job specifications for
the proposed new positions, with the intent that these staff would be in place early in January 2014. The new H&SS Compliance Officer will use the findings of the risk assessment and work with Risk Management and other County Departments
to develop a comprehensive compliance plan. H&SS will keep the Board informed as the major compliance components are
developed.
Contributions to Non-County Agencies
Health and Social Services facilitates contributions to non-county agencies in the amount of $1,789,557 of which $1,377,082 is
reflected as a transfer in described in the General Expenditures (BU1903) section of the Recommended Budget. Included in the
Health and Social Services County General Fund Contribution is $412,475 to facilitate contributions of $86,975 to the
Community Action Partnership of Solano (CAP Solano) $30,000 to the Solano/Contra Costa Food Bank, $8,000 to the NorthBay
Standdown and $287,500 to the Family Resource Centers (FRC) Network. The $287,500 for the FRC Network is comprised of
an initial contribution of $127,500 and bridge funding in the amount of $160,000 approved the Board of Supervisors on
December 11, 2012 to bridge a portion of the Office of Child Abuse Prevention funding which was redirected pursuant to the
State mandated and Board approved Child Welfare Services System Improvement Plan. The $160,000 for FY2013/14 is
included in the Recommended Budget. At this time the Health and Social Services budget does not include additional
contributions to replace the annualized loss of State funding which will require an additional $90,137. Further, a policy direction
from the Board will be asked, regarding the backfilling of the loss of State or Federal funding.
Other non-county agencies that have expressed to Health and Social Services an interest in receiving additional funding from
Health and Social Services or the County but have not yet provided a written proposal including the Children’s Network,
Community Clinics, Baby Coach, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in conjunction with
Planned Parenthood, Volunteer Center of Solano County and Senior Coalition. The County Administrator’s Office will be
working with Health and Social Services and the non-profit community to secure more information and supporting details for
Board consideration as part of the supplemental budget information for board consideration during budget deliberations.
The Department is in the early stages of implementing a new web based contracts database that will allow a more efficient way
for personnel to view, track, and process the hundreds of contracts within each Division. This system, called Tract Manager, will
be replacing the current Access database which is not supported by DoIT and is not an interactive system. The database will
house a library of current and past contracts that can be accessed for review purposes, create a platform for the electronic processing of contracts through each Division and County Counsel. Contract managers will now have a centralized location to
ensure contract compliance with key terms and deliverables. The Department is also looking into the possibility of storing
contract claims on this database for not only easy access but to update financial information, and allow for electronic processing
of claims. It is expected that this new database will not only create efficiencies in the process, it will become a valuable tool for
contract monitoring.
Federal oversight and reporting requirements have increased significantly. It is anticipated that with the implementation of
healthcare reform, federal authorities will increasingly audit counties to determine whether medical billing as well as privacy and
security practices are compliant with federal regulations.
Contributions to non-county agencies are processed through the Administration Division as non-reimbursable cost. The current
budget includes a contribution of $160,932 authorized by the Board of Supervisors on December 11, 2012 as bridge funding for
the Family Resource Center Network. The Children’s Network which provides coordination support to the Family Resource
Centers has informed the County Administrator’s Office that they will be requesting additional funding; however, a written
proposal is still pending. Funding for the Family Resources Centers and the Children’s Network will need to be discussed as a
part of the FY2013/14 Supplemental Budget.
 2011 Realignment and the passage of Proposition 30 have potentially stabilized a large portion of funding for mental health and
substance abuse services, while opening up new potential risks due to responsibilities that have followed realigned dollars. At this juncture, Narcotic Replacement Therapy service contracts, previously the financial responsibility of the State, are a Drug
Medi-Cal entitlement and the County Behavioral Health Division is now fiscally responsible for those services, funding the 50%
non-federal share with 2011 Realignment monies. While FY2012/13 realignment appears to adequately cover these services at
their current level, the lack of utilization management by counties may expose the county to increased costs in the future
depending on the rate of growth of these programs and whether or not the State Department of Health Care Services (DHCS)
allocates more utilization and contract management control to counties.
Changes to children’s mental health as a result of the Katie A. settlement are anticipated to become operational in late spring of
2013. The State is expected to issue definitive guidelines that will help clarify the additional programming necessary to maintain
compliance with this new mandated service delivery system. Services will include wraparound services to families and foster
children, in-home behavioral services, therapeutic foster care services, and increased coordination activity. Most, if not all, of
these new activities will be eligible for federal match at the 50% level. The 50% non-federal match will need to be funded with
1991 and 2011 Realignment monies to the extent available. If realignment funding is exhausted, the Division will need to find
additional funding to support the non-federal match of the program.
The expansion of Medi-Cal under the Affordable Care Act will present a challenge for existing service capacity, especially for
mental health managed care and substance abuse outpatient and residential services if the increased eligible populations seeks
services from the County. While estimates have been made about the numbers of newly eligible clients, the actual magnitude is
unknown as it is unclear how many newly eligible will actually sign up for Medi-Cal. Also unknown are the numbers of
individuals who will remain as indigent after January 1, 2014 and will continue to rely on county systems for care. As many of
the newly eligible are already participating in the County Medi-Cal Services Program (CMSP), a successful transition of this
population into the Medi-Cal expansion may not pose a huge financial risk for the County as services for the newly eligible Medi-
Cal population will be federally reimbursed at 100% for the next three years. The bigger financial risk is for those individuals
who will remain as indigent and will continue to receive services that rely on local funding resources.
In addition to the unknown magnitude of the newly eligible population, questions still remain about the benefits for these
individuals and if they will mirror existing Medi-Cal benefits, or if the benefit will be enhanced and federally subsidized. The
interpretation of the Wellstone Domeneci Parity Act at the Federal and State level is not yet finalized, and some uncertainty
exists about whether the Parity Act will be applicable to any Medi-Cal eligible. If not, the substance abuse benefit will continue
to be inadequate and mental health services for the new population will most likely mirror those of current Medi-Cal eligible.
As discussions on the Governor’s proposal on the State implementation of the Medi-Cal expansion continue, this Spring and
Summer, the future impacts on the County are still uncertain. The implementation of Medi-Cal expansion will bring risks and
opportunities to counties, and may result in cost-shifting from the State or take-back of realignment funds designated for indigent
care by the Department.
Healthy Families recipients are being phased transitioned into Medi-Cal pursuant to Federal Healthcare Reform. 6,000 or more
Solano County children will be converting to Medi-Cal eligibility status and cycling from private insurance to public managed
care and mental health/substance abuse services. Approximately 4,000 of these children are enrolled with Kaiser. The Division
is currently negotiating with the State and Kaiser to continue to serve these children instead of having them referred to the
County Mental Health and Substance Abuse Divisions for services.
The impact of Medi-Cal Expansion in 2014 is still being determined, due to the undetermined role of State and counties at the
time of this writing. It is expected that a significant increase in new Medi-Cal enrollees will result in a greater need for services
and require an increase in capacity within the County itself and through its contractors, for both Mental Health and Substance
Abuse services. While some of these additional service responsibilities will be offset by Federal revenue, some will not and may
pose additional strain on the Division’s budget.
In anticipation of funding changes at the federal level, either through losses from the Federal Sequestration or increases as a
result of Health Care Reform, the Division continues to look at opportunities for continued integration of services to maximize
available funding. Improvements in care and efficiency from integration should result in lower morbidity, relapse and recidivism
rates, and save care costs across different systems. In particular, substance abuse services integrated into primary care and
targeted to certain high risk populations has been demonstrated to directly diminish medical expenditures per individual treated.
To the extent that Realignment provides more flexibility with funding, the Division will continue to move toward an integrated
approach of providing cost effective coordinated care for a vulnerable population. The Federal Sequester will impact federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment (SAPT) monies as well as some Mental Health federal revenues that support
mental health services for homeless individuals. While the impact of the Federal Sequester is currently unknown, early
estimates for revenue loss for FY2013/14 are approximately $200,000.
There are a number of significant issues and policy considerations at the state and federal levels that may impact the Division of
Health Services. At the federal level, the effects of Sequestration are still being evaluated. Sequestration may potentially result
in significant reductions in federal funding for public health programs, including chronic disease prevention, WIC, nutrition services, MCAH programs, emergency preparedness, immunization, childhood lead poisoning prevention, and communicable
disease prevention.
The full impacts of the 2010 Federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act remain uncertain; however, with implementation
effective January 1, 2014, FY2013/14 will be a challenging year. At the state level, both the Assembly and Senate have
introduced bills to address the mandatory changes for healthcare reform, including the expansion of the Medi-Cal population to
cover childless adults and to address insurance market reforms through administrative simplification and implementation of the
health benefits exchange, Covered California.
The State is currently reviewing the components of the Affordable Care Act and discussing the options of state implementation
versus county implementation for Medi-Cal expansion. The biggest uncertainty in these discussions at present concerns public
health realignment funding (1991 public health realignment); it is unclear how much of the public health realignment funds will be
diverted to the State to help pay for costs related to implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
Apart from these unknown financial impacts on the Health Services Division, the impacts of healthcare reform on the Division
are expected to include an increase in the proportion of clients served in the Family Health Services Clinics who have health
insurance and are, therefore, able to pay for clinical services, and a modest increase in the number of clients served in the
Clinics. The FHS Clinics are preparing to absorb this increase.
Other notable pending issues for the Division in FY2013/14 include expansion of the Napa-Solano-Yolo regional Public Health
Laboratory to include Marin County, and designation of a Level II Trauma Center for Solano County.
The Department of Health and Social Services is tracking a number of Federal/State proposed legislation changes which have
the potential to further impact the County in the next coming fiscal years including:
• 2011 Realignment funding for Foster Care, Adoptions, Child Protective Services, and Adult Protective Services now have a
dedicated funding source from sales tax due to revisions made by SB 1020 to Assembly Bill AB 118 and ABX1. Each
county has a set percentage, based on FY2011/12 expenditures. The total amount of funding generated by this funding
mechanism may vary based on sales tax receipts; however, the percentage share to each County is fixed. The State no
longer has a share of program costs, and Counties assume the risk of not having sufficient funding for cost increases,
especially in the Assistance programs where the services are mandatory and the County has no discretion in the eligibility
factors that require a county to provide the mandated services to eligible clients.
• 2011 Realignment not only shift/realigned public safety to counties, it also shifted Mental Health 1991 Realignment funds to
pay for a portion of the State’s share of CalWORKs Assistance grants. This funding source remains flat as established in
FY2011/12. If the amount allocated does not cover the full cost of the CalWORKs assistance grant, the State provides
State General Fund to cover the State share of cost. The County’s share of CalWORKs assistance is still 2.5%, and has
not changed.
• Assembly Bill (AB) 12 recently extended assistance to children in foster care until their 21st birthday. To date 20 Solano
youth have chosen to continue in the Foster Care Program. Because implementation of the legislation began in 2012, and
the State and the Counties have very little experience with the types of services and needs this population are unclear. In
FY2012/13, the Legislature added $18.2 Million to the Statewide Protective Services 2011 Realignment account for this
expansion of the Foster Care Program.
• Affordable Care Act (ACA) is a major change that will have impacts on all aspects of the health care delivery system. The
State of California is in the process of developing the parameters of its implementation, so it is difficult to properly analyze
or project the impacts at this time. The impact on E&ES is an estimate based on projected population and the assigned
responsibility to perform eligibility determination and resource requirements. There will be an expansion of the existing Medi-Cal eligibility to include those childless adult Solano County residents whose income is below 138% of the Federal
Poverty Line (FPL). CWDA estimates that an additional 5,797 new individuals, or 4,831 families, may be eligible based on
the Medi-Cal expansion. Additionally, currently eligible clients who are not enrolled may choose to enroll due to ACA’s
requirement that all people have insurance coverage or pay a penalty. CWDA estimates 3,108 individuals or 1,243 families
may be added due to this factor. The total increase is estimated to be 8,905 individuals or 6,074 families. It is anticipated
that the County will be expected to answer calls transferred from Covered California call centers (warm handoff) within 30
seconds 80% of the time, complete the application process in one call, and perhaps take calls for other counties within an
automated system consortia to meet required service levels. State Exchange hours are set for 8 AM – 8 PM Monday –
Saturday (during open enrollment periods, Oct-Dec) and 8 AM – 6 PM Monday – Friday, 8 AM – 5 PM Saturday (non-open
enrollment). ACA provisions also require horizontal integration, the County is expected to evaluate all applications for Medi-
Cal for other benefit programs (CalFresh and CalWORKs). Counties will be the “In Person” option for Exchange Subsidy
(advanced premium tax credit) initial eligibility determination and health plan selection and enrollment and health plan
selection and enrollment for non-subsidized insurance through Covered California.
CARES – Child Welfare Services
• In 2002, a class action lawsuit (Katie A v. Bonta) was filed in federal district court concerning the availability of intensive
mental health services to children in California who are either in foster care or at imminent risk of coming into care. A
settlement agreement was reached in the case in December 2011, and child welfare and mental health leaders from state
and local levels are working together to establish a sustainable framework for the provision of an array of services that
occur in community settings and in a coordinated manner. Requirements include Intensive Care Coordination, provision of
Intensive Home Based Services and Therapeutic Foster Care as State guidelines are completed in FY2013/14 the
department will provide an update to the Board on potential requirements.
The Governor’s Budget no longer includes a 3.6 percent across-the-board reduction in service hours for IHSS participants. It
does assume that in the second half of FY 2013/14, the State will prevail in the lawsuit that challenged the State’s 2010
decrease in wages to $10.50 per hour. However, a recent settlement of the Oster/Dominguez vs. Lightbourne lawsuit includes
an 8% across the Board reduction in authorized service hours for 12 consecutive months, starting July 1, 2013. This will not
affect our costs in FY2013/14 due to the existing IHSS MOE but may have a future impact on the MOE.
Foster Care: AB 12 was approved in FY2010/11 and extends foster care for youths between the ages of 18 to 21 on a
voluntary basis; however, State guidelines have been issued and became effective January 2012. It is still too early to
estimate the on-going fiscal impact of retaining these children in the Foster Care program. The State will be adding
reporting requirements to determine that the cost is neutral to the Counties, but there is no assurance that the County’s cost
for foster care placements will not increase. State mandated rate increases are continuing to increase the cost per case of
a foster care placement. Since the County is now responsible for 100% of the non-federal share of this program, increases
in County General Fund may occur.
• Adoptions: Increases in State mandated rates are driving up the costs of this program and caseload has been increasing,
currently projected at approximately 2%. Since the County is now responsible for 100% of the non-federal share of this
program, increases in County General Fund may occur.
• CalWORKs: As a result of State program changes over the past two years and associated reductions to the CalWORKs
caseload, the cost of aid payments to Solano County is much lower, resulting in reduced state and federal revenue in this
program. The Governor’s proposed FY2013/14 budget restores some requirements for families to re-engage in work
activities, but it is not expected that caseloads will increase dramatically.
• IHSS Provider Wages: The State’s application to the Federal government to include the IHSS program in the Community
First Choice Option (CFCO) program was approved, and the State negotiated an MOU with the Federal Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to implement the Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI) as a pilot program with 8
counties. The outcome of this pilot program will determine whether or not the IHSS MOE will continue as the State’s
methodology for funding the cost of the In-Home Supportive Services provider wages. The IHSS MOE limits the County’s
share of cost of provider wages to the amount budgeted in FY 2013/14, and provides for a 3.5% automatic increase to this
amount in FY 2014/15.
• General Assistance cost may be impacted by the Affordable Care Act. A credit was provided for individuals enrolled in
CMSP, with the shift to Medi-Cal the credit would not be applicable and may impact the savings projected in this program.
The IHSS-MOE is intended to permanently replace the County’s share of cost for the Administration of the IHSS program in the
Older and Disabled Adult Services Division, for IHSS provider wages, and for IHSS-PA Administration. The base year costs to
establish the MOE is FY 2011/12 and it has a built in inflation factor of 3.5% effective July 2014. This new approach to funding
the IHSS program will include moving collective bargaining with IHSS Providers from the local level to the State level over a
three year period. This proposal is contingent upon the success of pilot projects in 8 counties for the State’s Coordinated Care
Initiative (CCI), that intends to utilize a managed care approach for all of the components of long term care and to place these
components under the State’s control. If the pilot projects are not successful, the legislation (SB1036) allows the State to
terminate the CCI project, and collective bargaining would return to the counties and the MOE would revert to the pre-existing
35% of non-federal cost.
The number of IHSS providers that can be covered by health insurance will vary in relation to changes in paid hours because
the funding for this benefit is based exclusively on reimbursement at $0.60 per paid provider hour.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) may have an impact on the health benefits for IHSS providers however the details are pending a
legislative review. Pending legislation AB784 would establish an advisory committee to assess the impact of the ACA on health
care benefits for IHSS providers. The bill would require the advisory committee to provide a report to specified legislative
committees on or before March 1, 2014, on the appropriate employer in the IHSS program to provide health care benefits to
IHSS providers under ACA. Under existing law, the state, a county, a public authority, a nonprofit consortium, or an IHSS
recipient may be considered the employer of an IHSS provider.
There are no significant pending issues or policy considerations regarding the Tobacco Prevention and Education
Fund for FY2013/14. The Fund allocations to Counties have been gradually decreasing as smoking rates in
California have been decreasing; however, this is both anticipated and desired.
Of its $6.4 million Recommended Budget, First 5 Solano currently holds contracts with Solano County Health and
Social Services (H&SS) amounting to about $1.5 million annually. Thus, significant changes at the state and federal
level to health and social services programs could directly impact First 5 programs. There are also significant
potential negative impacts for First 5 Solano’s direct-service contracts with many city, school district and community
partners serving approximately 10,000 children and 11,000 parents/guardians annually.
The Children’s Network which provides staff support to the Children’s Alliance has informed the County Administrator’s Office
that they will be requesting additional funding; however, a written proposal is still pending.
Baby Coach has formally requested $50,000 in match funding for FY2013/14 to recruit and train an additional 20 volunteer Baby
Coaches and Interns to serve at least 30 pregnant/parenting mothers and their infants.
Funding for Baby Coach, Children’s Alliance, Family Resource Centers and other non-county agencies will need to be
discussed as a part of the FY2013/14 Supplemental Budget.
The Library continues to address its structural deficit having achieved a balanced budget for FY2013/14. However, with the
increase in personnel costs and only the stabilization of property tax, the Department is still working on keeping its budget
balanced and decreasing its structural deficit. The Department continues to rely on fund balance or one-time revenues to
balance its budget.
The Affordable Care Act will require employers to pay healthcare costs for those who work 30 hours or more per week for 90
days. Although the Library utilizes many extra help employees who shelve library materials, they do not work more than 19
hours per week, therefore the Affordable Care Act should not have an impact to the Library’s budget
In April 2013, the Napa County Board of Supervisors approved the termination of the agreement that Napa County has with
Solano County and the SNAP system effective June 30, 2014. Although this will have no fiscal impact for the FY2013/14 budget
there will be a loss of revenue in FY2014/15. This loss will be somewhat mitigated by the fact that the costs to operate the
automated system will decrease. The Department will work in FY2013/14 to address the reduction of this revenue stream.
Consolidating the Solano, Yolo and Sacramento County UCCE offices into one administrative unit is anticipated in FY2013/14
which will create administrative efficiencies in program delivery and reduce overall space and operating costs. UCCE will
continue to offer the same suite of programs to Solano County residents including agricultural advisor, 4-H and Master Gardener
programs and will strive to re-establish the nutrition education program. The 4-H, Master Gardener and nutrition programs will
have staff located in a Solano County satellite office, while all other programs will operate from a central office located in Yolo
County. This restructuring is expected to improve the delivery of existing programs and expand other programs to Solano County. The UCCE is dedicated to develop a new structure that will be more efficient, adaptive to County needs and provide a
more stable program delivery model.
In considering the setting of contingency for FY2013/14, there are a number of uncertainties that may impact the County.
FY2013/14 will be a transition year of new programs for the County. With the ACA implementation, there is a potential exposure
to the General Fund for increases in medical rates to the County as the employer and as a provider of services. The Governor’s
May Revision indicates the State is considering realigning some human services programs from the State to the County and will
result in a shift of funding to these programs and a loss of funding to other programs (1991 Realignment) to the County.
Specifically for FY2013/14, the Governor is proposing to take away $300 million statewide ($3.1 million for Solano County) from
1991 Health Realignment Funds that would normally be used to provide county public health services.
FY2013/14 is the third year of the implementation of the 2011 Realignment which shifted state programs and responsibilities to
counties in public safety and health and social services. While the voters in November 2012 approved Proposition 30, which
affirmed counties’ constitutional protections for certain sales tax revenue streams from the State, the current revenue
allocation/distribution formula for public safety is an interim formula for FY2013/14 and the health and social services funding
sources was flat funded in the past year. The current jail population for Solano County is now over 1,000 and there is a concern
that the County will continue to have a growing and longer staying jail population (under AB 109 Realignment) to manage and
that AB109 realignment revenues from the State will not cover the increasing costs for the County. If this trend proves correct,
then the County will have to appropriate additional General Fund funding above current recommended budget appropriations to
be able to properly staff and manage this growing jail population.
Another potential exposure to the General Fund is a potential reduction in ABX126 revenues in FY2013/14. Despite the
redevelopment agencies dissolving in February 2012, there are currently 81 lawsuits pending on the Redevelopment Dissolution
Process statewide, and there are a number of legislative bills that seek to expand and redefine the financial obligations for the
successor agencies (former redevelopment agencies) and that if adopted, may potentially reduce the dollar amount of ABX126
residual taxes that the County and other taxing entities currently receive. Also of note there are a few successor agencies
(cities) in Solano County that are still in the active appeal process with the Department of Finance over properties and
obligations (not currently allowed) and as a result may negatively impact projected ABX126 revenues as well.
In summary, with all of these fiscal uncertainties, the County Administrator recommends a Contingency appropriation of
$19,000,000 for FY2013/14.
The District’s property tax revenues have not yet stabilized and remain at risk of further declines during the economic recovery.
There are two major federal deliberations which may affect the future status of, and activities of the WIB agency, as discussed
below. Within these two are mixed signals of Congressional support for the WIA program’s legislative reauthorization and
annual appropriations.
• The Congress and President continue debating efforts to balance the annual federal budget and reduce the federal debt
levels. The “annual deficit spending” debates also have an impact. However, there is expressed bipartisan support for the
“public workforce system” and a block grant effort to local communities, with a business-led board. Proposals for complete
elimination of the federal WIA program funding are not being suggested as in FY2010/11, and proposals for “steady state”
or perhaps up to a 10-12% reduction are being discussed. This lays open a lot of uncertainty and a wide range of possible
options for the future; and
• Congressional authorizing committees are taking up WIA Reauthorization legislation, which would provide a continued
longer-term revenue stream for the program. This effort has been undertaken a number of times across the last eight years, only to be stalled. However, there is initial optimism that WIA Reauthorization will be passed in the next
Congressional session.
• A number of new initiatives are coming forth at the State level. These pose a greater current or potential impact on the
WIB’s operation. These include the following.
 Congress has removed the bulk of the Governor’s discretionary WIA funds, which the WIB routinely was able to access
with successful competitive grant applications. This has long-term implications for the WIB. Without this funding
source, such dedicated programs for veterans, ex-offenders, and certain targeted industries will likely have to cease.
 State legislative actions and/or staff-led initiatives are gradually impeding upon local decision-making (as
envisioned/afforded in the WIA legislation itself) and moving the public workforce system toward a more “one size fits
all” model for administration and service delivery. Some of these initiatives present unfunded mandates upon local
governments and WIBs.
 The challenge of day-to-day operation of the One-Stop Centers is compounded by continued reductions in State
funding for virtually every local agency that serves as a One-Stop Center partner. This includes annual reductions in
staffing provided by the State Employment Development Department (EDD). Either more of the responsibility falls upon
the WIB to support One-Stop Center services, or major reductions in the range and/or availability of services may have
to be implemented in the near future.
The Solano County Fair Association continues to face major challenges in 2013. Increasing revenue in a continuing slow
economic time, particularly with respect to discretionary spending, continues to be a significant challenge. Maintaining the
current level of activities while creatively attracting new events, activities and revenue, represents an even greater challenge as
the SCFA goes forward with limited staff and resources. Particularly in light of the loss of State funding and replacement
revenue for live horse racing in 2012, SCFA continues to be mindful of the need to discover new revenue streams and increase
revenues from existing sources.
Maintaining and improving existing aging facilities with limited resources continues to challenge most fairgrounds in the United
States, including the Solano County Fairgrounds. SCFA must continue to maximize its limited resources for needed deferred
maintenance and capital improvements, while aggressively and creatively seeking and seizing new revenue opportunities.
Solano360, the redevelopment plan of the fairgrounds property and the “Fair of the Future,” continues to move forward with the
entitlement phase of the project. On February 26, 2013, the Board of Supervisors certified the Final Environmental Impact
Report for the Project and approved the Solano360 Specific Plan and recommended that application be sent to the City of
Vallejo for the Development Agreement and Tentative Map. On April 29, 2013, the Vallejo City Planning Commission approved
the Tentative Map for the Project and recommended approval of the specific Plan, Development Agreement, Vallejo General
Plan Amendments and Zoning Amendments to the Vallejo City council. The Vallejo City Council is scheduled to discuss the
Project on May 14, 2013.
The Solano County Fair has been active partner in the development of the redevelopment strategies, and enthusiastically
supports the project. In the short term, the Solano County Fair is challenged with developing new revenue streams that will not
conflict with this long-term strategy.
The SCFA 2013 budget anticipates a year-end Unrestricted Reserve of $514,696, which is $172,405 or 25% less than budgeted
at year-end 2012. The SCFA 2013 budget anticipates a year-end Restricted Reserve of $197,573, which is $165,197 or 510%
more than budgeted at year-end 2012. The 2013 Budget anticipates year-end total combined reserves equal to $712,269. The
SCFA understands that ongoing operational costs cannot rely on the use of reserves and will continue to expand its year-round
revenue streams.
