 Partner with the City of Santa Rosa to complete the annexation of Roseland and other southwest Santa Rosa unincorporated area islands.
 In Progress: County Administrator’s Office staff and the County’s Southwest Santa Rosa Annexation Ad Hoc Committee, working with several other County departments, are in the process of negotiating a pre-annexation agreement to address the sharing of additional costs associated with the provision of services and infrastructure projects that will be incurred before and after annexation. Negotiations are on track to produce a pre-annexation agreement and to enable the County to support the City of Santa Rosa with the annexation process in FY 2016-2017.
 Implement the Community and Local Law Enforcement Task Force recommendations including a civilian oversight program.
 Completed: The Independent Office of Law Enforcement Review and Outreach (IOLERO) was created in August 2015 and the new director began work in April 2016, completing the implantation of a civilian review program.
 In Progress: County Administrator’s Office staff presented the final report to Board and received direction on remaining Task Force recommendations to be implemented including: completion of Andy’s Unity Park (Regional Parks Department); implement a mural project integrated into the Roseland Community Development project (Community Development Commission); issue Request for Proposal (RFP) to provide one-time seed funding to support the expansion of the Student Congress program (County Administrator’s Office); issue RFP to provide one-time seed funding to support the establishment of a Restorative Practices Collaborative (County Administrator’s Office); and issue RFP for on-going support of expanded restorative practices program in schools (County Administrator’s Office).
 Lead the County’s ability to increase staffing capacity by ensuring maximum utilization of the new Hyperion budget tool functionalities, which is expected to provide increased financial transparency and robust multi-year fiscal planning opportunities.
 In Progress: Hyperion was launched in FY 2015-2016. The focus of the first year was on staff training and end user acceptance of the system, as well as implementing refinements to maximize the efficiency of the system. In FY 2016-2017, the County Administrator’s Office will launch additional elements of the system, including the multi-year forecasting tool, and will optimize reporting options.
 Coordinate the Healthcare Task Force initiative, which aims to reduce healthcare plan costs by working with stakeholders to identify cost savings opportunities.
 Completed: In collaboration with the Human Resources Department, established the Healthcare Round Table with private and public sector employers, healthcare providers and labor organizations; and established the Public Sector Healthcare Task Force with public employers and labor organizations. Completed the Healthcare Task Force Report and presented the Report to the Board of Supervisors on April 26, 2016. A subcommittee of the Task Force is in the process of completing an in-depth due diligence of report recommendations as part of Phase II.
 Continue to develop the community engagement framework enhancing the County’s ability to be more connected and partner with its citizenry to address key issues.
 In Progress: Staff has provided a detailed work plan for a comprehensive and coordinated county-wide community engagement effort. The FY 2016-2017 budget adds a Public Information Officer who will assist with the engagement effort.
 Facilitate the disposition of the Chanate property to ensure the asset provides value added services to the community.
 In Progress: A Request for Proposals was released to solicit developers. Staff is currently evaluating the proposals with the goal of bringing to the Ad Hoc Committee and Board of Supervisors an Exclusive Negotiating Agreement with the successful proposer by late summer or early fall 2016.
 Coordinate efforts toward achieving the 2015 Board-established priorities, including addressing the impacts of marijuana, increasing affordable housing, supporting the expansion of early learning opportunities, completing the development of a sustainability initiative, and continuing to ensure the long-term fiscal health of the County.
 Completed/ In Progress:
 Safe, Healthy & Caring Community
 Affordable Housing: The Board appropriated gap funding for the Palms Inn project, enabling lease agreements serving 104 Single Room Occupancy units, including 60 veterans; received staff’s Building HOMES Housing Plan, outlining a ten-year strategy to create 2,200 homeless-dedicated housing units; approved developers for the Broadway Project and Roseland Village; funded the “Code Blue” cold weather sheltering program; expanded the Homeless Outreach Services Team; and approved the use of County facilities for the Tiny Home pilot project.
 Universal Preschool: The Board secured an additional 312 preschool spots by making an immediate Preschool Needs Investment of $665,000 which leveraged nearly $2.4 million in funding; staff completed a funding analysis and an Options for School Readiness Report; the County received a technical assistance grant from the Institute for Child Success for exploration of a Pay for Success model; and the County has a contract underway to conduct a community assessment and Education and Engagement plan
 Marijuana: Sonoma County is a member of the North Coast Counties Collaborative and participated in two Marijuana Summits designed to coordinate legislative advocacy and local policy development and implementation. The County has participated in the State Legislative process and worked to influence recent medical cannabis regulation. The Board has formed an Ad Hoc Committee comprised of Supervisors Carrillo and Gorin and directed staff to pursue a comprehensive permitting and regulatory framework. The Ad Hoc and staff are working with stakeholders to develop regulatory and revenue options for Board consideration by December 2015.
 Invest in the Future
 Fiscal Responsibility: The Board continued applying non-recurring discretionary resources to building County General Fund reserves, reaching $49 million, or 11.4% of FY 2015-2016 General Fund budgeted revenues; and the Board reduced County debt through its approval of an extra $3.5 million payment toward unfunded pension liabilities.
 Facilities Planning: The Board’s Ad-Hoc Facilities Committee worked with staff to develop a surplus procedure for the Chanate Campus, pursuant to which a community outreach meeting was convened and a project website established; the Criminal Justice Master Plan was updated in December 2015, and the County received a $40 million State grant for construction of an Adult Detention Mental Health Facility; and the Charles M. Schulz Sonoma County Airport completed Transportation and Public Works’ biggest project, adding nearly 900 feet of runway, expanding the rental car area and rehabilitating the airline parking apron.
 Health Care Task Force: The County examined the causes of rising local health care costs, and explored possible solutions, during Public / Private Employers Round Tables held in July and August, followed by Public Sector Task Force meetings in September, October, November and December; followed by County solicitation of bids for employee health care plans to be offered beginning in June 2016.
 Economic and Environmental Stewardship
 Sustainability Initiative: The County has received an $8 million award under the USDA Regional Conservation Partnership Program to address the following resource concerns: water sufficiency, water quality degradation, soil quality degradation and fish and wildlife habitat adequacy; the Board appropriated $220,000 for Resource Conservation Districts to pursue state and federal grant dollars and provide land smart technical assistance to over 100 landowners; the Department of Agriculture created a new Land Stewardship Division to promote agricultural practices that protect waterways and the environment; and a County work group including the Water Agency; the Permit and Resource Management Department, County Counsel and the County Administrator’s Office has initiated stakeholder assessments and research, launching a new website: http://sonomacountygroundwater.org
 Civic Services & Engagement
 CALLE: In May 2015, the Community and Local Law Enforcement Task Force (CALLE) recommendations were delivered to the Board; in June, the Board designated $2.6 million for CALLE-related projects; in August, the Board established the Independent Office of Law Enforcement Review and Outreach (IOLERO), and after an extensive recruitment process, the new Director was hired and the Office launched in April 2016. The new IOLERO Director is developing a work-plan for the Office for the Board’s consideration – anticipated by the end of FY 2015-2016. Additional funding was provided to substantially complete the development of Andy’s Unity Park by December 2016. The Board also provided direction to staff on all remaining recommendations: funded three (3) positions in the Sheriff’s Office to support the efforts of the IOLERO and the recommended community engagement efforts; provided funding for the purchase of a use-of-force training simulator for the Sheriff’s Office; funded restorative justice, student congress; the mural program and efforts to support the spirit of the social action music center recommendation.
 Youth Engagement: Staff compiled an inventory of youth-related activities underway across County departments; began development of a youth engagement portal consolidating and showcasing existing County youth-related programs; and drafted preliminary recommendations for sustaining and expanding a youth engagement program that would be housed within the Human Resources Department. Staff expects to finalize and bring those recommendations to the board in FY 2016-2017.
 Fire Services Review: An Ad Hoc Fire Services Committee, comprised of Supervisors Carrillo and Gore, was created in April 2015; further community meetings were held, and the Advisory Committee developed draft recommendations for Board consideration; the Board approved Fire Services recommendations in December 2015.
 Southwest Santa Rosa Annexation: The Annexation Ad Hoc Committee, comprised of Supervisors Carrillo and Zane, are working with councilmembers of the City of Santa Rosa to achieve the annexation of five unincorporated islands in Southwest Santa Rosa. Staff and the Ad Hoc are working with the City to negotiate a pre-annexation agreement to share the anticipated costs of consolidating the jurisdictions and providing services and infrastructure improvements going forward.
 Work with the County, Water Agency, and interested stakeholders to develop a governance model for new state groundwater management regulations, which were enacted to ensure groundwater is managed locally in order to preserve limited groundwater resources.
 In Progress: The Department continues providing legal support to County and Agency staff and the Board Ad Hoc Committee to develop a governance model for the three groundwater basins identified by the State pursuant to the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act.
 Provide legal assistance to develop a regulatory system to address the safety, health, environmental, and economic impacts of medical cannabis and the potential legalization of recreational cannabis in 2016.
 In Progress: In FY 2015-2016, the Department researched and drafted an urgency ordinance to retain local control of cannabis regulations and a Resolution of Intention, the latter of which was passed on February 2, 2016, directing staff to develop a comprehensive regulatory framework for the commercial cannabis industry. The Department will continue to provide legal counsel to the Board’s Medical Cannabis Ad Hoc Committee and the Marijuana Technical Advisory Committee, participate in the six-county North Coast Counties Collaboration, and draft a regulatory framework which is scheduled for Board consideration by December 2016.
 Assist with Labor negotiations in order to complete new Memorandum of Understandings (MOU) by the end of FY 2015-2016.
 In Progress: With the majority of new labor contracts negotiated and adopted, it is anticipated that all new agreements will be completed in 2016.
 Work with Permit and Resource Management Department (PRMD) to prepare a draft of a resolution and ordinance for the Code Enforcement Enhancement Program, which will provide additional resources and tools to tackle the environmental, health, and safety impacts associated with properties that are not in compliance with building codes.
 Completed: The Department successfully executed and assisted with implementation of elements of the Code Enforcement Enhancement Program (CEEP) adopted in May 2015, including partnering with PRMD for the use of delegated settlement authority to resolve cases and the identification of priority properties for County-initiated cleanup.
 Work with PRMD to prepare a draft of proposed amendments to the Vacation Rental Ordinance, which is intended to address the impacts associated with unregulated vacation rentals.
 Completed: The Department worked with PRMD to draft Vacation Rental Ordinance amendments that were adopted by the Board in March 2016 to incentivize best management practices and enhance enforcement.
 Provide legal support to Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) and County to address legal and governance issues related to fire and other special districts in order to efficiently and effectively meet public safety interests throughout our community.
 In Progress: In FY 2015-2016, the Department provided legal counsel to LAFCO and the County in the formation of the new North Sonoma Coast Fire Protection District and provided legal counsel to the County regarding the County Fire Study and Board of Supervisors Fire Services Project. The Department will continue to provide legal services with regard to the Fire Services Project and addressing associated legal and governance issues.
 Continue legal support to Caltrans and Sonoma County Transit Authority (SCTA) for the Highway 101 improvement project right of way acquisitions to improve public safety and provide for congestion relief.
 Completed: The Department worked with Caltrans and SCTA to successfully acquire all required right of ways for the Highway 101 improvement project.
 Work with the Board of Supervisors Southwest Santa Rosa Annexation Ad Hoc Committee, County Administrator’s Office, Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector, and City of Santa Rosa to finalize an agreement facilitating the City’s annexation of five unincorporated islands in Southwest Santa Rosa.
 Enhance the Office’s Litigation program and coordinate with Human Resources’ Risk Management Division to retain more litigation defense work in-house to increase efficiency and improve results.
 Complete a 3-year department strategic plan that guides department priorities and identifies performance metrics.
 Completed: Established mission, vision, and values; developed additional performance metrics; identified key department priorities.
 Complete Phase One of workforce development programs (implementation of workforce development program and curriculum) and begin Phase Two (development of succession planning program and tools), to establish and implement programs that develop and retain an outstanding workforce.
 In Progress: Phase One is complete. Phase Two is in progress and will launch in 2016.
 Complete the majority of labor negotiations in the first year of the 2-year budget cycle with the objective of balancing fiscal responsibility to ensure continuity of services with a competitive work environment that will attract and retain a high quality workforce.
 In Progress: Five of eleven employee organization agreements have been successfully negotiated and approved. Negotiations are anticipated to be completed by mid-2016.
 Continue the Human Resources Optimization Project and the Internal Services Management Review by evaluating outcomes and findings, developing appropriate action plans, and initiating implementation to determine how to best optimize resources to enhance services to our internal customers and the public.
 In Progress: Organizational review is in process; website redesign is in process; a position was added in the FY 2015-2016 adopted budget to improve classification services; launched Ask HR to improve training and communications with departments. Continue County-wide policy/guideline review and development, including the following: Code of Conduct Policy, Extra-Help Guidelines, and Performance Management Guidelines to provide leadership and guidance to departments and ensure consistent policies and application throughout the County. Developed performance management training, pre-employment screening policy and guidelines. Additional policies and guidelines in progress.
 Upgrade, in collaboration with the Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector, the Human Resources Management System (HRMS) and continue development and roll-out of HRMS modules and features.
 In Progress: Successfully completed system upgrade; improved employee benefits module; enhanced features for employee qualification tracking in workforce development module.
 Convert Department internet site to the new County standard Content Management System to improve user navigation and content for internal customers and the public.
 In Progress: Several Department divisions/services have been launched with balance of Department sections going live 2016.
 In collaboration with the County Administrator’s Office, staff the Countywide Healthcare Taskforce that engages local leaders, private and public employers, labor organizations, and local healthcare providers to explore opportunities that could lead to change and more affordability in our local healthcare options.
 Completed: In collaboration with the County Administrator’s Office, established Healthcare Round Table with private and public sector employers, healthcare providers, and labor organizations. Established Public Sector Health Care Task Force with public employers and labor organizations. Completed Task Force Report and presented Report to Board of Supervisors in April 2016. Phase Two-subcommittee of Task Force completing in-depth due diligence of report recommendations is in progress.
 In collaboration with the Joint Labor Management Committee, evaluate the current Healthy Habits/Employee Wellness Program and other current wellness related activities and develop program enhancements.
Implement recommendations related to the Chanate Complex including develop potential options for use, cost, and funding plans.
 In Progress: A Request for Proposals was issued to developers for the redevelopment of the property to include mixed use housing, related neighborhood commercial, and open space. Responses are due in May 2016. During FY 2016-2017, County staff expects to review the responses, interview prospective developers, enter into a Board approved Exclusive Negotiating Agreement with the selected developer, and begin the Master Plan process.
 Support and prioritize an increase in facility maintenance work to retain value and preserve assets, and to ensure that the County’s older buildings are operated in a safe, compliant, and sustainable manner.
 In Progress.
 Continue barrier removal projects identified in the updated American with Disabilities Act (ADA) Transition Plan for County Facilities to improve public access.
 In Progress: Staff continues with existing projects and in conjunction with Human Resources and County Counsel is updating the County ADA Transition Plan.
 Continue a lead role in engaging departments to better focus on procurement planning for services and commodities to align the County’s strategic procurement position resulting in business practices that are accessible, transparent, fiscally responsible, and accountable to the public.
 In Progress: Purchasing continues successful engagement with County departments resulting in wider range vendor solicitation opportunities.
 Complete California Energy Commission and Metropolitan Transportation Commission grant funded electric vehicle charging stations to upgrade technology and accessibility and expand the Sonoma County Electric Trail to support economic and environmental stewardship by reducing carbon emissions.
 In Progress: Staff is working to implement the North County Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Agreement Phase 2, which was approved by the Board in March 2016. The Department is implementing an Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging connection charge, including enrolling in Department of Energy (DOE) Workplace Charging program and expanding the EV Charging network to leased and owned facilities.
 In collaboration with other departments, develop an internal operations Climate Action 2020 plan proposal for consideration by the Board of Supervisors.
 In Progress: The Department is collaborating with the Regional Climate Protection Authority on the community Climate Action 2020 plan.
 Complete Internal Services Review process and prepare recommendations for Board of Supervisors consideration.
 Redevelop the Integrated Justice System to incorporate bi-directional data and document sharing between new Court case system and County justice systems to retain efficiencies ensuring data is available in a timely manner and to mitigate risks.
 In Progress: Completed installation of data exchange infrastructure. In order to meet the Court’s targeted “go live” date in FY 2016-2017, the data exchange development will continue and bi-directional data transfers will be tested and validated. Business processes will be reviewed for impact mitigation to support County priorities.
 Improve management of information to allow County departments and the public to better access and analyze data with expansion of Geographic Information System (GIS) analytics, web content services and electronic file storage and retrieval to decrease public records response times.
 In Progress: Realigned GIS, Web, Records and electronic document management functions into a single division. Working to expand the County’s repository of electronic records and improve Public Records Act request response times through implementation of a new Document Imaging Pilot Program.
 Implement a mobile technology program that will provide secure access to County data and applications while reducing risks to the organization benefitting access to both employees and the public.
 Completed: Installed secure Wi-Fi infrastructure for main campus and some remote locations improving safe access. Will continue implementing additional security and authentication methods to improve data protection.
 Enhance the County’s new Enterprise Financial System functionality to streamline business processes by leveraging additional benefits of the newly deployed system to gain efficiencies for County departments.
 Completed: Added project costing, accounts receivable, billing, contracts, and reporting. Functionality enhancements will continue throughout FY 2016-2017.
 Implement updated technology features providing more real-time data to the Sonoma County Public Safety Consortium, including: officer ability to complete crime reports in the field; data gathering and sharing via California‘s Smart Justice System to access statewide information; and Cal Fire 911 integration.
 Completed: Implemented all features for field use by Sonoma County Public Safety Consortium members.
 Expand tools and resources for increased awareness and engagement in government services through web sites, mobile applications, social media, online data sets, and related technologies, to allow more access of public information.
 In Progress: Launched “SoCo Report It”, an online service request tool, and “SoCo Data”, an online open data portal providing information on an expanding collection of County-specific datasets. Completion of the following projects is anticipated during FY 2016-2017: publishing an online list of enterprise systems to comply with Senate Bill 272 requirements, and implementation of “SoCo Budget”, an online open budget portal. Work is underway to implement such new civic engagement resources as: streaming and archival media, virtual town hall, closed captioning, agenda management, board/commission management, and constituent management.
 Expand self-service functionality to County departments of current tools for IT service management to improve service delivery, monitoring and reporting.
 In Progress: Implementing a self-service portal for customers to submit and check the status of service requests online. As of the date of this report, work is underway and scheduled for completion in FY 2016-2017.
 Upgrade core enterprise financial and human resource timekeeping systems to current release levels, which will help protect the County’s technology investments and assure performance and supportability.
 Shift to a “mobile-first” strategy for organizing and displaying the County’s website and applications content. Optimizing the experience for mobile device users will help ensure all members of the public continue to have reliable and easy access to the County’s information and services.
 Complete phase 2 of the Enterprise Financial System implementation, including Hyperion budgeting, grants accounting, contract management, accounts receivable, billing, and project costing.
 Completed. EFS Phase 2 went live July 2015. All modules, including the budget module- Hyperion, are now live.
 Increased efficiency and stability in the Human Resources Management System by upgrading to version 4.5 and moving it onto Microsoft supported servers to maintain warranty and ensure ongoing vendor support.
 Completed. HRMS upgrade to version 4.5 was completed and went live October 2015.
 Continue to collaborate with the Permit and Resource Management Department to increase revenues from the Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)/Vacation Rental by Owner programs by pursuing statewide legislation impacting the third-party vacation rental marketplace and by revising the TOT ordinance to require a unique registration certificate for each applicable property in the unincorporated County.
 In Progress. During FY 2015-2016, completed issuance of a unique certificate number for each property that is managed by a property manager. Approximately 700 certificates were issued, which will improve tracking of TOT revenue. TOT Administration has been working with California State Association of Counties to influence SB 1102, which addresses the collection of TOT by online operators and the ability to conduct audits on those operators. PRMD and TOT Administration have been working together to identify areas of overlap relating to administration of the two vacation ordinances. This work identified the need for a shared customer facing resource between the two departments, which the Board approved May 2016.
 Identify, control and reduce risk throughout the County by beginning a three-year audit program based upon the results of a County-wide risk assessment.
 In Progress. The Audit Committee approved a 2 year risk based audit plan, beginning in FY 2015-2016. An audit of Payroll operations was completed during FY 2015-2016; the Revenue audit is in progress and expected to be completed in FY 2016-2017. Audits of the General Accounting, Budget and Cash Management functions are also expected to be completed during FY 2016-2017.
 Inclusion of California Home Energy Renovation Opportunity (HERO) and California FIRST Property Assessed Clean Energy programs as new clean energy assessment options for Sonoma County property owners for the FY 2015-2016 tax roll.
 Completed. Sonoma County began offering the HERO and California FIRST financing options to citizens who are interested in financing energy efficiency improvements to their homes in the beginning of June 2015.
 Contribute to the County’s public accountability and fiscal transparency by obtaining the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) awards for the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR), the Popular Annual Financial Report (PAFR) and the County’s Adopted Budget.
 Completed. The County was recognized by GFOA for excellence in financial reporting for both the CAFR and the PAFR for the fiscal year reports ending June 30, 2014. The County also received the GFOA’s Distinguished Budget Presentation Award for the period ending June 30, 2014.
 Support department fiscal operations County-wide by educating and training staff on required accounting standards and best practices.
 Completed. Numerous staff attended the GFOA Governmental Accounting Academy in Chicago in March of 2016. Staff throughout the department attend continuing education throughout the year. Staff with a CPA license are completing their required continuing educational requirements in order to renew their licenses. Additionally, staff participate in conferences hosted by the State Association of County Auditors, the California Association of Treasurer-Tax Collectors and the National Association of Counties, along with participation in numerous working groups such as the Accounting and Reporting Managers and Property Tax Managers.
 Upgrade the Treasury cashiering software system to a web hosted platform to provide system stability and increased vendor support.
 Complete an upgrade of the Enterprise Financial System. This objective is required in order to continue system support by Oracle. This system provides a public benefit by ensuring the County can continue to pay vendors, deposit monies received and produce the County’s Annual Financial Report.
 Complete an upgrade of the Kronos Timekeeping System. This objective is required in order to continue system support by Kronos, the TimeSaver vendor. This time entry system is used by all County employees and provides a public benefit by ensuring that time is captured accurately and all provisions of the MOU’s are applied correctly.
 Provide training and mentoring opportunities to staff to prepare the next generation of managers and leaders. This objective addresses succession planning and helps to ensure that staff are adequately trained within the organization in order to continue to meet all of the required mandates of the office and tax collection services to the public.
 Implement all facets of e-recording and document management to expedite processing, improve accuracy, and speed up retrieval of official records.
 In Progress: The Recorder began e-recording on March 21, 2016 and will continue increasing the volume of e-recorded documents throughout FY 2016-2017.
 Implement e-filing solutions for fictitious business names and vital statistics applications to increase efficiency and streamline data retrieval.
 Completed: In place, late summer 2015.
 Develop a succession plan for positions being vacated; assess current work assignments; and, reassign where appropriate, reducing costs and ensuring consistent customer service and better public access.
 In Progress: Some positions and tasks have been examined to assess workflow and appropriate use of staff; however, more positions need to be evaluated.
 Execute a smooth transition to VoteCal, the new statewide voter registration system, which was scheduled to roll out during 2015-2016 to comply with new state election regulations.
 Completed: VoteCal went live on February 16, 2016.
 Develop options and identify funding to replace the current voting and ballot counting systems to conduct more efficient and successful elections.
 In Progress: Funding is partially secured, election legislation is pending, and potential voting systems await state certification.
 Increase Clerk & Recorder resource efficiencies and streamline services provided to the public by completing a classification study and co-locating the divisions.
 Monitor ongoing death penalty case for potential impacts on the Alternate Public Defender Services budget.
 Completed: Due to the District Attorney’s decision to not pursue the death penalty in the Forestville case, there were no additional financial impacts to the County. Staff will continue monitoring future death penalty cases for potential impacts to these services.
 Work with County Counsel to ensure continuity of Alternate Public Defender Services beyond the expiration of current contract on June 30, 2016.
 In progress: Staff has been working with the Contactor to develop a successor agreement, which will be brought to the Board for consideration in May 2016.
 Enhance and refine the Department’s efforts to reduce recidivism among juvenile and adult offenders.
 Develop expertise of sworn staff in delivering evidence based practices.
 In Progress: Several staff trainings and updates have occurred across the Department, and the Department is exploring options to increase mental health services for both adult and juvenile offenders, especially clinical services for youth in detention at the Juvenile Hall and Boy’s Camp.
 Improve data collection and outcome measurements to evaluate effectiveness of supervision and program services, to ensure the right programs are being offered to the right offenders.
 In Progress: The Department has assessed and identified the resources required to enhance capacity to collect data and capture outcomes, and is exploring options to increase capacity for analysis, program development, and evaluation to measure effectiveness of supervision, intervention programs, and correctional practices.
 Develop sanctions and incentives matrices for adult and juvenile offenders.
 In Progress: Conversations with key justice system stakeholders have ensued and preliminary work on “draft” matrices has commenced.
 Improving re-entry component of the Boys Camp and Juvenile Hall, including development of pro- social, supportive connections with community members.
 In Progress: Partnerships with community based organizations and local agencies continue to assist with connecting youth to stable housing, education, and employment resources.
Probation staff is partnering with the Department of Health Services to increase mental health services for both adult and juvenile offenders, especially clinical services for youth in detention at the Juvenile Hall and Boy’s Camp.
 Maintain and enhance comprehensive staff development programs supporting the acquisition and application of officer safety and case management skills.
 In Progress: The Department continues to invest heavily in these critical areas, including “training for trainers” to enhance internal capacity. Also, as the Department continues to develop long-term succession plans, staff had identified a lack of qualified applicants as a significant challenge. As a result, the Department has begun to expand the student intern program in order to develop a cadre of suitable candidates adequately prepared to fill critical positions.
 Adjust Juvenile Hall staff schedule to provide a more efficient service delivery model and enhance programming for youth in detention.
 Complete: The new schedule allows programming time for case management and re-entry planning for youth returning to the community.
 Invest in infrastructure, including facility equipment in the Juvenile Hall and Camp, trailers in Supervised Adult Crews, and emerging technologies to improve officer and community safety, and enhance supervision effectiveness.
 In Progress: Electronic security systems were replaced at the Hall and Camp, mobile computing devices were purchased for selected field officers (pilot project), and a new trailer was purchased for Supervised Adult Crews. The Department plans to enhance productivity and increase Probation Officer safety by equipping a majority of Probation vehicles with mobile computing devices, and invest in stable connectivity infrastructure.
 Revise the County's Comprehensive Multi-Agency Juvenile Justice Plan and fully implement the Title IV-E Waiver (California Well-Being Project) to improve outcomes for delinquent youth and their families.
 Complete: An update to the County’s comprehensive plan has been developed, and many key recommendations are being implemented. The Well-Being project has launched and services have been expanded to target populations.
 Continue to investigate and prosecute those who prey on elders, handling cases of sexual and physical abuse, the infliction of mental abuse, and neglect, as well as all financial crimes, including fraud, identity theft, and forgery. Outreach efforts will continue to educate seniors about scams and how to avoid them, and to raise awareness on services.
 In Progress: We continue to meet these objectives through prosecution, investigation, community outreach and education.
 Expand collaboration with criminal justice and community partners to serve victims of family violence, sexual assault, elder abuse and child abuse as the lead administrative agent of the Family Justice Center.
 In Progress: We continue to work with our community partners and actively in search of collaborative grants to meet this objective.
 Develop a strategic plan to focus prosecution in the areas of greatest need, including elder protection, domestic violence, major fraud, and the development of a real estate fraud unit.
 In Progress: We continue to meet these objectives through prosecution, investigation, community outreach and education.
 The District Attorney will continue to collaborate with justice partners on proven intervention and prevention programs, such as the Mayor’s Gang Task force; the Gang Resistance, Education and Training Program; Gun Information for Teens; and truancy programs for juveniles and their parents.
 In Progress: Our Safe Neighborhood Deputy District Attorney continues to collaborate with our justice partners to meet this objective.
 Continue to improve client and inter-departmental communications using holistic client-based theories and technology including implementation of an updated website that provides links to community services, public information, and department contacts.
 In progress: In partnership with Information Systems Department, the Department is in the process of updating our website to enhance information available to the public. Information and web links will be provided to community services as well as the Department’s information and services.
 Improve representation of non-citizen clients by providing immigration law training and resources.
 Completed: With the addition of a new Immigration Specialist, the office has developed a training and attorney consultation program to improve the representation of our non-citizen clients.
 Encourage and train staff in the use of the new Legal Case Management system to increase the efficient use of data in court, reduce paper, and improve department procedures.
 In progress: Staff continues to learn the new Legal Case Management System and implement its functionality into the daily business processes.
 Build statistical data reports based upon the established benchmarks using the new legal Case Management System implemented in March 2015. These reports will be used to ensure that workloads are distributed in a manner that provides consistent representation for all clients.
 In progress: The Department is working closely with the vendor to create the reports required for long term workload statistics.
 Identify and implement systematic approaches to lessen the increased workload created by the approval of Proposition 47.
 In Progress: Procedures are in place that prioritize the representation of clients eligible for Proposition 47 reductions of prior felony convictions to misdemeanors. The implementation of Proposition 47 has increased the misdemeanor caseload, causing the Courts to open an additional misdemeanor courtroom.
 Analyze options to replace the Sheriff’s aging helicopter to ensure the Sheriff’s continued ability to provide the community with air support for law enforcement, search and rescue (SAR), fire suppression, and long line emergency rescue missions.
 Completed: Analysis will be shared with the County Administrator and Board for direction on next steps. The Sheriff’s Office anticipates additional work on the recommended option in the coming year.
 Improve efficiencies in the County’s adult detention facilities through the implementation of a Jail Management System (JMS). A new JMS system will allow for the retirement of the current obsolete UNIX system, support inmate scheduling and visiting, improve information sharing and record keeping, provide inventory control, and a multitude of other detention facility operational functions that can result in potential cost savings in the future.
 In Progress.
 Explore the provision of regional pathology services to prevent future case backlogs, increase accountability and improve response times on coroner cases. Regionalization may also produce financial savings for the agencies involved.
 Completed: Exploration determined that this option is not feasible as the level of interest and resources from neighboring counties cannot support the regional provision of these services at this time.
 Be responsive to the Community and Local Law Enforcement Task Force by evaluating and responding appropriately to Task Force recommendations.
 Completed: The Sheriff’s Office prepared two documents, Sheriff’s Office Response to Specific Task Force Recommendations and Sheriff’s Office Resource Need to Support Specific CALLE Task Force Recommendations. Both documents were presented to the Board at their public meeting on March 15, 2016.
 The Sheriff has requested additional staffing in order to address on-going hiring and retention needs, to analyze current patterns of retention, turnover, injury, illness and hiring rates, and to develop a strategy to implement the findings of the analysis.
In Progress.
 Implement the Portrait of Sonoma County’s Agenda for Action, which highlights the goals of providing universal preschool, preventing tobacco use and addressing inequality at education’s starting gate.
 In Progress: As recommended in the Agenda for Action, work continues to expand targeted home visiting for low-income families during pregnancy and the first 2 years of life to reduce disparities in healthy development and break the cycle of poverty. (Public Health)
 In Progress: Provide ongoing support to Health Action, Cradle-to-Career and First 5 Sonoma County in developing strategies to expand early care and education, focusing on sustainable financing planning; and assess and launch local pooled fund for sustainable financing for health prevention efforts. (Health Policy, Planning and Evaluation)
 Completed: Developed a Tobacco Retail License ordinance under the Sonoma County Code regulating the location, density and types of businesses that can sell tobacco products. (Health Policy, Planning and Evaluation)
 Implement the expansion of a County operated Medi-Cal Managed Care Plan for substance use disorder services, which will provide services to clients who previously did not qualify or previously experienced barriers to service access, poor treatment outcomes, or high cost of services.
 In Progress: The Behavioral Health Division will begin implementing its Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System expansion plan in FY 2016-2017.
 Expand targeted investments in low-income families during pregnancy and the first two years of life to build resiliency and reduce disparities in the healthy development of children through the Nurse Family Partnership and Strengthening Families Field Nursing Program, both part of the Upstream Investments Portfolio.
 In Progress: The Public Health home visiting programs added 2.2 FTE Public Health Nurse to help reduce service wait lists. Work will continue in expanding investments to help more low-income families break the cycle of poverty and support healthy early childhood development. (Public Health)
 Complete the implementation of a new and expanded Behavioral Health Crisis Stabilization Unit and identify long-term facilities solutions for out-patient behavioral health services, children’s medical therapy services, public health laboratory services, and animal shelter services.
 In Progress: The transition to new Medical Therapy Unit sites provided by the Sonoma County Office of Education are expected by fall 2016. Planning is underway with General Services for Animal Services facility improvements, including an expanded medical/surgical suite. Planning is underway with General Services for facility recommendations for the 5th Street Public Health building location and Public Health Lab. (Public Health)
 Completed: As part of a successful Mental Health Crisis Facility Grant application through the state’s Mental Health Wellness Act of 2013, Sonoma County Behavioral Health leased and renovated a facility located at 2225 Challenger Way (The Lakes campus), providing Access and CSU services. (Behavioral Health)
 Explore funding sources for prevention and health equity, including new financing strategies such as Wellness Trusts and Social Impact Bonds.
 In Progress: The Department continues tracking and supporting possible sources of expanded prevention funding, such as President Obama’s FY 2017 budget proposal to expand over 10 years (2017-2026) funding of the Maternal, Infant, Early Childhood Home Visiting Program to ensure that evidence-based home visiting services reach additional vulnerable children and families. (Public Health)
 Develop the Department’s 2017-2020 Strategic Plan.
 With ongoing guidance from the Board, continue implementing strategies outlined by the Portrait of Sonoma Agenda for Action, to address the health-related social needs that improve health outcomes and reduce costs.
 Complete implementation of the Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System for substance use disorder.
 Develop strategies to maintain a well-trained workforce to prepare the Department for public health accreditation.
 Enhance information technology and upgrades to improve Department operations, coordination, client care, and customer service.
 Develop performance management processes to collect, store, monitor, analyze, and report on performance data across the Department.
 Develop a comprehensive Opiate Use/Misuse prevention strategy, including coordination with the medical community on the development and adoption of opiate prescription standards and guidelines.
 Expand human services transportation services to all regions in Sonoma County. The Sonoma Access Coordinated Transportation Services (SACTS) Consortium in partnership with over 40 organizations countywide is coordinating expansion and development of up to 9 volunteer coordinator sites,. 7 volunteer driver programs, 7 travel voucher programs, and 10 travel trainings for seniors. This effort is funded through a combination of Federal Transportation Authority and local funds.
 In Progress: HSD was awarded an $89,572 Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) grant and a $388,975 Caltrans grant for senior transportation service needs.
 Launch Aging Together Sonoma County, a new initiative to connect Sonoma County residents across their lifespan with resources and support focused on healthy aging.
 Completed: The launch of the Aging Together initiative was completed. A series of community forums were held and the Department officially established the Age-Friendly Communities in Sonoma County.
 Complete Paulin Lobby remodel and intake business process redesign. Expand CalFresh Community Connections outreach to include place based services in collaboration with other divisions, departments, and community based partners.
 Completed: The Paulin lobby remodel was completed in July 2015.
 In Progress: The Economic Assistance Program conducted CalFresh Connections outreach at 18 sites and participated in 25 outreach events. In addition, the Department has contracts with several community-based organizations, including the Redwood Community Health Coalition and the Redwood Empire Food Bank, to provide additional CalFresh outreach.
 As part of the Northern California Career Pathways Alliance, develop career pathways for youth that provide a pipeline to high-skill, high-wage, and high-growth employment.
 In Progress: In Partnership with the Northern California Career Pathways Alliance (NCCPA), the Sonoma County Workforce Investment Board (WIB) developed two roundtable forums for the purpose of aligning education with training and employment needs in an effort to help prepare youth with the skill sets needed for careers in the healthcare and manufacturing field. Two additional roundtable events are planned.
 Develop additional strategies and services for CalWORKs clients to assist in improving their economic situation, including housing, asset building, training, education, and work opportunities.
 In Progress: Sonoma County was awarded a second year of new funding for State Housing Support in the amount of $1,012,381, which provides housing assistance to CalWORKs families. To date, 80 CalWORKs families have secured permanent housing. The Employment and Training Division also launched an outreach program to clients who were sanctioned for not participating in activities designed to get them back to work, decreasing the number of clients being sanctioned.
 Increase the number of placements with relatives and extended family members in order to not only improve children’s experience in foster care but also increase the number of children that leave foster care to a permanent home.
 In Progress: Increased from 123 to 169 the number of children in foster care placed with relatives, representing an increase of 8%, with an overall placement percentage of 36.5%.
 Complete Strategic Planning Framework and begin implementation.
 In Progress: HSD has completed the readiness phase of its strategic planning process and has completed work with a consultant to identify priorities and strategies. The Department is now working with the American Public Human Services Association (APHSA) to frame the strategic planning process across a human services value curve.
 Expand the provision of HSD services into all regions of Sonoma County through place-based services in alignment with the Portrait of Sonoma County.
 In Progress: HSD has completed an analysis of community and geographic considerations and is working with General Services to identify potential service sites.
 Reduce wait times for eligibility determinations and responses to requests for services.
 In Progress: HSD has implemented changes in staffing models and business processes for Economic Assistance to increase efficiencies and reduce lobby wait times. CalWORKs wait times are currently within two business days of application. Due to budgetary constraints, HSD has not been able to add all of the positions that were originally planned to reduce wait times in other program areas.
 Connect residents to basic services such as housing and food.
 In Progress: The Family, Youth and Children’s Division implemented a new program for emergency housing for families through its Child Abuse Prevention Program. The Department is a partner in several County housing initiatives, including the Homeless Outreach Services Team, the Dream Center, and the Palms Inn. In addition, the Department supports the Earned Income Tax Credit program, which brings additional money into the hands of low-income Sonoma County families to better enable them to pay for housing and food.
 Begin implementation of the Continuum of Care Reform, required by the adoption of Assembly Bill 403, which is a comprehensive reform effort designed to improve California’s foster care system.
 Complete the Upstream Investments systems change evaluation and submit a three-year work plan for the Board of Supervisors’ consideration and approval.
 Complete state eligibility requirements for 2,500 IHSS caregivers, including investigating criminal histories and providing orientation.
 In Progress: To date, nearly 1,400 IHSS caregivers have completed the state eligibility requirements.
 Match 1,600 client requests for caregiver assistance with Registry caregivers.
 In Progress: To date, 700 IHSS clients have been matched with a Registry caregiver.
 Add 300 new caregivers to the Registry.
 In Progress: To date, 88 caregivers have been added to the Registry.
 Implement an automated 24/7 call-in system enabling IHSS clients and workers to request certain forms, confirm the status of applications, and receive automated updates on the status of paychecks and submitted time sheets.
 Ensure Sonoma County families in need of child support receive services by improving accessibility, expanding public information, and increasing outreach.
 In Progress: The Department continues to expand outreach efforts to employer fairs and expos, and increase the number of presentations to child care agencies, schools and colleges, women’s centers, and community religious and charitable organizations. Accessibility is being improved by offering services through the Family Law Courts and Human Services.
 Completed: The Department increased usages of digital technology to conduct interviews, which reduces travel for families.
 Strengthen collaborative partnerships by working with Sonoma County Upstream and Health Action Economic Wellness Committee, Human Services (Economic Assistance and Job Links), Sonoma County Courts, Probation Department, District Attorney’s Office, Sheriff’s Office, Public Defender, and Family Justice Center to provide comprehensive services to children and families.
 In Progress: Continue and strengthen these existing partnerships and other partnerships with the Child Care Planning Council, Head Start, and other child support agencies.
 Maximize use of the state-managed web-based case management system to improve outcomes, including a reduction in the timeframes for opening and enforcing child support orders, as well as increasing the amount of child support payments collected and distributed to families.
 In Progress: The Department is on track to exceed Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2014-2015 collections by 2.5%.
 Completed: The Department distributed $29 million in child support collections in FFY 2014-2015, an increase of 1.2% over previous year. The Department’s average days from monetary order to first payment is 9 days compared to statewide average of 22 days.
 Monitor and implement strategies to meet or exceed the Department’s previous accomplishments with the following state and federal performance measures: paternity establishment; support order establishment; percent of child support collected compared to the amount due; number of cases which a payment is made on past due amounts; and cost effectiveness standard of distributed child support collections per dollar of expenditure for Department expenses.
 In Progress: The Department is currently exceeding expectations as of the six-month review.
 Provide excellent customer service by implementing diversified methods for payments and a customer satisfaction tool to allow for feedback; and continue to work collaboratively with parents to increase stipulated child support orders.
 In Progress: The Department will develop and implement a Customer Service Initiative to improve all areas of service to the public and create a “gold standard” for service delivery and accountability, which will include the development of a customer satisfaction survey.
 Completed: The Department expanded payment options to include MoneyGram and PayNearMe; the Department maintains an average of 60% for stipulated child support orders, compared to the statewide average of 27.4%.
 Establish an organizational framework to address succession planning, professional development, and streamlined internal services.
 In Progress: The Department will invest in and support staff development and leadership training to prepare internal staff for promotional opportunities and provide job shadowing and cross-training opportunities. Staff is being included in the development of departmental strategies, including monitoring progress and identifying areas of improvement. The Department actively participates in county and statewide initiatives that support professional development.
 Develop a seismic safety retrofit ordinance to ensure existing structures to be retrofitted to meet seismic standards to reduce damage from seismic and geological hazards.
 In progress: The Department is on track to deliver a proposed Phase I draft ordinance by December 2016.
 Partner with the Sonoma County Water Agency and local water providers to determine governance options for groundwater management to sustain and protect important groundwater sources.
 In progress: The Department has been working with interested stakeholders on groundwater management governance and is on schedule to meet the July 2017 milestone for formation of the Groundwater Sustainability Agencies as mandated by the California Sustainable Groundwater Management Act.
 Develop policies for wineries and agricultural promotion events in order to balance benefits to tourism and economic development with neighborhood compatibility.
 In progress: The Department has been working closely with the community on developing policy options and standards for winery and agricultural promotional events and is scheduled to present issues to the Board of Supervisors with draft code amendments by March 2017.
 Complete updates to Vacation Rental Ordinance in order to support County tourism while ensuring neighborhood compatibility and protecting the general welfare of residents.
 Completed: After a robust community engagement process, the Department presented Vacation Rental Ordinance code amendments that were adopted by the Board of Supervisors in March 2016 to incentivize best management practices and enhance enforcement.
 In progress: The Department is in the process of implementing the new programs adopted in the ordinance with the implementation phase estimated to be completed during fall 2016.
 Develop regulations and policies for medical cannabis cultivation that are consistent with state regulations by balancing the needs of patients and communities to protect public safety, and avoid or mitigate environmental and nuisance impacts.
 In progress: The Department is in the process of working with stakeholders, researching regulations and policies, and working with the Board of Supervisors’ Medical Cannabis Ad Hoc Committee and is scheduled to present draft regulations to the Board of Supervisors by December 2016.
 Complete Code Enforcement program improvements to enhance regulation compliance processes and identify funding to clean up properties chronically in code violation.
 In progress: The Department has procured funding and the cleanup for the first set of major cases, Phase I, is scheduled to be completed by December 2016. Phase II includes identifying further funding for the remaining major cases and is on schedule to be completed by June 2017.
 Implement the Records Project including electronic document management and digitizing historical records to provide greater access for the public.
 In progress: The Department has completed two pilots to determine file breakdown costs and the scanning of microfiche and microfilm. Building off of these successful pilots, the Records Project will be presented for Board of Supervisors consideration in FY 2016-2017.
 Implement the Housing Plan to End Homelessness, and the 10-Year Homeless Action Plan.
 In Progress: The Community Development Commission has launched the Implementation Work Plan for Building HOMES: A Policy Maker’s Toolbox for Ending Homelessness (Toolbox) approved by the Board in January 2016. Over two dozen presentations of the Toolbox have occurred. The Commission is in the process of planning a Countywide Summit and a series of regional summits to launch the ongoing public communications effort. From the Summits, it is expected that ongoing working groups will be established to move forward the policy, land use, regulatory, and funding efforts required to create 2,200 new homeless-dedicated units. The following Continuum of Care initiatives have been launched: SSI/SSDI Access initiative; partnering with Health agencies for provision of intensive services; collaborative landlord outreach; and promulgating evidence based practices in homeless services.
 Promote new and existing housing and shelter options, day labor centers, and services supporting the continuum of care system, including the Homeless Outreach Services Team (HOST) Pilot Project.
 In Progress: An additional $700,000 in funding or in-kind contributions has been added to sustain the HOST project in Santa Rosa, and expand the project to South County, lower Russian River, and Sonoma Valley. In FY 2015-2016, CDC staff coordinated and played a central role in advocating for sustained state funding for shelters and RapidRe-Housing, and will administer state funds in the coming year. Code Blue winter shelter efforts provided 1,324 bed nights of expanded shelter to 536 people during extreme weather. The Commission has submitted a funding request to the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for 16 units of permanent supportive housing to be located on the site of the planned Guerneville Homeless Center and has issued a Request for Proposals for homeless-dedicated Project Based Voucher units.
 Increase the number of housing units that are affordable, accessible, and available to lower-income residents including special needs subpopulations identified in the Sonoma County Housing Element.
 In Progress: In FY 2015-2016, the Commission increased and maintained existing housing stock through its approval of $2,387,562 in loans to support development of 118 new affordable housing units and 13 units of new transitional housing, and $1,085,740 in loans and grants to assist rehabilitation of 101 existing affordable homes for lower-income residents. The selection criteria for awarding funds prioritizes special needs populations such as large families, farmworkers, persons with disabilities and seniors, particularly persons experiencing or at risk of becoming homeless.
 Utilize property acquired through redevelopment dissolution to provide affordable housing.
 In Progress: Two single family homes and a 34-unit apartment complex acquired through redevelopment dissolution are being used as affordable rental housing. Developers have been selected for the Roseland Neighborhood Village Project, which will include approximately 70 units of new affordable housing, and for the Broadway property in Sonoma, which will provide 53 new affordable rental units.
 Assist in prevention of homelessness and promote stable housing for nearly 3,000 low-income households by providing rental subsidies through the Housing Choice Voucher and similar programs.
 In Progress: The Commission provides housing assistance to the nearly 3,000 very low-income households throughout the County, except for Santa Rosa, through Housing Authority administered rental assistance programs. The Housing Authority will continue seeking new funding opportunities to expand its rental assistance efforts.
 Secure additional federal funding for rental housing assistance programs to assist chronically homeless individuals with disabilities.
 In Progress: The Housing Authority has continued to apply for additional Continuum of Care Special Programs funding to serve chronically homeless, disabled persons and households. Additionally, the Housing Authority has applied for HOME Tenant Based Rental Assistance funds to provide rental subsidies to homeless individuals and households.
 Place and manage all affordable housing funds available from the County Fund for Housing and federally-funded housing programs via competitive processes for affordable housing developers.
 In Progress: CDC manages two competitive application processes each year, resulting in the allocation of all available funds in the County Fund for Housing and the federally funded HOME and CDBG programs. In FY 2015-2016, the CDC provided six loans to affordable housing developers: two loans totaling $1,500,000 from the County Fund for Housing; three loans totaling $716,570 from the HOME funds, and one loan of $170,992 from the CDBG fund.
CDC will use a FY 2016-2017 allocation of $1 million from Advertising Program funds as seed money to leverage other public and private funds in creating a proposed Workforce Housing Development trust fund to operate countywide. Through participation of key partners, including local municipalities and the business community, these funds will provide a catalyst for the creation of the many new rental units needed to sustain a productive workforce and economic vitality in the County.
 Support the Board of Supervisors’ goal of creating a more effective, efficient, and sustainable fire service delivery system throughout Sonoma County through the completion of the Fire Service Project. Recommendations will be made in the fall of 2015, with implementation of changes in FY 2016-2017.
 In progress. Fire Service Project recommendations were approved by the Board of Supervisors on December 8, 2015. The recommendation to establish a Regional Model with 7 regional councils and a County-Wide Advisory Council is being implemented. Council members have been appointed and will provide input to the Board of Supervisors, including recommendations for collaborative efforts of fire agencies county-wide and recommendations for the distribution of funding provided by the County for fire services.
 Begin marketing and offering “SoCo Alert” (Sonoma County Alert) to the public for voluntary enrollment to receive emergency text warning and notification messages from the Operational Area Telephone Emergency Notification System.
 Completed. The Board of Supervisors approved a software services contract executed March 1, 2016. Implementation, testing and training occurred on the new SoCo Alert system. Marketing materials and videos were created, a public signup outreach plan developed and an initial event was conducted during the Bodega Bay Fisherman’s Fest. Deployment approaches completion at this writing and should be completed in FY 2016-2017. Ongoing marketing will continue encouraging enrollment.
 Develop the local Emergency Operations Center Logistics Plan in accordance with regional guidance and design, and conduct an Emergency Operations Center functional exercise in conjunction with Urban Shield Yellow Command 2015.
 Completed. Plan developed, exercise conducted, and improvement action plan implemented. Lessons learned and additional capabilities being incorporated into Urban Shield Yellow Command 2016 regional exercise.
 Work with the Hazardous Material Program regulated businesses to bring reporting compliance for the California Environmental Reporting System to 90% or better.
 Completed. 91.1% of businesses now meet State electronic reporting standards.
 Help residents better manage their fire risk by offering free curbside chipping and providing convenient public access to wildland fire hazard maps and educational mitigation materials on the County website.
 Completed. In 2015 20,500 cubic yards of material were chipped at 214 sites. Chipping Program is ongoing to support continued fire fuels reduction.
 Conduct an analysis of county emergency response and critical facilities identified as being in wildland fire zones to verify reliable water sources for fire suppression and develop a strategy to make improvements.
 In progress. The Fire Marshall will conduct this analysis during FY 2016-2017.
 Continue to strengthen the level of fire services provided in County Fire CSA #40 by implementing fire apparatus fuel and maintenance programs for Volunteer Fire Company (VFC) and County Fire owned apparatus; continuing fire apparatus replacement efforts; and launching the construction process for a new fire station in Lakeville as funding allows.
 In progress. Re-established Standard Operating Procedure and Resource sub-committees comprised of representatives from the VFC’s. These committees are working closely with the Fire Operations Division to develop and implement a vehicle inspection and maintenance program. The plan is to utilize the County Fleet Services Division, as well as a select group of authorized local vendors, for specialty work when needed.
 Implement Pilot Vegetation Management Program at Fitch Mountain and Camp Meeker to support Fire Fuels Reduction using the Abatement of Hazardous Vegetation and Combustible Materials Ordinance mechanism.
 Implement the Long Term Roads Plan financed with existing and potential new funding sources to address the needs of the entire County road network.
 In Progress: The Department continues exploring alternative mechanisms for funding Road system needs.  Deliver two-year pavement preservation program based on Road Evaluation Framework and approved by the Board of Supervisors in spring 2015.  In Progress: The two year program is expected to be delivered during summer 2016.  Work with the contracted Integrated Waste operator, who will construct the material recovery facility at the Central Transfer Station, to process construction and demolition materials to increase diversion of recyclable materials from landfill disposal and provide ongoing landfill capacity.  In Progress: The project is on schedule to be completed during spring 2017.  Plan and implement deferred maintenance projects on the closed landfill sites to correct for settlement and erosion issues.  In Progress: Work commenced in FY 2015-2016 and is expected to continue throughout FY 2016-2017.  Evaluate airport terminal remodel opportunities to improve the passenger experience. Continue efforts to attract additional commercial airlines and increase available destinations.  In Progress: New air service provider started service in May 2016; terminal design to begin during summer 2016.  Complete the Healdsburg Intermodal Facility project, readying the facility for future Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit (SMART) use.  Completed: June 2016.  Successfully introduce the regional Clipper Card on Sonoma County Transit. Update Sonoma County Transit schedules and services to coordinate with SMART upon its service commencement in 2016.  In Progress: Clipper Card active; Department continues working closely with SMART to ensure smooth passenger transition between services.  Implement enhanced change-out incentive program for woodstoves and fireplaces in the Northern Sonoma County Air Pollution Control District.  In Progress: The District began granting funds in FY 2015-2016 and expects to continue doing so through FY 2016-2017 until all funds are expended.  Begin energy efficient lighting change out program for streetlights within the County’s unincorporated area.  In Progress: Department began implementation of change out program in FY 2015-2016 and expects to continue during FY 2016-2017.
 Conduct two-year process to develop governance structure for city and county entities and stakeholders under the state Sustainable Groundwater Management Act to ensure that groundwater resources in Sonoma County will be sustainably managed and comply with the requirements of state law.
 In progress: Local agencies have agreed on a skeleton structure for the creation of Groundwater Sustainability Agencies, with one agency in each of three mandated basins and coordination between these agencies. The Water Agency, in coordination with the County and other local agencies, is on track to form Groundwater Sustainability Agencies by June 30, 2017, in compliance with state law.
 Complete design of, and initiate construction on, Miles 2 and 3 of the Dry Creek Habitat Enhancement Project in collaboration with the US Army Corps of Engineers to continue efforts to improve habitat for listed species in compliance with the Russian River Biological Opinion.
 In progress: Work consisting of hydraulic modeling, design, and construction of habitat enhancement features in Dry Creek is underway. Design of Miles 2 and 3 will be final by the end of December 2016, with construction beginning in spring of 2017 and projected to be completed by December 2017. Construction of Miles 4, 5, and 6 is expected to begin during FY 2017-2018.
 Complete construction of the Westside Facility, install educational exhibits, and initiate watershed education classes to teach Sonoma County students about their water systems.
 Completed: The facility opened, with watershed education classes being conducted, as of August 2015.
 Complete construction of the Mirabel Fish Ladder, Fish Screen, and Viewing Gallery Project and initiate fish monitoring and public tours and improve access for salmonids to the upper Russian River watershed.
 In progress: Construction was substantially completed during FY 2015-2016, with final work continuing through summer 2016 and official opening day anticipated for October 2016. 
 Implement the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration funded Russian River Habitat Blueprint to restore habitat for endangered fish species; conduct drought and atmospheric rivers research to inform reservoir operations; and improve community and ecosystem resiliency to flooding and drought.
 In progress: Twenty-one inversion towers have been installed for frost protection forecasting and the Lake Mendocino Forecast Informed Reservoir Operations (FIRO) preliminary feasibility study and Russian River pilot project are underway.
 Expand the impact of the FIRO project by executing an agreement with the Department of Water Resources for a $19.8 million grant to lead a collaboration of federal, state, local, and academic partners to improve observing systems and numerical forecast modeling systems that will provide accurate and timely information to decision makers, allowing them to secure water supplies, mitigate flood risks, minimize water quality impacts to the Bay, and improve lead-time on projections for coastal and Bay inundation from severe storms like atmospheric rivers.
 Expand the Creative Sonoma program to support non-profit and for-profit arts organizations and individual artists, to improve the creative economy sector.
 In Progress: The Department has held 18 professional development workshops; co-sponsored the Business of Writing Conference and Next Level Music Industry Showcase & Conference; held Coffee and Conversation outreach meetings in 11 locations throughout the county; and has received and disbursed over $200,000 in grant revenues to arts organizations and individuals. Going forward, the Department is developing a website to promote programs and services; and is receiving applications to form an advisory board to guide future development.
 Encourage business cluster development by focusing on two clusters: Outdoor Recreation and Agriculture, and establishing two councils: an Outdoor Recreation Council that will be charged with developing Sonoma County into an outdoor recreation destination and Ag Business Council that will encourage business partnerships and address common industry challenges.
 In Progress: The Department has convened industry stakeholder groups from both sectors and is currently seeking applicants to serve on both advisory councils with expressions of interest from Regional Parks, tourism and hospitality, local manufacturers, educational institutions, and Ag groups. Going forward, the Department is reviewing the feasibility of developing an Ag Business Program to fill a need not currently being addressed by existing groups in the county.
 Expand bilingual Business Assistance Program to meet the needs of the growing Latino business community.
 In Progress: The Department has offered bilingual business assistance workshops on a variety of topics, including access to capital and starting and marketing local businesses. The Department is also providing individual business advising services in English / Spanish, assisting businesses with permits, micro loans, workforce development and a variety of other issues. In September 2015 the Department sponsored the first Sabores de Wine Country event showcasing Latino food and beverage purveyors, and subsequently coordinated the 2nd Latino Business Visitation Week for the Board of Supervisors, arranging business visits and tours with Latino business owners in their districts. Going forward, the Department will increase the number of bilingual workshops, continuing individual bilingual business advising, and will continue offering special industry events.
 Expand the Workforce Development Business Services program to include working with Job Link and SonomaWORKS programs to meet workforce needs of the local business community.
 In Progress: The Department has assisted over 150 companies recruit for 70 positions in a variety of growing industries and have executed 65 On-the-Job Training contracts with employers through Job Link. The Department developed and launched 4 customized trainings in Hybrid car technology and lean manufacturing, resulting in new jobs and higher wages for participating clients. Going forward, the Department is working with Job Link and the Santa Rosa Junior College to develop industry-specific certification programs for demand occupations, will offer additional industry-driven customized training this year, and will explore training partnerships with the California Manufacturer’s Association.
 Continue to improve business development and outreach services to better serve the needs of the business community.
 In Progress: The Department has increased the number of business clients served through the business retention and expansion program, the business hotline, and business marketing services. The Department’s website is being updated to improve marketing efforts and a communications strategy is in development to enhance community outreach and the branding of programs and services offered to the chambers of commerce, nine city partner agencies, and greater business community. The Department’s progress and updates are presented each year in an Annual Report to the Board of Supervisors.
 Deliver a progress report on Next Economy Project (NExT 2.0), including efforts to better connect key industry clusters in Sonoma County and continue to maintain a future-oriented outlook for Sonoma County’s economy.
 Completed: The Department presented the Board of Supervisors with a progress report identifying and analyzing ongoing trends, how shifts in those trends may affect the local economy, and what might be done now to leverage that information. Much of this will be achieved through strategic partnerships with public and private organizations whose missions are aligned with the following key themes: Innovative and Entrepreneurial Approaches (EDB’s Year of the Entrepreneur); Skills and Talent Pipeline (Workforce Investment Board and North Coast Builders Exchange); and Healthy and Vibrant Communities (Health Action). This approach enables inclusive and efficient representation of broad and diverse cross-section of businesses in the county, and enables interactive engagement with businesses and related stakeholders.
 Launch a micro-lending initiative that supports access to capital for small businesses that may not qualify for traditional financing.
 Develop a talent attraction effort to support our local employers and meet the needs of our local workforce development system.
 Transfer designated Sonoma County Agricultural Preservation and Open Space District fee properties including Mark West, Carrington, Poff, Calabasas, Keegan-Coppin, and Occidental Road to Regional Parks and open for public access, and expand regional parks in collaboration with partners.
 In Progress: Regional Parks and the Sonoma County Agricultural Preservation and Open Space District (SCAPOSD) are finalizing acquisitions for and transfers of the Mark West Creek Regional Park and Open Space Preserve. A draft conservation easement for Carrington Ranch has been prepared and Regional Parks is working with SCAPOSD on details of the transfer. Resource Management Plans for Poff and Calabasas are underway. This progress will continue during FY 2016-2017.
 Address deferred and major maintenance priorities strategically to maintain facilities.
 In Progress: The high priority deferred maintenance projects funded during the FY 2014-2015 budget have been substantially completed. The Department continues to strategically prioritize major maintenance projects.
 Expand our capacity to manage natural resources to ensure planning, development, maintenance and operation of our parks and trails are done in a manner that supports biodiversity and sustainability.
 In Progress: Staffed a new Natural Resource Manager position. Built partnerships with California Academy of Sciences and Point Blue to monitor and assess ecological conditions in parks. Built partnership with California Native Plant Society to identify rare plant communities and remove invasive plants. Building a partnership with Pepperwood to implement the best available science on climate change over the next 50 –100 years in Sonoma County. Provided strategic direction to volunteer crews to focus on parks’ ecological restoration needs. Worked with maintenance crews to promote health and reverse degradation in key forest areas. Implemented a pilot project to replace mowing with sheep grazing at Putnam to build soil biodiversity. Worked with planning staff to alter Tolay grazing plans to protect archeological sites and restore rangeland vigor. Built on partnership with Kashia Pomo to create Gualala interpretive native plant garden. 
 Partner with state and local park agencies, non-profits, and business to increase collaboration and cooperation in providing services and programs, and develop and implement a comprehensive branding approach to increase revenue, visibility, and use of regional parks.
 In Progress: Built and maintained partnerships with St. Joseph's Health, Kaiser Permanente, Sonoma County Department of Health Services, YMCA, and Roseland Parents Group to provide culturally relevant programming and services for Latino families. Cultivated relationships with Catholic Charities and Sonoma County Human Services to offer an annual vehicle pass for low-income residents. Attended numerous special events for diverse audiences to increase membership, park users and program attendance. Hosted monthly outreach activities at Andy's Unity Park. Partnered with local agencies to offer free swimming lessons in English and Spanish through the "Vamos a Nadar" program. Participated in county-wide initiatives with Sonoma Environmental Education Collaborative, Health Action, and Upstream Investments. Developing a comprehensive marketing approach, which includes a branding "refresh" with the production of a new Trails Challenge brochure and a new park map design produced for the first time in both English and Spanish.
 Complete and implement Sonoma County Integrated Park Plan recommendations with priority for those that most align with adopted sustainability goals of Regional Parks, and support the outdoor economy of Sonoma County.
 In Progress: Regional Parks presented the draft Sonoma County Integrated Parks Plan (SCIPP) to the BOS in December 2015, additional funding was provided to complete the SCIPP with the expectation that it will be presented to the Board for adoption in late June/early July 2016.
 Educate the youth of Sonoma County on the value of our environment, and provide extensive opportunities for place-based experiences.
 Completed: Expanded offerings with the new “Climate Change Agents” education program. Continue providing place-based experiences for over 18,000 students emphasizing the value of protecting our environment.
 Continue to expand investments along the Russian River to promote safe public access, water safety, tourism and environmental stewardship.
 In Progress: Provided the "Russian River Water Safety Patrol" at beaches with the greatest incidence of water related emergencies. Increased participation in the life-jacket loaner program along the Russian River. Collaborated with Sonoma County Department of Health Services to create safe opportunities for environmental water monitoring. Planned opening for Healdsburg Veterans Memorial Beach with lifeguards and a greater scope of water safety outreach. Planning special events along the Russian River like the Healdsburg Water Carnival in collaboration with the Regional Parks Foundation and other stakeholders. Planning to install 8 interpretive panels on river history, function and ecology at various parks and river access points along the river. 
 Transfer of Tolay Creek property from Sonoma Land Trust as an addition to Tolay Lake Regional Park & Open Space Preserve.
 Commence construction, completion and dedication of Andy’s Unity Park.
 Completion and dedication of the new sections of the Bodega Bay Coastal Prairie Trail.
 Completion of play structure and installation of exercise equipment along the Joe Rodota Trail at Roseland Plaza.
 Develop an integrated, hierarchical planning framework that will produce a long term strategic plan, annual work plans, property-specific plans, summary statistics for messaging and grants, and performance metrics.
 In Progress: The District has embarked on this planning process and expects to update the Board in May 2016 as well as at regular intervals thereafter. The plan will include a significant community outreach element, expected to begin in fall 2016 and will incorporate cutting edge science and data resulting from several grant funded initiatives on climate, vegetation mapping and ecosystem services.
 Enhance community outreach and focused youth engagement via a new website, stakeholder input, 25th anniversary celebration, community meetings, diverse media strategy, land stewardship, educational programs and hosting of workshops and events.
 In Progress: The District has launched its new website and has multiple youth engagement and community outreach opportunities advertised via the website and partner websites. The District is in the process of adding youth representation to the District Advisory Committee. The District is also implementing a community relations strategy which includes diverse media outreach (video, web and social media), new partnerships with the business community and a series of public workshops related to projects and initiatives.
 Complete transfer of Tier 1 properties including Carrington Ranch, Haroutunian North, Mark West Regional Park and Open Space Preserve, and Healdsburg Ridge Open Space Preserve.
 In Progress: District staff is actively working on the transfer of Carrington Ranch to Sonoma County Regional Parks and Healdsburg Ridge to the City of Healdsburg and anticipates successful completion of these transfers prior to the end of June 2017. District staff is also actively working on the sale of Haroutunian North to a conservation buyer. The transfer of Mark West is on hold while the District and Regional Parks pursue the acquisition of additional lands associated with the future park and open space preserve.
 Acquire six conservation easements that protect natural and scenic resources while furthering sustainable agricultural and forestry practices and recreational opportunities and initiate ongoing stewardship of each acquisition.
 In Progress: The District has acquired two conservation easements since the beginning of FY 2015-2016: the Kashia Coastal Reserve (688 acres) and Estero Ranch (547 acres). At least one additional conservation easement will be acquired prior to the end of FY 2016-2017. In addition, District staff is actively working on fourteen conservation easement acquisitions and anticipates that four of these will be completed prior to the end of June 2017.
 Present six Matching Grant projects to the Board of Directors that preserve and enhance urban open spaces with opportunities for a variety of recreational enjoyment.
 In Progress: District Staff has presented one Matching Grant project, the Sebastopol Skategarden Expansion project, to the Board of Directors since the beginning of FY 2015-2016. District staff will present two more Matching Grant projects to the Board prior to the end of FY 2015-2016. In addition, District staff is actively working on seven other Matching Grant Projects and anticipates presenting five of these projects to the Board by the end of June 2017. Also, the District welcomed applications for the 2016 Matching Grant Program cycle and will bring new project recommendations before the Board in late summer or early fall 2016.
 Establish a 2031 funding target for the Stewardship Reserve Fund through development of a model that can be continuously updated as easements are acquired.
 In Progress: District staff has completed development of a model for use in establishing a funding target for the Stewardship Reserve Fund and is continuing to work with the Fiscal Oversight Commission to refine the data and assumptions of the model so that a budget recommendation can be brought to the Board for consideration.
 Increase the frequency of conservation easement monitoring visits and other opportunities for communication with easement landowners.
 In Progress: Additional monitoring is being accomplished thanks to the addition of one position during FY 2015-2016 to address this objective. Staff continues to work on identifying and implementing efficiencies so that more properties can be monitored each year.
 Increase efficiencies and services in implementing new and existing programs within the new Land Stewardship Division.
 Completed: Division programs including VESCO, Riparian Corridor, Farm Plan, Hazardous Materials, and Frost Protection are now administered under one manager/supervisor who oversees programs and staff; work processes developed resulted in improved customer service, timeliness, and records management.
 Focus activities related to European Grapevine Moth (EGVM) detection and exclusion so that the remaining area can be removed from quarantine. Detection trapping in 2015 and early 2016 resulted in no EGVM being found in Sonoma County.
 In Progress: Anticipated date for quarantine removal is August 2016.
 Enhance consumer protection efforts by pursuing more cases in partnership with the District Attorney’s office and other agencies.
 In Progress: Efforts to date have resulted in approximately 20% more consumer law cases brought over the prior year by District Attorneys’ Consumer Protection Divisions statewide.
 Develop an agricultural waiver program that allows growers to comply with State Regional Water Quality Control Board’s (RWQCB) requirements by leveraging existing county requirements under VESCO. This will allow growers to streamline their compliance efforts while enhancing environmental stewardship and economic sustainability.
 In Progress: Development of farm water quality plan template is complete and meetings with the RWQCB will continue into fiscal year 2016-2017.
 Increase number of package inspections by approximately 10% (800 additional product inspections) to identify and correct short-weight packages and improperly labeled commodities sold at local businesses. These inspections and investigative activities increase local consumer protection and educate packers on the state and federal Fair Package and Labeling Act requirements.
 In Progress: Continuing to strengthen package inspection efforts in order to identify and correct short-weight packages and improperly labeled commodities sold at local businesses. FY 2016-2017 inspection efforts are expected to increase by approximately 250 packages or five percent above FY 2015-2016 levels. These inspections and investigative activities increase local consumer protection, and educate packers on the state and federal Fair Package and Labeling Act requirements.
 Continue to expand activities to prevent the introduction and spread of exotic pests that threaten the economic viability of agriculture. Besides EGVM, recent increased threats include Glassy-Winged Sharpshooter, Asian Citrus Psyllid, and Light Brown Apple Moth.
 In Progress: In FY 2015-2016, continued to conduct inspections to ensure the pests have not spread. Will pursue funds from the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) for new pesticide threats such as Asian Citrus Psyllid in FY 2016-2017.
 Replace specialized truck and crane weight testing equipment in order to reduce ongoing maintenance costs to aging equipment and improve safety. This equipment is shared under the Joint Powers Authority with neighboring counties in order to reduce cost to our County.
 In Progress: The specification and bid process has been completed with the assistance of Fleet Services. The build and delivery of the project will be completed in the first quarter of FY 2016-2017, which will reduce ongoing vehicle maintenance costs.
 Increase number of pesticide related inspections in sensitive areas such as in proximity to schools, residences and sensitive natural habitats.
 Fulfill CDFA grant to produce manual of Best Management Practices for erosion control in existing vineyards and orchards and complete associated outreach.
 Explore opportunities to create a Community Food Systems Advocate to promote and support existing and new community food systems to increase food security.
 Completed: The County funded a 1.0 FTE Department Program Manager position (working title: Community Food Systems Advocate/Master Gardener Coordinator).
 Expand the 4-H outreach program to increase participation of underserved youth, focusing on the Latino community.
 In Progress: The County-funded Bilingual 4-H Outreach Coordinator will continue outreach efforts in the local community with a focus on introducing 4-H clubs to underserved populations; and the University of California has funded a full-time bilingual position that will continue outreach to underserved populations at schools by adding 4 afterschool programs to the existing 4 schools already up and running in Santa Rosa and Windsor.
 Increase Agricultural Sustainability by building networks that integrate sustainable food production, processing, distribution, enhancing environmental, economic and social health through partnerships to assist with permitting for and production from small-scale farming operations.
 In Progress: Building ongoing partnerships that promote the concept of agricultural sustainability and offering learning opportunities for agricultural operations.
 Evaluate the ecosystem services provided by agriculture and rangelands, in an effort to achieve a more market-based approach to management and decision making while striving to achieve conservation in the face of climate change.
 In Progress: UCCE continues to examine innovative approaches for Payment of Ecosystem Services for landowners to achieve conservation and sustainability, while meeting the County’s climate change goals.
 Establish an incubator farm where aspiring farmers and ranchers would be given access to the land, equipment, and mentorship needed to begin careers in agriculture.
 In Progress: Continued planning (identifying potential lands where incubator farms could be developed) and education in the community about the benefits of the proposed incubator farm (public meetings and workshops for interested community members).
 Enhance food recovery opportunities to increase food security and reduce food waste. UCCE Sonoma will collaborate with key players in the local food supply chain to identify food recovery roadblocks and solutions for reducing food waste and hunger.
 Increase composting education in the community in the wake of the closure of Sonoma Compost; the UCCE Master Gardeners will offer 8 workshops around the County (3 in Spanish) and host 6 information tables on the topics of composting and vermicomposting.
 Continue monitoring trends in the presence, abundance, and distribution of endangered Coho salmon and threatened steelhead trout throughout the southern portion of the Russian River watershed that will provide critical data that will help with efforts to protect habitat and reverse the decline in populations of these species.
 Complete a Strategic Plan to address financial sustainability, including the exploration of various financial strategies to mitigate the impact upon revenues associated with the change in the horse racing schedule.
 In Progress: The Fair Board has scheduled two meetings in May 2016 to address updates to the Sonoma County Event Center’s strategic plan. The primary goal of these meetings is to determine how best to utilize facilities, staff, and other resources to maximize the revenue generating potential of the event center.
 Promote the Event Center at the Fairgrounds as a tourist attraction within Sonoma County and seek funding opportunities that will expand the Fair’s presence in Sonoma County tourism.
 In Progress: Outward-facing media, including the Event Center website, signage, electronic message board, social media, have all been refreshed to present a unified message that the Event Center is a viable venue for holding events. The Event Center continues receiving County Advertising Program funding to supplement the media costs associated with its promotional efforts.
 Continue developing a Capital Improvement Plan for facility replacement and improvements, including the continuation of fundraising and construction efforts to build the Saralee and Richard's Barn.
 In Progress: Construction is well underway on Saralee and Richard’s Barn. The building is expected to be in use during the 2016 Sonoma County Fair, and will generate non-fair revenue after the conclusion of the Fair. An overall Capital Improvement Plan will be discussed as part of the Strategic Planning Session in May 2016.
 Repurpose areas of the Fairgrounds property which are currently underutilized to realize opportunities for highest and best use.
 In Progress: The optimal use of existing Fairgrounds property will be discussed at the May 2016 Strategic Planning Session.
 Research funding opportunities to commission an economic impact study to demonstrate the contribution of the Fairgrounds related activities to the local economy.
 In Progress: The Sonoma County Event Center will partner with event promoters to prepare analysis on the impact to the local economy of selected major events, on an ad hoc basis.
 Maximize revenues for the newly branded Sonoma County Event Center at the Fairgrounds, including increased marketing efforts to bring new business and non-fair rentals.
 In Progress: Rebranding and outreach efforts continue.
 Mitigate the cost of waste water runoff during operation of the County Fair through a storm water runoff mitigation project from a private developer and at no cost to the County or Fair. The proposed improvements will capture storm water, filter trash and sediment, encourage infiltration and harvest water for re-use. In addition, the improvements will reduce the labor and equipment cost associated with manually hauling off and relocating water that was prevented from entering storm drains.
 Continue to support Economic Development initiatives to improve the County’s tourism and economic vitality.
 In progress: The Board has approved a new funding category, Workforce Development and Scholarships, to support the growing needs of the tourism industry as well as increase the overall health of the community. An amendment to the Advertising Program Policy allows specific funds for grants that will support workforce development and increase access to educational opportunities through scholarships.
 Establish strong economic uncertainty reserves to minimize the impact on grant recipients and County’s economic development programs and services during economic downturn.
 In progress: The Board has approved an overall commitment of 10% of fund balance to be set aside specifically for use as an economic uncertainty reserve.
 Explore placing a Transient Occupancy Tax rate increase on the November 2016 General Election ballot to increase program revenues to help mitigate the impacts of tourism and support promotional, community and cultural activities in Sonoma County.
 Develop and submit first year, and long-term, work plans for Board approval.
 Build a foundation for a strong collaborative working relationship with the Sheriff’s Office, including establishing procedures and protocols for audits of administrative investigations.
 Establish internal policies and procedures for the Department.
 Develop and implement a community engagement plan.
 Establish the Community Advisory Board, including a process for monthly meetings.
 Set up an effective database system for intake and tracking of public complaints.
 Investigate and procure database tracking system that will provide statistical and trend analysis of complaints.
 Develop and implement performance measures for IOLERO, including possible survey instruments.
 Begin exploration of options for resolving complaints through a mediation program.
 Issue first Annual Report to the Board of Supervisors.
 Construct new Fleet Light Operations and Materials Testing Lab at Russell Avenue site to maintain service continuity.
 In progress: Construction is expected to be completed December 31, 2016.
 Implement Phase 1 of the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor office co-location into a single service site at or near the County Administration Center.
 In Progress: Staff continues efforts to secure a new office space to accommodate the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor.
 Preserve existing assets via: Phase 1 of re-roofing the MADF, resealing MADF recreation yard exterior windows; and start Family Justice Center new re-roofing.
 In Progress: Phase 1 of the MADF roof and re-sealing of the recreation yard windows was completed/will be completed in May 2016. The re-roofing at the Family Justice center was completed in December 2015.
 Support changing inmate classification needs at MADF with a new Body Scanner installation, Booking Space Evaluation and Renovation, new Observation Cell and Safety Cell Conversion and Housing Safety and Security requirements implementation.
 In Progress: Dayroom division walls and door hardening in R-MOD, C-MOD Visitation hardening, Booking Area improvements and support for the installation of the Body Scanner, Touchscreen software improvements for group release programming and R-MOD Visitation ADA improvements were completed during FY 2015-2016. F-MOD hardening will be completed in the Summer of 2016.
 Complete the acquisition of Mark West Creek Regional Park and Open Space Preserve.
 In progress: In summer 2016, staff will bring the Board of Supervisors an item to approve the acquisition for the Mark West Creek Regional Park & Open Space Preserve and to provide staff with additional direction. In addition, moderate progress has been made on two additional acquisitions in support of this project.
 Complete the master plan and development of Sonoma Valley Regional Park Expansion.
 In progress: Regional Parks presented the draft Master Plan to the community in April 2016 and anticipates completing the environmental document and bringing it to the Board for adoption in November/December 2016.
 Complete the master plan and development of Moorland Park Phase 1.
 In Progress: Andy’s Unity Park Master Plan was adopted in spring 2016, initial development is anticipated to be completed during the fall 2016.
 Complete construction of the Doran Cove restrooms in fall 2016, after the end of the camping season.
 Completed: Doran Cove restroom opened in spring 2016.
 Design and begin construction on the MADF Courthouse connector and other projects related to the new State Courthouse construction.
 Develop the Criteria Documents for the Behavioral Health Housing Unit Design-Build project.
 Update the Americans with Disabilities Act Self Evaluation and Transition Plan.
 Complete transfer of Tolay Creek property from Sonoma Land Trust as an addition to Tolay Lake Regional Park and Open Space Preserve and complete Environmental Studies for possible public access in 2017.
 Design and begin construction of Taylor Mountain Phase 2 to open 8 miles of new trail and 3 new trailheads.
 Construct Westside Park boat launch facility improvements to support recreational and commercial boating.
 Completion and dedication of play structure and installation of exercise equipment along the Joe Rodota Trail at Roseland Plaza.
