 Lead and coordinate efforts towards achieving the 2014 Board of Supervisors Policy Objectives: improve community’s health to become Healthiest County by 2020; support immigrants and families; increase confidence in safety and justice services; improve transportation and recreation facilities; protect natural resources and local food system; develop local economy through education and jobs; ensure County organization’s long term fiscal health; develop new ongoing revenue
sources to support County priorities and neighborhood resilience; insure the highest and best use of County facilities and systems; increase access to and citizen participation in County government; and increasingly become a County organization responsive to community needs.
 Provide leadership and guidance through Board established Ad Hoc committees to: maximize the highest and best use of County facilities; review Countywide Fire Services delivery and operations; develop business outeach and retention to include education investments; collaborate with the City of Santa Rosa in the Southwest Santa Rosa Annexation; and establish long term Roads funding solutions.
 Review the Community and Local Law Enforcement Task Force recommendations with a goal of improving relationships with the community relative to safety and justice services.
 Develop and implement the County’s 2 year Budget Plan guided by established Board priorities and established fiscal policy, with the goal of aligning long-term resource and service delivery planning with the County’s Strategic Plan.
 Work with the Permit and Resource Management Department to complete legal review and revisions to finalize a draft of the Development Code.
 Work with the Permit and Resource Management Department to complete legal review and revisions to finalize a draft of the Riparian Corridor Ordinance.
 Facilitate Open Space District transfers of the McCullough/Cresta property to Regional Parks and the Montini property to the City of Sonoma through preparation of the necessary transfer documents, easements, title review, and closing escrow.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Implement a comprehensive training program county-wide to support workforce development and succession planning.
 Review and revise Human Resources policies and Civil Service Rules to improve services, operations and ensure current legal compliance. Priority policies include Equal Employment and Discrimination, Employee Relations Policy and Performance Evaluation Policy.
 Continue to recruit and retain a diverse workforce, and collaborate with partners in education and employment to support the County’s Cradle to Career initiative.
 Complete integration of benefits in to and fully implement the Human Resources Management System (HRMS) Benefits Module.
 Continue supporting Countywide Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) initiatives and implement a Risk Management Information System in the Liability and Insurance Unit to enhance data reporting and metrics development.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Support the Board’s priority to invest in the future by providing the
highest and best use of space and facilities.
 Integrate department and agency procurement services to leverage goods
and services agreements and achieve cost savings.
 Develop strategy for maintaining high quality fleet management services
within the County and contracting cities and counties, while developing a
plan for the relocation of Fleet Operations light equipment facility long-term needs, a move necessitated in order to accommodate construction of the new courthouse.
 Increase preventative maintenance component of facility maintenance work, which allows the county’s older buildings to be operated in a safe, compliant and sustainable manner.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Support implementation of Phase II of the County’s Enterprise Financial System (EFS).
 Implement a legal case management system for District Attorney and Public Defender offices that interfaces with County’s Integrated Justice System to retain data exchange efficiencies.
 Improve public access to information with on-line services through
web content management and electronic document management systems and support department needs for advanced on-line transactions.
 Refine information management strategy to better leverage the investment and value of information contained in systems; and conduct an outside Records and Reprographics service delivery review to improve fiscal sustainability and services.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 The Non-Departmental budget unit is administered by the County Administrator’s staff. Please see departmental objectives under the County Administrator’s budget narrative.
 Complete an annual audit plan based upon the results of the county-wide risk assessment.
 Conduct a thorough review of all Treasury investment practices to ensure that the primary objectives of safety and liquidity are being met, while providing a reasonable rate of return.
 Work with the Enterprise Financial System team on the transition to
the new financial management system.
 Contribute to the County's public accountability and fiscal transparency by obtaining the Government Finance Officers Association's awards for the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, Popular Annual Financial Report, and the County's Adopted Budget.
 Support department fiscal operations Countywide by educating and training staff on required accounting standards and best practices.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Co-locate the Clerk and Recorder divisions and complete the lease or purchase of a storage warehouse to accommodate all departmental storage needs. This represents phase I of full departmental co-location, which will enhance customer service and create efficiencies.
 Close the FY 14-15 assessment roll no later than June 30, 2015, which will provide early notification to taxpayers of their annual values, and
timely mailing of the annual tax bills.
 Develop a replacement plan for the 31-year old voting system to ensure the County’s ability to conduct efficient and successful elections.
 Increase voter outreach through marketing campaigns and new technology.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Analyze the Court fees/fines/penalties downward trend and evaluate options to reverse trend in order to mitigate the General Fund impact.
 Reduce Alternate Dispute Resolution contract services to match decreasing revenue from court fees.
 Manage the successful transition for Day Reporting Center services
provided by a contractor to a county-operated program.
 Update Juvenile Hall equipment, including cameras and camera
recording, intercom, and touch-screen security systems, to assure
safety and security of the facility.
 Support development and implementation of the 2014 update of the
Criminal Justice Master Plan.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Work with justice partners to mitigate the impact of realignment on the community and emphasize aggressive prosecution of gang crimes, sexual assaults, domestic violence and serious and violent felonies.
 Develop a strategic plan to focus prosecution in the areas of greatest need, including elder protection, domestic violence, major fraud, and develop a real estate fraud unit. The Department will also continue to
work with justice partners on proven intervention and prevention programs, such as the Mayor’s Gang Task force, the Gang Resistance, Education and Training Program, Gun Information for Teens, and truancy programs for juveniles and their parents.
 Coordinate with the Information Systems Department and the Public Defender to complete the implementation of the legal Case Management System which will support the goals of the office and better align our criminal justice and community partners.
 Procure grant funding to enhance prosecutorial services and increase services to victims.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Promote increases in use of split sentences, thereby reducing jail
population and increasing services available through probation.
 Improve client and inter-departmental communications using holistic
client-based theories, and technology and modern communication
techniques such as websites with resource links, public information and
department contacts.
 Establish benchmarks and produce statistical data reports from the newly implemented case management system to provide workload and case disposition analysis.
 Collaborate with County and non-profit agencies for available services to support client needs and reduce recidivism.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Develop a comprehensive plan to relocate the Main Adult Detention
Facility and the North County Detention Facility kitchens in the most
efficient and cost effective manner possible, and evaluate whether
ongoing costs associated with the preparation and service of meals to
inmates can be reduced.
 Reduce overtime for all job classes by continuing the Sheriff’s
Intensive Hiring and Training effort with the goal of hiring a total of 70 new employees to fill vacancies.
 Revitalize community oriented policing through an evaluation of options for the restoration of the Sheriff’s Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) Unit and a new investment in social media with the goal of maximizing community outreach and interaction with the public. Continue to encourage Sheriff’s Office managers and staff to participate in community events and forums to increase and broaden community engagement.
 Implement major technology upgrades to Law Enforcement systems including Dispatching software, Patrol car software, and Crime Report Writing software in order to provide efficiencies.
 Secure an alternate site for temporary relocation of the Emergency Vehicle Operations Course during the Sonoma County Airport expansion project. A temporary alternate site is necessary to continue meeting state mandated training requirements.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Develop a community-driven health improvement plan that addresses health disparities in locations identified by the Portrait of Sonoma County.`
 Fully implement the Avatar electronic health record system to access e-prescription services and continue to improve services and claiming, billing and reporting processes.
 Develop a department-wide facilities plan with particular emphasis on Behavioral Health modernization and centralization that improves client services and clinical outcomes.
 Develop and implement a food facility rating system that includes outreach and engagement with key stakeholders and supports a regional approach through a local Food Facility Placarding System.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Fully implement "Healthier at Home", a Community Care Transitions Program (CCTP), at all local hospitals. The CCTP is a partnership with the Department of Health Services and a coalition of health care providers to prevent hospital readmissions for Medicare clients and funded through the Affordable Care Act.
 Improve the intake customer service experience for Medi-Cal and
CalFresh applicants by implementing more efficient processes, utilizing appropriate technology, and decreasing lobby waiting and application processing time.
 Continue to implement all aspects of Health Care Reform, meeting the county-wide objective of enrolling 13,500 newly eligible individuals into Medi-Cal by December 2014.
 Implement new and expanded strategies and services that provide resources to improve the health and economic mobility of low-income children and families receiving CalWORKs. Expand our Subsidized Employment Program (SEP) to include more participants. SEP provides clients with an opportunity to build skills while earning money. It also helps businesses by providing a 50% wage subsidy for 6 months for every SEP employee.
 Begin implementation of the System Improvement Plan (SIP), our local roadmap for improvements to the child welfare system for the next five years, with particular focus on Team Decision Making, reducing group home placements, and providing improved services through new wraparound and kinship support contracts.
 Using Upstream Investments principles, continue quality improvement through the application of evaluation and program development activities (research of literature, data collection and analysis and qualitative methods) and by building the capacity of providers to implement data-driven programming through technical assistance and training.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Successfully implement the new federal travel and wait time compensation and overtime requirements beginning in January 2015.
 Complete state eligibility requirements for 1,400 new IHSS caregivers, including investigating criminal histories and providing orientation.
 Match 740 client requests for caregiver assistance with Registry caregivers.
 Add 140 new caregivers to the Registry.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Meet or exceed last year’s distributed collections of $28.3 million in child support payments.
 Monitor and implement strategies to meet or exceed the following federal performance measures: (1) paternity establishment; (2) support order establishment, which sets the amount of child support which should be paid; (3) percent of child support collected compared to the
amount of due; (4) number of cases which a payment is made on past due amounts; and (5) cost effectiveness, which represents the amount of child support collected and distributed over department expenses.
 Continue to strengthen the Department’s collaboration and outreach with the Sonoma County Superior Court Family Law Division, Probation Department, District Attorney’s Office, Sheriff’s Office, Public Defender, and Family Justice Center to provide comprehensive services to children and families.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Advance implementation of the new on-line permitting system by completing data migration and workflow design, providing enhanced customer service to the public.
 Finalize drafts of the Development Code and Riparian Corridor Ordinance and complete the related initial public hearings at the Planning Commission, balancing natural resource protection with
orderly development.
 Recommend new zoning provisions to streamline permit requirements related to agricultural production in Agricultural zones, and food and beverage production in Industrial and Commercial zones, encouraging responsible development of the County’s agricultural economy.
 Develop an updated Well Ordinance and update the Well and Septic Division’s Blue Book containing all septic system regulations, providing updated construction standards so well and septic projects are completed and operated in an efficient manner.
 Coordinate with the Federal Emergency Management Agency to successfully complete the Community Action Visit, a necessary step to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program Community Rating System Program, which encourages flood management activities that result in decreased insurance rates for residents and businesses.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Complete or make substantial progress on high priority revitalization projects, including the Roseland Village mixed-use development, Highway 12 improvements, and Monte Rio wastewater planning.
 Utilize property acquired through redevelopment dissolution to provide affordable housing in cities throughout the County.
 Expand efforts to reduce homelessness by seeking resources to bolster
the local Continuum of Care Consortium, address unmet homelessness needs, and increase the Commission’s capacity for strategic planning, program development, and implementation of locally-funded initiatives.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Support Board priority to improve governance of fire service in the unincorporated area, which has 21 fire agencies and 14 volunteer fire companies.
 Coordinate local government efforts related to drought response and mitigations.
 Provide Fire Emergency Services in accordance with the 2012
Standards of Coverage Response Plan and complete the recommendations established in the Vision 20/20 Plan. Include a needs assessment for apparatus replacement and maintenance, fire facilities location and maintenance, and volunteer firefighter recruitment and retention.
 Fully implement the new California Environmental Reporting System (CERS) hazardous materials database to provide real-time hazard information to first responders.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Implement Board adopted Long Term Road Funding Plan Ad Hoc recommendations, including engaging the community in the development of new revenue proposals which may require voter approval.
 Work with the Refuse Contractor to construct the material recovery facility at the Central Transfer Station to process dry commercial waste, construction and demolition material and
selected self-haul materials to increase diversion of recyclable materials from landfill disposal and provide ongoing landfill capacity.
 Evaluate terminal remodel opportunities for the Sonoma County Airport to improve the passenger experience and throughput.
 Upgrade and modernize the County’s transit services with new natural gas buses, expanded passenger information systems, and electronic payment options.
 Develop a formal Greenhouse Gas Reduction Credit banking and trading regulation for the Northern Sonoma County Air Pollution Control District (NSCAPCD) based on the existing interim policy.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Collaborate with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to prepare a feasibility study for environmental enhancement work on Dry Creek to protect critical habitat for coho and steelhead and implement the provisions of the Biological Opinion.
 Leverage state and federal drought relief funding for water conservation and recycled water projects to reduce use of potable
water and encourage demand for projects conserving existing potable water sources.
 Construct Mirabel fish screen and fish ladder project and federally funded natural hazard reliability project.
 Continue climate change modeling and development of an adaptation plan to prepare for long-term changes to water supply brought about by extended droughts and global climate change.
 Seamlessly integrate Water Agency SAP cost accounting enterprise financial system with new County enterprise financial system.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Develop a 10-year 2025 Strategic Economic Action plan with the Innovation Council that looks at the future impacts on jobs of changing demographics in Sonoma County including: meeting the needs of the aging baby-boomer population and the Hispanic community; and preparing for anticipated changes in key local economic clusters.
 Develop an access-to-capital initiative targeting underserved
communities through technical assistance services and connecting businesses with micro and small business loans.
 Support the growth of jobs in the creative economy via the development of the County’s first cultural arts strategic action plan.
 Expand the Business Development Program with the latest in internet marketing and business intelligence tools in response to an increased demand for direct service with local small business and providing support to building and permit process improvement efforts.
 Provide continued support to countywide tourism efforts by managing contracts for services with Sonoma County Tourism and visitor centers, supporting such efforts as Restaurant Week, providing industry research reports, staffing regular visitor centers network meetings, and supporting customer service training for visitor center staff.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Increase the visibility and credibility of Regional Parks as a community resource supporting the areas of tourism and economic development, health promotion and environmental stewardship by enhancing programs to bring more users from a variety of backgrounds to parks and achieve greater financial stability.
 Work with the Agricultural Preservation and Open Space District
(SCAPOSD) to transfer Carrington and McCullough/Cresta (Mark West Creek Regional Park and Open Space Preserve) properties.
 Open North Sonoma Mountain Regional Park and Open Space Preserve for public use including the 4.2 mile trail connecting to Jack London State Park, and begin planning/design work for trail development of the Lawson addition to Hood Mountain Regional Park and Open Space Preserve.
 Complete the Sonoma County Integrated Park Plan, creating a cohesive countywide network of parks, trails, and other publicly accessible lands.
 Acquire, and begin to plan the development of the Moorland Avenue area community park, including extensive community outreach and collaboration regarding the park’s features and design.
 Begin the implementation of a Community Engagement Plan, enhancing efforts to better meet the needs of underserved communities throughout the county.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Complete transfer of Tier 1 Fee Land properties including McCullough/Cresta and Carrington to Sonoma County Regional Parks, and Haroutunian North to an agricultural operator for continued farming.
 Acquire four conservation easements that protect scenic and natural resources while furthering sustainable agricultural and forestry
practices.
 Identify new projects through the 2014 Matching Grant Program and bring six Matching Grant projects to the Board of Directors for approval.
 Document, analyze and communicate the economic and climate benefits of land conservation in Sonoma County through the District's grant funded initiatives (Moore Foundation/Coastal Conservancy/Bechtel Foundation/Nature Conservancy).
 Establish farming or ranching leases on Young Armos and Haroutunian South greenbelt properties, increasing the total number of District-owned greenbelt properties with farming or grazing activities to seven.
 Increase public engagement in the stewardship of District-protected lands.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Enforce quarantine requirements associated with the European
Grapevine Moth to allow the county to be substantially removed
from quarantine and to prevent re-infestation.
 Leverage existing local agricultural community efforts to develop an
innovative Agricultural Waiver program that streamlines state and
local water regulations to promote environmental stewardship and
economic sustainability. To facilitate compliance, the program development will be modeled on the successful Agricultural Grading, Drainage and/or Vineyard/Orchard Site Development County Ordinance (VESCO) and the California Code of Sustainable Winegrowing, a grower led environmental stewardship program.
 Continue vigorous enforcement of traditional Weights and Measures inspections and investigations to create a level playing field for businesses and ensure fairness to consumers, which is the cornerstone of a healthy consumer economy and vitally important during challenging economic times.
 Increase the number of pesticide use enforcement inspections, the monitoring of sensitive sites, regulatory actions and education and outreach efforts to improve protection of the health and safety of our residents and the environment.
 Expand working partnerships, and funding opportunities, with state agencies and district attorney’s offices in order to proactively pursue consumer protection cases that have implications of consumer harm across county lines.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Expand the local incubator farm model for replication on publicly owned
lands to increase access to healthy food and support local agriculture.
 Promote the use of the Ag Ombudsman to assist agriculture producers
through the permitting process, in order to develop value added ventures
within the County.
 Expand services in underserved communities and implement a volunteer
training program in order to increase diversity in the 4-H youth & Master Gardeners’ programs.
 Conduct educational and program outreach in home gardening practices that promote water conservation, food gardening, reduction to landfill inputs, and a reduction in toxic garden pesticides in urban landscapes.
 Establish towers equipped with temperature sensors and data loggers that allow for real-time online data access to enable growers to determine springtime temperature inversion conditions in the Russian River watershed.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Provide optimal library services to the patrons of the Sonoma County Library.
 Undertake a strategic planning process.
 Establish and implement best financial practices.
 Improve Library computer systems, digital assets, and digital
environment.
 Ensure/support successful implementation of the new Joint Powers Agreement (JPA) governing the Library (under consideration by signatory parties as of this writing).
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Begin a Capital Improvement Plan for facility replacement and improvements.
 Develop a conceptual plan and capital campaign for a memorial “barn” on the Fairgrounds in honor of Saralee McClelland Kunde to be completed within the next three years.
 Work with local experts to repurpose sheds on the
Fairgrounds property to maximize revenue generation and community benefit.
 Maximize revenues from the Jockey Club.
 Commission an Economic Impact study to demonstrate the economic contribution of the fair and fairgrounds to the local economy.
 Develop and implement a three to five year Strategic Plan focused on financial sustainability.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
 Continue to support Economic Development initiatives to improve the County’s tourism and economic vitality.
 Establish strong fund balance reserves to minimize the impact on grant recipients during economic downturns.
 Evaluate electronic security systems for detention and begin
implementing recommendations.
 Prepare for the decommissioning of Chanate hospital facility.
 Coordinate with the state for the new courthouse project and related
improvements at the County Center.
 Facilitate acquisition of space suitable for co-location of all office
functions of the Clerk-Recorder-Assessor office into a single service location at or near the County Administration Center.
 Construct Coastal Prairie Trail Phase 1 of Bodega Bay Bicycle and Pedestrian Trail.
 Construct the SMART Pedestrian Trail from Hearn Avenue to the Joe Rodota Trail.
 Acquire the necessary lands for the future Mark West Creek Regional Park and Open Space Preserve.
 Accomplish FY 13-14 objectives in progress.
