The 2015-2016 Final Budget recommends $198,748,847 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $72,110,053 in
department revenue, $122,901,939 in a contribution from the General Fund and
$3,736,855 in fund balance.
In 2011, Assembly Bill 109 made fundamental changes to California’s correctional
system. It realigned custodial and community supervision responsibility for non-serious,
non-violent, and non-sex offenders, as well as supervision of lower level adult parolees
returning from state prison sentences to counties. In Fiscal Year 2011-2012, counties
received nine months of funding; Stanislaus County’s allocation was $6.6 million. In
Fiscal Year 2012-2013 the County received funding of $12.4 million, $14.5 for Fiscal
Year 2013-2014, and $14.4 million for Fiscal Year 2014-2015. The allocation for Fiscal
Year 2015-2016 funding is unknown for the 2015-2016 Final Budget. Departments
have therefore allocated at the 2014-2015 Fiscal Year level of $14.4 million.
The District Attorney is working toward enhancing overall support, supervision and
performance of prosecutors and investigators with the implementation of Public Safety
Restoration. They will also continue to expand the use of electronic data in order to
reduce reliance on paper filings and discovery and to increase efficiency. Included in
the Final Budget is the purchase of an ID/Proxy Card system.
The Probation Department anticipates maintaining current service and staffing levels as
well as filling all of the approved Public Safety Restoration positions. The Department
continues to work on improving data collections and evaluating juvenile justice
programs.
The Public Defender anticipates maintaining current service and staffing levels using
net county cost carryover savings, a portion of which will be used toward filling Public
Safety Restoration positions in 2015-2016. The Department was again funded from the
Community Correction Partnership two Attorney positions and a Legal Clerk and funds
for the Indigent Defense fund to address increased demands as a result of realignment.
The Sheriff anticipates increasing current service and staffing levels with the use of
funds received from Public Safety Restoration. The Sheriff plans to increase the
number of deputies working general crimes within the County, return deputies to
regional task forces such as the Stanislaus County Auto Theft Task Force and to put a
Sheriff’s Team Investigating Narcotics and Gangs (STING) back on the street. It is also
the goal of the Department to conduct classes of the reactivated Sheriff’s Deputy
Training Academy in Fiscal Year 2015-2016. As part of the Final Budget the
Department requested the purchase of equipment and services to aid in safe and
efficient services to the community.
The 2015-2016 Final Budget recommends $536,203,208 in appropriations for
this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of
$511,377,604 in department revenue and $5,503,685 in fund balance/retained
earnings. The net General Fund revenue allocation for Behavioral Health and
Recovery Services’ programs, including Mental Health and Public Guardian, is
$1,980,924; for the Community Services Agency programs, including General
Assistance, In-Home Supportive Services Provider wages, Public Authority
benefits, Public Economic Assistance, and Services and Support, the net
General Fund revenue allocation is $9,514,440, a permanent reduction of $1.8
million; for the Health Services Agency programs, including Clinics and Ancillary
Services, Indigent Health Care, and Public Health, the net General Fund revenue
allocation is $ 7,173,416.
The Department of Aging and Veterans Services Final Budget totals over $4
million and includes sufficient Older American Act (OAA) funding that will provide
through Howard Training Center (HTC), the Senior Meals Program provider, five
days per week of meal service at all 13 Congregate Meal sites located
throughout the County. Additionally, through an act of the State legislature, the
County’s Veterans Services Office will now receive a permanent subvention
funding allocation from the California Department of Veterans Affairs. This
funding is primarily for California Veterans Service Offices to hire additional staff
to assist veterans who are returning from recent conflicts. One full-time Veterans
Representative position is recommended for the Department. The Department
continues to partner with the Veterans Advisory Commission to develop a
Veterans Center Facility. The net General Fund revenue allocation for Aging and
Veterans Services is $653,139.
Behavioral Health and Recovery Services, with a total Final Budget of $104.7
million, continues to work with the Chief Executive Office on implementing
strategies that reduce costs and preserve scarce reserves. This includes the final
goal of the strategic plan for the 24/7 Secure Mental Health Services that was
approved by the Board of Supervisors in November 2012, implementation of a
Crisis Stabilization Unit (CSU). The CSU is ready to be bid in the coming weeks,
will be operational in the new fiscal year and is expected to bring additional relief
from hospitalization exposure.
In Community Services Agency (CSA) the Final Budget totals $325.0 million.
This includes Federal and State funding in support of Health Care Reform and
Welfare to Work early engagement, family support and subsidized employment.
It is estimated that one in 1.9 persons residing in Stanislaus County now have
access to health care and nutritional assistance. At the same time, the number
of persons on cash aid (CalWORKs and General Assistance) have decreased
from a high of one in 16.3 persons receiving services in Fiscal Year 2010-2011,
to one in 19 persons receiving services in Fiscal Year 2014-2015. The County Match of $9.5 million reflects a permanent reduction of $1.8 million, freeing up
discretionary funds for other purposes.
The Health Services Agency’s Final Budget totals $79.1 million and reflects a
permanent reduction of over $10 million in 1991 Health Realignment funding as
the result of the State’s redirection of funding from the implementation of the
Affordable Care Act and Medi-Cal expansion, which began January 1, 2014. The
Agency anticipates receiving funding through two separate Intergovernmental
Transfers (a Federal Medicaid matching program), as well as Federal grant
funding from attestation of Meaningful Use of its electronic medical records
system. The Agency’s County Match of $7.2 million reflects a permanent
reduction of $600,000, freeing up discretionary funds for other purposes.
The 2015-2016 Final Budget recommends $32,772,780 in appropriations for this priority
area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $29,573,820 in department
revenue, $1,991,810 in revenue from the General Fund and $1,207,150 in fund
balance.
For Fiscal Year 2015-2016, Alliance will be relying on $446,894 in fund balance in its
Final Budget. This reliance on fund balance is due to a reduction in the availability of
competitive grant opportunities and a continued high demand of services. Within the Chief Executive Office – Economic Development Bank, $1.5 million in
appropriations will be added to the Community Development Fund as a one-time
recharge. Additionally, $200,000 of available Economic Development Bank will be
allocated to the Domestic Well Recovery Loan Program which began in August 2014.
The Library is primarily funded by a voter approved 1/8-cent sales tax, which represents
approximately 94% of the Library’s total revenue to support the Library operations in
Fiscal Year 2015-2016. The voter approved 1/8-cent sales tax did sunset on June 30,
2013, but was extended through a successful local measure for an additional five years.
State literacy funds are estimated to return to the $112,000 base level while Federal
funding is anticipated in the amount of $44,000. The Library continues to seek ways to
use new technology to deliver better customer services and more self-service options
for customers.
The 2015-2016 Final Budget recommends $6,087,607 in appropriations for this priority
area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $3,391,898 in department
revenue, $2,679,470 in General Fund contribution and $16,239 in fund balance.
The Agricultural Commissioner will be able to maintain the current level of service
provided to the community through the use of a portion of the Net County Cost savings
from prior years, and the use of increased State funding to protect the County’s valuable
agricultural resources. This is primarily funded through increased State contracts and
mill tax reimbursement revenue. The additional state contract funding will extend the
trapping season for Asian Citrus Psyllid, a small insect that feeds on the leaves and
stems of citrus trees, in Stanislaus County. The University of California (UC) Cooperative Stanislaus County provides funding for
the Department’s operational expenses, including the facilities that house UC
Cooperative Extension, vehicles and support staff that work with the UC Cooperative
Extension advisors and paraprofessionals in program delivery. Included in the Proposed
Budget is a recommendation to fund $15,500 in extra help expenses for needed clerical
support for UC Cooperative Extension advisors.
The 2015-2016 Final Budget recommends $130,758,153 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $111,534,153 in
department revenue, $4,593,629 in a General Fund contribution and $14,630,371 in
fund balance/retained earnings.
The Department of Environmental Resources will continue to provide for mandated
education, investigation and inspection services for programs. Restoring positions will increase service levels in the Hazardous Materials and Code Enforcement Divisions.
The Department implemented activities related to the Groundwater Management Action
Plan adopted by the Board of Supervisors on June 10, 2014, and continues to move
that effort forward.
The Department of Parks and Recreation will continue to maintain parks and facilities
with an expanded level of service. Re-evaluating priorities and adjusting the workforce
to the priorities identified will result in the continued ability to efficiently carry out their
mission and provide basic levels of services at neighborhood parks, cemeteries,
bridges, County Centers and office buildings, Woodward Reservoir and Modesto
Reservoir Regional Parks. Further, a new marketing plan will focus on improving the
park system's performance, to include special events as well as target audience
knowledge and awareness campaigns with the goal of increasing patron/park visits.
The Planning and Community Development focus for the upcoming fiscal year is on
maintaining core services while fulfilling all State and Federal mandated requirements
relating to land use activities, building codes, special revenue grants, and the
administration of the Stanislaus County Successor and Successor Housing Agencies (of
the former Stanislaus County Redevelopment Agency). The Department will focus on
land-use and subdivision application processing, local oversight of permitted surface
mining operations, implementation of the Williamson Act, and maintenance of the
County General Plan in compliance with State mandates and local needs.
The Department of Public Works, funded through Federal and State transportation
funding sources, will maximize use of these funds for the operation and maintenance of
the transportation infrastructure in Stanislaus County. Current funding is inadequate to
maintain the roadway system in a sustainable manner. Maintenance efforts will include
repairs, improvements, and preventive maintenance performed on an annual basis. Two
significant roads projects will be completed in Fiscal Year 2015-2016: State Route
99/Kiernan Interchange and Claribel Road Widening.
The 2015-2016 Recommended Final Budget recommends $192,711,318 in
appropriations for this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of
$124,411,663 in department revenue, $67,496,312 in contributions from the General
Fund and $803,343 in fund balance/retained earnings.
The Assessor budget provides funding for the addition of a Supervising Account/Admin
Clerk I/II and the reclassification of a vacant Admin Clerk II to an Account Clerk II/III.
These staffing adjustments will assist the Department in their efforts to improve the
turnaround time for processing documents. The $78,722 cost is funded through
additional General Fund contributions.
The Chief Executive Office – Risk Management Division has adapted to changes in
obtaining and maintaining insurance certificates implemented in Fiscal Year 2014-2015.
These changes have increased workload, prompting the restoration of a Confidential
Assistant III position in the 2015-2016 Proposed Budget. This position also provides
critical support services in proportion to the increased staffing levels realized Countywide.
The total annual cost of $80,000 will be funded in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 from
approximately $56,000 in departmental charges and $24,000 in net county cost that will
be covered by net county cost carryover savings. The Department anticipates that this
increased net county cost will be sustained using net county cost savings for a minimum
of two fiscal years.
Initiated in the 2014-2015 Final Budget, funding for a community emphasis on programs
and partnerships focused on investments in prevention services and activities was
provided through the Chief Executive Office – Appropriations for Contingencies budget
unit. Focus on Prevention is now being established as a unique budget entity within
Chief Executive Office – County Operations. This budget unit has $1,000,000 in
appropriations for Fiscal Year 2015-2016. These funds will support the Community-wide transformation process and support the County in partnership with all sectors of
the Community, to pursue prevention of root causes of many of the social ills that affect
Stanislaus County. Fiscal Year focus is on preventing homelessness and strengthening
families.
The Chief Executive Office – County Facilities base budget was increased by $120,127
to cover increased utility and maintenance costs for the county facilities maintained in
this budget unit. Final Budget includes a recommendation to increase appropriations by
$3 million for needed general facility improvements and refurbishments, including those
to Harvest Hall, County Center III, Emergency Operations Center, and roadway
improvement at the Public Safety Center site.
The Chief Executive Office – General Fund Contribution to Other Programs base
appropriations budget was increased by $33,576. This augmentation will provide
$31,150 for the County Fire Service Fund towards Fire Prevention Bureau costs and
$426 for increases to commercial insurance costs for the 12th Street office building.
Additional adjustments in Final Budget include a contribution to Environmental
Resources for the cost of the Manager to be assigned to the Code Enforcement
Program and technical adjustments to align match with current operations in Sheriff -
Court Security and Local Area Formation Commission (LAFCO).
The Chief Executive Office – Mandated County Match budget was increased by
$197,252. This adjustment will accommodate $31,552 in Behavioral Health and
Recovery Services Public Guardian costs, a mandated County responsibility, and
$165,700 for increased code enforcement service levels for the Department of
Environmental Resources.
The Clerk-Recorder – Elections Division budget was increased by $750,000 to
accommodate funding needs associated with the June 2016 presidential primary
election, a mandated biennial service to the community.
The General Services Agency base appropriations budget was increased by $426 for
the increased costs in commercial insurance for the 12th Street office building. This
adjustment was accommodated through the Chief Executive Office – General Fund
Contribution to Other Programs budget increase. Additional appropriations are
recommended in Final Budget for Cost Accounting Management Software (CAMS)
improvements, including the installation of mobile applications.
Develop an emergency operations center
management team program to train a
regional team that can be deployed to
support the Operational Area in an
emergency.
 Update the Emergency Operations Plan to
provide a planned response to emergency
situations in the Operational Area.
 Implement the best permitting practices and
continue to advance the One-Stop-Shop
program to improve customer service
through electronic plan submittal and
inspections.
 Continue to enhance the capabilities of the
Stanislaus Operational Area first responders
through partnerships and development of regional teams and funding of equipment,
training and exercises through the Homeland
Security Grant.
Electronic interface with Superior Court to
allow population of the ICJIS database with
information from court minute orders.
 Enhance overall support, supervision and
performance of prosecutors and
investigators with the beginning
implementation of Public Safety Restoration
resources.
 Continue to expand the use of electronic
data management in order to reduce reliance
on paper filings and discovery and to
increase efficiency.
 Collaborate with local and county fire
agencies and law enforcement to enhance
the investigation and prosecution of arson
crimes.
Implement additional electronic interfaces
with internal departments and external
entities to reduce redundant data entry and
improve operational performance.
 Continue to upgrade current software
infrastructure, enhance feature set and
maintain a technical posture that facilitates
ease of use, flexibility and interoperability.
Complete data collection and identification of
improved services for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual
Transgender (LBGT) youth.
 Expand and enhance Field Officer Training
(FTO) and Institution Officer Training (ITO)
programs for sworn officers.
 Complete construction of Day Reporting
Center and enhance services to adult
offender population.
 Implement new adult risk/needs assessment
tool to improve outcomes for adult offenders
 Improve data collection and evaluation of
juvenile justice programs.
Rebuild investigative branch of the Office as
part of the Counties Criminal Justice
Restoration Initiative.
 File hundreds of Petitions for sentence
reduction for those convicted in the past of
drug possession or theft of property of a
value of less than $950.
 Provide excellent representation to all the
clients of the Stanislaus County Public
Defender.
Conclude Design phase and break ground
on SB1022 facility for Re-Entry and
Enhanced Alternatives to Custody Center
(REACT Center).
 Complete the first and second classes of the
reactivated POST Regular Basic Course at
the Ray Simon Regional Criminal Justice
Training Center.
 Move into the newly renovated Sheriff’s
Coroner Facility at County Center III.
 Complete the first phase of the Public Safety
Restoration passed by the Board of
Supervisors on March 6, 2015. The first
phase will allow the Sheriff to increase the
number of deputies working patrol, general
crimes, and return deputies to regional task
forces such as the Stanislaus County Auto
Theft Task Force (STANCATT).
 Redeploy the Sheriff’s Team Investigating
Narcotics and Gangs (STING).
 Complete staffing plan and begin hiring to fill
positions associated with the completion of
the AB900 Phase II Public Safety Facility
Expansion project.
In addition to continuing with the programs
and services listed, the Department will
contract with a care coordination agency to
create a Transitional Care Program.
 Create a case management program to
assist seniors who do not qualify for
Multipurpose Senior Services Program
(MSSP).
 Continue to recruit volunteers to assist with
various programs, particularly bi-lingual
volunteers. These volunteers will visit
homebound/isolated seniors.
 Plan greater number of outreach events to
low income seniors, increasing their
awareness of services and programs to
assist them.
 Work with local elementary schools to create
an intergenerational mentoring program.
 Continue to give staff support to the
Veterans Advisory Commission.
 The County Veterans Service Office will
continue to assist the Veterans Advisory
Commission in the following priorities: 1)
Development of the “One-Stop Shop” facility
concept for veterans services in Stanislaus
County; 2) Increase outreach efforts to
inform all veterans of services available to
them; 3) Continue to develop the
Transportation for Homebound Veterans as
well as increase the VA transportation volunteer base; and 4) Provide education
and job placement opportunities for veterans.
 Continue to work with other veterans
groups/organizations to assist in the
establishment of a Veterans Court.
Additionally the Veterans Services Office will
continue to work with these groups to assist
homeless veterans to help them secure
housing, employment and other supportive
services.
Complete implementation of all modules of
the Electronic Health Record, including
electronic prescribing of controlled
substances, eLabs, and Personal Health
Record.
 Transition to the new Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM
V) and to International Classification of
Diseases Tenth Revision (ICD 10). This will
be a major change in psychiatric diagnoses
and coding practices and require EHR
functionality.
 Complete the second round of planning for
Fiscal Year 2015-2016 MHSA with the
development of a MHSA Plan Update.
 The Executive Assistant and one other new
Senior Leader will attend the intensive
Leadership Institute offered by the California
Institute for Behavioral Health Solutions and
University of Southern California.
 Implement the final goal of the Strategic Plan
for 24/7 Secure Mental Health Services with
the opening of a Crisis Stabilization Unit
(CSU) on the Stanislaus Recovery Center
campus by November 2015.
 Continue to implement Department-wide use
of iDashboard to enable monitoring of
outcomes. Improve engagement of offender population
into substance use treatment using quick
access to assessment and education when
Probation first identifies need for substance
use treatment.
 Successfully obtain Drug Medi-Cal
certification from Department of Health Care
Services for outpatient substance use
treatment services, allowing billing for
Federal financial participation funds to
augment funding for these services.
 Successfully integrate a new Assistant
Director and a new Associate Director into
our Executive Senior Leadership team.
Maintain collection and distribution at
$48,250,000 of child support to families
 Collect 66.2% of current court ordered
support
 Continue to obtain a support order on
95.6% of cases
 Meet the State required collection to cost
ratio
 Actively participate with other agencies in
the countywide Focus on Prevention in the
area of Strengthening Families
 Reduce the number of days it takes from
case opening to when the first payment is
sent to families
Implement Year One of the 2015-2017
Strategic Plan.
 Maintain positive trends in the reduction of
repeat child maltreatment reports.
 Increase the number of children who are
cognitively, socially, and behaviorally ready
to enter school.
 Maintain access and maximize utilization of
children’s preventative and ongoing health
care.
 Increase the number of healthy births from
high risk pregnancies.
Provide a customer focused culture that
supports self-reliance and is responsive to
the needs of the community.
 Encourage and expand community
partnerships and collaboration
opportunities.
 Enhance operational efficiencies and
effectiveness through innovation and
continuous service delivery improvement.
 Encourage and support the Strengthening
Families Framework.
 Support a healthy, diverse and engaged
workforce.
 Enhance financial management practices
to maximize funding and ensure program
sustainability.
Plan and strategize for Federal Health Care
Reform, changes in the healthcare
environment, and prevention opportunities.
 Establish timeline for Public Health
accreditation preparation and make
measurable progress on deliverables.
 Achieve annual recertification of the
Federally Qualified Health Center Look-Alike
designation.
 Receive renewed and new grant support to
enable multiple initiatives.
 Continue efforts to improve efficiencies,
enhance revenue, and increase staff
development, while meeting fiscal targets,
programmatic objectives and achieving
compliance.
 Attest for Meaningful Use Stage One.
 Engage consultation with Acadia to pilot
Patient Centered Medical Home project.
 Begin implementation of the CareManager
software component of the Electronic
Medical Record (EMR) which has population
health capabilities for our Federally Qualified Healthcare Clinic (FQHC) patients, including
disease registries and disease management
tools.
 Revitalize the Stanislaus Health Foundation
and leverage the volunteer services and
Framework for a Thriving Stanislaus initiative
Increase training and internship opportunities
for job seekers, targeting careers to meet the
employment needs of local businesses.
 Continue to build partnerships with
businesses to work in conjunction with
Alliance Worknet for their employment
needs.
 Work in partnership with CSA to increase
services provided by the WTW program,
increase the capacity to serve additional
participants and improve Work Participation
Rates (WPR).
 Increase assistance to TANF (Temporary Aid
to Needy Families) customers by providing
job search and job retention skills, to
increase their ability to obtain and retain
employment.
 Increase outreach activities to educate the
community regarding our services.
 Open a new Career Resource Center in
Turlock to provide services to area
customers.
 Provide over 4,500 Stanislaus County
residents with WTW- related services.
 Increase Pre-Apprenticeship and
Apprenticeship training opportunities in order
to link businesses with their new prospective
employees.
Strive to meet WIA Performance Measures.
Add an enhanced security and inventory
system for the library collection with a
wireless Radio Frequency (RFID) data
management system. RFID will also reduce
materials handling time, improve ergonomic
injuries caused by repetitive tasks, and
improve customer service.
 Deploy an outreach librarian to provide
bilingual outreach and literacy services to
youth throughout Stanislaus County.
 Implement self-pay and self-checkouts,
which will allow customers to pay fees and
check out materials without having to wait for
staff assistance.
 Increase the number of library card holders.
Customers will have the ability to apply for a
library e-card online that can provide instant
access to electronic resources through the
Library’s website and mobile app. New
technology will enable new library cards to
be issued at outreach events.
 Continue to enhance library technology
services including 24/7 Wi-Fi access, online
payment options, self-service printing, and
library catalog enhancements to simplify
finding materials.
 Create a new seating area in the Modesto
Library, where customers can read or work
on their laptops in a quiet space.
Working through the newly acquired
Software Developer II position, design and
implement two to four new software
programs to enhance Department
productivity.
 Install a vehicle scale to be used to perform
the required certifications of the
Department’s heavy capacity weight truck.
 Partner with the Sheriff’s Department to
further enhance the enforcement of the
Purchase and Sale of Walnuts ordinance
 In cooperation with the Chief Executive
Office, begin the process of upgrading the
Harvest Hall meeting facility.
Initiate a project cooperating with U.C.
Davis researchers, local irrigation
districts and growers to evaluate refilling
the local aquifer by winter-time flooding
of indigenous orchards.
 Improve silage management practices
on dairies; create a tool to aid producers
in their decision-making.
 Determine best use of water on forage
crops in terms of energy yield for milk
production.
 Complete Pasture Pork Resource Guide
to help producers in the area protect
natural resources and diversify their
operations.
 Develop 4-H Youth Development
programs and curriculums focused
specifically on water literacy to prepare
young residents for the challenges created by the drought.
Continue implementing the Groundwater
Management Action Plan adopted by the
Board.
 Complete the groundwater database
development and well mapping project.
 Construct Ash Cell 4 at the Fink Road
Landfill.
 Begin the evaluation of upgrades to the
groundwater extraction and treatment
system at the Geer Road Landfill.
 Implement a residential green waste
recycling program.
Continued development and construction of
T-Island and Muir Point Campground
improvements at Woodward Reservoir.
 Implementation of Parks Online Reservation
System.
Implement Accela Mobile Office for
building permit field inspection services.
 Assess and refine integration of the
County’s Focus on Prevention into the
CDBG and Emergency Solutions Grant
(ESG) Awards.
 Develop a One Stop Shop website to
provide customers with a centralized
information source.
 Work with the local development
community to identify process
improvement opportunities.
Complete Geer Road Bridge retrofit.
 Complete Kiernan Avenue/State Route 219
interchange.
 Implement the Americans with Disabilities
Act Complementary Paratransit Service in
the County’s Service Area.
 Begin construction of the Morgan Road
Shop/Administrative buildings.
Complete a timely assessment roll as
required by the California Constitution.
 Resume the scanning project to increase
efficiencies and accessibility by converting
paper-based records to electronic format and
ensure against document loss in a disaster.
 Restructure the office to remove redundancy
and improve efficient delivery of public
services.
 To improve public service and work towards
our long-range goal of transferring deeds and
entering new owner information into the
property tax system no more than six weeks
following the recording date, we will strive to
close the gap between recording date and
processing date by 25%.
Begin the process of upgrading Oracle
Financial Management System to the next
application version.
 Begin the process of upgrading Oracle
PeopleSoft application to the next application
version.
 Begin the implementation process of
converting to the Oracle PeopleSoft Absence
Management module.
 Implement GASB Pronouncement 68.
 Convert the Annual Financial Report (AFR) to
a Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
(CAFR).
The first Community Convening of the Focus
on Prevention Initiative is scheduled for
October 1, 2015 at the Modesto Centre
Plaza. This convening is focused on
preventing homelessness in Stanislaus
County. The Homeless Action Council will
continue to meet and the Action Council for
Strengthening Families will be established in
2015-2016.
 Continue to monitor and aggressively lobby
for Stanislaus County Irrigation Districts and
residents regarding Federal and State
agencies that are engaged in attempting to
influence the amount of unimpeded flows on
rivers in the Central Valley. The County is
opposed to any law or regulation that
inappropriately increases unimpaired flows
or that does not appropriately address nonflow
alternatives.
 Complete the feasibility study for the South
County Corridor Project.
 Establish the formation of a new Joint
Powers Agreement (JPA), complete
environmental documentation, and begin the
design and right of way for the SR132 project.
 The Claribel Road improvements are
anticipated to be complete in August 2015
and the Kiernan (SR219) improvements are
anticipated to be complete in April 2016.
 Working as part of the StanCOG Policy
Board – Board members will continue to
advocate and educate agencies,
organizations and the citizenry on the
importance of a one-half cent sales tax ballot
measure to support local road maintenance
and improvements, regional goods
movement projects, and alternative modes of
transportation for Stanislaus County
residents.
 PSR Phase I continues with quarterly reports
to the Board of Supervisors to provide
updates on the status of restoration; the
County’s Long Range Financial Model will
support decision-making on sustainable
recommendations for PSR in future budget
submissions.
 Begin a re-evaluation process around the
County’s Mission, Vision and Values to
develop priorities and goals that will take the
County to Budget Year 2020 and beyond.
 Engage Department Heads in determining
“what success looks like” for the County.
 Refine the County Budget as a policy
document, to include return on investment
and performance outcomes.
 Revitalize the County Agenda process to
include an electronic agenda management
system.
 Engage County Leadership in various areas:
Succession Planning; Security; Emergency
Preparedness; Leadership Development;
Recruitment and Retention Strategy.
 Develop a Public Information/Focused
Communication strategy that includes
marketing the County through press releases
and the use of social media.
Disability Management: continue to work with
Chief Executive Office and departmental
Human Resources staff to ensure that
departments continue to effectively work with
injured or ill employees to identify reasonable
accommodations through interactive process
meetings; continue to work with the Auditor-
Controller’s office in exploring the use of the
Absence Management module in PeopleSoft
(staff from both offices have attended training
and will begin testing the application in the
development database); develop an online
training module for new employee orientation,
allowing new employees to receive training
during their first week of employment.
 Employee Benefits: continue to work with
consultants to evaluate the County’s Self-
Insured Medical Program and make any
approved recommended changes; continue to
evaluate and monitor the County’s Healthcare
Program to ensure compliance with the
Affordable Care Act; continue to work closely
with consultants, vendors, and other
stakeholders to develop a comprehensive
employee wellness program; conduct all
necessary proposal solicitation processes and
implement any associated approved contracts
for the County's Healthcare Program to
ensure members have access to high quality providers and administrators at the lowest
cost possible; evaluate, and implement if
possible, a standard process for retirees,
COBRA enrollees, and employees on unpaid
leaves of absences to make automated
payments for healthcare premium costs;
implement an optional Long Term Care (LTC)
benefit for employees; conduct an operational
audit of the deferred compensation program
and part-time employee Social Security
replacement plan.
 Liability and Insurance Program: continue to
maintain loss insurance programs to minimize
risk exposure and control liability; continue to
work with County Counsel on implementing
the County’s updated insurance requirements
and contract language templates; continue to
partner with the General Services Agency
Purchasing Division and Strategic Business
Technology to develop the Contract and
Insurance Management System (CIMS)
database that will create a central repository
for vendor insurance documents (this will
assist departments in obtaining the
appropriate insurance certificates and
endorsements from vendors and contractors
performing work on behalf of the County);
continue to administer claims in a fair and
unbiased manner.
 Safety: continue to track department training
compliance; review and revise existing safety
policies as appropriate; continue to promote
safety throughout the organization to maintain
the County’s lower-than-average OSHA
incident rate.
 Conduct the Consolidated District
Election in November 2015.
 Conduct the Presidential Primary
Election in June 2016.
 Place Vital Record images into
production.
Provide State mandated training on
preventing workplace harassment and
bullying.
 Provide State mandated ethics training to
elected and appointed officials.
 Maintain compliance with County safety
policies.
 Enforce bail bond forfeitures, and recover
transportation costs incurred by law
enforcement agencies.
 Provide timely legal support for County
programs and projects.
Develop a methodology for monitoring and
measuring Countywide vehicle utilization.
 Repair/resurface/restripe asphalt at ten
County facilities, providing improved access to
locations.
 Update Purchasing Policies to provide
improved guidance to departments.
 Complete Year 3 of the California State Storm
Water Permit process, improving water quality
for County residents.
Implement Stanislaus County’s new Web
Site design. Some of the enhancements
provided by the new Web design provide the
customer ease of use by automatically
detecting the device and displaying
information to fit that device. Greater
emphasis on mobile services, improved
search capabilities, and much more.
 Complete implementation of Tenth Street
Place switch upgrade. Replacing aged
equipment ensures the delivery data,
connectivity and information.
 Install new backup storage system at SBT
801 datacenter. This will allow replication of
data from the primary site to this site as a
secondary/backup; providing improved
turnaround time in a recovery situation.
 Upgrade Oracle PeopleSoft and Financial
database; and begin application upgrades
from version 11.2.0.4 to 12.1. This is the first
step in moving towards application upgrades.
Begin PeopleSoft application upgrades from
version 9.1 to version 9.2; schedule to be
completed prior to September 2017. Doing
the upgrades in-house provides a cost effective means of keeping our systems
current.
 Implement Network Configuration
Management Software. The monitoring
software has the ability to quickly detect,
diagnose, and resolve network performance
issues and outages. Providing improved
efficiencies and availability of Networks.
The Division will complete staff training
and restore all Revenue Recovery
operations to maximize efficiencies and
overcome staffing challenges in recent
years.
 The entire Department is focused on
increasing collections through improved
functionality of the Columbia Ultimate
Business Systems, Inc. (CUBS) recovery
database, including modification of client
and status codes and the elimination of
uncollectible accounts. The expected
outcome is an increase in revenue and
improved functionality of the CUBS
database.
