The 2014-2015 Final Budget recommends $184,951,584 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $72,344,940 in
department revenue, $110,541,586 in revenue from the General Fund and $2,065,058
in fund balance.
In 2011, Assembly Bill 109 made fundamental changes to California’s correctional
system. It realigned custodial and community supervision responsibility for non-serious,
non-violent, and non-sex offenders, as well as supervision of lower level adult parolees
returning from state prison sentences to counties. In Fiscal Year 2011-2012, counties
received nine months of funding; Stanislaus County’s allocation was $6.6 million. In
Fiscal Year 2012-2013 the County received funding of $12.4 million and $14.5 for Fiscal
Year 2013-2014. The base allocation for Fiscal Year 2014-2015 funding is $14.4
million, which is included in the Recommended Final Budget.
The Probation Department plans to pursue grant funding opportunities to reduce racial
and ethnic disparities in the juvenile justice system. The Department also plans to
research and implement an improved detention risk assessment tool for juvenile
offenders.
The District Attorney plans to establish actual connectivity with Modesto Police
Department after they implement upgrades to software. The Electronic Data
Management has been implemented and will be significantly expanded as new
scanning stations are brought on line.
The Public Defender – Indigent Defense Fund required an increase in appropriations in
the 2013-2014 Fiscal Year Third Quarter Financial Report. The requested level of
funding in the 2014-2015 Fiscal Year is consistent with prior year trends and should be
sufficient to pay the cost of providing these services for the entire fiscal year. The
Department has received an additional $90,000 in funding as part of the AB 109
Community Corrections Partnership funding allocation.
The Sheriff plans on breaking ground on AB900 Phase II inmate facility. The complex,
when completed will encompass a Maximum Security Housing and Medical/Mental
Health Facility, a Day Reporting Center and an Intake and Release Center. The Sheriff
also plans to initiate design phase on SB 1022 project which will be a facility for Re-
Entry and Enhanced Alternatives to Custody Center (REACT Center).
The Chief Executive Office – Office of Emergency Services, Probation, Public Defender
and Sheriff’s Department were able to carry forward 100% net county cost savings from
prior fiscal years and 75% of their 2013-2014 net county cost savings. These increases
are reflected in the 2014-2015 Recommended Final Budget.
The 2014-2015 Final Budget recommends $528,797,561 in appropriations for
this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of
$487,319,041 in department revenue, $35,269,753 in revenue from the General
Fund and $6,208,767 in fund balance/retained earnings. The net General Fund
revenue allocation for Behavioral Health and Recovery Services’ programs
including Mental Health, and Public Guardian is $1,949,372; for the Community
Services Agency programs including General Assistance, In-Home Supportive
Services Provider wages, Public Authority benefits, Public Economic Assistance,
and Services and Support, the net General Fund revenue allocation is
$11,314,440; for the Health Services Agency programs including Clinics and
Ancillary Services, Indigent Health Care, and Public Health, the net General
Fund revenue allocation is $6,369,959. In addition, $15 million from the General
Fund fund balance is allocated to the Health Services Agency to accelerate
payment of long-term debt tied to the closure of the former County hospital and
the federal recoupment of funds from the former Stanislaus Family Medicine
Residency program.
The Department of Aging and Veterans Services Final Budget totals over $4
million and will receive a slight increase in Older Americans Act (OAA) funding
that will provide through Howard Training Center (HTC), the Senior Meals
Program provider, one additional day per week of meal service at all 13
Congregate Meal sites located throughout the County. Additionally, staffing
resources will be expanded to provide additional referral and outreach services to
combat veterans located in Stanislaus County. The Department is focused on
assisting the Veterans Advisory Commission in the development of a “one-stop”
Veterans Center.
Behavioral Health and Recovery Services with a total Final Budget of $88.9
million, continues to work with the Chief Executive Office on implementing
strategies that reduce costs and preserve scarce reserves. This includes the final
goal of the strategic plan for the 24/7 Secure Mental Health Services that was
approved by the Board of Supervisors in November 2012, implementation of a
Crisis Stabilization Unit (CSU) that would relieve certain hospital admissions and
emergency room pressure. A plan to locate a CSU at the Stanislaus Recovery
Center in Ceres is under development for location and could be operational by
June 2015. The Department anticipates the use of Mental Health Services Act
(MHSA) funding for remodeling costs associated with the CSU, and a
combination of MHSA and Medi-Cal matching funds for operational costs of the
CSU.
In Community Services Agency (CSA) the Final Budget totals $320.5 million.
This includes Federal and State funding in support of Health Care Reform and
Welfare to Work early engagement, family support and subsidized employment.
It is estimated that one in 2.3 persons residing in Stanislaus County now have access to health care and nutritional assistance. At the same time, the number
of persons on cash aid (CalWORKs and General Assistance) have decreased
from a high of one in 16.3 persons receiving services in Fiscal Year 2010-2011,
to one in 18.6 persons receiving services in Fiscal Year 2013-2014.
The Health Services Agency’s Final Budget totals $92.1 million and includes a
reduction of over $10 million in 1991 Health Realignment funding as the result of
the State’s redirection of funding from the implementation of the Affordable Care
Act and Medi-Cal expansion, which began January 1, 2014. Also included in the
Health Services Agency’s Clinics and Ancillary Services division is $15 million of
one-time funding from the General Fund that will be used to accelerate the payoff
of the Agency’s long-term debt related to the closure of the former County
hospital and the Federal recoupment of funding for the Stanislaus Family
Medicine Residency program. The total debt of $18.1 million will now be fully
repaid several years ahead of schedule and will make available operating capital
for use at the Public Safety Center as the AB 900 Phase II jail expansion projects
are completed and put into operation.
The 2014-2015 Final Budget recommends $29,757,189 in appropriations for this priority
area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $28,177,748 in department
revenue, $491,810 in a General Fund contribution and $1,087,631 in fund balance.
For Fiscal Year 2014-2015, Alliance Worknet revenues are substantially less than Fiscal
Year 2013-2014 and result in strict limitations on the number of individuals referred to
vocational training programs as well as limiting the funding available for on-the-job
training reimbursements to employers. Training referrals will have to be limited to
programs that prepare individuals for only those occupations that are in very high
demand by local businesses.
An increase in contracted funding from the Community Services Agency to Alliance
Worknet – StanWORKs will allow the Department to increase its services for Temporary Aid to Needy Families recipients. The Department anticipates providing over 4000
Stanislaus County residents with Welfare to Work related services.
The Library is primarily funded by a voter approved 1/8-cent sales tax, which represents
approximately 89% of the Library’s total revenue to support the Library operations in
Fiscal Year 2014-2015. The voter approved 1/8-cent sales tax was scheduled to sunset
on June 30, 2013, but was extended through a successful local measure for an
additional five years. Local revenue has also increased due to the increased demand
for passport application services and the generous support from the Library Foundation
and friends of the Library. State Literacy funding is anticipated to increase in Fiscal
Year 2014-2015.
Technology is fundamentally changing the library model and delivery of service. The
Library anticipates using a portion of fund balance to upgrade outdated technology and
improve facilities. Electronic audio, magazines and newspapers will be available for
downloading, audio and video upgrades to enhance storytelling activities and trainings
will occur, and the Patterson Library will have a computer and training lab for adults.
The Ceres Library will receive current materials, new furnishings and an emphasis on
technology. A large quiet room will be designated in the Modesto Library to provide
customers with a calm and comfortable area to study and use electronic devices. There
are several projects occurring this fiscal year to create a safer and welcoming
environment.
The 2014-2015 Final Budget recommends $5,814,523 in appropriations for this priority
area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $3,216,547 in department
revenue, $2,581,084 in General Fund contribution and $16,892 in fund balance.
The Agricultural Commissioner will be able to maintain the current level of service
provided to the community through the use of a portion of the net county cost savings
from prior years, and the use of increased State funding to protect the County’s valuable
agricultural resources. This is primarily funded through increased unclaimed gas tax
and mill tax reimbursement revenue materializing higher than originally budgeted. This
additional State funding will allow the Department to conduct egg inspections at
production and wholesale facilities, surveillance activities of the glassy-winged
sharpshooter, trapping activities for the detection of the light brown apple moth, conduct surveillance and agricultural inspection activities of cantaloupe fields, and to spot check
flea markets and swap meets for gunny sacking activities in Stanislaus County.
The Department developed the Purchase and Sale of Walnuts ordinance to prevent
walnut theft by requiring sellers to provide documentation for proof of ownership and
establishing a buying period. The ordinance will be implemented in the fall of 2014 and
it is anticipated the ordinance will decrease the amount of walnuts stolen directly from
farmer’s orchards.
The University of California (UC) Cooperative Extension Stanislaus County continues to
provide practical, researched-based solutions to local industry problems. The 4-H
Youth Development program continues to provide a wide variety of activities and
learning opportunities for their young members. The Department also continues its
efforts in improving fertility practices among farmers and developing more productive
crop varieties for local farmers. At the recommended level of funding, the Department
can maintain the current level of service through the use of net county cost savings from
prior years and an increase in General Fund contribution.
The 2014-2015 Final Budget recommends $141,295,959 in appropriations for this
priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of $123,824,687 in
department revenue, $4,255,309 in a General Fund contribution and $13,215,963 in
fund balance/retained earnings.
The Department of Environmental Resources will continue to provide for mandated
education, investigation and inspection services for programs. The new groundwater mining ordinance was implemented last fiscal year. The Department will continue to
move that effort forward and will implement the Groundwater Management Action Plan
adopted by the Board of Supervisors on June 10, 2014.
The Department of Parks and Recreation will continue to maintain the identified parks
and facilities at the current level of service. Re-evaluating priorities and adjusting the
workforce to the priorities identified will result in the continued ability to efficiently carry
out their mission and provide basic levels of services at all general funded
neighborhood parks, cemeteries, bridges, County Centers and office buildings,
Woodward Reservoir and Modesto Reservoir Regional Parks.
The Planning and Community Development focus for the upcoming fiscal year is on
maintaining core services while fulfilling all State and Federal mandated requirements
relating to land use activities, building codes, special revenue grants, and the
administration of the Stanislaus County Successor and Successor Housing Agencies (of
the former Stanislaus County Redevelopment Agency). The Department will focus on
land-use and subdivision application processing, local oversight of permitted surface
mining operations, implementation of the Williamson Act, and maintenance of the
County General Plan in compliance with State mandates and local needs.
The Department of Public Works, funded through Federal, State and local transportation
funding sources, expects to maintain the County’s roadway system in a reasonably safe
and cost-effective manner. This includes repairs, improvements, and preventive
maintenance performed on an annual basis. The Public Works – Road & Bridge budget
includes funding of $29.1 million for two significant roads projects: State Route
99/Kiernan Interchange and Claribel Road Widening.
The 2014-2015 Recommended Final Budget recommends $202,041,295 in
appropriations for this priority area. These expenditures are funded by a combination of
$118,810,560 in department revenue, $81,995,593 in contributions from the General
Fund and $1,235,142 in fund balance.
Over the past six years the County used a combination of reductions-in-force coupled
with adjustments to the compensation and benefits structure as a cost cutting and cost
containment strategy in order to maintain financial viability during a period of financial
difficulty. Starting in Fiscal Year 2009-2010, all County Labor Associations,
Unrepresented Confidential and Management Employees and Elected Officials partook
in a 5% salary deduction. In 2012, the County reached agreement for a 6% permanent
salary deduction with all Labor Associations, Unrepresented Confidential and
Management Employees and Elected Officials. In July 2013, with signs of economic
recovery the Board of Supervisors approved the restoration of 1% of the 6% permanent
salary deduction. With all County Labor Association agreements set to expire on June
30, 2014, and the long-term growth in discretionary revenue over the next five years,
the Board of Supervisors approved the restoration of an additional 3% for all
Unrepresented Confidential and Management Employees and Elected Officials in June
2014. To absorb this increase, the Assessor, Clerk-Recorder, Clerk-Recorder –
Elections and County Counsel were provided with an additional General Fund
contribution in an amount of $76,597 in their base budgets. The County is in
negotiations with the labor associations that represent the remaining employees in this
Board priority and will review budgets quarterly to determine if any additional
adjustments are needed.
Included in this budget is the plan to reestablish the Internal Audit Division within the
Auditor-Controller Office. This plan includes the restoration of one unfunded Manager IV
position to lead the Division as well as two new Accounting III positions. The prorated
cost for Fiscal Year 2014-2015 for these positions is $169,000 offset by $114,000 in estimated revenue. The difference will be funded by net county cost savings the
Department has accumulated.
The Chief Executive Office – Appropriations for Contingencies budget includes an
increase in appropriations by $6.6 million. This increase is in preparation for anticipated
increases associated with Public Safety restoration, prevention programs, termination
cashouts, countywide security functions and labor increases.
The Chief Executive Office – County Facilities budget provides funding for costs
associated with maintaining certain County property. This budget’s base budget was
increased by $151,905 funded by additional General Fund support in response to the
increased costs associated with maintaining County facilities.
In Fiscal Year 2013-2014 the County refinanced its debt obligations. This resulted in an
increase in the annual debt service costs and therefore the Chief Executive Office –
Debt Service base appropriations budget was increased by $1,659,760 to fund all debt
service obligations.
The Chief Executive Office – General Fund Contributions to Other Programs budget
includes increased contributions of $139,406 in its base budget to the Department of
Environmental Resources for the Water Resources Manager position. An additional
contribution of $122,486 is recommended to Public Works – Administration to help fund
Geographical Information Systems, $45,000 to Public Works – Engineering support
non-road related survey services and an additional $20,000 to the Department of
Environmental Resources to fund a Water Consultant contract. Furthermore, an
additional $15,000,000 contribution to Health Services Agency – Clinics and Ancillary
Services is recommended to accelerate the Clinics and Ancillary Services’ deficit
repayment.
The Chief Executive Office – Plant Acquisition budget includes increased appropriations
of $1,900,000 for deferred maintenance projects, the disposition and
remediation/cleanup at the former Honor Farm, to complete the booster pump system
upgrades at the Public Safety Center, professional legal services, professional grant
writing services for the Veterans’ Services Facility Project and to fund the County’s
portion of the costs to repair the card reader access system at Tenth Street Place.
The Clerk-Recorder Office has recently been coming in contact with disruptive members
of the public. In response to this, it is recommended to increase the Clerk-Recorder
budget by $17,715 to fund the cost of a private security guard for five months.
The Auditor-Controller, Board of Supervisors, Chief Executive Office – Operations and
Services, Chief Executive Office – Risk Management, Chief Executive Office – Crows
Landing Air Facility, and Treasurer-Tax Collector were able to carry forward 100% of net
county cost savings from prior fiscal years and 75% of their 2013-2014 net county cost
savings. These increases are reflected in the 2014-2015 Recommended Final Budget.
Continue the integration of emergency
management, fire warden and fire service
fund functions within the County
organization.
 Establish and carry out performance
objectives for the division.
 Provide enhanced support to local fire
agencies through better communications, fire
prevention and fire investigations, finance
and administration.
 Provide emergency management
coordination for the Stanislaus Operational
Area including the development of the
Stanislaus County Emergency Operations
Plan and updating the Multi-Jurisdictional
Hazard Mitigation Plan.
Establish actual connectivity with Modesto
Police Department (MPD) after MPD
implements upgrades to software.
 Interface with Superior Court to allow
population of Integrated Criminal Justice
Information System (ICJIS) database with
information from court minute orders.
 Electronic Data Management has been
implemented and will be significantly
expanded as new scanning stations are
brought on line.
ICJIS will implement additional electronic
interfaces with internal departments and
external entities to reduce redundant data
entry and improve operational performance.
 ICJIS will work to upgrade its current
software infrastructure, enhance its feature
set and maintain a technical posture that
facilitates ease of use, flexibility and
interoperability.
 ICJIS will contribute to a safe and secure
community by providing local law
enforcement, County Departments, and
other agencies vital, real-time, criminal
justice information.
Research and implement an improved
detention risk assessment tool for juvenile
offenders.
 Pursue grant funding opportunities to reduce
racial and ethnic disparities in the juvenile
justice system.
 Actively participate in the construction of a
new adult Day Reporting Center and related
programming.
 Improve supervision strategies that include
both incentives and sanctions to produce
better offender outcomes.
Continue to provide effective representation
to our clients.
Re-open Inmate Work Quarters at the
downtown Men’s Jail.
 Break ground on AB900 Phase II inmate
facility. The complex, when completed will
encompass a Maximum Security Housing
and Medical/Mental Health Facility, a Day
Reporting Center and an Intake and Release
Center.
 Initiate design phase on SB 1022 project
which will be a facility for Re-Entry and
Enhanced Alternatives to Custody Center
(REACT Center).
 Research and plan toward the possible
reactivation of the Sheriff’s Deputy Training
Academy at the Ray Simon Training Center
that was temporarily suspended on January
12, 2010.
 Begin the renovation of the vacant County
Property to house a new Coroner’s Facility
that is planned to meet the County’s Coroner
needs now and into the future.
 Hire a Captain to oversee a restructured
Administrative Division which will be
responsible for Administration (HR, Payroll
and Safety), Courts Services, Civil Division,
Coroner’s Facility/Public Administration and
Records.
 Hire a Crime Analyst to assist patrol operations and detectives in identifying and
addressing local crime trends and suspect
identification.
 Continue infrastructure build out for county
wide-radio interoperability project funded by
the COPS grant.
In addition to continuing with the programs
and services listed, the Department will work
with local radio stations to produce public
service announcements regarding available
programs and services of the Area Agency
on Aging.
 Coordinate with the Adult Protective Services
and the Behavioral Health and Recovery
Services programs to handle special cases
that are referred through the Prevention and
Early Intervention Programs and the
Information and Assistance Program. When
appropriate, we will work with the Stanislaus
Senior Foundation and Advancing Vibrant
Communities to offer emergency assistance.
 Continue to provide staff support for the
Veterans Advisory Commission.
 The County Veterans Service Office will
continue to assist the Veterans Advisory
Committee in the following priorities: 1)
Development of the “One-Stop Shop” facility
concept for veterans services in Stanislaus
County; 2) Increase outreach efforts to
inform all veterans of services available to
them; 3) Continue to develop the
Transportation for Homebound Veterans as
well as increase the VA transportation
volunteer base; and 4) Provide education
and job placement opportunities for veterans.
Coordinate with the California State
University, Stanislaus to utilize social work
and nursing student interns in the MSSP and
Prevention and Early Intervention Programs.
 Expand HICAP services to a new satellite
location in Turlock once per month.
 Coordinate with the Healthy Aging
Association to develop and implement a new
SNAP-Ed program. The program will
encourage seniors to improve their health,
incorporating more fresh fruits and
vegetables in their diets.
Complete Managed Care Operations module
of Electronic Health Record.
 Complete installation of new computers for
BHRS staff.
 Complete the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Mental
Health Services Act (MHSA) annual update
and three-year expenditure plan.
 The Executive Assistant and the new
Manager for Consumer and Family Affairs
will attend the Leadership Institute offered by
the California Institute for Mental Health and
University of Southern California.
 Implement provisions of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA)
in January 2015.
 Implement the final goal of the Strategic Plan
for 24/7 Secure Mental Health Services with
the opening of a Crisis Stabilization Unit
(CSU) on the Stanislaus Recovery Center
campus by June 2015.
Maintain collection and distribution at
$48,000,000 of child support to families.
 Collect 65.2% of current court ordered
support.
 Continue to obtain a support order on
95.6% of cases.
 Maintain collections on 63.8% of cases
with an arrears balance.
 Meet the State required collection to cost
ratio.
 Partner with County departments and
agencies to establish a fatherhood
program.
Implement Year Three of the 2012-2014
Strategic Plan.
 Develop and adopt a 2015-2017 Strategic
Plan.
 Maintain positive trends in the reduction of
repeat child maltreatment reports.
 Increase the number of children who are
cognitively, socially, and behaviorally ready
to enter school.
 Maintain access and maximize utilization of
children’s preventative and ongoing health
care.
 Increase the number of healthy births from
high risk pregnancies.
Strengthen protective services for children
through prevention strategies including
continued implementation of Katie A mental
health services focused on the Strengthening
Families Framework and increasing public
awareness related to Commercially Sexually
Exploited Child victims.
 Increase the opportunity for Welfare to Work
customers to become self-sufficient through
expanding subsidized employment
opportunities and the implementation of
Family Stabilization.
 Improve access to health benefits and
nutrition through Medi-Cal outreach and
CalFresh horizontal integration.
 Ensure Quality Assurance and Customer
Services in IHSS while implementing new
Fair Labor Standards Law changes related to
overtime for in-home care providers.
 Develop a master plan focused on customer
service through infrastructure improvements
in facilities, capital maintenance projects and mobility access.
 Implement a workforce development strategy
focused on staff recruitment and retention to
ensure a healthy, diverse and engaged
workforce.
Plan and strategize for Federal Health Care
Reform and changes in the healthcare
environment
 Establish timeline for Public Health
accreditation preparation and make
measurable progress on deliverables.
 Achieve annual recertification of the
Federally Qualified Health Center Look-Alike
designation.
 Achieve renewed and new grant support to
enable multiple initiatives.
 Continue efforts to improve efficiencies,
enhance revenue, and increase staff
development, while meeting fiscal targets,
programmatic objectives and achieving
compliance.
 Will complete implementation of an upgrade
to the VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol)
phone system which should be finalized in
July 2014.
 Continue efforts to improve population health
and health outcomes.
Increase training and internship opportunities
for careers that are in demand.
 Continue to build partnerships with
businesses in the community to work in
conjunction with Alliance Worknet for their
employment needs.
 Work in partnership with Community
Services Agency (CSA) to increase services
provided by the WTW program and increase
the capacity to serve additional participants
and improving Work Participation Rates
(WPR).
 Increase assistance to TANF (Temporary Aid
to Needy Families) customers by providing
job search and job retention skills.
 Increase outreach activities.
 Open a new Career Resource Center in
Turlock.
 Provide over 4,000 Stanislaus County
residents with Welfare to Work related
services.
Revitalize the Ceres Library into a Fresh
Collection Branch with current new materials,
new furnishings and an emphasis on
technology. Children’s programs and
outreach will increase.
 Install a new computer and training lab at the
Patterson Library.
 Expand passport application services to the
Turlock and Salida Libraries.
 Redesign the library’s website to make it
more attractive, user-friendly and up-to-date.
 Designate a large quiet/study room at the
Modesto Library.
 Issue an RFP and award a contract for a
Library Facilities and Technology Master
Plan.
 Add additional on-line resources such as a
language learning database and
downloadable audio.
In conjunction with CDFA, roll out the
Stanislaus County egg inspection software to
all counties in the state who are participating
in the egg inspection program.
 Implement the Stanislaus County Purchase
and Sale of Walnuts Ordinance.
 Hold a pesticide disposal event, allowing
growers in Stanislaus County to dispose of
unwanted pesticides.
Begin a process to import and quarantine
several almond varieties from Europe to
evaluate their performance under Stanislaus
County growing conditions.
 Evaluate new horticultural and farming
methods to improve current practices.
 Develop and present an introductory course
for new almond growers.
 Complete research projects on silage
management.
 Secure additional funding for future applied
research on dairies.
Implement the Groundwater Management
Action Plan adopted by the Board.
 Construct Ash Cell 4 at the Fink Road
Landfill.
 Complete the Phase III upgrades to the
landfill gas system at the Geer Road Landfill.
 Develop long-term agreements for waste
flow control with the Regional Solid Waste
Planning Agency cities.
 Evaluate the implementation of a residential
green waste recycling program.
Development and implementation schedule
of the Regional Parks Marketing Plan.
 Continued development of T-Island and Muir
Point Campground improvements at
Woodward.
 Installation of fuel pumps at Modesto
Reservoir.
Maintain core functions and a high level of
customer service within budget.
 Continue the effective implementation of
existing State and Federal Grants.
 Pursue new grants to cover needed
infrastructure construction costs.
 Obtain full implementation of the citizen
access online permitting and Interactive
voice response components of the Accela
permit software package.
 Evaluate best practices for permitting
processes.
 Continue to realign staffing levels to reflect
current workload activities.
Resurface 80 miles of roadway with
conventional chip seal.
 Begin construction on the bridge seismic
retrofit project on Pete Miller Road over Delta
Mendota Canal.
 Adopt the locally preferred alternative route
for the North County Corridor.
 Research and implement transit technology
for Stanislaus Regional Transit (StaRT).
 Board adoption and implementation of a
Local Traffic Mitigation Fund Program.
 Construct sidewalks in Parklawn and Empire
neighborhoods.
Complete a timely assessment roll.
 Continue the project to digitize existing
appraisal records.
 Create all new appraisal records in an
electronic format.
 Maintain current service and staffing levels.
Complete PeopleSoft Tools Upgrade.
 Continue to provide implementation of
electronic time entry to County departments.
 Work towards utilizing the Financial
Management Solutions Sub Ledger functions
to perform the reconciliation between the
Government Wide and Fund Financial
Statements.
 Train Independent Special Districts to
complete the annual State Controller’s Office
reporting requirements.
 Implement an automatic electronic solution for
distribution of financial reports to School
Districts who hold monies in the County
Treasury.
The Board will continue to guide the priorities
for the County and set expectation levels for
departments.
Development and promotion of a Prevention
Based Services focus in the organization and
broader community including a convening of
non-profit, faith-based, education, business,
government and media community partners
to prepare a Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) analysis
of the current service delivery system as it
relates to homelessness, youth early
intervention, reducing recidivism and
strengthening families.
 Successful completion of new labor and
health contracts with all twelve labor
organizations.
 Continue to focus on improvements to the
County’s recruitment process to ensure
outreach and communications with each
candidate results in the strongest possible
pool of qualified applicants. Initiatives will
include quantifying recruitment results by
advertising location, attending job fairs and
conducting outreach at local educational
institutions.
 Succession planning remains a critical
initiative for the County. Focus for the next year will be on developing tools to support
Departments Heads and staff in planning for
critical vacancies and providing additional
training to Department Heads on Employee
Development and planning for crucial gaps.
 Initiate long term planning for the County’s
safety net programs. Evaluate real impacts
of the Affordable Care Act, significant
reductions in the Medically Indigent Adult
population and future options for community
partnerships. Evaluate options for a
Psychiatry Residency program.
 Chief Executive Office staff will continue to
promote Stanislaus County as an attractive
place to develop and grow business. Several
of the primary objectives for the 2014-2015
Fiscal Year include: continue to facilitate the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
process for the Crows Landing Air Facility
development effort with a primary objective
to have an Administrative Draft
Environmental Impact Report (ADEIR) ready
for review and next steps; continue to assist
the Parks Department with developing a
strong promotional agenda for our Regional
Parks; assist and coordinate the
development efforts born out of the Water
Advisory Committee Groundwater
Management model; adjust the Public
Facilities Fee Program for inflationary
update.
 With significant capital projects work
underway, 2014-2015 will be primarily
focused on repurposing a vacant County
facility for the Sheriff’s Coroner Project; the
design-build construction at the public safety
center site of the AB 900 Phase II Jail
Expansion Project One (Maximum-Security
Housing Units/Medical, Mental Health Units),
Project Two (Day Reporting Center), and
Project Three (Intake, Release, and
Transportation); and the design of Project
Four, the Re-Entry and Enhanced
Alternatives to Custody Training (REACT)
Center Project which will include 288 beds
and program space.
 A Collaborative effort will continue with the
Stanislaus County Veterans Advisory
Commission to implement the Four Part
Strategy approved by the Board of
Supervisors in July, 2014 to pursue a onestop
Veterans Service Center.
Disability Management: 1) Continue to work
with Chief Executive Office and departmental
Human Resources staff to ensure that
departments continue to effectively work with
injured or ill employees to identify reasonable
accommodations through interactive process
meetings; 2) Work with the Auditor-
Controller’s office to begin development of the
Absence Management module in PeopleSoft;
3) Develop an online training module for new
employee orientation allowing new employees
to receive training during their first week of
employment.
 Employee Benefits: 1) Continue to work with
consultants to evaluate the County’s Self-
Insured Medical Program and make any
approved recommended changes; 2)
Continue to work on the implementation of
health care reform to ensure compliance with
the Affordable Care Act; 3) Work closely with
consultants and vendors to develop a new
employee wellness program; 4) Implement
any necessary Requests for Proposals for the
County's Healthcare Program to ensure
members have access to high quality
providers and administrators at the lowest
cost possible; 5) Evaluate, and implement if
possible, a standard process for retirees,
COBRA enrollees, and employees on unpaid leaves of absences to make automated
payments for healthcare premium costs.
 Liability and Insurance Program: 1) Continue
to maintain loss insurance programs to
minimize risk exposure and control liability; 2)
Continue to work with County Counsel on the
County’s existing insurance requirements and
contract language updates; 3) Continue to
partner with the General Services Agency
Purchasing Division to ensure departments
are obtaining the appropriate insurance
certificates and endorsements from vendors
and contractors performing work on behalf of
the County; 4) Continue to administer claims
in a fair and unbiased manner.
 Safety: 1) Explore existing and develop
additional online training opportunities to
expand safety training options to County
employees; 2) Continue to promote safety
throughout the organization to maintain the
County’s lower-than-average OSHA incident
rate.
Conduct the Gubernatorial General Election
in November 2014.
 Implement government to government erecording.
 Remodel Clerk Recorder counters and
cubicles.
 Implement HVAC system improvements.
Provide State mandated training on ethics to
elected and appointed officials receiving
reimbursement for travel expenses.
 Provide State mandated training to
managers and supervisors on preventing
workplace harassment.
 Maintain 100% compliance with County
safety program and policies, and ensure a
safe working environment for employees.
Completion of a multi-cycle department
reorganization strategy.
 Develop improved method of tracking vehicle
mileage, utilization, and safety.
 Continue to monitor and improve upon our
master agreement strategies.
 Develop a green procurement strategy for
GSA.
Implement Mobile Device Management and
Web Filtering Solutions.
 Implement Board of Supervisors Mobile site
and live streaming upgrade to support mobile
viewing on any devices.
 County Web Site upgrade: enhanced
graphics, department focus, and department
level search features, auto-fit of device being
utilized including mobile devices.
 Continue to work in partnership with BHRS
to deploy VoIP solutions at the Stanislaus
Recovery Center in Ceres and Ninth Street
in Modesto.
 Upgrade 50+ servers to Windows 2012
R2/2008 R2.
 Begin design and implementation of core
network infrastructure at Tenth Street Place.
Upgrading aging switches to Power over
Ethernet (POE).
Complete the status code conversion in the
Revenue Recovery database.
 Complete the cash flow projections for
capital projects, including the jail expansion.
 Continue enhanced collections, including
possible seizure and sale of property
pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code
2951.
