TCBHS will continue to focus extensively in the coming year on the Alcohol
and Other Drug Services (AODS) Division. With Health Care Reform on the horizon,
and the insurance parity that comes with that change, much needs to be done to get
prepared. The Agency must submit an application to the State Department of Health
Care Services (DHCS) for Drug Medi-Cal certification, and this will be accomplished
before March of this year. When Medi-Cal becomes more available to citizens with a
lower threshold for qualification, there may be pent up need for services. Additionally,
with AB 109 necessitating more options for prisoners, a wider variety of interventions
will be required. The Agency now accepts the Low Income Health Plan, CMSP’s
Path2Health insurance, for AODS services. In March of this year, CORRECTIONAL
COUNSELING, INC. presents state-of-the-art certified MRT™ (Moral Reconation
Therapy) TRAINING as sponsored by the local community correctional planning group.
All this being said, it is apparent there will be much to do to streamline programs so
TCBHS can meet the needs of the community.
Time line: This project will take most of 2013 to complete.
Funding Source: Drug Medi-Cal; AB 109 funding; Reimbursement from Anthem Blue
Cross for CMSP; Realignment AOD Funds; SAPT Federal Dollars; and the Self Pay Fee
Schedule.
Justification: Health Care Reform is changing the way we think about intervention and
the reimbursement rules are changing. As a County Behavioral Health organization,
TCBHS must update their business plan for the future.
Responsible Persons: Anne Lagorio, as AODS Administrator, will be primarily
responsible. Rachel Sanger, the TCBHS Business Manager, will be fully involved in
keeping the funding streams accurate and in compliance. The Kings View Anasazi Staff
will be assisting with the billing processes, as will Dr Cruz, also from Kings View, as our
medical director, be signing off on our certification application. TCBHS will be working
closely with the Probation Department to facilitate persons coming into the Agency for
services.
Outcomes:
 Medi-Cal Drug Certification.
 Increased capacity to serve more community members.
 Stronger fiscal health in the AODS Division.
 Evidence-based practice in place to serve residents.
 Improved quality of life for Trinity County residents.
2. Activity: TCBHS will focus more extensively on the reorganization of the Clinical
Services Division in the coming year. With the Board of Supervisors decision in February
of 2013 to allow TCBHS to hire a supervisor in this division, it is the Agency’s intent to
add depth to the clinical services provided. This will result in more clinical expertise in
Hayfork, a greater range of licensed crisis coverage throughout the county, and beefed up
supervision to case managers. Additionally, as a way to measure the Agency’s success
during the course of this coming year, TCBHS will be introducing three (3) new outcome
measures. One is now ready for implementation with staff training complete and the other
two will follow in the months ahead. Another area of focus for TCBHS in this clinical
arena is to follow up with the work CAL MHSA is doing with Suicide Prevention. Along
these lines, the Agency is working with the local hospital district and the Sheriff Office to
agree on an MOU outlining the roles and responsibilities of each party when an
evaluation service is done for a citizen experiencing an episode of serious mental illness.
Timeline: Beginning in January and going through December 2013, the Agency will
proceed with the activities mentioned above.
Funding Source: Federal Medi-Cal; Realigned Funds; and Mental Health Services Act
Funds.
Responsible Persons: Ann Houle, as Agency Clinical Director, will lead the process; the
Management Leadership will provide guidance.
Justification: With health care reform on the immediate horizon, the Agency would
be remiss not to strengthen and prepare for the new consumers who will be coming
to the clinic in the months ahead.
Outcomes:
 More experienced presence in Hayfork.
 Outcome measures to be in place for all clients served.
 A more developed licensed crisis response backup team.
 Better strategies for suicide intervention.
 A signed MOU between the ER, the Sheriff, and TCBHS.
 Better clinical outcomes for the clients of the Agency.
3. Activity: TCBHS will reorganize the Quality Improvement (QI) Program in the coming
year. With the hiring of a data specialist, who is also a clinician, the hope is to collect
and analyze the data that the outcome measures will produce. TCBHS will participate in
an external quality review process on April 18, 2013, as facilitated by the APS Health
Organization. The Federal Government mandates this review since TCBHS is a Medi-Cal
provider. TCBHS will also participate in a “self audit” in June as a preparation for the
State of California Medi-Cal Audit Process to happen in fall of 2013.
Timeline: These are annual events and generally last about one (1) or two (2) days.
A report is issued several months after each site visit.
Funding Source: There is no cost to participate in these activities, except lost revenue
for staff time to do preparation and the cost of compliance, to realize recommendations.
Responsible persons:
 Noel J. O’Neill will take the lead but all managers and staff at TCBHS will
participate in a variety of ways. The new data clinician will be immersed in this
entire activity.
 Rachel Sanger will interface with Kings View Business Services to provide the
various reports and data that are needed in the reviews.
 Pam Thayer, a Quality Assurance Contractor, on contract with TCBHS from
North Valley Catholic Social Services (NVCCS), and Sue Sirlin, from Outlook
Associates, will interface with APS Health Organization and focus on the two (2)
Primary Intervention Projects (PIP) that are required to evaluate certain clinical
and administrative practices.
 Ann Houle and Anne Lagorio will respond to questions about access and crisis
and quality of clinical services.
 Joyce Ott, Patient Rights Advocate, and Boe Anna Gorsuch and Rosalyn Santos,
as consumer peer specialists, will describe consumer involvement in TCBHS
programs.
Justification: These are required activities that are associated with the Managed Care
Contract that TCBHS has with the State Department of Mental Health.
Outcomes:
 The hope is that services will be improved and that better quality and delivery of
services are the result of the efforts of the review.
 The final report may contain recommendations that could improve various
aspects of clinic functioning.
4. Activity: TCBHS will support the Wellness Center’s Client Drop-In Centers to generate
a wider variety of activities than are currently available, especially activities that promote
Recovery Principles that might lead to prevocational and vocational outcomes. This
coming year, due to the outreach the Agency had with the Department of Rehabilitation
(DOR), we hope to involve consumers in various supports that DOR can offer. As an
Innovative Program, Milestones Outreach Support Team, or MOST, is a team of
individuals who have completed a leadership program with Milestones, and who typically
are extra hire employees providing support and follow up case management for other
peers of the Agency. The goal in the coming year is to see how this remarkable effort
may be able to benefit clients of the clinic in such a manner that more members of the
drop-in center can benefit from their services. TCBHS will greatly expand this program
over the next 12 months.
Timeline: This is an activity that will take the full fiscal year to address.
Funding Sources and Status: The primary revenue for this activity will be MHSA;
Community Supports and Services and Innovation dollars will be utilized. Both of these
funding streams are approved and available as budgeted.
Justification: The Wellness Center’s Drop-In Centers are meant to be more than just an
environment for acceptance and socialization. Peer Support and Recovery from mental
illness are primary goals. The Drop-In Centers should promote activities that will assist
clients to take better control of their lives and potentially, in some cases, lead to gainful
employment, either in sheltered or open market settings.
Responsible Persons: The Mental Health Board; the Mental Health Services Act
Manager, Marlinda Butler; the Board of Directors at the Wellness Center’s Drop-In
Centers; the Leadership Team of the Agency; and the clients themselves.
Outcomes:
 More opportunities for consumers and family members to participate in the
activities at the Wellness Center’s Drop-In Centers which will lead to Recovery
and will potentially lead to work settings, either sheltered or on the open market.
 A better and stronger partnership between the public mental health system and
the consumers of services so the strengths of consumers and family members can
be utilized in filling gaps in service that currently exist.
 Development of a stronger and independent client community at the Wellness
Center’s Drop-In Centers where the daily census is on the rise.

Administration
 Preparation and Implementation of Health Care Reform
 Implement document imaging software to minimize storage of closed cases
 Staff training of increased number of applicants
 Work closely with the Auditor’s office in learning the updates to the County’s accounting system –
Bitech.
 Continue to keep Board and public apprised of activities and services provided by Health &
Human Services
 Work within the confines of restricted or reduced state and federal funding to ensure quality public
service.
Adult Services/ In Home Supportive Services / Public Guardian
 Seek additional county funding to support a full-time Public Guardian staff member. Current
funding supports 0.3 FTE
 Implement new state IHSS Program Integrity (Fraud) guidelines
 Develop procedures to conduct joint abuse/fraud investigations with Fraud Investigator to improve
outcomes and enhance safety in the field
58
 Seek funding/training for Welfare Fraud Investigator position. State law requires the Fraud
Investigator to complete the Specialized Investigative Basic Course (SIBC)
 Continue to review and revise APS, IHSS, and PG practices in view of changes resulting from
implementation of CMIPS II and EMS
 Continue to field-test mobile solutions to enhance communication and safety for field staff
 Address recent increase in financial abuse and scams in the county. Victims are losing tens of
thousands of dollars to perpetrators outside of the county. Continue outreach with local law
enforcement and financial institutions, FBI and FTC to address financial scams
 Explore use of local and social media to increase awareness of elder and dependent adult abuse,
both for local residents and their families, who may reside out of the county
Child Welfare Services
 Participate with the AmeriCorps program with 2 staff to help expand Differential Response and
expand the service offerings for prevention.
 Implementation efforts jointly with Behavioral Health Services to provide expanded Mental Health
services to foster youth (Katie A. Implementation)
 Revisit and develop new policies & procedures around drug testing, visitation, family services,
and various other needs within Child Welfare.
 Develop and Implement Family Engagement groups and parent/caregiver orientations monthly or
bi-monthly.
 Obtain or develop additional services/providers to serve families that are not able to access
services locally.
Eligibility
 Prepare and implementation of Health Care Reform
 Engage the community and involve as many individuals and organizations as possible to assist
with health care reform implementation to the county.
 Become fully staffed and staff retention
 Implementation and transition into semi-annual reporting for CalWorks and Cal Fresh
 Assist a much greater portion of Trinity County residents due to health care reform
 Establish a comprehensive General Assistance Program Manual
Employment Services
 Complete the implementation of the 24 month time clock regulation
 Implement family stabilization plan with six month crisis reduction plan for families coming into the
welfare to work program.
 Complete reengagement of all families discontinued from the young child exemptions.
 Continue to expand subsidized employment program by adding five new placements.
Public Health
 Work with Public Health new management to make smooth transition in management position
with limited staffing
 Address concerns raised by State WIC Branch regarding our current PWPC (Primary WIC point
of Contact) arrangements with Shasta County by continuing recruitment efforts to hire an inhouse
position.
 Work towards getting Health Department staffed with Nurses and a Health Officer to ensure
Public Health services are being met.

 Coordinate essential services (Immunizations clinics, communicable disease investigations,
emergency planning, CCS program, TB control and Rabies Surveillance) of Public Health and
keep them functioning in the transition of staffing in Public Health.
 Coordination of multiple disaster/emergency plans required by the Public Health Emergency
Preparedness program.
 Continue to serve and keep the public aware of Public Health programs.
 Continue nutrition education efforts via federal grants being provided to Public Health.
 Work with Partnership HealthPlan of California (PHC), our managed care company, for the
implementation of MOU’s related to Public Health.
 Keep working relationship with Planned Parenthood Clinic to provide outreach services to Trinity
County.

Continue to pursue increasing our State & Federal Performance Goals as assigned by
the State.
 Continue to work on inventory listing and disposing of old no longer used equipment &
furniture
 Work to continue to increase collections through Early Intervention with the new
wireless computer system used in court.
 Continue updating our office procedure manual to keep it up to date with required
State & Federal instructions and changes.
We are striving to bring our collections back up but are struggling with tough economic
times, high unemployment rate, our underground economy, and long term unemployment
payments ceasing in the very near future.
Major goals of the coming fiscal year include coordinating the activities of the Master Gardener
Volunteers. The majority of their efforts will be focused on efforts that benefit Trinity County
communities. We are also planning to increase the FTE of one of our nutrition educators from
0.80 FTE to 1.0 FTE. We will conduct additional workshops on food preservation, nutrition,
forest management, water measurement and other needs identified by the community.
Trends
The economic situation in Trinity County has resulted in increased interest in our Cal-Fresh
program as well as gardening and food preservation. This interest fueled our efforts to increase
the FTE of one of the nutrition educators.

We will continue to provide the best possible service given our limited resources. This includes responding
to an ever increasing call volume and handing an increase in incident reports. In 2012 the Sheriffs Office
handled 8054 calls for service and took 1843 incident reports. These figures represent a modest increase
over 2011, but they reflect a rather significant increase over previous years. Even though the workload
continues to increase our staffing level remains the same. The unfortunate result of this situation is a
reduction in service to the community.
Both the Detective Division and Narcotics Division have seen a dramatic increase in their caseload over
previous years. With the increase in crimes against persons and the need for extensive investigation into
these cases, property crimes are only being worked as time allows. In addition, Narcotics Investigators
have stepped up drug enforcement over the efforts of previous administrations. However, with only four
Investigators assigned to the Narcotics Task Force cases have to be handled on a priority bases.
The Trinity County Jail continues to be a major area of concern that constitutes significant liability for the
County. The jail is an antiquated and outdated facility that presents substantial safety concerns for both staff
and inmates alike. The number of bookings into the jail is on the increase as is the average daily population.
We are consistently above the jail's rated capacity level of fifty-three. In fact the only way we have managed
to hold the population close to the authorized level is through early releases and increasing the electronic
monitoring program. In an effort to address safety concerns we have filled three vacant correctional officer
positions this past year, but one additional position still remains unfilled. Unfortunately, attrition in the jail is
an ongoing issue as current officers are continually seeking enhanced opportunities with other agencies.
However, our goal is to overcome these obstacles and provide an effective and efficient jail operation.
Unfortunately, this becomes more difficult as our budgetary sources dry up and costs
increase. This year we are requesting over $280,000 more in general fund contributions
than last year just to maintain the status quo. This also means that, if we do not get this
increase in budget, business will have to change in the DA's office. We will have to make
hard choices such as staff reduction which means also we cannot handle the same
amount of cases as usual. We will need to choose which types of crimes to prosecute,
and which ones not to prosecute. And, we will not have the staff to file asset forfeiture
cases, which means a loss of revenue to the DA's Office, the Sheriff's Department, and
Probation.
At the same time, we currently have an unprecedented six homicide cases, one with three
defendants and therefore three potential trials, and five other potential homicide trials. We
have to dedicate a significant amount of resources to properly prosecute these homicides,
which means tough choices need to be made in other cases.
The bottom line is, while we will never lose sight of our goal of keeping our citizens safe
and will continue to fight for justice in each and every case, without more funding from the
County, public safety will suffer.
On a positive note, our Victim/Witness coordinator is doing an outstanding job and is
providing excellent service to all of our victims and their families. We will continue to
provide these services because helping our victims is a priority in all of our cases and we
are having a positive impact on our victims' lives.
Continue to conduct business with the highest ethical and due diligence standards.
 Continue to provide respectful and professional customer service.
 Continue to train and support staff on the various facets of this department.
 Continue to provide transparency and useful information to the Board of Supervisors.
 Continue to meet all reporting deadlines.
 Continue to work with our consultant to prepare new or update existing financial reporting
templates
 Submit Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for the period ending June 30, 2013 to
Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) award.
 Continue with the implementation of the Financial System Upgrade. Installation and go-live date
are tentatively scheduled to occur this fiscal year.
 Work with Consultant to ensure compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Fringe Benefit
and Franchise Tax Board (FTB) 1099 reporting requirements.
 County-wide Cost Allocation Plan Training.
 Continue to review, update and implement when appropriate, policies and procedures.
 Staff development and training.
 Update the new Auditor’s website to provide easier access to County financial information.
 Increase support to the Citizens of Trinity County, County Departments and Special Districts.
Future Goals and Objectives
 Planning and implementing the new payroll check outline and covert to pressure seal
forms.
 Begin to research the requirements of electronic payments to vendors.

The 13/14 proposed operating budget will continue to put strain on
all operations, expectations and responsibilities of the General Services Department. As always
the General Services Department will continue to be supportive of the imposed budget given and
continue to try and provide an expected level of service. Going forward into fiscal year 13/14
General services will be catching up on the current preventive maintenance program, revising
and implementing new practices that will match the 13/14 imposed budget.


For 2013 -2014, the IT Department’s main goal is to replace our Microsoft Exchange
2003 E-mail server. It’s incompatibility with newer software and limited functionality with
mobile devices is mandating an upgrade. This is an expensive undertaking. Due to a static
general fund contribution, this may not be able to be accomplished in the current fiscal year.
The effect on the County is that users who acquire new computers will have to downgrade their
E-mail application in order to access our current Exchange server. Also, the aged equipment that
hosts our Exchange Server is no longer under warranty and increases the chances of equipment
failure. We would like to address this issue sooner rather than later in order to maintain the
integrity of this key system. As always, we will provide the best possible service with the
resources given.

Review and update Site Control and Emergency Response
Plans for all sites, including the Hazardous Material Business Plans required by State agencies
(DTSC & CalEPA). Review and update departmental Code of Safe Practices. Perform these
updates using an interactive process where staff can be included and can contribute to project,
enhancing awareness of the components of the operations.
Weaverville Landfill Closure Projects: The Weaverville Landfill is still pending closure.
It is our goal to incorporate specific projects designated in the closure plan into the current year
cycle so as to minimize the impact of the overall project when it is finally approved. The 2012
inflation factor issued by CalRecycle (calculated in arrears) is 1.8%. Cost estimates for closure
increase annually by the designated inflation factor, so we will try to complete any projects we
can at current cost estimates. Any work done this way will be performed through the enterprise
fund budget and reimbursed by the Closure Trust Fund upon State approval. Our current
endeavor is the installation of two gas venting wells.

The biggest issue continues to be maintaining funding for rural roads in California. With
the passage of MAP-21, the state is taking a wholesale look at how things are funded, but
with the dilemma of the MPO’s pushing for an even larger share. Working with Rural
Counties Task Force (RCTF), North State Super Region (NSSR), and County Engineers
Association of California (CEAC), we are looking for ways to ensure that we continue to
receive our fair share without losing further ground, and seeking ways to correct current
inequities for rural area road funding. Fortunately we have had some limited success
such as increasing our Regional Surface Transportation Program (RSTP) to be based on a
formula considering road miles vs. just population.
Cash Flow will become a significant issue over the next three years as we set out to
construct significant road projects in the County. The Department, working with the
CAO, Auditor, and Caltrans will seek out resolutions to assist as we proceed forward.
Design and acquisition for Lance Gulch Road are expected to be wrapped up by the end
of the calendar year. Utility Clearance Construction is anticipated for later this fall with
the project in full construction starting April 2014 for a September 2015 opening. Major
brush removal will also take place this fall in preparation for the future road.
SUMMARY
Roadway maintenance is, and will continue to be, a challenge as our roadways become
older and funding becomes less available. The Department will continue to look for
opportunities to procure funding for all divisions, road, transit, and airports, whenever the
opportunity presents itself. Also, in the interest of maximizing the effectiveness of
available funds, the department will utilize a new system that will outline high accident
locations and direct effective pavement repairs with available resources.

Planning: Indirect cost for the Planning Department has decreased significantly now that
basic policies are in place. These policies reduce the need for assistance from County
Counsel. The bulk of the work in the following year will be allocated to updating the
2014 Housing Element. Planning is committed to provide a full and comprehensive
update for the Board to take action upon within mandated time frames. Planning is now
responsible for the General Plan Update Fund and Budget ensuring that fees collected for
this activity are used for the purposes of updating the General Plan.
Environmental Health: the Division will fund the Code Enforcement Officer until
December 2013 using the Environmental Health Officer vacancy funded with Health
Realignment and departmental funds. The inability to recover any cost associated with
zoning violations related to permit violations and the marijuana industry continues to be
problematic and will be a critical item once funding expires in December 2013. Funds
for Solid Waste oversight have been bifurcated from the Building Budget into a dedicated
account titled Local Enforcement Agency. This will assist in ensuring funds are used for
purposes of Solid Waste Oversight.
Building: It appears that building is picking up though out the state. Trinity County has
yet to see indicators of this increase. The number of permit fees is anticipated to remain
stagnant, however there has been an increase in the cost of building structures of the last
couple of year. To account for this increase, the department is increasing the valuation,
which in turn will increase the overall amount collected by approximately 7%.

Utilize current resources to effectively process applications while maintaining the best
level of service. Without revenues and limited general fund contribution, the Department
staffing is below minimum standards in all sections. The outcome of this issue has been
problematic follow through, reduced counter hours, and delays in permit processing, plan
check and inspections. This will not be resolved until construction and planning
activities and funding return to previous levels. For example in Planning, we are
currently at 40% of what the discretionary planning activities were in 2007 but holding
study. On a positive note, additional funding that has been provided allowed for a 50%
increase in counter time allowing for the office to remain open through lunch time.
Update the General Plan. The current priority, due to State imposed guidelines, is to
update the Housing Element during 2014. The RCD is currently working on an update to
the Safety Element with participation from a variety of community agencies, including
the Planning Department, as well as various interest groups. It is anticipated that this
element will begin its public review period in the coming months with formal
presentation for consideration by the Board being scheduled during the winter.
The Department will continue to also investigate and pursue means to fund a more
comprehensive update of the General Plan.
Find ways to encourage property owners to get building permits. This has been a long
standing issue in the County where a large amount of buildings in the County are
unpermitted structures. Working with the Assessor’s Office and Code Enforcement,
develop a program where unpermitted structures can be identified and brought into
compliance. We will also evaluate an amnesty program to encourage owners to be
compliant. This will only be possible as time and resources allow.
SUMMARY
Checking plans and proposals, inspecting buildings and health issues, and enforcing the
code is, and will continue to be, a challenge as our department funding continue to
limited. The Department will continue to look for opportunities to procure funding to
assist in any of the responsibilities, whenever the opportunity presents itself. Also, in the
interest of maximizing the effectiveness of available resources, the department will utilize
GIS mapping for identifying zoning requirements and permitting issues.
Again, with a stagnant General Fund contribution and increasing cost, this Department
will not have sufficient staffing to deliver all of the basic needs, and struggles to be able
to sustain basic services. However, additional funding provided last year is allowing for
a return of some critical services and increase in counter hours which is appreciated by
the Public and by Staff.

We are kicking off this fiscal year with good news. The department has been successful with a
request for additional funding, which will cover a larger cost for operations.
Increase Service
 Lewiston route; existing morning and evening service between Lewiston and Weaverville
will be increased to five days per week, Monday thru Friday.
 Lewiston route; a mid-day run between Weaverville and Lewiston will begin this fall and
will be available five days per week.
Operational Changes
 The Trinity Transit office was relocated to the Department of Transportation building at
the beginning of the FY. This change is much more efficient and convenient for staff to
communicate and will save money by reducing overhead costs and travel time.
 A new bus shelter has been installed at Martin Road and Highway 299. This allows the
buses to meet along the highway instead of entering the Tops Market parking lot, which
will reduce risks and lessen congestion within the parking lot.
Planning
 Complete the update to the Short Range Transit Development Plan and the Coordinated
Plan. A major focus of this plan is to forecast capital needs in the future and improve
ridership.
 Complete a preliminary plan focusing on the development of a Transit Maintenance
Facility.

Coordinate with local agencies and intercity transportation services to improve
transportation service.
 Explore/plan operation of Saturday service.
 Continue recruitment of back-up drivers
 Policy/training development
KEY ISSUES
The biggest issue this year is to continue applying for and maintaining operational and capital
funding for Trinity Transit's service. As a rural county, public transportation is extremely
important for local residents and intercity travelers. Securing toll credits for this FY, will cover
approximately 70% of operations. Fortunately, Map 21 has not had any drastic effects on the
FTA 5311 program. It is expected credits will be available in future years.

Because of the extensive project delivery schedule within DOT for Road Projects, no
airport projects are proposed in this Fiscal Year.
KEY ISSUES
There is a need for significant pavement maintenance at several airports. In order to keep
the airports in good shape, maintenance is required at all airports. This will be the first
priority for all future airport projects. For this fiscal year, the efforts will be made by the
Road Crews to increase the amount of crack sealing to help limit and control weed
growth.
Caltrans Aeronautics has identified several issues concerning trees and poles that
could/have lead to operational restrictions at the airport. Staff working with the AAC
will be trying to address these issues in the upcoming year.
SUMMARY
While the AAC desires much more action concerning construction, there is also an
understanding of other commitments within DOT. With this understanding, they have
unanimously recommended this year airport budgets for approval, but with the
understanding that future budgets will incorporate a more robust maintenance and
improvement program.