The FY 2016-17 Budget for TCBHS reflects an overall increase of approximately
$1,303,000 as compared to FY 2015-16. Of this total increase, Department 4200
accounts for approximately $1,146,000. Salary increases coupled with changes in
72
benefit and retirement amounts, and increased use and reclassifications of our position
allocations account for $466,000 of this increase. The majority of this increase to
Department 4200 is due to a $750,000 grant award TCBHS received from CHFFA to
construct a four bedroom respite home. In addition to these changes, there was a
$70,000 reduction to Services and Supplies accounts as well as Support and Care of
persons. Significant changes in Services and Supplies are seen in professional and
specialized services, and Transportation and travel.
Department 4230 accounts for the remaining increase of $157,000 as compared to
FY2015/16. This increase is primarily due to Salaries. Salary increases as well as
adjustments to benefits and retirement, coupled with the fact that we are budgeting for
1.0 additional FTE within our existing allotment, results in an increase to Salaries of
$143,000. An additional increase of $14,000 is the result of changes in various
Services and Supplies and Other Charges.
Overall revenue is projected to increase by approximately $1,303,000 in FY 2016/17.
Of this amount, the projected increase in revenue for Department 4200 is $1,176,000.
This is primarily due to the $750,000 CHFFA Respite Home grant, however there are
also projected increases in 1991 Realignment, SAMHSA Grant, and MHSA revenue
offset by decreased projected 2011 Behavioral Health Sub-account realignment and
Medi-Cal revenue. The remaining increase in revenue is approximately $126,000 for
Department 4230. This increase is primarily due to increases in Substance Abuse
Prevention and Treatment Block Grant. We also have increased revenue from AB 109
reimbursements transferred from Probation and Interfund Revenue from Health and
Human Services to fund two Substance Abuse Specialist positions. These increases
are offset by a decrease in Drug Medi-Cal funding.

Cedar House
In the spring of FY 2015-16, the Agency applied for and received a $750,000 grant from
CHFFA to construct a four bedroom home, called Cedar House, on the same campus
as Alpine House. In FY 2016-17, TCBHS will utilize these funds to construct Cedar
House. While a significant amount of planning was done prior to submitting the grant
application, we continue to move forward with the planning and design process. Our
goal is to go out to bid for this project and select a contractor by early 2017 and
complete the construction process during the spring. We anticipate that Cedar House
will be staffed with four Peer Specialists and be open to consumers early in FY 2017-
73
18. Cedar House and its staff will fall under the supervision of our newly created and
hired Triage Manage. It is hoped that by integrating triage, crisis, and Wellness Center
services with Cedar House, weekend services will be readily available, minimizing the
need and cost for services provided at the local Emergency Room (ER).
? Expansion to serve individuals with Mild and Moderate Mental Illnesses
With the Beacon contract in place, TCBHS will continue to work with Beacon to expand
our client population to include individuals with diagnoses of mild to moderate mental
illnesses. In addition to working with Beacon, TCBHS intends to examine the possibility
of contracting with other insurance carriers, such as Anthem Blue Shield, to fund
services to this mild to moderate mental illness population. This will allow TCBHS to
continue moving toward our goal of providing cutting edge treatment locally in
Weaverville and Hayfork.
? Peer Certification
In FY 2016-17, the Agency will continue its efforts toward the professionalization and
career path for Peer Specialists. In addition to sending individual Peer Specialists to
trainings geared toward certification, the Agency will also send a Peer Coordinator and
Case Manager to Peer Training for Trainers. The goal of this effort is to have staff
attend the training to gain the skills and abilities to come back to the Agency and train
additional Peer Specialists. This will be instrumental in training the Peer Specialist staff
hired to oversee Cedar House.
In order to promote more effective integration of this recovery model in our system, the
Agency is interested in developing a career ladder for the Peer Specialist, and to that
end, a second tier job classification for the more seasoned staff person is being
planned for the near future. The Agency has also joined a Superior Region WET project
to provide intensive training provided by CASRA, a contract rehabilitative provider.
This training began in July of 2015 for four peer specialists and one supervisor.
? Cognitive Based Trauma Informed Services
TCBHS received an increase in its Mental Health Block Grant to provide services to
individuals experiencing a Firsts Episode Psychosis break. In addition, TCBHS
participated in a multi-agency grant effort to fund services for crime victims. A portion
of these funds will be used to provide TCBHS staff with training on providing Cognitive
Based Trauma Informed services. This training will strengthen TCBHS’ ability to
provide quality services to Trinity County residents by expanding the variety of evidence
based services we can provide.
74
Substance Use Disorder (SUD) Services and Prevention Activities
? Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System
In addition to continuing with the Drug Medi-Cal program, the Agency will opt in to the
new Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System (DMC ODS) Waiver that will expand
SUD services. TCBHS understands that it is critical to have a full range of services for
SUD clients, ranging from medical detoxification, to residential care, to drug
replacement therapy, and to outpatient intensive care for all Medi-Cal Beneficiaries to
include Residential and Medication Assisted Treatment options. This will require that
TCBHS join with other counties in a regional approach. Under this approach, services
that are not available in Trinity County, such as Residential Treatment, medical
detoxification, and drug replacement therapy, will be made available via contracts with
providers within the region.

 Focus on practice indicators established as goals for FFY 16/17:
o Improve number of days from case opening to order to 1st payment;
o Increase number of orders established by stipulated agreement between clients;
o Increase the number of families we serve by:
o Working with Family Court to identify families who need our services;
o Reaching out to clients receiving only Medi-Cal benefits.
 Establish a T1 line linking Trinity County directly to Humboldt County for shared
services usage.
 Continue streamlining both counties’ procedures to identify cost-savings opportunities.

We currently have a vacancy on the CalFresh side we are working on filling. The program
manager, Janessa Hartman will be working on how to address this vacancy. Major goals for the
coming fiscal year include continuing to develop and maintain a corps of Master Gardener
volunteers across the county.
Trends
Water continues to be an issue on irrigated farms and ranches locally. Recent legislation has
required measurement devices on some diversions. We will continue to work on providing
educational on this topic. The CalFresh staff will be working in classroom across the County
conducting food and nutrition lessons and working in the community promoting healthy eating.

 Work collaboratively with the Planning Department to begin development of a Cannabis
Cultivation Licensing and Certification Program in the Agricultural Commissioner’s Office.
 To host continued education sessions for license/certificate holders in Trinity County.
 Increase Ground Inspections at nursery, producers, and organic properties.
 Survey areas of diffuse & spotted knapweed, plumeless thistle, and hoary cress infestations.
 Emphasize inspections of plant materials for Pierce’s disease, glassy?winged sharpshooter, and
Sudden Oak Death (Phytophthora ramorum).
 Survey different areas of the County for the placement of gypsy moth traps which have not been
trapped recently.
 Obtain a cart to carry two 5 gallon test measures to perform retail fuel pump inspections.
 Continue pesticide use monitoring inspections on Agriculture and Structural Companies.
 Increase Ground Inspections nursery, farmer market and organic producers.
 Complete the second year of the broom species removal project and work collaboratively with
Watershed Center and Trinity County Resource Conservation District.

The 9 patrol positions is something that causes me great concern. The last time anyone
can recall 24/7 coverage on the patrol side in Trinity County was 1993 when the Sheriffs’ Office
had 38 sworn personnel. It’s not hard to see that it is impossible to provide the law enforcement
standard of 24/7 coverage with only 9 patrol personnel.

In the spring of this year I learned that I needed to plan for the pending retirements of
four of our most experienced sworn staff members at the end of 2018. Those four retirements
will create a 23.53% reduction of the sworn staff of the Sheriffs’ Office (this calculation does not
include the position of Sheriff). This 23.53% reduction will have a drastic impact on the services
the Sheriffs’ Office currently provides. Without immediate action being taken to prepare for
filling these vacancies Trinity County communities will be left with little to no law enforcement
services.
To add to these already challenging circumstances I also have learned that our 22 year
veteran Animal Control Officer, Christine Edwards, will be retiring at the end of June 2017. ACO
Edwards experience, dedication, attention to duty and service to the community cannot be
replaced but we’ll try.
That is why my budget request, for Fiscal Year 2016/2017, included a succession plan to
deal with these pending vacancies. I explained to the BOS’s, on the budget committee, that the
hiring process for law enforcement personnel is a lengthy and time consuming endeavor. I told
them that time is needed to advertise for the positions, test, conduct extensive mandated
background investigations and medical and psychological examinations. These requirements
can take six months or longer. If we have an applicant that has not attended a POST approved
academy then we can add another six months to the process. This means it can take up to one
year from the start of the process before we have a deputy that still needs to go through the field
training program. I also advised budget committee Board Members that I would be retiring at the
end of 2018 as well and to leave the next Sheriff with a 23.53% hole to fill on the sworn side and
not be able to hire someone on six months prior to the ACO’s departure to be trained would be
at the least be irresponsible. But the true victims of failing to act on this immediately will be the
people of Trinity County.
Yesterday, August 16, 2016, I was informed by County Administrative Officer fiscal staff
that there were no funds available to implement any portion of the succession plan. I was also
informed that the County’s fiscal woes are expected to last for the next several years. This is
extremely unfortunate.

Use IGT, MAA and TCM revenues to hire two additional Deputy Probation Officers (at least
one of the positions will be an inner-departmental promotion).
? Complete the training of all Deputy Probation Officers in Targeted Case Management (TCM)
to maximize state/federal reimbursement of case management services provided to clients.
? Continue to partner with Child Welfare to successfully achieve identified shared goals and
targets with regards to the County System Improvement Plan (SIP), Resource Approval Plan
(RFP), Blue Ribbon Committee, and the Hayfork Student Success Project.
? Continue to partner with the Trinity County Superior Court to implement a community court
that encompasses emerging best practice standards with substance abusing individuals
? Continue to work with BSCC to reclassify the juvenile hall in order to secure additional yearly
funding through the state.
? Finalize the new contract with Shasta County for long-term detention of youth.
? Amend and submit to the Board for approval a revised Community Corrections Partnership
(CCP) Plan for Trinity County.
? Open recruitment for a new Chief Probation Officer due to the pending retirement of the
current Chief.
? During the 4th Quarter of the fiscal year open recruitment to replace a retiring Deputy Probation
Officer,
? Replace the current copier/printer from the copier trust account first quarter of FY 16/17. The
current printer is more than 15 years old and parts are no longer available. Staff will access
the new printer through the network which is not an available option with the current printer.

Manage the county portfolio while maintaining principal and providing an
effective cash flow to meet expenditure needs.
 Invest idle funds and increase portfolio diversification while obtaining a
respectable yield.
 Complete preparation and provide a special workshop to BOS for refunding of
debt issuance to review the options available to save the county much needed
revenue and options to ease cash flow constraints.
 Meet mandated deadlines for bills, notices, reporting requirements and
publications.
 Perform additional transient occupancy audits.
 Enact transient occupancy amnesty program to encourage voluntary
participation within specified timeframe without incurring penalties.
 Continue to decrease delinquency percentages.
 Continuous training of team members.
 Implement new processes and modernize internal departmental procedures to
increase response times and to provide enhanced services
 Provide exercise for countywide fiscal staff on cash handling procedures and
monetary safety habits.
 Conduct annual tax-defaulted property auction.
 Planning and implementation of supplemental collection methods.
 Continue research to replace current tax software.

The budget I submitted for FY 16/17 allowed for all existing (6) employees to remain full-time.
As an “additional request” item, which was not included in my budget figures as directed, was a
project manager to assist with the implementation and testing of data between IFAS and One
Solution, onsite. This individual would be able to come in, roll up their sleeves and assist with
all the processing and testing between the two environments plus keep the project on track.
With our existing staffing level, maintaining our current workloads and processing transactions
and testing in both environments, additional assistance is necessary to make this a successful
transfer. Otherwise, it will require all staff to work additional hours which will result in overtime
pay or compensatory time and staff morale being reduced.
With the staffing level in the Information Technology department and the retirement of the
individual who had the most experience with our accounting software, I requested that this
department receive training from SunGard to manage the day to day issues as they arise.
Optimally it would be beneficial to the County to have this department trained on report writing,
database management, database cleanup and other programming tasks that are typically
performed by I.T. staff in other counties. However in my opinion, we don’t have enough work
to require full time dedicated staff in this area and therefore contracting out is the most fiscally
sound option.
Staff has been working with an outside contractor reviewing the County’s existing benefits being
provided to employees to ensure that we are in compliance with the Internal Revenue Service.
If any changes are found that are out of compliance, they will be implemented by January 2017.
Based on the Budget Committee’s recommended budget cut, the project manager and training
for I.T. staff was eliminated. The additional $22,709, will be absorbed by cutting some services
and supplies and delaying contractual projects until after mid-year. If at mid-year, revenues
come in higher than projected contractual projects will resume.

Going forward into 16/17 General Services will continued to maintain a structured preventive
maintenance program. This program is imperative in maintaining mechanical and structural
integrity throughout our service areas. General Services will continue identifying and
implementing cost saving alternatives and identity opportunities to become more efficient. As
in years past General Services will continue to work with and support other county
departments where needed.

The Department's goals and objectives for this coming year include: CAL VET funding for
county veteran services has been permanently increased to $5.6 million/year allowing regular
twice monthly service to Hayfork to continue. Transition to electronic submission of VA claims
and pensions is near. Expanded interne bandwidth for the Veteran Service Office computer
system is necessary in order to utilize the VA Veterans Benefit Management System and
CAL VET web-based required training. The VSO will continue to collaborate with VA Northern
California Healthcare District representatives and Mountain Communities Healthcare District for
expansion of VA Rural Healthcare into Trinity County. The FY 2015/2016 Veterans Service
Operations Plan will be presented to the Trinity County BOS in August 2015.

The Department's goals and objectives for this coming year include: All County employees
will be provided AB1825 Compliance training, "Respect & Professionalism in the Workplace:
Discrimination, Harassment & Retaliation Prevention" which now includes a new component,
AB2053 "Abusive Conduct." Accomplish two (2) evacuation drills per county office building.
For the third year, we are conducting a Healthy For Life challenge which has been incorporated
into the County's wellness program. The department will continue to evaluate, revise and train
staff on current County contract insurance requirements. Review and update the remaining
employee handbook policies and train all employees accordingly. Conduct risk assessments in
each department and provide trainings, resources and support in loss prevention efforts to all
county staff.

Goals for 2015/16: Begin final phase II closure of the Weaverville Landfill by processing RFPs
for contract work, contracting and completing the initial grading plans and excavation; apply for
new Registration Permit for the Inert Debris Cell disposal site; review department Code of Safe
Practices, and train staff on additional operational objectives; devise a plan for addressing
deferred maintenance and equipment replacement; develop a compliance schedule to align
transfer stations with increased regulatory requirements (LEA, CUPA, RWQCB, DTSC,
CalRecycle).

Utilize any additional funding and support from the California State Library and the
NorthNet Library System to enhance and expand services, collections and digital resources.
 Use allocated grant funding in the renewed Zip Books program to purchase items
requested by patrons, supplementing the program with interlibrary loan service.
 Continue to work with the Corporation for Education Network Initiatives in California
(CENIC) and the California State Library to secure high speed broadband access for the
library.
 Explore the provision of access to the library’s digital resources through online library card
sign-up.