Safety and Security
Goal 1: Work with State and Federal government officials to
maintain local land use authority concerning marijuana grow
sites.
 Objective 1 – Continue to monitor and provide feedback,
as needed, on all State and Federal legislative proposals.
Goal 2: Maximize public and private resource to address the
Tree Mortality epidemic in Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – Use the Tree Mortality removal plan to seek
State and Federal funding for the removal of dead and
dying trees along County owned mountain roads and
infrastructure.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Work with the San Joaquin Valley Water
Infrastructure Authority to continue to seek, promote, arrange,
and compete for grant funding for water infrastructure projects
benefitting the San Joaquin Valley Residents.
 Objective 1 – Seek funding from the California Water
Bond for the proposed Temperance Flat Dam on the San
Joaquin River and other local surface water and
groundwater storage projects.
Goal 2: Continue to explore solutions for communities in
Tulare County that have water quality issues.
 Objective 1 – Seek Proposition 1 Disadvantaged
Community IRWM Funding to meet the needs of our
disadvantaged communities.
Goal 3: Continue to pursue goals outlined in the adopted
Strategic Plan for the Step Up Program.
 Objective 1 – Using the data collected from the
consultant, seek and apply for grant funding to expand
Step Up programming.
 Objective 2 - Identify gaps in service in communities found
to be under served by the Step Up Program.
 Objective 3 – Increase participant involvement for the
Lead Program to 57% or more for the 2016-2017 school
year from targeted populations.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Initiate the County’s five year 2016-2021 Strategic
Business Plan to ensure continued alignment between
community priorities and County services.
 Objective 1 – Update and adopt five year Strategic
Business Plan by December 2016.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Build upon our current safety training program which
is designed to keep all Agricultural Commissioner employees
safe in a variety of different situations. Update the program
to include recent changes to California laws and regulations.
 Objective 1 – Focus on the new Heat Illness Prevention
laws and regulations, update the current list of training
of inspectors and supervisors, and purchase and provide
additional safety equipment to the employees as needed.
Periodically and annually train the staff in these
regulations and assure implementation.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Reach out to our Spanish speaking growers in an
effort to help educate and train them in the safe methods of
using, storing, and applying pesticides to their agricultural
commodities.
 Objective 1 – Implement a Spanish only training class,
which mirrors other Spanish/English worker safety
training classes, designed to offer special assistance to
growers as they prepare to take their Private Applicators
Exam, a requirement in getting a Restricted Use
Pesticides Permit. This permit would allow the applicant
to purchase and safely apply Restricted Use Pesticides.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Identify, plan, and budget for needed repairs and/or
equipment upgrades. These are items that are beyond
normal maintenance, things like floor coverings, modular
cubicle dividers, and more.
 Objective 1 – Develop a prioritized list of needed
upgrades that can be implemented as the budget allows.
These projects will continuously improve organizational
effectiveness and fiscal stability of this Department.


Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Value all taxable property in Tulare County in order
to accurately publish the Secured and Unsecured
assessment roll and deliver it to the County Auditor by June
2017.
 Objective 1 – Value an estimated 181,500 property
accounts. Of the estimated 181,500 property accounts,
review 28,172 for decline in value and 14,444 Williamson
Act reduced assessments.
 Objective 2 - Deliver an accurate and complete
assessment roll to the County Auditor by June 2017.
Goal 2: Complete initial project milestones for the
implementation of new property tax system software by June
2017.
 Objective 1 – Finish recordation of full base year value
data set by June 2017.
 Objective 2 - Complete Phase 1 of system conversion
including initial data migration and testing.
Goal 3: Begin document imaging of approximately 900,000
historic property tax records to better comply with the County
Record Retention Policy and increase the effective utility of
new property tax software.
 Objective 1 - Procure all needed hardware, funding, and
staff to begin the project by October 2016.
 Objective 2 - Establish a systematic process to capture
and store images which will allow for the creation of an
independent data base to be subsequently linked to the
coming property system by November 2016.
Goal 4: Begin preservation and digitizing of 1923-1959
official record indices.
 Objective 1 – Digitize 50% of historical 1923-1959
official records by FY 2017/18.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve customer service and overall department
efficiencies by uploading files into the Questys System, which
will give all staff immediate access to available information.
 Objective 1 – Upload files to the Questys system by June
2017 to enable access to data by staff.
Goal 2: Improve the efficiency of preparing and issuing the
County’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) by
utilizing macros.
 Objective 1: Develop a macro to be used within the
financial statements, as well as their corresponding tables
and charts by June 2017.
 Objective 2: Apply the macro to financial statement
documents, tables, and charts by June 2017.
Goal 3: Replace end of life mainframe Property Information
Management System (PIMS) in Property Tax and Tax
Collector Divisions.
 Objective 1 – Implement phase two of base conversion
for the Property Tax Division by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Implement phase two of base conversion
for the Tax Collector Division by June 2017.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Improve safety of the public and employees.
Objective 1 – Work with Facilities to complete repairs to
parking lot hazards by June 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Increase Community Savings.
 Objective 1 – Promote Surplus inventory at an additional
reduced cost to various community programs by June
2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Improve use of County Funds.
Objective 1 – Work with County departments to implement
additional cost saving measures to acquire public services
and improve County infrastructure resulting in cost savings by
June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Develop highly knowledgeable staff to meet all
County procurement needs.
 Objective 1 – Finalize execution of Policies and
Procedures Manual to serve departments more effectively
and in a timelier manner by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Implement cross-training process, to
increase Purchasing Department’s response time and
effectiveness by June 2017.
Goal 2: Improve insurance coverage documentation for
contracts and agreements.
Objective 1 – Implement repository system for countywide
access to store and retrieve required insurance
documentation using Questys software by June 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Reduce injuries and illness of field workers from
potential hazards in production agriculture.
 Objective 1 – Provide and participate in field worker safety
classes by April 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Enhance competitive, sustainable food systems.
 Objective 1 – Reduce impact of invasive weeds. Weed
management research will be conducted on cropping and
non-crop systems. The results are to be presented at
producers and industry meetings by April 2017.
Goal 2: Developing a Peach and Nectarine Orchard for the
21st Century.
 Objective 1 – This project was initiated to study ladderless
orchards that reduce labor inputs and improve worker
safety. We are also examining new irrigation technologies
that save water including pulsed subsurface drip. The
project is administered through this office and is funded by
a UC ANR grant award of $289,000 and more than
$50,000 of in-kind donations from industry.
Goal 3: To help local citrus producers make more effective
cultural practice decisions.
 Objective 1 – Acquire grant funding to support new
studies by January 2017.
be compiled and studied by June 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Enhance the health of Californians.
 Objective 1 – Conduct nutrition and family consumer
science research, and implement programs that address
childhood obesity and the human nutritional status.
Provide outreach to 300 families, through the Expanded
Food and Nutrition Education Program (EFNEP), and to
reach over 5,500 youth and 6,000 family members through
the CalFresh Program by June 2017.
Goal 2: Advance youth leadership and science literacy in
natural resources, agricultural, and nutrition.
 Objective 1 – Extend the use of new “iThrive” online
curriculum to all local 4-H Club programs by June 2017.
Goal 3: Promote water conservation and drought strategies
for urban landscapes.
 Objective 1 – Expand outreach with new educational
opportunities to promote gardening “Central Valley Style”
by June 2017.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Further Improve client service by developing and
providing relevant training.
 Objective 1 - Work collaboratively with Health & Human
Services Agency – Mental Health to develop a
presentation outlining mental health services in Tulare
County by May 2017.
 Objective 2 - Conduct one training on testifying in court,
for Child Welfare Services staff, by March 2017.
 Objective 3 - Conduct one training on compliance with
the Indian Child Welfare Act, for Child Welfare Services
staff, by March 2017.
 Objective 4 - Conduct one training on search and
seizure for Child Welfare Services staff, by February
2017.
 Objective 5 - Conduct one training on new cases and
legislation for Child Welfare Services staff, by February
2017.
Objective 6 - Prepare and provide monthly training for
Public Guardian staff on legal issues (Public Guardian
and County Counsel Training Series), each month,
through June 2017.
 Objective 7 – Provide training on the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) by
June 2017.
Goal 2: Assist our clients in the provision of services.
 Objective 1 - Assist Child Welfare Services in the
preparation and completion of a Memorandum of
Understanding between Tulare County and the Tule
River Indian Tribe concerning the investigation and
subsequent disposition of child abuse and neglect
matters for Tule River Indian children by June 2017.
Goal 3: Further improve legal framework for effective civil
code enforcement.
 Objective 1 – Further update section 165 of the Tulare
County ordinance including revision to the applicants’
appeal application manual, and internal checklist for
departments for use during appeal process by April 2017.
 Objective 2 – Create a practice guide for internal use to
advise hearing officers in the administrative hearings held
under Chapter 23 of Part 1 of the Tulare County
Ordinance Code pertaining to administrative fines by
June 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Further improve County effectiveness in contracting
for goods and services.
 Objective 1 – Continue revising County contract
boilerplate language to address contracting with different
business entities by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Provide contracts training for departments
by January 2017.
Goal 2: Further improve County fee setting process.
 Objective 1 – Conduct County Fee Setting Process
training for departments by March 2017.
 Objective 2 – Continue partnership with requesting
departments to review and assist in bringing before the
Board new fee structures by June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Further define the County’s obligations to locate
and preserve records, electronic data, and other evidence,
and create training regarding those obligations and the
development and implementation of appropriate litigation
hold processes.
 Objective 1 - Develop specialized subpoena response
training material for Health and Human Services Agency
and Sheriff’s Department by June 2017.
Goal 2: Further increase efficiency in filing and managing
legal documents.
 Objective 1 - Establish method of tracking adoption of
and revisions to Personnel Rules and Administrative
Regulations for efficient access to implementing
resolutions for use in legal proceedings by March 2017.
Goal 3: Further improve public meetings conducted by
County committees and commissions.
 Objective 1 – Update Brown Act manual with recent
case law developments by April 2017.
 Objective 2 – Provide Brown Act Training by May 2017.
Goal 4: Further improve effectiveness of employees and
work teams in the delivery of legal and risk management
services to departments.
 Objective 1 – Develop new protocols for client contacts
during the course of litigation matters by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Complete assessments of team functions
and preliminary implementation of recommended
improvements in four of the eight work teams by
December 2016.
 Objective 3 – Implement Comprehensive Onboarding
Program for all new employees and employees
transferring to new positions, by March 2017.
 Objective 4 – Develop internal practice guides regarding
County personnel matters and employee due process,
advocacy in administrative hearings, handling Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA) breaches, and protected leaves of absences by
June 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Assist in the completion of capital projects affecting
law enforcement, fire safety, roads, and emergency
operations.
 Objective 1 – Provide administrative and funding support
to the affected departments (e.g., Sheriff, Fire, Resource
management Agency, and Health and Human Services
Agency) for safety and security projects.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Implement Tulare County’s Economic Development
Strategy
 Objective 1 – Form a team to develop a target marketing
plan focusing on business development, tourism and film
activities.
 Objective 2 – Maximize intergovernmental economic
development opportunities by collaborating with cities
other public entities, and private sector participants
leading to joint project development and funding.
 Objective 3 – Explore public-private development
partnership opportunities to help generate increased
streams of general purpose revenue such as property
taxes, sales taxes, transient occupancy taxes, and
project revenue sharing.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Working with affected departments, implement
Plans, Policies and Projects affecting water and wastewater,
and flood control.
 Objective 1 – Provide administrative and funding support
to the affected departments (e.g., Resource Management
Agency and Health and Human Services Agency) for
these projects.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Implement Tulare County’s Strategic Management
System by focusing on the CAO’s Profile in Strategic
Management.
 Objective 1 – Emphasize team-based, proactive and
performance management promoting responsiveness,
results and accountability.
 Objective 2 - Apply a Business Model to produce public
value by helping to enhance departmental operations and
public service delivery.
 Objective 3 – Lead Tulare County’s Economic
Development Strategy and the execution of a business
science-based Target Marketing Plan promoting prudent
development and concurrently protecting Tulare County’s
valuable agricultural resources and businesses.
 Objective 4 – Emphasize financial forecasting with
respect to estimating Tulare County’s revenues,
expenses and fund balances.
 Objective 5 – Conduct sensitivity and scenario analyses
designed to strengthen fiscal decisions and improve
predictability of results for the Board of Supervisors, the
County’s valued employees and the general public.
 Objective 6 – Develop strong fiscal sustainability plans in
the key areas such as retirement, health insurance,
workers’ compensation, and zones of benefit.
 Objective 7 – Monitor prudently and periodically report
public investment and debt financing activities.
 Objective 8 – Conduct financial feasibility of Economic
Development Projects such as pro forma analyses of
industrial and commercial projects, as well as firm-based
analyses of targeted business sectors and companies.
 Objective 9 – Implement expeditiously capital project
construction with a current focus on criminal justice
projects, space planning implementation, and building
maintenance and repairs designed to improve public
service and enhance safety to the public and employees.
 Objective 10 – Implement expeditiously public
infrastructure construction such as roads, transit, water,
wastewater, flood control, and park projects.
 Objective 11 – Enhance all departmental operations and
services with an Internal Service focus on General
Services, Purchasing, Human Resources, and
Information Technology.
 Objective 12 – Address organizational and fiscal needs
of departments by insuring CAO accessibility and
collaboration with the overarching goal of “Getting to
Yes”.
 Objective 13 – Improve customer service delivery and
responsiveness to residents, groups and local
businesses.
 Objective 14 – Improve and strengthen relations with
members of the public, community groups, interested
stakeholders, employee organizations, cities, special
districts, the state, and the federal government by
promoting effective use of a cooperation model of
interaction.
 Objective 15 – Report regularly to the Board of
Supervisors to help insure and demonstrate
responsiveness, achievement of results, and professional
accountability.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Ensure trees at County Parks are well maintained
and safe in order to provide appropriate recreation areas.
 Objective 1 – Parks staff will remove strategically
targeted trees lost to extreme drought conditions by
December 2016.
 Objective 2 – Parks staff will replace trees that have
been removed where prudent by June 2017.
Goal 2: Support the Countywide Tree Mortality Task Force
to ensure that County has the necessary resources and
coordination to adequately respond to the emergency tree
mortality conditions.
 Objective 1 – The Parks and Recreation division will
attend Tree Mortality Task Force meetings beginning
August 2016 and commit staff and material resources as
necessary.
Goal 3: Complete acquisitions of property for the Avenue
280 widening project between Highway 99 and Akers Road.
 Objective 1 – Identify any property acquisitions in need
of a Resolution of Necessity by August 2016.
 Objective 2 – Bring all Purchases and Sale Agreements
for Board approval by September 2016.
Goal 4: Complete property matters related to obtaining final
grant approval for the SB 81 and SB 1022 California
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation Projects.
 Objective 1 – Address property rights issues with the
California Department of General Services and
Department of Finance on County owned project sites by
June 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Facilitate quarterly meetings of the Parks Advisory
Committee and develop an Implementation Strategy for the
approved Mooney Grove 20 Year Conceptual Master Plan to
provide for enhanced park services.
 Objective 1 – Complete the initial draft of the
Implementation Strategy by November 2016.
 Objective 2 – Present the Implementation Strategy to the
Board of Supervisors for approval by May 2017.
Goal 2: Design and open a Chinese exhibition as part of the
History of Farm Labor and Agriculture’s rotating cultural
display.
 Objective 1 – Establish a committee of community
residents and local leaders to represent the Chinese
community by August 2016.
 Objective 2 – Meet with committee to gather artifacts
from the local community to create a display and identify
community members to be involved in the opening event
by September 2016.
 Objective 3 – Install the new exhibit and host an opening
reception for Chinese exhibit by October 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Identify upgrade needs to the Parks Reservation
System to increase organizational efficiencies and reduce
staff costs.
 Objective 1 – Meet with new TCiCT programmer to
review all internal controls of the Park Reservation
System for update by December 2016.
 Objective 2 – Install iNovah hardware to integrate with
the Parks Reservation System to accept credit card and
check payments by March 2017.
 Objective 3 – Work with TCiCT to create fiscal reports
for balancing the WinCams System in order to reduce
staff time dedicated to manual reporting by June 2017.
Goal 2: Provide Property Management services to the
Tulare/Akers Professional Center to create consistency
within the property management program and ensure the
highest and best use for this new revenue-generating facility.
 Objective 1 – Work with the current building property
management company to successfully transition services
to County forces by December 2016.
Goal 3: Develop policies and procedures for critical tasks in
the divisions of General Services to enhance organizational
performance.
 Objective 1 – Establish a Department Safety Committee
with members from each division by July 2016.
 Objective 2 – Develop a comprehensive written safety
policy by September 2016.
 Objective 3 – Finalize division specific policy manuals by
June 2017.
Goal 4: Develop a structure for continuous improvement
based upon Lean Six Sigma concepts to deliver meaningful
customer service in the most effective and efficient manner.
 Objective 1 – Survey Custodial customers to determine
needs and identify gaps in service by September 2016.
 Objective 2 – Shadow Custodial staff to identify best
practices and areas of opportunity by September 2016.
 Objective 3 – Compile findings and make
recommendations for improvements by December 2016.
 Objective 4 - Implement improvements by March 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Manage the transfer of the Comcast data lines to the
most effective and lowest cost alternative provider using
established State contracts. Existing lease for data lines with
Comcast ends in October 2016, this 30 year lease provided
free data connections to the County. Changes in the law
prevent renewing this lease.
 Objective 1 – Engineer, purchase, and install new data
lines by October 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Obtain a Web-based Case Management System.
Our current Case Management System was obtained over a
decade ago. Vendors now offer systems that are webbased,
which will allow our staff to access our case database
from mobile platforms. We estimate the increased efficiency
in staff hours to be tremendous.
 Objective 1 – Make final selection of which CMS is best
suited for the needs of the department by September
2016.
 Objective 2 – Have a contract negotiated and approved
by County Counsel by January, 2017.
 Objective 3 – Obtain approval of CAO’s office, and
Board of Supervisors, by March, 2017.
Goal 2: Obtain a Courthouse Comfort Dog. Studies have
repeatedly shown these dogs provide a measurable level of
comfort and assurance for victims and witnesses who testify.
 Objective 1 – Have a contract approved through
Purchasing and County Counsel by October 2016.
 Objective 2 – Have a Courthouse Comfort Dog working
with the department by December 2016.
Goal 3: Go “paperless” with two more local agencies.
Currently, three local agencies submit their report
electronically.
 Objective 1 – Have one additional law enforcement
agency filing their reports with us electronically by
December 2016.
 Objective 2 – Have a second law enforcement agency
filing their reports with us electronically by June 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop, expand, or improve services to ensure a
safe and thriving community.
 Objective 1 – By June 2017, the Health Care Centers
will have piloted a team-based care model, allowing
clients to receive accessible, affordable, quality,
coordinated, and whole-person care with their personal
clinician and care team.
 Objective 2 – By June 2017, the Health Care Centers
will have implemented the population health
management standard towards achieving patientcentered
medical home recognition, allowing the health
care centers to utilize the electronic health records
system to identify and address health service needs for
specific populations in a culturally and linguistically
competent manner.
 Objective 3 – By June 2017, the Public Health
Laboratory will have established a semi-annual
stakeholder meeting with laboratory system partners,
including all three hospital laboratories, with the purpose
improvement in the public health lab’s delivery of the 11
core functions.
 Objective 4 – By June 2017, to improve service and
safety to the community, the Environmental Health
Division will provide access, education and outreach to
the public by creating an Environmental Health website
for use by the community.
 Objective 5 – By June 2017, Children’s Medical Services
will improve services by hosting a “transition fair” to assist
California Children’s Service clients reaching the age 21
to seamlessly transition into other health care plans.
 Objective 6 – By June 2017, the Nutrition Education and
Obesity Prevention (NEOP) program will design and
create a healthy food and beverage advertising campaign
to be placed in five targeted retail sites, offering nutrition
education and informational tools to encourage
consumers to increase consumption of healthy food and
beverages.
 Objective 7 – By January 2017, the Porterville Wellness
and Recovery Center will be operational, serving
approximately 50 center clients per month, by providing a
central, safe and welcoming place for individuals with
lived mental illness experience and their family members
to connect and continue their wellness and recovery
journey.
 Objective 8 – By June 2017, Animal Services will
provide a community centered spay, neuter, and vaccine
program, with the goal of bringing low cost spay/neuter
and vaccination services to the rural communities in the
County.
Goal 2: Evaluate and improve services to ensure they are
provided in a collaborative and community-driven manner.
 Objective 1 – Beginning January 2017, HHSA’s Human
Services and Mental Health branches, along with
Juvenile Probation, will collaborate to implement the
Continuum of Care Reform, a comprehensive reform
effort to ensure all foster youth receive the services and
supports they need for their emotional and physical wellbeing
while in care. This reform includes strategies for
strengthening foster care providers, creating child and
family teams to guide case planning and placement
decisions, and certifying short-term residential treatment
facilities in the community, to serve only those children
whose needs cannot be met in lower-level foster
placements.
 Objective 2 – By June 2017, the Mental Health Branch
will develop and release the FY 2016/2017 Mental Health
Services Act (MHSA) Innovation Plan, developed through
feedback from a series of Community Planning Process
activities.
 Objective 3 – In the fall of 2016, the Veterans Services
Office will relocate to a new, more service-friendly
location in Visalia. This new site will be in close proximity
to other HHSA adult services programs, providing a
much more integrated and collaborative atmosphere
where veterans can obtain multiple services at one
location.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase the value of our services by enhancing
quality and strengthening our ability to deliver cost effective
programs consistent with the Agency’s Vision, Mission, and
Values.
 Objective 1 – By June 2017, Human Services will
expand outreach to a broader client base, provide a wide
range of program services to individuals in rural
communities with limited access to services, and connect
clients with resources through the addition of
TulareWORKs outreach staff to the Mental Health Mobile
Unit Clinics.
 Objective 2 – By June 2017, the Mental Health Branch,
Alcohol and Other Drug (AOD) Division will convert to the
AVATAR electronic health record (EHR) system currently
used by Mental Health, which will improve the ability to
integrate Mental Health and AOD services for
consumers.
 Objective 3 – By June 2017, the Mental Health Branch,
Alcohol and Other Drug (AOD) Division will have adopted
American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM)
assessment criteria standards to allow for a more
objective assessment process evaluating consumer
need.
 Objective 4 – By June 2017, the Mental Health Branch
will implement the use of Business Intelligence reporting
capabilities which will enable the centralization of
benchmark metrics, improve the ability to predict future
utilization of services, and monitor quality performance
standards across network and County providers.
 Objective 5 – By June 2017, the Mental Health Branch
will implement a personal health record (PHR)
component to its existing electronic health record (EHR)
to improve the quality of care for mental health
consumers by making information more readily available
and easily accessible, and providing another outlet by
which consumers can communicate and coordinate with
their providers.
 Objective 6 – By June 2017, Animals Services, with
assistance from the Animal Services Advisory
Committee, will have researched, outlined the process,
and will bring forward a proposal for establishing a
501(c)(3) in order to maximize revenue generation and
sustainability through the pursuit of grant funding.
 Objective 7 – By January 2017, Fiscal Operations will
create Vision, Mission and Value statements that support
a valued and respected culture and provide an
opportunity to enhance services internally and externally.
 Objective 8 – By June 2017, Fiscal Operations will
provide an outlet that will link all staff to the new Mission,
Vision, and Values and help to communicate the
Branch’s philosophy of mutual respect and enhanced
internal and external customer service.
Goal 2: Strengthen partnerships with community providers to
maximize effectiveness, funding sustainability, and capacity
building.
 Objective 1 – By June 2017, the Public Health
Emergency Preparedness (PHEP) program will expand
outreach related to the Public Health Emergency
Preparedness Advisory Committee to increase
membership and participation from local healthcare
providers, especially clinics and skilled nursing facilities.
 Objective 2 – By June 2017, the Mental Health Branch
will have developed and implemented a pilot with the
Mental Health Plan provider, Turning Point, to assess the
efficiency and effectiveness in using the Child and
Adolescent Needs and Strengths (CANS) assessment
tool to allow for a more objective assessment process of
evaluating consumers’ level of care and treatment
planning.
 Objective 3 – By June 2017, Animal Services will partner
with rescue organizations and other community groups to
decrease the shelters euthanize rate by increasing the
placement of animals with rescues, foster families, and
adoptions.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Relocation of HRD Office: Plan, develop, coordinate
and relocate HRD office, training and testing facilities to
2500 West Burrel in Visalia by early 2017.
 Objective 1 – Work with Program Review Committee to
formalize spatial design planning for improved staff
functionality and value added client services.
 Objective 2 – Provide a safe and secure environment for
employees and customers within the facility.
 Objective 3 – Strive for employer of choice by providing
a stimulating learning environment conducive to
employee innovation and workplace creativity.
 Objective 4 – Offer cutting-edge training, facilities and
resources with increased technological capabilities.
 Objective 5 – Increase capacity for computerized testing
of applicants and computer training lab for employees
and other departments to utilize.
 Objective 6 – Partner with other departments/agencies
to secure additional resources for facility enhancements
and pilot project opportunities while setting the example
as an efficient user of natural resources.
Goal 2: Develop and present two new training workshops for
employees “Respect and Professional Behavior in the
Workplace” and “Discipline Training: Soup to Nuts.”
 Objective 1 – Present “Discipline Training: Soup to Nuts”
for the experienced supervisor in the Fall 2016. A
collaborative training with HRD, County Counsel and
Risk Management.
 Objective 2 – Create, develop and present “Respect and
Professional Behavior in the Workplace” training in
Spring 2017.
Goal 3: Collaborate with Countywide stakeholders to
facilitate successful implementation of the new Human
Capital Management System/HRIS by calendar year end
2017.
 Objective 1 – Review list of process improvements
provided by third party administrator/RCM Technologies
and partner with stakeholders to identify and execute
selected recommendations.
Objective 2 – Develop list of business process changes
resulting from new system implementation; perform
modifications and create associated policies and or
procedures.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Complete Phase 2 and Phase 3 of the Camera
Project at both the Juvenile Detention Facility and the Youth
Facility
 Objective 1 – Schedule a meeting with the Project
Team, consisting of representatives from TCiCT, General
Services, Facilities, and the Probation Department on or
before July 15, 2016 to develop an implementation plan
and assign agency responsibilities.
Objective 2 – Schedule monthly meetings each month
thereafter to address areas of concern and project
milestones.
 Objective 3 – Complete Phase 2 of the project, which
involves the installation of new switches, the addition of
100 hallway cameras, lenses and associated storage, by
December 1, 2016.
 Objective 4 – Complete Phase 3 of the project, which
involves placing all new cameras on the DVR system and
eliminating any remaining blind spots through the
purchase of additional cameras, lenses and associated
storage, by June 30, 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Continue to work in concert with the Sheriff’s Office
to identify programming and treatment needs of offenders
and combine resources to allow for a continuum of service
delivery from custody programs through probation
supervision.
 Objective 1 – Continue weekly meetings with the
Treatment Team subcommittee.
 Objective 2 – Finalize Multidisciplinary Team
membership by July 18, 2016.
 Objective 3 – Finalize the Strategic Plan for
implementation by August 1, 2016.
 Objective 4 – Program implementation to begin on
November 1, 2016.
Economic Well-Being and Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Enhance our ability to train and retain new Probation
Correction Officers in an effort to maximize our investment in
the recruitment and vetting process.
 Objective 1 – Add two FTE Probation Correctional
Officer positions to address the training needs of new
staff during the first 90 days of employment by November
1, 2016.
 Objective 2 – Develop a training curriculum that
addresses Title 15, PREA, policies and procedures,
accepted workplace practices and Officer Safety Training
by July 15, 2016.
Goal 2: Implement a Sex Offender Treatment Program
within the Juvenile Detention Facility to serve the needs of
low to medium risk juvenile offenders in lieu of costly long
term group home placement or commitment to the Division
of Juvenile Justice (DJJ).
 Objective 1 – Contract with Alliant University for the
provision of psychological assessments and evidencebased
treatment by July 15, 2016.
 Objective 2 – Purchase the Forward Focused curriculum
currently being utilized by the Division of Juvenile Justice
(DJJ) by July 1, 2016.
 Objective 3 – Train Probation Correctional staff in
reinforcing this empathy-based curriculum during all
interactions with juvenile offenders by August 15, 2016.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Expand outreach to citizens and former clients about
the Clean Slate Project
 Objective 1 – Identify other means and public events to
publicize and disseminate program services information.
This is very important based on the fact that Proposition
47 relief ends November 2017.
Goal 2: Secure funding for a Social Worker through the
Community Corrections Partnership. The Social Worker will
assist an inter-departmental team providing services to
inmates while in-custody and upon their release.
 Objective 1 – To provide rehabilitative services with the
goal of reducing recidivism rates.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Work with Justice Partners and TCiCT to become
more automated in our procedures and the exchange of
information.
 Objective 1 – To complete the process of automation for
juvenile petition filings.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Promote the economic well-being of the residents and
businesses within the unincorporated area of Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – Work with a minimum of ten Tulare County
existing companies by way of the Business Retention and
Expansion (BEAR) Program by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Attract business to Tulare County by directly
marketing to a minimum of ten targeted companies by
June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Work with companies on business
development that results in the creation of 75 jobs by June
2017.
 Objective 4 - Apply for ten grants for economic
development and infrastructure projects by June 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of Tulare County by implementing the
County’s General Plan 2030 Update through completion of
major environmental, planning, development, and building
initiatives.
 Objective 1 – Complete the Community Plan updating
process for the unincorporated communities of Earlimart,
Goshen, Three Rivers, and Cutler Orosi by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Complete the Animal Confinement Facilities
Plan (ACFP) (Dairy Plan) and the related Program
Environmental Impact Report by June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Complete the SGC Disadvantaged
Communities Land Use and Zoning Plan by June 2017.
 Objective 4 – Complete over 350 medical marijuana code
enforcement cases by June 2017.
 Objective 5 – Issue 3,768 building permits, a 20%
increase over the prior year’s objective by June 2017.
 Objective 6 – Complete over 363 general code
enforcement cases, a 10% increase over prior year’s
objective by June 2017.
 Objective 7 – Complete over 300 planning and
development projects by June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve the organizational performance of RMA’s
Economic Development and Planning, Public Works and
Fiscal Services Branches by implementing RMA’s Strategic
Management System.
Objective 1 – Continue to reduce RMA’s overhead
expenses by, among other things, applying to Caltrans for
approval of an Indirect Cost Rate Plan (ICRP) by June
2017.
 Objective 2 – Prepare monthly reports within each branch
of RMA to document progress on key projects.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Concentrate on apprehension of serious criminals in
County.
 Objective 1 – Bring the new County Apprehension Team
Tracking Criminals in Hiding (CATTCH) to full staffing level
by January 1, 2017.
 Objective 2 – Locate and arrest an average of two
suspects a month from the Sheriff’s “Top 10” list of
criminals in hiding during FY 2016-17.
Goal 2: Disrupt gang culture and activity.
 Objective 1 – Conduct 300 probation and parole
compliance checks by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Increase weapons and narcotics seizures
by 5% during FY 2016-17 compared to previous year.
Goal 3: Enhance management of mentally ill inmates.
 Objective 1 – Recruit correctional deputies by September
2016 to work in a mental health unit within the Tulare
County Jail System.
 Objective 2 – Provide specialized training by January
2017 for deputies selected to work with mentally ill
inmates.
 Objective 3 – Open a 35-bed unit for mentally ill inmates
at the Adult Pre-trial Facility by March 2017.
Goal 4: Expand use-of-force training for correctional and field
deputies.
 Objective 1 – Purchase use-of-force simulator by
November 2016 to complement department’s existing
simulator.
 Objective 2 – Recruit and select a correctional deputy to
attend range master school by November 2016.
 Objective 3 – Implement use-of-force simulator at the
Adult Pretrial Facility by January 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Maximize use of holding cells at Superior Court in
Visalia to increase security.
 Objective 1 – Implement full usage of holding cells vs. jury
box seating in courtrooms of inmates awaiting trials or
hearings by August 2016 to provide better security and
control of inmates, limit escape risk, and reduce overtime
of correctional staff.
Goal 2: Enhanced emergency preparedness for first
responders.
 Objective 1 – Conduct an “Active Shooter” training
exercise at Superior Court in Visalia by October 2016 with
participation of local and State police, fire, and other first
responder agencies.
Goal 3: Revise hiring and training standards in keeping with
continuous improvement policy of Sheriff’s Office.
 Objective 1 – Establish a written test by January 2017 for
Deputy I job candidates on ethical and leadership
scenarios to assist in evaluating whether they can perform
in today’s demanding police environment.
 Objective 2 – Incorporate additional ethical and
leadership training by September 2016 into the curriculum
for the CORE Academy program for correctional deputies
at the Tulare/Kings Police Officers Academy of the College
of the Sequoias. The special training helps further assure
that correctional deputies are able to handle situations in
the police environment.
 Objective 3 – Provide enhanced driver training for
deputies with a series of law enforcement-oriented videos
by September 2016.
 Objective 4 – Expand Sheriff’s Office participation at wellregarded
Los Angeles Police Department Leadership
Program to all members of the Sheriff’s Management
Team, with three members of the team to attend by June
2017. The Sheriff’s Office will also continue management
training through the Law Enforcement Education
Development Association, POST Command College, and
the FBI Academy.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Encourage safe use of County waterways to enhance
enjoyment by general public.
 Objective 1 – Make six water safety presentations to
general public by October 2016.
 Objective 2 – Prepare handouts by April 2017 for safe use
of Lakes Kaweah and Success, Kings River, and other
County waterways.
Safety and Security
Goal: Utilize the COPS funds to maintain staffing levels in
Patrol and Detention divisions and to allow the Department to
address its community policing goals.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Work with local governmental organizations to ensure
Tulare County continues to receive annual funding.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Successfully investigate and prosecute ag crimes.
Goal 2: Offer services through the Owner Applied Number
system and stamp equipment to deter theft.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Continue our involvement in the CRCPTF Rural
Crime School.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Add one FTE Deputy Probation Officer position to
the RESET program to serve juvenile offenders who
have been committed for programming at the Juvenile
Detention Facility or the Probation Youth Facility and who
have received a high school diploma while in custody, or
who will turn 18 following release to the Aftercare
Program.
 Objective 1 – Add one FTE Deputy Probation Officer
position by November 15, 2016.
 Objective 2 – Provide the RESET job readiness training
to 45 juvenile offenders by June 30, 2017.
 Objective 3 – Secure educational or job placement for
18 juvenile offenders by June 30, 2017
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop, expand, or improve services that ensure a
safe and thriving community.
 Objective 1 – By June 2017, the Tobacco Control
program will complete two media activities that promote
smoke-free multi-unit housing complexes in Tulare
County.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase collaboration with community members in
an effort to decrease tobacco use in Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – By June 2017, partner and coordinate
with three multi-unit housing complex managers to adopt
smoke free policies.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide a safe and secure environment for staff and
the public at all Library locations.
 Objective 1 – Complete Emergency Action Plan working
with Risk Management by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Revise library rules to provide better
guidelines for expected patron behavior by December
2017.
 Objective 3 – Provide staff training in safety and security
practices by March 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Increase and improve County residents’ access and
usage of the Library’s electronic online resources.
 Objective 1 – Provide ongoing training for staff to assist
customers with public computers, online resources, and
digital literacy by May 2017.
 Objective 2 – Work with CENIC, Califa, and SJVLS to
install increased bandwidth internet connections on the
California Research and Education Network, a highcapacity
network, at twelve branch locations with
financial assistance from the State Library and E-rate
discounts by June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Work with SJVLS on E-rate application
process that will assist with costs to install permanent
WiFi solutions in our libraries by June 2017.
Goal 2: Increase access to literacy services, resources, and
programs for adults and teens.
 Objective 1 – Continue implementing Career Online
High School resource by recruiting at least an additional
four students and the graduation of two current students
by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Work with the Visalia Unified School
District to provide tutoring at the Visalia Adult School and
other locations by November 2016.
Objective 3 – Create a citizenship information center in
the Visalia Library that assists patrons seeking
information and support on the citizenship process by
March 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Improve County residents’ well-being and quality of
life through partnerships and programs.
 Objective 1 – Work with County Sheriff’s Department to
develop a basic literacy program for possible use in the
jails by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Work with Fresno State to provide
customer training on using computers and software for
work, employment, and school by October 2016.
 Objective 3 – Continue partnerships with ‘Lea Conmigo’
in Farmersville and ‘Path to Literacy’ in Woodlake to
expand early literacy efforts in their communities by
attending meetings and participating in at least 2
community events by June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve recruitment and professional development
for staff and tutors.
 Objective 1 – Implement enhanced professional
development for literacy tutors through workshops,
conferences, and one-on-one training by May 2017.
 Objective 2 – Coordinate training opportunities for staff
in our rural libraries to enhance library services, including
outreach, children’s, and customer service by April 2017.
 Objective 3 – Actively recruit volunteer literacy tutors for
our branch libraries with a focus on Dinuba and
Woodlake by February 2017.
 Objective 4 – Outreach to high schools, job fairs, and
other organizations to recruit and seek feedback for our
entry level job openings. Also, provide information on
career paths for the higher level opportunities in our
libraries by June 2017.
Goal 2: Improve organizational performance and planning to
support staff and better serve the public.
 Objective 1 – Develop teams to address planning
programs, collections, and services system wide by June
2017.
 Objective 2 – Develop supervisor team to support staff
by providing training, including sending at least two
supervisors to Supervisory Academy by June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Complete recruitment, hiring, and
orientation and training process for new Librarians,
Library Services Specialists, and Deputy County
Librarian by January 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Maintain airport facilities in fully operational condition.
• Objective 1 – Pass annual state and federal inspection.
Results: Objective met. Completed in May 2016.
• Objective 2 – Prepare site control assessment and
prepare access control plan by June 2017.
• Objective 3 – Implement procedures to streamline airport
self-inspection by June 2017.
Goal 2: Upgrade airport facilities for increased operational
safety.
• Objective 1 – Complete installation of navigational aid
upgrades by June 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Improve revenue sources for airport operations.
• Objective 1 – Obtain annual state aeronautics entitlement
funding. Results: Objective met. Completed in June
2016.
• Objective 2 – Prepare and implement airport marketing
plan for hangar and tie-down rentals by June 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Provide and coordinate use of the facility with other
County departments for public benefit.
• Objective 1 – Continue to provide facility use to Office of
Emergency Services for drought relief bottled water
program.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase staff’s airport administration and
management capabilities and expertise.
• Objective 1 – Research, identify and attend training
session for airport managers by June 2017.
Goal 2: Provide strategic planning for future airport
improvements.
• Objective 1 – Review and update the Airport Capital
Improvement Plan (ACIP) by June 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Improve and Enhance Life & Safety Operations
within the Department.
 Objective 1 – Vet and establish a Swift Water and Flood
Rescue program to assist and provide an increased level
of service no later than June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Increase first responder training
capabilities no later than June 2017 to meet State
recognized standards.
 Objective 3 – Determine equipment needs, training
needs, and appropriate Standard Response levels no
later than June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve operational efficiencies by conducting a
current standards of coverall analysis focusing on improved
response times, hazard mitigation/recognition, and
communications.
 Objective 1 – Identify gaps in service delivery and
determine response analytics no later than June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Purchase and provide training on all new
equipment acquired no later than June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Provide updated response time
expectations and analytics to all interested parties no
later than June 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Improve safety of roadway network for all
transportation methods including vehicular, transit,
pedestrian, cyclist and other alternative means.
 Objective 1 – Complete construction of the Multiple Stop
Controlled Intersection Improvement Project by June
2017.
 Objective 2 – Begin the roadway construction phase of
the Avenue 416 Widening Project from Ave 56 to the
Fresno County Line by November 2016.
 Objective 3 – Begin construction of the Avenue 280
Widening Project from SR 99 to Akers St. by June 2017.
 Objective 4 – Initiate design and environmental phases
of the Highway Safety Improvement Program (HSIP)
Cycle 7 projects on Avenue 232, Avenue 328, and Worth
Avenue by January 2017.
 Objective 5 – Begin Construction of the HSIP project on
Avenue 152 by June 2017.
 Objective 6 – Initiate design and environmental phases
of the three Active Transportation Program Projects:
Jacobs Street in Traver, Main Street in Pixely, and
sidewalk improvements at the Earlimart Park by June
2017.
 Objective 7 – Coordinate with County Tree Mortality
Task force as appropriate and implement actions to
prevent access or safety issues related to tree mortality
along priority corridors.
Goal 2: Improve the condition of the County bridge network.
Objective 1 – Complete the design and environmental
phases of the Sand Creek Bridge and the Rancheria
Creek Bridge by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Complete Construction of the Diagonal 39
Bridge over the Traver Canal by June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Obtain authorization to proceed with
Phase 1 of the Bridge Preventative Maintenance
Program (BPMP) by January 2017.
 Objective 4 – Complete preliminary design,
environmental phase and right-of-way phase of the
Mineral King Bridge project by June 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Apply for additional competitive grant funding
applications
 Objective 1 – Apply for Cycle 8 of HSIP by August 2016
for safety improvement projects.
Goal 2: Coordinate rural and community improvement
project and maintenance planning with the Economic
Development and Planning Branch for strategic distribution
of discretionary funds.
 Objective 1 – Identify and prioritize improvements and
maintenance to heavily utilized Farm to Market Routes.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Maintain and improve the roadway network working
toward a five year goal of increasing the countywide
Pavement Condition Index (PCI) by 10 points.
 Objective 1 – Construct the Avenue 144 asphalt overlay
by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Utilize approximately $2.5 million of
Measure R revenue towards construction of roadway
maintenance or reconstruction projects on high priority
rural roadways with construction of projects started by
June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Construct road rehabilitation projects in
Pixley, Goshen, and Traver by November 2016.
 Objective 4 – Fully implement the use of modern
Pavement Management System software for inspection
and planning purposes by June 2017.
Goal 2: Improve non-vehicular transportation infrastructure
such as sidewalks, bike lanes and ADA facilities to reduce
barriers to alternative and active modes of transportation.
 Objective 1 – Complete the update to the County’s ADA
Transition Plan by January 2017.
 Objective 2 – Update the County Improvement
Standards to utilize current ADA and Complete Streets
design standards by June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Coordinate with Economic Development
and Planning Branch to develop Complete Streets
policies for the following communities Three Rivers,
Woodville, East Orosi, Poplar, Allensworth, Ivanhoe,
Terra Bella, and Alpaugh by June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Establish or improve protocols and written policies
for processes within Public Works - Roads.
Objective 1 – Finalize and obtain approval for RMA
construction project Change Order Procedure by June
2017.
 Objective 2 – Establish standardized specification
template through committee for road/bridge projects and
for non-road/bridge projects. Train staff to independently
utilize standard template. Implement the use of the
template on all construction projects bidding after
December 2016.
 Objective 3 – Develop and implement a written
departmental policy for construction plan review quality
assurance by December 2016.
 Objective 4 – Develop written procedures for plan review
process for subdivision maps, special use permits, site
plans, parcel maps, etc. by June 2017.
 Objective 5 – Develop and implement electronic file
management system framework and policy by December
2016.
Goal 2: Provide training and mentoring program for staff to
improve job skills, knowledge, productivity, and quality of
work.
 Objective 1 – Provide AutoCAD and GIS training to all
entry level design staff and technicians by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Provide project management training and
instruction to all project managers and supervisors by
June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Identify a minimum of one “special topic”
training opportunity for all engineering and technician
staff members to attend. Establish recurring department
training session for each staff member to report back to
division on their special topic by June 2017.
 Objective 4 – Continue and expand ongoing Traffic Zone
Construction Safety education program for all field staff
and inspectors.
Goal 3: Develop interdepartmental coordination for design
and construction services to other branches on reimbursable
projects.
 Objective 1 – Assist Flood Control Department staff in
Management Group 3 with design of the Juvenile
Detention Facility project and Yettem/Button Ditch by
June 2017, and construction Seville/Sontag Ditch project
by October 2016.
 Objective 2 – Assist Economic Development and
Planning Branch with Housing Related Parks Project in
Earlimart. Prepare Contract documents for bidding by
September 2016.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Achieve at least 90% of all WIOA Adult and
Dislocated Worker participant performance goals set by the
California Employment Development Department Workforce
Services Division (EDD WSD) by June 2017. Individuals must
meet WIOA low income criteria to be eligible for the Adult
Program. Individuals must meet dislocated worker criteria
such as being laid off due to a company closure or substantial
lay off, or receiving unemployment insurance and unlikely to
return to their previous industry or occupation.
 Objective 1 – 51.5% of all Adult Program participants will
find employment within 90 days after program completion.
57.5% of all Dislocated Worker Program participants will
find employment within 90 days after program completion.
 Objective 2 – 77.5% of all Adult Program participants who
find employment after program completion will remain
employed for six months. 77.5% of all Dislocated Worker
Program participants who find employment after program
completion will remain employed for six months.
 Objective 3 - The average earnings of all Adult Program
participants employed six months after program
completion will be $10,100. The average earnings for all
Dislocated Worker Program participants six months after
program completion will be $11,900.
Goal 2: Achieve at least 90% of all WIOA In-School and Outof-
School Youth Program performance goals set by the EDD
WSD by June 2017. Youth must be between the ages of 16
to 24, be low income, and have a barrier to finding
employment or completing school to be eligible for the WIOA
Youth Program.
 Objective 1 – 68% of youth participants will find a job or
enroll in school within three months of program
completion.
 Objective 2 – 53% of Youth Program participants will
receive a GED, High School Diploma, or Vocational
School Certificate within three months of program
completion.
 Objective 3 – 53.5% of Out-of-School youth will increase
at least one educational functioning level within three
months of program completion.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Ensure that children in cases involving Title IV-D of
the Federal Social Security Act have support from parents as
ordered by increasing the amount of child support collections
and distributions by September 2016 as set by the State.
 Objective 1 – Collect and distribute $38,869,307 in child
support.
 Objective 2 – Collect and distribute 75% of the amount
of current child support due.
 Objective 3 – Collect on 65% of cases with arrears
owing.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Increase the percentage of children with a legal
relationship with their parents by September 2016 as set by
the State.
 Objective 1 – Maintain or increase Statewide Paternity
Establishment Percentage to 100% or above.
Goal 2: Increase the percentage of child support cases with
support orders by September 2016 as set by the State.
 Objective 1 – Establish support orders in 96.8% of cases
needing a support order.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Operate a cost effective program by September
2016 as set by the State.
 Objective 1 – Achieve a Cost Effectiveness ratio of at
least $2.25.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide project management for the construction of
the South County Detention Facility, a 500-bed jail facility to
be constructed in Porterville, to provide the building
resources necessary for the County’s future law enforcement
needs.
 Objective 1 – Ensure the project remains on schedule
for June 2018 completion.
Goal 2: Provide project management for the design of the
Sequoia Field Program Facility to provide for the County’s
future law enforcement needs.
 Objective 1 – Establish the project scope and budget
with the State Public Works Board by December 2016.
 Objective 2 – Execute consultant contracts for
architecture and construction management services, and
initiate facility design with County stakeholders by
October 2016.
 Objective 3 – Proceed to project design and engineering
phase by January 2017.
Goal 3: Ensure that Tulare County Fire Department has a
long-term and sustainable station near Visalia.
 Objective 1 – Complete the biddable plans and
specifications in conjunction with the Transportation
Operations and Maintenance Facility and Compressed
Natural Gas Fueling Station by December 2016.
 Objective 2 – Proceed to construction by May 2017 for a
completion in Fiscal Year 2017/18.
Goal 4: Ensure that Tulare County has the necessary
facilities to support the Sheriff’s Property & Evidence
function.
 Objective 1 – Retain a project architect and complete
biddable plans and specifications by April 2017.
 Objective 2 – Proceed to construction by June 2017 for
a completion in Fiscal Year 2017/18.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Provide additional job training skills for youth by
designing and constructing the Juvenile Vocational
Education Center.
 Objective 1 – Execute a consultant contract for
architecture services and begin designing the facility with
County stakeholders by December 2016.
 Objective 2 – Complete biddable Plans and
Specifications by May 2017.
Goal 2: Provide additional services to clients of the Health
and Human Services Agency by renovating the new mental
health building located in Porterville.
 Objective 1 – Finish construction of the project by
September 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve the quality of working conditions for County
employees and enhance services to the public by renovating
portions of the following Departments: Sheriff’s Office, Fire,
County Counsel, and Human Resources and Development.
 Objective 1 – Complete space programming and
construction documents by November 2016.
 Objective 2 – Complete building renovations and
employee relocation by June 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: To improve the area coverage of the Tulare County
Radio Network (TCRN). Public Safety is dependent upon
voice and data radio communications provided by TCRN.
Currently there are significant gaps in area coverage that
place the public and first responders in danger.
Objective 1 – Complete engineering and initial site
preparation for the next tower by April 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Prepare for the replacement of the current obsolete
property management system (PIMS) with up to date
technology and a modern database. This will require
careful conversion of PIMS data to the new Aumentum
system.
 Objective 1 – Complete initial hardware and software
installation by March, 2017.
 Objective 2 – Complete basic configuration and setup
of the Aumentum system by June, 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Seek additional funding for additional equipment,
such as fire equipment and/or fire facilities improvements
 Objective 1 – Apply for funding once the new Notice of
Funding Availability is released in early 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Seek funding for infrastructure improvement projects.
 Objective 1 – Apply for CDBG funding in early 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Apply for additional funding for water and/or sewer
lateral funding.
 Objective 1 – Apply for CDBG funding in early 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Apply for Planning grant funding.
 Objective 1 – Apply for CDBG funding in early 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Collaborate with public agencies and stakeholders
to identify project needs and develop project descriptions for
future funding opportunities.
• Objective 1 – Prepare list of project needs and
descriptions.
Provide an adequate and safe water supply.
 Objective 1 – Provide assistance with maintenance and
repair of the water distribution system.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Ensure a safe, clean and reliable source of water for
serviced communities within County Service Areas Numbers
1 and 2.
 Objective 1 – Monitor and test water system for quality
and adequacy of supply and report findings as required to
regulators and users of the system by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Maintain water distribution systems, inspect
aging infrastructure, and perform repairs quickly with
minimal impact to users by June2017.
 Objective 3 – Begin construction on the Yettem and
Seville water system consolidation project by June 2017.
Goal 2: Ensure safe, clean and reliable sewage treatment
facilities for communities within County Service Areas
Numbers 1 and 2.
 Objective 1 – Monitor and test sewage treatment facilities
according to Water Quality Control Board Waste
Discharge Requirements by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Maintain sewer collection systems, inspect
aging infrastructure, and perform repairs quickly with
minimal impact to users by June 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Attain independent financial sustainability of water
and sewer systems.
 Objective 1 – Place delinquent accounts on the County
Assessors’ Tax Roll by August 2016.

 Objective 2 –Identify potential economies of scale through
consolidation with nearby larger water or sewer systems
by June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Transfer ownership of Wells Tract water and
sewer systems to the City of Woodlake by June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Prepare system infrastructure and finances to reduce
impediments to future development within the Zones of
Benefit.
 Objective 1 – Complete the design of the Traver Sewer
Upgrade project for increased capacity and prepare for
construction by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Coordinate system improvements and
prepare Capital Improvement Plans for County Service
Areas Numbers 1 and 2 by June 2017.
Goal 2: Improve reliability and sustainability of water sources
for water systems.
 Objective 1 – Coordinate and provide technical
assistance with the North County Surface Water
Treatment Plant project and Governance group to
establish surface water connections for Yettem and Seville
systems by June 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Improve security for drivers and passengers.
 Objective 1 – Begin installation and implementation of
on-board technology package. This package will include
real time AVL/GPS systems showing bus locations and
on-board security cameras by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Purchase and install solar powered transit
shelter security lighting at all existing transit shelters by
June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Purchase and install electronic
cardreaders or fully functional fare boxes or electronic
card readers by December 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide the public with easy access to quality
information and services.
 Objective 1 – Provide free Wi-Fi for transit users as part
of the on-board technology package by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Provide live tracking of buses to riders
through the TCaT website and various mobile
applications by June 2017 to assist riders in planning
trips.
 Objective 3 – Replace or install improved route
information signs at bus stops throughout the TCaT
system.
Goal 2: Promote increased ridership in Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – Establish TCaT only monthly passes by
June 2017, which will be offered at discounted rates.
 Objective 2 – Implement a reduced fare rider program
for new transit users residing in unincorporated areas
through grant funding from the Low Carbon Transit
Operations Program (cap and trade) program by June
2017.
Goal 3: Improve Service Delivery to Tulare County
Residents.
 Objective 1 – Synchronize at least two TCaT routes with
routes from other agencies by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Identify service expansion options by June
2017 for implementation in FY 17/18.
Goal 4: Provide infrastructure to support better service
delivery.
 Objective 1 – Complete design of Transit Operations
and Maintenance Facility (TOMF) that will house the
TCaT bus fleet by June 2017.
 Objective 2 - Begin implementation of a systematic fleet
replacement program, by ordering two CNG passenger
buses that will replace two diesel buses by June 2017.
 Objective 3 – By June 2017, staff will analyze all existing
TCaT bus stops and develop a policy and improvement
plan for the installation of bus shelters. Staff will begin
the implementation of these shelters installations by
selecting the highest priority locations based on rider
demand and safety considerations. Ten new bus shelters
will be installed by June 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Evaluate tipping fees.
 Objective 1 – Conduct a comprehensive analysis of
landfill and transfer station programs and tipping fees by
April 2017 to ensure that each site is solvent.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Improve recycling opportunities.
 Objective 1 – Conduct a comprehensive analysis of the
Landfill Salvage Program by March 2017 to ensure that
the County is efficiently and effectively eliminating
recyclable material from the waste stream.
 Objective 2 – Analyze the current Construction &
Demolition Debris (C&D) and Wood Waste programs and
issue Requests for Proposals by August 2016.
 Objective 3 – Create a comprehensive recycling
program in County facilities by December 2016.
Goal 2: Develop long term resource and facility plans.
 Objective 1 – Conduct an analysis and determine future
landfill expansion timelines by December 2016.
 Objective 2 - Finalize a twenty year agreement to secure
waste from the City of Tulare by March 2017 that will
allow the Department to begin planning for future facility
expansions.
 Objective 3 – Develop and secure long term agreements
with the cities of Porterville and Visalia by March 2017.
 Objective 4 - Redesign the closure shape of Teapot
Dome Landfill to extend its life by three years by June
2017.
 Objective 5 - Design and bid out the Phase 2 Visalia
Expansion project for construction by December 2016.
 Objective 6 – Finalize evaluation of the Earlimart
Transfer Station by December 2016.
Goal 1: Implement AB 1826.
 Objective 1 – Meet and confer with franchised haulers to
establish rates for services on organic material collection
programs by October 2016.
 Objective 2 – Implement the second phase of AB 1826
by January 2017 ensuring businesses that generate four
cubic yards of organic waste per week have organic
waste recycling services.
Goal 2: Reducing Air Emissions.
 Objective 1 – Upgrade heavy equipment fleet, beginning
with the replacement of a D7R Dozer, in order to comply
with environmental standards to reduce air emissions by
2023.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Evaluate sustainable energy opportunities.
 Objective 1 – Analyze solar power system options for
the Visalia Landfill by February 2017 in order to reduce
the cost of electricity used on site.
Goal 2: Increase permitted volumes at County Landfills.
 Objective 1 – Revise Teapot Dome Landfill permit to
increase daily tonnage to 800 tons by October 2016 in
order to ensure that cities and Franchised Haulers have
the option of utilizing the Site on a daily basis.
Goal 3: Implement Grazing Program.
 Objective 1 – Construct fencing for the Habitat
Conservation Grazing Plan by December 2016 in order to
comply with State of California Fish and Game
regulations.
 Objective 2 – Execute agreement with the Sheriff’s
Department for utilization of the Woodville Landfill Habitat
Conservation area for cattle grazing by November 2016.
Goal 4: Improve Customer Service.
 Objective 1 – Further reduce hauler cycle times at scale
houses with expanded access to WasteWizard by
September 2016.
 Objective 2 – Implement use of credit cards at County
Landfills to offer more forms of payment for customers by
September 2016.
Goal 5: Improve management skills.
 Objective 1 – Contract with SWANA to house a Manager
of Landfill Operations training for six employees by June
2017.
Construct Waste Management Unit 1’s (WMU-1)
closure at the Visalia Landfill.
 Objective 1 – Continue the construction of WMU-1
through FY 2016/17 with an estimated completion date of
September 2017.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Ensure safe, clean and reliable sewage treatment
facilities.
 Objective 1 – Monitor and test sewage treatment facilities
according to Water Quality Control Board waste discharge
requirements.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Maintain independent financial sustainability of the
Terra Bella sewer system.
 Objective 1 – Place delinquent accounts on the County
Assessors’ Tax Roll by August 2016.
Goal 2: Prepare system infrastructure to reduce impediments
to future development within the sewer district.
 Objective 1 – Prepare Capital Improvement Plan by June
2017.
Goal 3: Improve reliability and sustainability of treatment
facility and collection system.
 Objective 1 – Perform preventative maintenance and
upgrades to system to reduce downtime and potential
service interruptions.
for the storm drainage systems, roadways and landscape
belts within the assessment districts.
• Objective 1 – Perform an inspection of the basins by
September 2016 and perform identified maintenance by
November 2016.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Ensure adequate funding for the management and
maintenance of the assessment districts storm drainage
systems, roadways and landscape districts.
• Objective 1 - Ensure annual assessment district fees are
provided to the Assessor’s Office for placement on the
tax roll within 1 month of establishment of new district.
Goal 2: Maintain district facilities for functional and aesthetic
purposes.
• Objective 1 – Perform weed abatement at storm
drainage basins prior to June 2017 and necessary fence
repairs prior to October 2016.
• Objective 2 – Perform scheduled road maintenance as
identified in the improvement program established for the
districts by June 2017.
Goal 1: Plan and coordinate emergency training exercises at
the County Courthouse and Government Plaza.
 Objective 1 – Complete training exercise at Tulare
County Superior Courthouse by September 30. 2016.
 Objective 2 – Complete training exercise at Government
Plaza by December 30, 2016.
 Objective 3 – Provide the County Administrative Office
feedback regarding results of training exercise by June
2017.
Goal 2: Reduce work related injury and ensure compliance
with Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
standards.
 Objective 1 – Develop loss prevention plans specific to
the activities and hazards of each County department by
June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Complete a review of safety plans to
ensure compliance with Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) standards by June 2017.
Goal 3: Develop emergency exercise and drill protocols for
County Departments to ensure a state of readiness.
 Objective 1 – Establish drill protocol to ensure regulatory
compliance by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Conduct training on the protocol to County
agencies by June 2017.
Further improve the efficiency of risk finance
functions and insurance administration service to
departments.
 Objective 1 – Implement an Owner Controlled Insurance
Program in order to realize cost savings during major
construction projects by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Develop an early intervention and workers’
compensation advocate program to support County
employees who are injured on the job by June 2017.
To maintain dental insurance rates without major
increases in premiums.
 Objective 1 – Manage claims through proactive wellness
activities and webinars.
 Objective 2 – Offset premium increases in 2017 for
current subscribers using reserves from prior years.
Ensure trees in County owned properties are well
maintained and safe.
 Objective 1 – Grounds staff will remove strategically
targeted trees lost to drought by December 2016.
 Objective 2 – Grounds staff will replace trees that have
been removed, where prudent, by June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide additional staffing for Grounds to the
Tulare/Akers Professional Center.
 Objective 1 – Hire two additional Grounds workers to
provide regular grounds services to this facility by
October 2016.
Ensure that County assets are well maintained and
functional by installing modernized equipment.
 Objective 1 – Install two remote automatic irrigation
clocks by December 2016. The clocks will include flow
and soil moisture sensors which will regulate and assist
in identifying repairs.
Goal 1: Provide external improvements to the Alpaugh
Library to improve building safety.
 Objective 1 – Facilities staff will replace minor structural
failures to the fascia, roof line, and exterior paint of the
library by June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide OSHA required training to Facilities staff in
safe rescue techniques to ensure compliance with workplace
safety regulations.
 Objective 1 – As part of the Facilities Fall Prevention
Plan, five (5) staff will receive quarterly rescue training by
June 2017.
Goal 2: Provide additional staffing and building management
to the Tulare/Akers Professional Center.
 Objective 1 – Hire two additional Maintenance Worker
II’s to provide regular preventative maintenance to this
building by October 2016.
 Objective 2 – Identify and implement maintenance
needs for County inventory by December 2016.

Goal 1: Establish regular safety training content and
schedule for Custodial staff by December 2016.
 Objective 1 – Provide regular equipment and material
safety training to keep custodial staff informed of industry
changes and to create a safer work environment for
custodians and County staff.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Establish process improvement project baseline by
January 2017.
 Objective 1 – Develop a comprehensive snapshot of
current custodial services and customer satisfaction
against which process improvement impact will be
measured.
 Objective 2 – Compare current custodial services to
industry standards in order to create sustainable,
measurable custodial standards for the County.
Goal 2: Provide additional staffing for Custodial Services to
the Tulare/Akers Professional Center.
 Objective 1 – Hire three additional Custodial Workers by
October 2016 to provide regular services to this facility.
 Objective 2 – Train additional Custodial workers in
safety and service to meet the needs of new facility
customers by December 2016.
Goal 1: Work in conjunction with Capital Projects to expand
the parts and inventory storage area to provide a secure
storage facility for the parts inventory.
 Objective 1 – Begin construction by October 2016.
 Objective 2 – Complete construction by November 2016.
Improve tracking and billing of fuel services to
County departments to ensure appropriate cost monitoring
and tracking.
 Objective 1 – Purchase Data Pass Hardware and
Software for County vehicles and fueling sites by January
2017.
 Objective 2 – Install Data Pass Hardware and Software
in 50% of County vehicles and at all County fueling
facilities by June 2017.
In view of the increasing security threat to citizen
owned data held by the County, continue to enhance the
County’s Security Program.
 Objective 1 – Replace key lock doors with controlled
access card systems at critical priority TCiCT data and
communications sites. Provides greater security and
accountability for access to data systems. Systems will
be in place by May 2017.
 Objective 2 – Malware attempts to steal citizen data for
identity theft or hold it hostage for cash by tricking the
legitimate user of the data. The principal defense against
malware is increased training and monitoring for those
who legitimately access the data. Will provide a training
program for County use by October 2016.
 Objective 3 – Modernize existing security event
monitoring to extend reporting to include both external
and internal malicious activity. Internal monitoring
system will be operational by August 2016 and external
system will be operational by October 2016.
 Objective 4 – Expand Network Access Control to include
critical priority workstations as determined by the
business and security needs of County Departments by
June 2017.
 Objective 5 – Replace old firewalls connecting with our
Public Safety and Community partners. New systems
will be in place by May 2017.
 Objective 6 – Replace obsolete wireless access points
that are security risks. New systems will be in place by
June 2017.
Goal 2: In cooperation with Health and Human Services
Agency (HHSA), add encryption to more devices. HHSA is
mandated to protect citizen’s personal and health
information from unintended disclosure.
 Objective 1 – By June 2017, increase the number of
encryption licenses and install as called for to meet the
business needs of HHSA.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Enhance the data center known as the Bunker. This
Data Center serves the public by remote backup of data
from other locations and the continued operation of County
services in the event of a disaster.
 Objective 1 – Modernize the Bunker’s fire suppression
system with current technology by June 2017.
Supporting the CAO “Open for Business”, TCiCT will
work to make Information Technology firms aware of the
opportunities in Tulare County and increase the skills of the
IT professionals who reside here.
 Objective 1 – Present the 2017 Central Valley
Technology Expo and Conference. This event features
technology vendors, training classes, seminars, and
speakers. Attendees include local governments and
other non-profit entities. This event is scheduled for
March 8, 2017.
 Objective 2 – Improve local and regional technology
education by bringing technical training to Tulare County.
TCiCT will invite other departments and local entities to
take part in technical training opportunities presented by
TCiCT. Completion by June 2017.
Goal 3: In cooperation with the Resource Management
Agency, further improve and enhance the Permitting system.
 Objective 1 – Complete planned improvements in
workflows by March 2017.
 Objective 2 – Implement improved GIS mapping April
2017.
 Objective 3 – Install the tracking of parcel splits by May
2017.
 Objective 4 – Improve constituent access of records and
communication by May 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Collaborate with HHSA to ensure that the
TulareWorks call center remains able to provide telephone
services for Tulare County applicants and recipients of cash
aid, food supplements, medical assistance, and the
Affordable Care Act
 Objective 1 – Replace the current end-of-life call center
router with state of the art router by May 2017.
Goal 2: Partner with HHSA to ensure the climate control of
the Government Plaza data center. This is required by the
enterprise level technology housed at GP.
 Objective 1 – This will be accomplished by replacing the
obsolete air conditioners with two new units that are more
efficient by May 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve remote management of electrical power for
critical data systems
 Objective 1 – Upgrade power distribution units within the
data centers by April 2017.
 Objective 2 – In essential Uninterruptable Power
Systems (UPS) replace five year old batteries by June
2017. Batteries may be recycled into less critical
locations.
To improve the ability of Radio to install and
maintain communications equipment of Public Safety
vehicles by providing a covered work area. This will
increase the production area of Radio during hot or
inclement weather.
 Objective 1 – Engineer, purchase, and install a covered
work area by June 2017.
Expand service to local municipalities in need of
bulk mail services by May 2017 to generate additional
revenues and customer base.
 Objective 1 – Increase mail volume and expand service
by 5%.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Procure and apply new technology to aid the
division in diversifying workload capabilities.
 Objective 1 – Research options for greater capacity and
more efficient throughput by March 2017.
 Objective 2 - Procure technology or budget fixed assets
for the following fiscal year by June 2017.
Provide more cost-effective copier services to
County departments.
 Objective 1 – Procure a copier agreement that meets or
exceeds the fiscal and production output needs of County
departments by March 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Enhance Customer Service by promoting products
and services to internal County customers.
 Objective 1 – Develop a newsletter to educate end-users
on the benefits of the multi-function device copier by
September 2016.
Increase Utilization of Large Format Print for use in
marketing products for County departments.
 Objective 1 – Subscribe to a high definition/quality image
provider by August 2016.
 Objective 2 – Provide training to graphic design staff in
the use of high definition images and substrates by
October 2016.
 Objective 3 – Provide large format printer training to staff
by October 2016.
Enhance customer service by increasing the Print
Services webpage accessibility.
 Objective 1 – Evaluate the comprehensive survey from
TCiCT and determine the website modules that need to
be upgraded by December 2016.
 Objective 2 – Upgrade identified modules with TCiCT by
June 2017.
Provide energy usage and cost information across
the portfolio of county-owned facilities and other County
utility accounts to determine future energy cost savings
possibilities.
 Objective 1 – Coordinate with SJVCEO to create a
benchmarking schedule and strategy for remaining
county-owned facilities, pumps, and street lights by
September 2016.
 Objective 2 – Implement benchmarking strategy for
remaining county-owned facilities, pumps, and street
lights by July 2017.
Goal 2: Coordinate with local utility companies to streamline
the billing process through Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
to improve responsiveness and improve turnaround time for
bill payment.
 Objective 1 – Identify accounts that are not currently
transmitted via EDI by September 2016.
 Objective 2 – Add identified accounts for EDI transfer by
July 2017.
Goal 3: Develop a quarterly system to gather data on energy
consumption to align with the County’s Climate Action Plan.
 Objective 1 – Develop a strategy and schedule to gather
and report energy usage by September of 2016.
 Objective 2 – Compile energy consumption data into
quarterly reports to provide annual totals by April 2017.
Reduce or eliminate flood hazards in Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – Construct the Seville Sontag Ditch Project
by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Construct improvements along the
Cottonwood Creek drainage to reduce potential of flood
damage to the communities of Yettem, Seville, and the
County’s Juvenile Detention Facility by June 2017.
 Objective 3 – Update and Implement the Flood Control
Facility Management Plan (FCFMP) by June 2017.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Identify opportunities to leverage Flood Control
District revenue for increased project allocations.
 Objective 1 – Research and identify potential funding
sources (Grants) for future flood control projects by June
2017.
 Objective 2 - Coordinate with local water resource
agencies and irrigation districts for force multiplying
projects such as channel clearing by June 2017.
Goal 2: Increase utilization of inherent value of storm water.
 Objective 1 - Coordinate flood retention with
Groundwater Sustainability Agencies for improved
groundwater aquifer recharge by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Update portions of the Tulare County
Flood Control Master Plan using current information and
resource management strategies by June 2017.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Prepare for and respond to nuisance flooding during
rain events
 Objective 1 – Hold pre-season and post-season
coordination meetings with storm water resource
stakeholders groups for improved efficiencies during
storm response by June 2017.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Establish improved monitoring and reporting
methodologies for flood prone locations.
 Objective 1 – Utilize GIS to accurately record information
regarding flood prone areas during storm events for
improved future analysis by June 2017.
 Objective 2 – Integrate flood control management into
design considerations for all projects prepared by RMA
Public Works Management Groups 1, 2 and 3 during
design and implementation phases by June 2017.