Goal 1: Collaborate with the Sheriff’s Department, Resource
Management Agency and other County Departments to initiate
a program that addresses nuisance properties and compel
property owners and landlords to help mitigate the negative
impact these have on the unincorporated communities of the
County.
 Objective 1 – Identify properties that impact communities
negatively and abate homes.
 Objective 2 – Use funding received from collections of
abated properties to increase the number of future abated
properties.
Goal 2: Evaluate options related to the County Marijuana
Ordinance.
 Objective 1 – Hold a workshop in September 2013 to
receive updates from county departments and consider
options.
 Objective 2 – Move forward with any necessary revisions to
the Marijuana Ordinance with the assistance of County
Counsel and other county departments.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Support further improvements at Sequoia Field Airport
to facilitate future commercial development.
 Objective 1 – Obtain funding to complete aprons and ramp
by the end of FY 2013/14.
 Objective 2 – Create a five year work program that lists
projects to be completed annually with one project being
completed every year so as to support future commercial
business opportunities by Fiscal Year.
Goal 2: Adopt Developer Impact Fees.
 Objective 1 – Complete Developer Impact Fee studies in
relation to fees by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Approve Memorandum of Understanding with
the City of Porterville.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Continue to explore solutions for our communities that
have water quality issues.
 Objective 1 - Complete tasks four and five of the Tulare
Lake Basin Disadvantaged Community Water Study by June
2014.
Goal 2: Open more youth centers in the unincorporated areas
of Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – Continue to seek funding and identify potential
partners that have the capacity to add youth services to
facilities provided by the County.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Update Information Technology Systems.
 Objective 1 – Continue installing GPS tracking systems on
all fire trucks to assist with improving response time by
December 2013.
 Objective 2 - Increase radio reception in Three Rivers for
public safety by June 2014.
Goal 2: Initiate the County’s five year 2006-2011 Strategic
Business Plan to ensure continued alignment between
community priorities and County services.
 Objective 1 – Evaluate and update County initiatives by
June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Adopt and update five year 2012 – 2017
Strategic Business Plan by June 2014.
Goal 3: Establish policies and procedures for the legislative
review process.
 Objective 1 – Present legislative review process options to
the Board for discussion by October 2013.
Goal 4: Work with community partners and stakeholders to
develop a Strategic Plan for the Step Up Initiative.
 Objective 1 – Create a planning document that will guide
the Step Up Program for the next 3–5 years by June 2014.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Continue working with the County Treasurer and
Auditor on a cashiering system that will decrease duplication,
expedite service, and increase efficiency in customer
transactions.
 Objective 1 – Complete the installation of hardware and
software for the cashiering system by December 2013.
 Objective 2 - Integrate the existing account records and fully
deploy the service by the December 2013 project goal date.
 Objective 3 - Train the staff in the proper procedures and
use of the new system before, during, and after deployment.
Goal 2: Work cooperatively with the USDA, CDFA and the
public to prevent the establishment and spread of the ACP, a
quarantined pest which has recently been found in Tulare
County.
 Objective 1 – Work with the CDFA to deploy a minimum of
100 delimitation traps around each of the three recent finds
by June 2014.

treatments to 22 agricultural citrus blocks as well as
residential host trees in the affected eradication zones by
June 2014.
 Objective 3 - Join with USDA and CDFA personnel to inform
the public and agricultural industry of the three recent ACP
trap finds and the process of events that will come from
these. Participate in at least three of these meetings and
assist in developing numerous compliance agreements with
packing houses and nurseries by June 2014.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Better inform the public of Agricultural and Weights and
Measures issues by changing and improving our procedures
and the departments public access.
 Objective 1 – Upgrade and enhance the departments web
site in a way that will help the public visualize the different
crops grown in Tulare County and to access information they
or the industry needs to know by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Provide continuing education and training for
five department staff regarding a newly released Online
Organic Registration process. Offer personalized training to
all producers or handlers that require or request it by June
2014.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Value all taxable property in Tulare County in order to
accurately publish the Secured and Unsecured Assessment Roll
and deliver it to the County Auditor by June 2014.
 Objective 1 – Value an estimated 156,700 real property
accounts. There are approximately 70,000 single-family
residences and condominiums still under Proposition 8
(decline in value) review, which is due to the still recovering
economy; value an estimated 31,500 business and personal
property accounts by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Deliver an accurate and complete assessment
roll to the County Auditor by June 2014.
Goal 2: Replace end of life mainframe Property Information
Management System (PIMS) in Assessor’s office.
 Objective 1 – Confirm vendor for new property tax
management system by October 2013.
 Objective 2 – Take proposal to Board regarding
replacement system before October 2013.
 Objective 3 – Working with TCiCT perform gap analysis
between PIMS and replacement system; complete Phase 1
by October 2013 and Phase 2 by May 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Implement new countywide Fraud Hotline for County
financial issues.
 Objective 1 – Obtain a dedicated phone line to use for
answering fraud allegations by July 2013.
 Objective 2 – Develop call procedures to properly address
the concerns and allegations by October 2013.
 Objective 3 – Notify public and departments of this new
service provided by placing call information on the Auditor-
Controller website and issuing press releases by January
2014.
Goal 2: Enhance the visibility and communication of the
Department through our website.
 Objective 1 – Complete the migration of the Registrar of
Voters website to MURA to enhance visibility of Department
services by July 2013.
 Objective 2 – Work with TCiCT to program election’s look
up programs to work with mobile devices as well as other
web browsers by October 2013.
 Objective 3 – Expand our available services of the Auditor’s
website to the public by January 2014.
Goal 3: Begin the complex project of migrating to a new
property management system
 Objective 1 – Prepare detailed requirements for all
functions for the new system by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Work with TCiCT to find the best vendor for
an integrated system who can meet or exceed our
requirements by June 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Begin update of Policy and Procedure Manual.
 Objective 1 – Create draft updated Policy and Procedure
Manual based on Purchasing Department input by April
2014.
 Objective 2 – Send draft manual to departments for
feedback by May 2014.
Goal 2: Initiate a more productive way in AFIN of defining
County purchases within each commodity.
 Objective 1 – Work with Tulare County Information and
Communications Technology Department (TCiCT) and
Departments to start developing a breakdown of items being
acquired within each commodity by December 2013.
Objective 2 – Build a new commodity list in AFIN to make
procurement dollar reporting more efficient and beneficial
within our Purchasing guidelines no later than June 2014.
Goal 3: Hold at least six Purchasing Procedures Training
Classes for Departments throughout FY 2013/14.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Ensure a safe water supply.
 Objective 1 - Provide science-based information through
collaborative development of nitrogen management
strategies for agricultural production to maximize nitrogen
use efficiency (NUE). Multiple meetings, workshops, and
field days will be conducted in FY 2013/14.
Goal 2: Ensure safety of farm workers.
 Objective 1 - Collaborate with industry and agencies to
provide pesticide applicator safety training to Spanish
speaking farm workers. Multiple sessions to be conducted
before December 2013 and plan to reach 750 participants.
 Objective 2: Collaborate with industry and agencies to
provide cotton harvest safety training to Spanish speaking
farm workers. Multiple sessions are to be held in September
2013 and plan to reach 200 participants.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Enhance competitive, sustainable food systems.
 Objective 1 - Conduct research in cotton, small grain, and
weed management to provide science-based information on

new varieties that provide disease resistance, high yields,
and quality. Results will lead to greater profitability for the
grower with reduced inputs of fungicides, insecticides, and
more effective herbicides.
 Objective 2 – Conduct research in silage corn and blackeye
beans and in weed and insect management to provide
science-based information on new varieties that provide
disease resistance, high yields, and quality. Results will lead
to greater profitability for the grower with reduced inputs of
fungicides, insecticides, and herbicides.
 Objective 3 – Evaluate drip irrigation for blackeye beans as
a way to reduce water use and improve production
 Objective 4 - Continue research for crop utilization and crop
factors for irrigation of citrus to reduce water use and
minimize nitrogen loss. Results for the multi-year study will
be presented at the fall citrus grower meeting in November
2013, published in the fall citrus newsletter and be presented
at a professional society conference.
 Objective 5 – A research trial will be established in a
mandarin orange orchard to measure the water
requirements of the trees. The results of this study will
provide research based water requirements for efficient
water scheduling and efficient use of a vital resource.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Increase science literacy in natural resources,
agriculture, and nutrition.
 Objective 1 - Reaching out to all communities, 4-H Club
Programs provide activities to enable youth to reach their full
potential through developing citizenship, leadership, and life
skills. 4-H Science, Engineering, and Technology (SET)
projects engage youth in positive youth development
context. 4-H Club program goal is to involve 900 youth and
350 volunteers for FY 2013/14.
 Objective 2 - Promote sustainable landscapes and home
gardens appropriate for the Central Valley through the
Master Gardener program. Volunteer staff will provide two
days per week office service hours. MGs will conduct four
seasonal public events and participate in other community
and youth educational events in FY 2013/14.
 Objective 3 - Reach out to 1,800 adults throughout the
County and provide them with quality nutrition education in
FY 2013/14 through the Nutrition and Family Consumer
Science programs.
Goal 2: Enhance the health of Californians.
 Objective 1 - Conduct nutrition and family consumer science
research and implement programs that address childhood
obesity and the human nutritional status, with the goal to
reach 4,000 families from EFNEP and FSNEP programs and
to expand the School Nutrition Education Program to reach
over 4,000 youth by June 2014.
 Objective 2 - Increasing healthy living opportunities and
strengthening the presence of healthy living themes
throughout existing programs, activities and curriculum are
the focus of the 4-H Youth Development Programs. 4-H
members and volunteers incorporate healthy living into all
project areas. 4-H Club program goal is to involve 900 youth
and 350 volunteers for FY 2013/14.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Utilize technology for efficiencies and savings.
 Objective 1 – Installation of new Wi-fi access points will
enable more effective computing access to staff and visitors.
Goal 2: Staff development to capture efficiencies, effectiveness
and savings.
Objective 1 – The Master Gardener program normally
recruits and trains every other year, but we are considering
training 25-35 new volunteers two consecutive years to grow
the program. The adult volunteer program will continue to
provide continuing education to existing 80 volunteers to
improve communication outreach skills: public speaking,
newspaper writing, horticultural knowledge, and gardening
workshop demonstrations. Continuing education
opportunities will be monthly classroom education, field trips,
and hands on workshops.
 Objective 2 - Seek funding for continuation of WMA
Program efforts. Funding is committed for the site treatment
program through 2014. Additional grant funding to support
the Community Program Specialist/Coordinator position
established for the 2013 season will be pursued in order to
extend the position through the 2014 season.
 Objective 3 – The 4-H Program plans to recruit and train 45-
60 new volunteers and to provide continuing education to
approximately 300 existing volunteers. 4-H volunteers,
partner with youth to discover their passions, adopt a growth
mindset, practice self-reflection and set goals. 4-H
volunteers lead projects and programs that are focused
around the core content of citizenship, healthy living, and
science, engineering, and technology using a "learn-bydoing"
educational model.
 Objective 4 – Continue to develop a succession plan for
department management.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Improve legal framework for effective civil code
enforcement.
 Objective 1 – Continue to work with Departments to identify
those chapters of Tulare County Ordinance Code pertaining
to the County’s civil code enforcement authority that need to
be updated and improved by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Continue to work with County Departments to
update at least one chapter of the Tulare County Ordinance
to update the County’s civil code enforcement authority by
June 2014
 Objective 3 - Update and complete one chapter in a Code
Enforcement Manual by June 2014.
Economic Well Being
Goal 1: Further improve County effectiveness in contracting for
goods and services.
 Objective 1 - Provide or update three online training
modules on contracts and contract administration using the
County Counsel web page and the Performance Platform by
June 2014.
Goal 2: Create a Tax, Assessment, Fee and Financing
Reference Guide for internal use to advise departments and
develop trainings on each topic.
 Objective 1 – Draft a chapter for the Tax, Assessment, Fee
and Financing Reference Guide, setting out fee adoption
procedures and describing the basis for, and limits, on
County fees by June 2014.
Objective 2 – Develop training for departments on setting
County fees to be presented in conjunction with the County
Administrative Office’s annual request to departments to
update their fees by April 2014.
 Objective 3 - Prepare a first draft of a Chapter on taxes for
the Tax, Assessment, Fee and Financing Reference Guide
for internal use to advise departments by June 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Create a practice guide for internal use to advise those
departments conducing informal administrative hearings on
matters appealable to the BOS under Tulare County Ordinance
Code Section 165.
 Objective 1 - Prepare a proposed ordinance to substantively
update section 165 (pertaining to appeals to the Board) of
the Tulare County ordinance by March 1, 2014.
 Objective 2 - Create a practice guide for internal use to
advise hearing officers in the administrative hearings held
under Chapter 23 of Part I of the Tulare County Ordinance
Code pertaining to Administrative Fines by June 1, 2014.
 Objective 3 – Create a practice guide for internal use to
advise department advocates in administrative hearings held
under Chapter 23 of Part I of the Tulare County Ordinance
Code pertaining to Administrative Fines by July 1, 2014.
Goal 2: Create trainings and tools for departments to assist
them in handling routine legal matters on their own, and to also
recognize when they need to refer a legal issue to County
Counsel.
 Objective 1 - Continue to present training to departments on
how to respond to routine public record requests on their
own, using our guidelines, protocols, boilerplates, samples,
and checklists by June 2014.
 Objective 2 - Identify one new, routine legal subject area
that clients could be trained to handle on their own, develop
training and boilerplates, develop training materials and
checklists, and provide relevant training by June, 2014.
 Objective 3 - Implement one or more, regular blogs on legal
topics that could potentially impact or be useful to our clients.
Use MURA Broadcaster as well as e-mail to distribute to
clients by June 2014.
 Objective 4 - Create a new legal resource for the County
Counsel website and notify clients by June 2014.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Develop a five year financial forecast to assist in longterm
financial planning.
 Objective 1 – Perform and complete the five year forecast
and monthly variance analysis for all funds by December
2013.
 Objective 2 – Analyze forecast and evaluate trends for Mid-
Year review by March 2014.
Goal 2: Develop and implement Impact Fee Program.
 Objective 1 – Revise the inventory of buildings associated
with impact fees by September 2013.
 Objective 2 – Conduct and complete outreach to Cities by
December 2013.
 Objective 3 – Submit agenda item for approval of Impact
Fees to Board of Supervisors by June 2014.
Goal 3: Initiate the process to update the County’s Five Year
Strategic Plan.
 Objective 1 – Gather County and community input through
stakeholder meetings and surveys by March 2014.
 Objective 2 – Complete draft update of the County’s Five
Year Strategic Plan by May 2014.
 Objective 3 – Submit update to Board of Supervisors by
June 2014.
Goal 4: Complete Revolving Door Policy Ordinance.
 Objective 1 – Complete Revolving Door Policy ordinance by
December 2013.
 Objective 2 – Submit agenda item for approval of Revolving
Door Policy ordinance to Board of Supervisors by December
2013.

Goal 5: Implement financial policies for Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – Circulate draft of policies to Auditor
Controller/Treasurer-Tax Collector’s Department by August
2013.
 Objective 2 – Revise draft to reflect comments by Auditor
Controller/Treasurer-Tax Collector’s Department by
September 2013.
 Objective 3 – Submit agenda item for approval of policies to
Board of Supervisors by September 2013.
Goal 6: Automate the Fair Political Practices Commission Form
700 - Statement of Economic Interests filings for County
departments, Boards, Commissions and Committees, and
Special Districts through the eDisclosure solution. The
eDisclosure solution provides a streamlined, simplified method
for filers to complete their forms online, as well as for Filing
Officials to assist in managing filings and Biennial Reviews.
 Objective 1 - Compile a list of filers and input required data
into an excel spreadsheet.
 Objective 2 - Purchase and installation of the eDisclosure
software in test environment, configuration, and user
training.
 Objective 3 - Go live with the eDisclosure software for the
filing deadline of April 2, 2014.
Goal 1: Complete a full review of Internal Service Fund (ISF)
Rates. In FY 2012/13 new methodology was used to calculate
Internal Service Fund rates.
 Objective 1 – Complete a financial analysis of all expenses
for each ISF by December 2013.
 Objective 2 - Verify calculated rates by January 2014.

Goal 2: Install a new cashiering system that will work for Park
Reservations to improve cash management and customer
services.
 Objective 1 – Meet with Treasurer’s Office to create a
team for implementation of iNovah cashiering software by
September 2013.
 Objective 2 – Install iNovah Cashiering Software at the
Administration Office and test by December 2013.
 Objective 3 – Train staff on input requirements for the
new system by February 2014.
Goal 3: Complete the testing of the TCiCT Property
Management database and integrate it into full time use.
 Objective 1 – Complete the testing by December 2013.
 Objective 2 – Integrate the database into full time use by
March 2014.
Goal 4: Complete the purchase of a site for use by Health and
Human Services Agency (HHSA) as a Wellness and Recovery
Center by December 2013.
 Objective 1 – Negotiate and prepare a purchase agreement
for property in Porterville by October 2013
 Objective 2 – Prepare an Agenda and Resolution for a
notice of intent to purchase property for Board approval by
November 2013.
 Objective 3 – Prepare an Agenda and Resolution to
consummate the property purchase by December 2013.
Goal 5: - Commence property/right of way acquisitions for the
Avenue 416 widening project between Road 56 and Fresno
County Line.
 Objective 1 – Assist RMA Engineering with plats and legal
descriptions of property to be purchased by December 2013.
 Objective 2 – Prepare a request for proposal for appraisal
services after RMA Engineering has completed plats and
legal descriptions by January 2014.
 Objective 3 – Prepare property purchase agreements after
receipt of appraisal by January 2014.
Goal 6: Enhance the ongoing maintenance of Parks equipment
for better service to our Park patrons.
 Objective 1 – Add a mechanic to Park staff to provide a
greater level of service by October 2013.
 Objective 2 – Ensure repairs and preventive maintenance is
done in a timely and efficient manner to avoid unnecessary
down time by May 2014.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Add water safety education presentations to the public
and schools.
 Objective 1 – Train new staff and coordinate water safety
education with other agencies and schools to make positive
public contacts by October 2013.
 Objective 2 – Document all water safety presentations and
contacts made on a monthly basis by May 2014.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Control telephone costs.
 Objective 1 – Pay phone bills on time.
 Objective 2 – Continue to look for lines that can be
disconnected.
Goal 2: Integrate GIS services into TCiCT.
 Objective 1 – Combine GIS staffing with TCiCT staffing by
July 2013.
 Objective 2 – Develop written strategy for GIS services to
Tulare County by November 2013.
 Objective 3 – Build a complete Geographic Database for
Tulare County by June 2014.
 Objective 4 – Upgrade Esri software versions to most
current release throughout Tulare County by June 2014.
 Objective 5 – Build a GIS web site by June 2014.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Conduct a seamless transition in support of the opening
of the new South County Justice Center in Porterville by
October 2013.
Goal 2: Continue system updates in order to be consistent with
other departments which receive Court event data electronically.
 Objective 1 - Receive discovery electronically from local law
enforcement agencies directly into DAMION by June 2014.
 Obejctive 2 - Utilize electronic files in Courts which have
wireless connections by June 2014.
Goal 3: Work with local agencies, law enforcement, and private
entities to increase awareness of the recently created Crimes
Against Children Division. Give special emphasis to combating
those crimes in which the victim is a child by giving
presentations to each law enforcement agency in the County
about the new Division.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: To enhance the safety and security of the elderly,
HHSA’s Public Guardian/Adult Protective Services programs will
increase community awareness of how to recognize and
respond to elder abuse.
 Objective 1 – Implement professional elder abuse training
for community partners and conduct four such training
events by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Provide a minimum of four conveniently
located presentations focused on prevention of elder abuse
for Tulare County seniors, by June 2014.
Goal 2: To increase the safety and security of all county
residents, HHSA’s Office of Emergency Services will revise and
implement updated critical emergency plans for Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – By December 2013 finalize and adopt a new
Mass Care & Shelter Plan that will define roles and
responsibilities for departments, Tulare Operational Area
jurisdictions, and aid organizations; incorporate community
service organizations; and maintain a current inventory of
primary and supplemental locations for emergency shelters.
 Objective 2 – By March 2014, complete a revised Mass
Evacuation Plan for the Tulare Operational Area, to include
contingency plans for known hazards, pre-identified
receiving locations, and primary evacuation routes with
associated key control points based on various technical
analyses and flow/capacity studies.
 Objective 3 – Increase the availability of training on critical
emergency plans, processes, and systems for staff across
all disciplines, through creation and delivery of interactive,
online training, by June 2014.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: To enhance the well-being of children in the foster care
system, HHSA will continue to seek placement of foster youth in
the least restrictive, most family-like setting. Relative homes and
quality foster homes are two of the least restrictive options.
 Objective 1 – Increase the proportion of Tulare County
children placed with relatives to represent 35% of children in
out-of-home care by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Increase the number of new, licensed foster
care homes by 10% by June 2014.
Goal 2: In order to decrease the number of Tulare County
residents who are obese or overweight and therefore at risk for
chronic diseases, HHSA will increase interest in healthy foods,
decrease prevalence of unhealthy foods, increase opportunities
for enjoying physical activity, and increase access to
breastfeeding education and assistance in Tulare County
communities.
 Objective 1 – Partner with community-based organizations
to provide technical assistance to three school districts
working to strengthen school wellness policies, specifically to
reduce access to sugar-sweetened beverages and increase
utilization of safe routes to school, by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Deliver education classes on nutrition and

obesity prevention measures promoting food security as well
as individual, family, and organizational changes to 800
community members by June 2014.
 Objective 3 – Provide education classes on nutrition and
physical activity opportunities and/or support Network-
Approved social marketing strategies (such as MyPlate,
Rethink Your Drink, CalFresh campaigns) to 2,000 children
and 300 parents, to increase awareness of the importance of
consuming healthy food and beverages by June 2014.
 Objective 4 – Collaborate with 25 early-childhood care and
education sites to encourage incorporation of nutrition
education and obesity prevention strategies into their
operations, by June 2014.
 Objective 5 – Train all Women, Infants, and Children
Program (WIC) staff as competent breastfeeding advocates
and/or counselors by June 2014.
Goal 3: In order to protect the health of Tulare County residents
from communicable diseases, HHSA will increase the number of
immunizations provided, investigate Valley Fever cases, and
conduct a satisfaction survey of HIV Program clients.
 Objective 1 – By June 2014, increase the number of
Immunization Program vaccinations given to the community
by 10% over FY 2012/13.
 Objective 2 – Join other counties in initiating a regional
Valley Fever enhanced surveillance program by conducting
enhanced case investigations of a sample of 10% of cases
reported during FY 2013/14.
 Objective 3 – Complete a satisfaction assessment for Tulare
County HIV Program clients in order to identify unmet needs,
service gaps, and barriers for people living with HIV, by June
2014.
Goal 4: Increase supported, collaborative, and shared care
between Primary Care and Mental Health for primary care
patients with mental health issues, and for mental health
consumers with chronic physical health issues or those
transitioning from mental health services to primary care.
 Objective 1 – Co-locate Mental Health staff with Primary
Care and Primary Care staff with Mental Health by August
2013 and begin to provide an integration of services
between mental health and primary care to a minimum of
20% of consumers, including consultation, brief
assessments, collaborative treatment planning, and a warm
linkage between the systems.
 Objective 2 – Implement the Mental Health Services Act
(MHSA) Innovation Component Plan, Integrated
Health/Mental Health Clinic Integration with Pharmaceutical
Case Management Project by December 2013, with the colocation
of staff in Objective 1 as the first step in
implementation.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: To better assist its clients in meeting their operational
needs, HHSA’s Human Resources (HR) Division will become
more proactive in its approach and responsiveness.
 Objective 1 – Implement a Divisional restructure that
includes, among other adjustments: adding a Deputy
Director who will be a member of the Executive Management
Team, making HR a strategic partner with Agency branches;
redesigning the recruitment process to attract and provide
managers with the highest quality candidates; and initiating a
process to analyze all HR services and implement
appropriate changes to improve speed and effectiveness; by
June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Measure internal customer satisfaction by
implementing regular manager and supervisor satisfaction
surveys by June 2014.
 Objective 3 – Provide monthly management reports on
employee and personnel relations, recruitment, turnover,
and performance evaluations by June 2014.
Goal 2: The HR Division will strive to improve Agency
performance results through increasing leadership skills of
supervisors and managers.
 Objective 1 – Assess and identify leadership development
training needs and develop leadership training curriculum by
June 2014.
Goal 3: To provide improved customer service to seniors,
HHSA's Aging Services Division will take steps to increase
program efficiencies and address barriers to service access.
 Objective 1 – Implement a Service Center model in the In-
Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Public Authority (PA)
programs by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Conduct an assessment targeted to the senior
population to determine overall transportation needs, by
June 2014.
Goal 4: To improve the quality of care for consumers of mental
health services, HHSA will develop peer positions within the
organizational structure of the County-run mental health sites (to
include Visalia and Porterville Mental Health Clinics and the
Community of Wellness Supportive Housing sites).
 Objective 1 – Develop new job classification of Peer
Support Specialist by July 2013.
 Objective 2 – Recruit and hire eight Full-Time Equivalent
(FTE) Peer Support Specialists through the MHSA
Innovation Component Plan, Recovery Academy Project, by
November 2013.
 Objective 3 – Train all Peer Support Specialists to become
Wellness and Recovery Action Plan (WRAP) certified for the
implementation of the MHSA Innovation Component Plan,
Recovery Academy Project, by February 2014.
 Objective 4 – Develop and maintain ongoing peer
employment supports to allow for staff mentorship, peer-topeer
support, and support through the statewide Working
Well Together Peer Networking opportunities, by June 2014.
Goal 5: To improve the quality of care for consumers of mental
health services and increase consumers’ involvement with their
quality of care, HHSA will implement new EHR software that will
include consumer’s medical chart. Use of this software will
improve the decision-making process for the clinical staff and
allow consumers to access their information and communicate
with clinical staff electronically.
 Objective 1 – Convert the information from the current
Mental Health MIS software to the Netsmart Avatar System
by August 2013.
 Objective 2 – Begin using the Netsmart Avatar Cal-PM
module at County-run mental health clinics and contracted
clinic programs by September 2013.
 Objective 3 – Train all County Mental Health staff and
contracted provider staff on the use of the Netsmart Avatar
EHR software by November 2013.
 Objective 4 – Begin using the Netsmart Avatar CWS
module at designated mental health contracted clinic
programs by January 2014.
 Objective 5 – Begin planning with County staff and
consumers the elements to be included in the Netsmart
ConsumerConnect software by January 2014.

 Objective 6 – Begin training County staff and consumers on
using the ConsumerConnect software by June 2014.
Goal 6: Promote and enhance culturally and linguistically
competent services for clients, employees, and contracted
providers by developing and implementing strategies to
increase cultural competency knowledge, skills, and abilities.
 Objective 1 – Provide bi-annual cultural competency training
for Agency executive management and quarterly cultural
competency training for Diversity Works and Diversity
Outreach members through June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Provide monthly cultural competency training
for all Agency employees through June 2014.
 Objective 3 – Collaborate with the Community Outreach
Team and Agency departments on public outreach to ensure
a cultural competency component, through June 2014.


Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Develop a comprehensive Employee Wellness
Program with a departmental Wellness Committee to promote
wellness activities and issues and to mitigate health plan costs.
 Objective 1: Draft Wellness Activities & Project Plan by
August 2013.
 Objective 2: Hold Wellness Committee meeting by
September 2013.
 Objective 3: Solicit input from department representatives
on Draft Plan by October 2013.
 Objective 4: Present Employee Wellness Program Draft
Plan to the Board of Supervisors by December 2013.
 Objective 5: Implement Employee Wellness Program
through December 2014.
Goal 2: Launch Human Resources and Development internet
site to be a one-stop resource for stakeholders.
 Objective 1: Upload newly revised content by October
2013.
 Objective 2: Survey site users regarding content, ease of
access, and site navigation.
 Objective 3: Update web materials, forms, and documents
in response to survey results for final launch January 2014.

Goal 1: Expand participation in the development of a
standardized, statewide training curriculum for Rangemasters
that addresses Use of Force issues specific to Probation
Officer personnel.
 Objective 1 – Participate in working groups as provided by
the Chief Probation Officers of California.
 Objective 2 – Participate in the establishment of an active
Central Valley Region Range Master Coalition.
Goal 2: Arm three Probation Correctional Officer III positions
assigned to the Transport Unit at the Juvenile Detention
Facility.
 Objective 1 – Open position for application by August
2013.
 Objective 2 – Interview and select personnel by
September 2013.
 Objective 3 – Complete Arming Psychological, Simunition,
and PC 832 Firearms by October 2013.
 Objective 4 – Have staff fully armed during Court or other
high-risk transports by October 2013.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Increase the collection of Victim Restitution on adult
cases by 5%, from $551,858 to $579,451.
 Objective 1 - Conduct monthly meetings with the District
Attorney to identify and coordinate interagency efforts to
prosecute and collect on felony probation cases with high
restitution balances.
 Objective 2 – Delegate the function of entering cases and
setting-up accounts in Caseload Explorer to the newly
created Senior Account Clerks, to allow the Probation
Collections Investigators time to locate clients and initiate
collection efforts by August 2013.
 Objective 3 – Create a checklist for attachment to the Pre-
Sentence Financial Evaluation form to assist offenders in
obtaining documents needed for the financial assessment.
Goal 2: Act as chair the Community Corrections Partnership
consisting of the following voting members: the Chief
Probation Officer, the Superior Court Administrator, the
Sheriff-Coroner, the District Attorney, the Public Defender, the
Chief of the Visalia Police Department, and the Director of
Health and Human Services Agency. Work in concert with
these partners in addressing the mandates of AB 109 as they
impact the County.
 Objective 1 – Hold quarterly meetings of the CCP to
provide statistical information, evaluate needs/ trends, and
identify issues as they arise.
 Objective 2 – Coordinate the following subcommittees:
Sentencing/Incarceration, Performance Measures, and
Community Supervision.
 Objective 3 – Meet supervision ratios of 1:20, 1:30, and
1:40 based on assessed risk to the community.
 Objective 4 – Work closely with the CCP to develop
programs and services that provide both alternatives to
incarceration and address offender needs, both in-custody
and following release.
 Objective 5 – Work closely with the Superior Court to
develop alternatives to the existing bail schedule.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Work closely with the Board of Supervisors on Step-
Up events, as well as the Summer Night Lights program, on a
countywide basis.
 Objective 1 – Participate in a minimum of six Step-Up
events.
 Objective 2 – Participate in a minimum of 15 Summer
Night Lights events.
Goal 2: Develop a program in conjunction with County TCiCT
and College of the Sequoias whereby minors in long-term
programming at the Juvenile Detention Facility and the Youth
Facility who have graduated from high school or who have
received a GED can take online college courses.
 Objective 1 – Have County TCiCT assess both facilities
for connectivity by August 2013.
 Objective 2 – Work with College of the Sequoias to
develop a protocol for enrollment by August 2013.
 Objective 3 – Enroll first qualifying student for the Fall
2013 semester by August 2013.

Quality of Life
Goal 1: Implement Tulare County’s General Plan 2030 Update
by focusing on major environmental, planning, and development
activities within the Planning Branch.
 Objective 1 – Initiate the Community Plan updating process
with a Highway 99 corridor focus on three Community Plans,
namely, Goshen, Pixley, and Traver.
 Objective 2 - Implement the Housing Element, particularly
Action Program 9.
 Objective 3 – Complete the Agricultural Policy Advisory
Committee Work Plan, particularly the 2013 – 2014
Implementation Measures identified in the General Plan
2030 Update.
 Objective 4 - Complete the Animal Confinement Facilities
Plan Environmental Impact Report.
 Objective 5 – Complete the Yokohl Ranch Environmental
Impact Report.
 Objective 6 – Apply for five grants for economic
development and infrastructure projects.
 Objective 7 - Initiate three targeted zoning amendments to
expedite permit processing.
 Objective 8 - Complete Senate Bill 244 (Disadvantaged
Community) Work Plan.
 Objective 9 – Complete 250 general code enforcement
cases.
 Objective 10 – Complete 300 medical marijuana code
enforcement cases.
 Objective 11 – Complete 250 planning and development
projects.
 Objective 12 – Issue 2,000 building permits.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Reorganize the Planning Branch to implement the
Strategic Management System with emphasis on the
interdisciplinary project management approach.
 Objective 1 - Expand the Environmental Planning Division
by adding an Environmental Resources Unit focusing on
agriculture, dairies, surface mining, water resources, air
resources, biological resources, cultural resources, and
inspections.
 Objective 2 - Consolidate the Countywide Planning and
Project Review Divisions into a new Planning and Project
Processing Division concentrating on implementing the
General Plan 2030 Update and developing greater expertise
in planning, zoning, and development matters.
 Objective 3 – Merge the Grants and Development Division
into the Economic Development Office concentrating on
business opportunities, tourism, film and grants by applying

for and obtaining more grants leading to the construction of
needed public infrastructure within the unincorporated area
of Tulare County.
 Objective 4 – Transfer the Geographic Information System
(GIS) Unit to the Tulare County Information and
Communications Technology (TCiCT) Department, while
retaining the services of one drafter position to insure that
planning and development projects receive the necessary
design services in a timely manner.
Goal 2: Implement PALMS application to replace Permits
PLUS for permitting and inspections.
 Objective 1 – Complete workflow reviews by August 2013.
 Objective 2 – Complete business process, interface, and
reporting documentation and requirements by November
2013.
 Objective 3 – Complete data conversion mapping and
specifications by April 2014.
 Objective 4 – Begin user acceptance testing of PALMS
system by June 2014.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Complete a comprehensive plan for additional
alternatives to incarceration.
 Objective 1 – In consultation with other members of the
Tulare County Community Corrections Partnership,
complete a comprehensive plan for additional alternatives to
incarceration by June 2014.
Goal 2: Increase efficiency of criminal investigations through
information sharing with local criminal justice agencies.

Objective 1 – Implement electronic sharing of fingerprints of
new inmates in Tulare and Kings counties by January 2014.
 Objective 2 – Implement electronic sharing of crime reports
with other Tulare County law enforcement agencies by June
2014.
Goal 2: Enhance surveillance camera system at Bob Wiley
Correctional Facility and the Tulare County Men’s Correctional
Facility.
 Objective 1 – Complete analysis to update video
surveillance and recording systems by September 2013.
 Objective 2 – Purchase camera and recording equipment by
January 2014.
 Objective 3 – Install new equipment by April 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Start phase-in of new patrol vehicles.
 Objective 1 – Start replacement of Sheriff Department’s
standard patrol vehicles with Ford Police Interceptors, sport
utility vehicles designed to handle the rigors of police work
by June 2014.
Goal 2: Purchase and deploy a new mobile crime lab.
 Objective 1 – Purchase and deploy new mobile crime by
December 2013.
Goal 3: Consolidate booking of new male and female inmates
for the County jail system.
 Objective 1 – Move male inmate booking from the Main Jail
and female booking from the Bob Wiley Detention Center to
the Tulare County Adult Pre-Trial Facility by June 2014.
Goal 4: Implement video visitation with County inmates for
family and friends.
 Objective 1 – Implement video visitation with County
inmates for family and friends of inmates by June 2014.
Goal 5: Replace safety equipment that is at or near the end of
its service life.
 Objective 1 – Purchase hand guns, shot guns, tasers, and
computers in patrol cars to replace aging or out-of-date
equipment by January 2014.
 Objective 2 -- Inventory and distribute new guns and tasers
to deputies by February 2014.
 Objective 3 – Install new computers in patrol cars by April
2014.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Utilize the COPS funds to maintain staffing levels in
Patrol and Detention Divisions and to allow the Department to
address its community policing goals.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Work with local governmental organizations to ensure
Tulare County continues to receive annual funding.

Goal 1: Successfully prosecute agricultural crime cases and
maintain our high conviction rate by June 2014.
Goal 2: Expand outreach efforts and find innovative ways to
educate the agriculture community on how to protect their
property against crime by June 2014.
Goal 3: Network with the Central Valley Rural Crime Task Force
Counties to address agricultural crime throughout the Central
Valley and seek to have attendance for the task force meetings
from every law enforcement agency in the task force jurisdiction
by June 2014.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Interrupt the cycle of delinquent behavior among youth
through balanced and restorative justice services; reduce youth
contact with the formal juvenile justice system through the
provision of evidence-based services; and reduce the rate of
recidivism among youth.
 Objective 1 – Continue to provide NAB services to at-risk
youth and maintain a success rate of 80% by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Increase the Aftercare and Re-entry graduation
rate to 35% by June 2014.
 Objective 3 – Expand the GREAT Program by adding three
additional Probation Officer II positions and eight additional
school sites which will allow for provision of the GREAT
curriculum to a minimum of 4,260 children in 4th through 7th
grades throughout the county by June 2014.
 Objective 4 - Continue to provide GREAT Summer Camp to
100 children by June 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Implement treatment, educational, and vocational
programming at the Juvenile Detention Facility and the Youth
Facility based on validated assessment tools.
 Objective 1 - Develop a Professional Services Agreement
with Alliant University to conduct an empirical evaluation by
July 2013.
 Objective 2 - Create a composite report identifying the top
three criminogenic needs from the Positive Achievement
Change Tool risk and needs assessment on long-term
commitments at each facility by July 2013.
 Objective 3 - Purchase and install needed computers and
computer stations at each facility by August 2013.
 Objective 4 – Purchase and administer the Vocational
Research Institute interest and aptitude tool to all long-term
commitments at each facility by August 2013.
 Objective 5 – Complete final evaluation with recommended
programming by October 2013.

Goal 1: Improve communication in the TCMS Program to foster
program improvements and improve service delivery.
 Objective 1 – Enhance communication with providers by
fully implementing the TCMS Electronic Treatment
Authorization Request (Electronic-TAR) System for all
providers in the County by June 2014.

Objective 2 – Improve communication with the TulareCare
program and eligibility department by establishing consistent
meetings to ensure that clients have been linked to available
health service programs by June 2014. This will maximize
client services and reduce miscommunication between
programs and eligibility department, while improving the
overall responsiveness of the TCMS Program.

Quality of Life
Goal 1: Expand Youth Programs in library branches
 Objective 1 - Expand Wii gaming program to Three Rivers,
Springville, and Earlimart by September 2013.
 Objective 2 - Expand children’s movie program to Three
Rivers, Springville, and Earlimart by September 2013.
 Objective 3 - Expand Teen programming (anime & manga)
to Woodlake by September 2013.
 Objective 4 - Add Toddler Time to Alpaugh, Exeter, Three
Rivers by June 2014.
 Objective 5 - Plan and develop a program designed to meet
with different local groups i.e. Home Base, First Five, and
parent meetings at the different schools. Make visits to the
different groups to talk about what each branch has to offer
by September 2013.
Goal 2: Assist youth to produce a comic/graphic novel by the
end of summer reading program in 2014.

Objective 1 - Document the youth as they write, create,
draw, and film the final product of the comic/graphic novel
and upload to Valley PBS by You by June 2014.
 Objective 2 - Expand programming for summer reading
program by June 2014 to include more group activities.
 Objective 3 – Write at least one grant to support the teen
Digital Media Lab.
 Objective 4 - Startup "Your Tulare County" grant project
with iPads at Visalia as well as four other branches by
January 2014.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Expand and transition GED training instruction to meet
the requirements of the new 2014 GED test.
 Objective 1 - Complete purchase of new GED training
materials to meet the requirements of 2014 GED test.
 Objective 2 - Provide expanded computer support for GED
at the Literacy Center.
 Objective 3 - Train tutors on revised GED content standards
and instructional techniques by December 2013.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Explore, expand, and expose Tulare County Library
patrons to new technologies.
 Objective 1 - Increase bandwidth in Visalia, Dinuba, Exeter,
Lindsay, and Three Rivers Libraries. Establish wireless
Internet at each location by December 2013.
 Objective 2 - Expand Chromebook project to checkouts in
Dinuba, Exeter, Lindsay, and Three Rivers Libraries by
March 2014.
 Objective 3 - Investigate bandwidth expansion for all library
branches by June 2014.
Goal 2: Digitize, preserve, and host historic audio-visual
materials in the History Room.
 Objective 1 - Digitize, describe, and upload two reels of
slides of images of the Linnell Labor camp circa 1930, and
have a display of selected images in the Library, by June
2014.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Make accommodations for future site development of
the hangar and taxi lane reconstruction projects.
 Objective 1 – Meet with owners of portable T-hangars to
discuss relocating the T-hangars and negotiate new long
term contracts by November 2013.
Economic Well Being
Goal 1: Determine the feasibility of development potential at
the airport.
 Objective 1 – Prepare the ALP by November 2013.

Goal 2: Increase tenant occupancy of the hangars.
 Objective 1 – Research and identify potential aircraft-related
enterprises in leasing space by December 2013.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Explore cost effective options for emergency services
delivery.
 Objective 1 – Improve suppression effectiveness through
increased training on the use of appropriate fire
extinguishing agents such as different types of foams by
February 2014.
 Objective 2 - Complete review and update existing
interagency agreements and regional response capabilities
by March 2014.
 Objective 3 – Improve the recruitment and retention of
extra-help firefighters by March 2014.
 Objective 4 – Explore options for electronic and web-based
training delivery methods to improve training at stations for
both full-time and extra-help response staff by March 2014.
Goal 2: Develop and promote efficiency and response in the
Fire Dispatch Center.
 Objective 1 – Work with Tulare County Sheriff’s Office staff
towards the creation of a co-located County dispatch facility
and complete preliminary discussions by December 2013.
 Objective 2 – Modify current dispatcher training program to
improve response times by reducing call processing time by
March 2014.
Goal 3: Work with unincorporated communities to identify
placement and begin installation of 2,000 smoke/carbon
monoxide alarm detectors and 25 smoke/carbon monoxide
detectors with strobes for the hearing impaired.
 Objective 1 – Work with local community assistance
organizations, civic organizations, school districts, and utilize
door to door canvassing to identify and sign up low income
households in all communities by December 2013.
 Objective 2 – Promote the availability of alarm devices for
qualifying low income households during community fairs,
the Tulare County Fair, and other direct community functions
by December 2013.
 Objective 3 – Work with Veterans’ organizations, community
leaders and Office of Emergency Services 9-1-1 system to
identify the hearing impaired residents who qualify for the
alarm devices by December 2013.
 Objective 4 – Train Fire Department personnel in the
installation of the carbon monoxide/smoke alarm devices
and install these devices in the residences of qualified
households by June 2014.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Improve and Maintain Adequate Transportation
Infrastructure
 Objective 1: Secure federal funding for construction of two
bridge projects by June 2014.
 Objective 2: Obtain environmental clearance for the Road
182 Deep Creek Bridge project by June 2014.
 Objective 3: Complete preliminary design of seven bridge
projects by June 2014.
 Objective 4: Begin "Bridge Preventive Maintenance
Program" by December 2013. Program will be on-going into
FY 14/15.
 Objective 5: Continue design of the Avenue 416 road
widening project through June 2014 and begin right-of-way
acquisition by December 2013.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve staff’s understanding of the mechanics of soils
material testing as it pertains to compaction testing and soil
identification.
 Objective 1 – Provide a basic course in the Introduction of
Soils Material Testing for Engineers and Engineering
Technicians (Inspectors) by June 2014.
Goal 2: Improve maintenance of county roads.
 Objective 1 - Repair 250 miles of roadway using the
"Different Approach" method by June 2014.
 Objective 2 - Place 100 miles of a chip seal overlay.
 Objective 3 - Perform 400 miles of shoulder work
maintenance.

Goal 1: Meet all WIA Adult and Dislocated Worker participant
performance goals set by the California EDD WSD by June
2014. Individuals must meet WIA low-income criteria to be
eligible for the Adult Program. Individuals must meet dislocated
worker criteria such as being laid off due to a company closure
or substantial lay off, or receiving unemployment insurance and
unlikely to return to their previous industry or occupation. Tulare
County was designated as an Integrated Service Delivery Area
by EDD WSD, which allows the WIB to provide intensive
services to a larger number of individuals through the
Employment Connection One-Stop System.
 Objective 1 - 48% of all Adult Program participants will find
employment within 90 days after leaving the program, 67.3%
of all Dislocated Worker Program participants will find
employment within 90 days after completing the program.
 Objective 2 – 75.5% of all the Adult Program participants
who find employment after completing the program will
remain employed for at least 6 months. 79.5% of all
Dislocated Worker Program participants who find
employment after completing the program will remain
employed for at least 6 months.
 Objective 3 – 6 months after completing the Adult or
Dislocated Worker Programs, participants will earn a self
sufficient wage.
Goal 2: Meet all WIA In-School and Out-of-School Youth
Program performance goals set by the EDD WSD by June
2013. Youth must be between the ages of 16 to 21, be lowincome,
and have a barrier to finding employment or completing
school to be eligible for the WIA Youth Program.
 Objective 1 – 72% of youth participants will find a job or
enroll in school within 3 months of completing the program.
 Objective 2 – 60% of youth participants will receive a GED,
High School Diploma or Vocational School Certificate within
3 months of completing the program.
 Objective 3 – 54% of Out-of-School youth will increase at
least 1 educational functioning level within 3 months of
completing the program.

Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Ensure that children in cases involving Title IV-D of
the Federal Social Security Act have support from parents as
ordered by increasing the amount of child support collections
and distributions by September 2013 as set by the State.
 Objective 1 - Collect and distribute $37,766,583 in child
support.
 Objective 2 - Collect and distribute 65.9% of the amount
of current child support due.
 Objective 3 - Collect on 63.7% of cases with arrears
owing.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Increase the percentage of children with a legal
relationship with their parents by September 2013 as set by
the State.
 Objective 1 - Maintain or increase Statewide Paternity
Establishment Percentage to 100% or above.
Goal 2: Increase the percentage of child support cases with
support orders by September 2013 as set by the State.
 Objective 1 - Establish support orders in 92.3% of cases
needing a support order.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Operate a responsive, customer friendly program by
June 2014.
 Objective - Conduct customer service surveys and
achieve an annual customer satisfaction rate of at least
80%.
Goal 2 – Increase community outreach and educate the
public regarding department functions.
 Objective 1 – Identify new opportunities to educate
customers about Department services.
 Objective 2 – Develop and provide community
presentations about Department services and current
topics of interest.

Operate a cost effective program by September 2013
as set by the State.
 Objective - Achieve a Cost Effectiveness ratio of at least
$2.25.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide Project Management for the AB900 Grant
funded South County Detention Facility. The grant project is for
Capital Projects and Facilities Director Capital Projects
$66,664,000 (total project cost was revised in July 2013) and
will be fully constructed and occupied by August 2018.
 Objective 1 – Complete required AB900 Grant milestone of
project establishment with the State Public Works Board
including submittal of project scope, schedule, and phased
cost estimate by July 2013.
 Objective 2 – Complete required AB900 Grant Schematic
Design with Operational Program Statement milestones by
September 2013.
Objective 3 – Complete required AB900 Grant Design
Development with Staffing Plan and Operating Analysis
milestones by April 2014.
Goal 2: Install new boilers at the Bob Wiley Detention Facility.
 Objective 1 – Complete the biddable plans and
specifications for bidding by February 2014.
 Objective 2 – Complete the installation project by June
2014.
Goal 3: Complete a reroofing project at the Probation Youth
Facility to provide safe working conditions and protect assets.
 Objective 1 – Bid the project and complete the reroof by
September 2013.
Goal 4: Complete a reroofing project at the Visalia Health Care
Clinic to provide safe working conditions and protect assets.
 Objective 1 – Bid the project and complete the reroof by
October 2013.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Initiate Harmon Field Low Temperature Thermal
Desorption Project.
 Objective 1 – Complete the biddable plans and
specifications for bidding by July 2013.
 Objective 2 – Bid the project and award project contract by
November 2013.
 Objective 3 – Work with successful bidder to obtain
required San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District
permits by April 2014.
 Objective 4 - Initiate construction by June 2014. Project will
be completed in FY 2014/15.
Goal 2: Complete renovations at the Strathmore Library.
Project to include carpet, paint, new circulation desk, shelving,
remodel of restrooms, and landscaping.
 Objective 1 – Bid the project and complete project
renovations by June 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Installation of two emergency generators to provide
improved service delivery and protect assets during power
outages.
 Objective 1 – Bid and oversee installation of emergency
generator at the Visalia Courthouse by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Bid and oversee installation of emergency
generator at the Tulare County Government Plaza by June
2014.
Goal 2: Complete renovations of Assessor’s Rooms 103, 105,
107, 109, and 111 at the Visalia Courthouse. Project to include
asbestos and lead paint abatement, carpet, paint, electrical and
cubicle Installation.
 Objective 1 – Complete phased project work scope and
renovations by June 2014.

Goal 3: Relocation of Purchasing Department from Visalia
Courthouse to basement of Education Annex. Project will
include design and construction.
 Objective 1 – Complete project scope and design by March
2014.
 Objective 2 – Bid the project and initiate project renovations
for completion in FY 2014/15.

Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop viable communities by providing decent
housing and a suitable living environment.
 Objective 1 – Collaborate with County staff to identify
project needs and develop project descriptions for future
funding opportunities.
Economic Well-Being
Goal 1: Improve economic growth and community stability by
providing businesses with access to funding opportunities.

Objective 1 – Collaborate with Economic Development staff
to identify viable businesses and connect those businesses
with business expansion or retention funding opportunities.

Quality of Life
Goal 1: Continue efforts to provide safe and sanitary housing
for the low and very low income residents of unincorporated
Tulare County through its housing rehabilitation program, multifamily
housing construction project, and first-time homebuyer
mortgage assistance programs.
 Objective 1 – Submit an application to the State Department
of Housing and Community Development for 2013 HOME
Program grant funds to assist low and very low-income
residents with housing rehabilitation and to first-time
homebuyer funds.
 Objective 2 – Research opportunities for multi-family
housing projects.
Goal 2: Continue to collaborate with the Building Inspection
Division to develop a program to help eliminate substandard

housing and find a way to replace it with safe and decent
housing.
 Objective 1 – Identify additional funding opportunities that
allow expenditures on owner-occupied or rental ownership
homes to eliminate substandard housing.

Quality of Life
Goal 1: Develop viable communities by providing decent
housing and a suitable living environment.
 Objective 1 – Provide funding as match for two housing
grants by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Manage existing housing loan portfolio for
maximum revenue generation for future housing
opportunities.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Further improve safety programs and expand the levels
and types of safety services to departments.
 Objective 1 - Coordinate and act as custodian of record for
the Aerosol Transmissible Disease policy by June 2014
 Objective 2 - Provide Work Place Violence and Personal
Protection training to all County agencies by June 2014.
Goal 2: Develop and implement the Emergency Response
Action Plan for all County employee-occupied buildings. The
plan will provide protection to employees and the public in
County buildings in eminent safety threat situations.
 Objective 1 - Assist the Safety Representatives of each
agency to complete a threat assessment for each building
within their respective agencies by June 2014.
 Objective 2 - Implement the security plan which includes
providing training, drills, role playing, and refresher exercises
to County employees by June 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Further expand and enhance the effectiveness of the
Risk Management services through use of web-based
organizational performance management system, Performance
Platform, and completion of the Phase III of the Risk web site
enhancement.
 Objective 1 - Complete research and consult with County
Counsel and Human Resources and Development to
determine whether to implement the EPN program for all
County employees by June 2014.
 Objective 2 - Collaborate with County Counsel and Human
Resources and Development to address EPN noncompliance
and seek Board of Supervisors approval for
recommendations by June 2014.
 Objective 3 - Complete Phase III of the Risk intranet site
enhancement project to include comprehensive loss data for
all agencies by June 2014.
Goal 2: Improve the efficiency of risk finance administrative
functions and the insurance administration services to
departments.
 Objective 1 - Complete the review of all Boards and
Commissions to determine insurance needs and identify
potential liability exposures by June 2014.
 Objective 2 - Conduct training on the County’s insurance
requirements and procedures for all contacts that develop
vendor agreements for the County by June 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Develop dental insurance rates that are competitive in
the marketplace and consistent with FY2012/13.
 Objective 1 – Negotiate new premium rates in conjunction
with SJVIA by September 2013.
 Objective 2 – Implement new rates during open enrollment
in October 2013.
Goal 1: Ensure that County assets are well maintained and
functional.
 Objective 1 - The Grounds staff will work towards
standardizing the irrigation systems at the facilities
throughout the County via the gradual replacement of all
components (clocks, valves, heads, etc.) by December
2013.
 Objective 2 - The Grounds staff will identify ornamental
areas in need of new landscaping or refurbishment of
existing landscaping

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Replace aging and nonfunctioning aerators and
controls at the Waste Water Treatment Plant.
 Objective 1 – Develop a scope of work and bid the project
by December 2013.
 Objective 2 – Award and manage the project to completion
by March 2014.
Goal 2: Identify feasibility, cost and scope of work, to install
pressure vessel compressors, at domestic well sites, supporting
three detention facilities, increasing efficiency and decreasing
cost.
 Objective 1 – Develop a scope of work and bid the project
by November 2013.
 Objective 2 – Complete project by February 2014.

Goal 3: Replace Bob Wiley Detention Central Plant roof.
 Objective 1 - Develop a scope of work and bid the project
by May 2014.
 Objective 2 – Award and initiate project by June 2014 with
completion anticipated in FY 2014/15.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Identify internal KPI.
 Objective 1 – Continue to evaluate collected data against
industry standards in both the private sector and government
sector by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Analyze 2012/13 benchmarks and compare
them to the 2013/14 year by June 2014.
Goal 2: Train staff in advanced electrical and plumbing
techniques using the Facilities Training Room.
 Objective 1 – Provide training to all Facilities staff in the
electrical course by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Provide training to all Facilities staff in the
plumbing course by June 2014.
Goal 3: Establish new compliance procedures for all Facilities
staff who deal with refrigerant, in all aspects of AB 32 and the
resulting final regulations.
 Objective 1 – Develop a procedure that meets or exceeds
AB 32 requirements by December 2013.
 Objective 2 – Implement procedure and provide a system
for periodic checks by June 2014.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Enhance services performed to County owned/leased
buildings.
 Objective 1 – Fill position Custodial Worker I/II to provide
additional required services by October 2013.
Goal 2: Maintain inventory of equipment in working condition.
 Objective 1 – Replace floor burnisher to comply with Air
Quality Control Regulations by December 2013.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Complete the drainage project for the new Fleet
Services Facility.
 Objective 1 – Phase I: In conjunction with Capital Projects,
design a drainage plan that could fit into the site’s Master
Plan by September 2013.
 Objective 2 - Phase II: Complete drainage project that
would divert water from the area around the Fleet Services
Facility to the site’s holding area by October 2013.

Goal 2: Provide equipment for more customer efficient service.
 Objective 1 – Phase I: Work with TCiCT to establish data
connection to the Pixley Fueling Site by August 2013.
 Objective 2 - Phase ll: Install new card reader that ties
into the County Network and Fuel Tracking System by
September 2013.
Goal 3: Hire additional staff to provide increased efficient
service.
 Objective 1: - Hire an Auto Service Worker for servicing
County Vehicles by January 2014. This will increase the
amount of services the Motor Pool can perform while a
customer waits.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Network redundancy enhancements.
 Objective 1 – Redundancy will be enhanced through
automatic failover to redundant data paths by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Build redundancy to the 5th hub site using
microwave radio connectivity to the Dinuba District office by
December 2013.
 Objective 3 – Installation of core routers at the Hillman
Bunker and Mooney Business Continuity sites. This will
upgrade these sites to Data Centers. This is scheduled to
be completed by December 2013.
 Objective 4 – Currently the County has two main Internet
connections. By June 2014 a plan will be developed to
provide load balancing and fail over between the main
Internet connections.
Goal 2: Upgrade desktop operating systems.
 Objective 1 – Upgrade all desktop and laptop systems that
are currently using Microsoft XP operating systems or older
to Windows 7 or newer by April 2014.
Economic Well Being
Goal 1: Provide services to aid in meeting the requirements for
meaningful use for the health clinics.
 Objective 1 – Implementation of a patient portal for health
clinic patients by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Implementation of a new Lab System for the
Public Lab by September 2014.
 Objective 3 – Interface with Surescripts to the GE health
system by June 2014.
 Objective 4 – Upgrade to CPS 11 of the GE Health Care
System by March 2014.
Goal 2: Provide service to improve the Mental Health System.
 Objective 5 – Implementation of a new Mental Health
System by September 2013.
Goal 3: Implement PALMS application to replace Permits
PLUS for permitting and inspections.
 Objective 1 – Complete project hardware installation by
August 2013.
 Objective 2 – Complete hiring of additional County project
and support staff by August 2013.
 Objective 3 – Complete business process, interface, and
reporting documentation and requirements by November
2013.
 Objective 4 – Create automated work flows by April 2014.
Goal 4: Develop Enterprise level Master Address database for
use in County business processes.
 Objective 1 – Develop standards for address collection and
retention; align data elements and allowable input by
November 2013.
 Objective 2 – Complete address conversion to new
standards by June 2014.
Goal 5: Replace PIMS application with new Property Tax
Application to modernize Assessor, Tax Collector, and Auditor
business processes.
 Objective 1 – Negotiate contract terms with vendor to meet
business needs and functionality by October 2013.
 Objective 2 – Identify staffing needs to support project by
July 2013.
 Objective 3 - Fit/gap analysis to be done by vendor by June
2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Replace out of date servers and virtualization platform.
 Objective 1 – Migrate 15 servers from out of date HP blade
hardware to our current standard, Cisco Unified Computing
Systems (UCS) architecture, by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Convert the same 15 servers in Objective 1
from XEN Virtualization architecture to our current standard
VMWARE architecture by June 2014.
Goal 2: Start the process to upgrade large scale consolidated
database servers from older versions of MS-SQL to a newer
version.
 Objective 1 – Negotiate and work with software application
vendors connecting to the database servers to test and
certify their software for a newer version of MS-SQL by June
2014.
Goal 3: Improve data protection.
 Objective 1 – Evaluate the robotic backup tape library
system for either upgrade or replacement by November
2013.
 Objective 2 – Implement GroupWise Retain/Reveal
Countywide by March 2014.
 Objective 3 – Implement Patch Management for Desktops
for MS Operating System security patches by December
2013.
 Objective 4 – Fully implement IDS servers by December
2013
Goal 4: Improve accounting methodology for TCiCT by April
2014.
 Objective 1 – Implement a new cost accounting system for
TCiCT by April 2014.
Goal 5: Provide tighter integration between the Human
Resources Enterprise system and our IDM.
 Objective 1 – Implement improved detailed functionality
within IDM workflow to aid departments in the setup,
transfer, and termination of County employees by June
2014.
Goal 6: Vibe collaborative tool implementation across
departments.
 Objective 1 – Implement Vibe application by July 2013.
 Objective 2 – Determine model and sample workflows to
share with departments by July 2013.
 Objective 3 – Train Department staff in the use of Vibe for
selected business processes by September 2013.
Goal 7: Expand Law Library office services to the new
Porterville Courthouse.
 Objective 1 – Establish a self service Law Library office at
the new Porterville Courthouse by October 2013.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Continue to improve Tulare County voice and data
radio systems.

Objective 1 – Install SO2 repeater at Stoney Flat by
December 2013.
 Objective 2 – Install microwave from Stokes Mountain to
Stoney Flat to support the SO2 repeater by December 2013.
 Objective 3 – Install radio tower at Earlimart and all radio
systems on it by June 2014.
 Objective 4 – Install simulcast antennas at Lewis Hill by
June 2014.
 Objective 5 – Develop new microwave path from Mooney
Grove to the new Mental Health building on Santa Fe by
March 2014.
 Objective 6 – Develop new microwave path from Pixley Fire
station to Harmon field by December 2013.
 Objective 7 – Complete permanent fixes to Lewis Hill radio
tower to repair damages causes when a neighboring tower
fell on it by December 2013.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Implement user group meetings.
 Objective 1 – Provide department heads with the
opportunity to discuss the benefits and needs of the
program.
 Objective 2 – Work with TCiCT and the contractor to provide
training, tools, and equipment discussed in the group
meetings.
Goal 1: Procure a new additional high speed color copier and
replace three five year old black and white copiers with new
high speed state of the art machines with special finishing
components.
 Objective 1 – Research equipment and specifications
desired to replace three black and white and add one color
copier by May 2014.
 Objective 2 – Prepare an agreement(s) and Board agenda
in July 2014 to procure the copiers.
 Objective 3 – Evaluate and decide if keeping any of the
three used copiers for redundancy is required by March
2014.
Goal 2: Improve our online ordering system.
 Objective 1– To improve customer experience with online
orders and expand services and data use within the print
shop.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Provide County customers with electronic payment of
major utility bills and more efficient accounting procedures.
 Objective 1 - Coordinate with County Auditor’s Office,
TCiCT and utility company’s for County Auditor accounting
software electronic payment interface by October 2013.
 Objective 2 - Complete General Services accounting
system interface with utility tracking software by March 2014.
Goal 2: Provide County with energy usage and cost information
across portfolio of County-owned facilities.
 Objective 1 - Coordinate with SJVCEO and input County
owned facility information into EPA Energy Star Portfolio
Manager by January 2014. There is no cost for using
Portfolio Manager.
 Objective 2 - Coordinate with SJVCEO and utility providers
to utilize Portfolio Manager’s Automated Benchmarking
Service (ABS) that allows for monthly energy usage data to
automatically populate in the system by March 2014.
Goal 3: Provide energy efficiency education to County
employees and residents through outreach programs focusing
on unincorporated areas of the County.
 Objective 1 - Meet with VIEW partnership members to
develop plan schedule and strategy by November 2013.
 Objective 2 – Participate, with VIEW members, in several
energy efficiency improvement outreach meetings
throughout the unincorporated areas of the County by June
2014. This will include community outreach to residential
and business customers as well as local schools.

Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Install bus informational schedule holders at all bus
stops listed in our route guides.
 Objective 1 – By June 2014 have updated informational
schedule holders installed on TCaT bus stops listed in our
route guides.
Goal 2: Improve access to transit services provided to
individuals with disabilities.
 Objective 1 – By April 2014 present an updated Americans
with Disabilities Act Transit application for TCaT.
Goal 3: Study and recommend modification to the TCaT “Fixed
Route” fare structure.
 Objective 1 – Complete study by November 2013 to make
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors on Fixed Route
fare adjustments.
Goal 4: Present to the Board of Supervisors a Transit
Development Plan for TCaT.
 Objective 1 – By April 2014 present to the Board of
Supervisors a recommended Transit Development Plan to
guide the Transit Division for the next five years.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Continue to progress towards completion of the
environmental document for the CNG fueling facility.
 Objective 1 – Establish a Project Description and Project
Scope for the expansion of the Central Road Yard that
includes the new CNG fueling facility by June 2014.

Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide safe home generated Sharps disposal for
County residents.
 Objective 1 – Work with the Consolidated Waste
Management Authority to adopt a Sharps ordinance by
December 2013.
Goal 2: Improve landfill safety.
 Objective 1 – Purchase and provide updated safety training
to landfill staff by September 2013.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Initiate construction of the Visalia Landfill closure.
 Objective 1 – Complete design of the landfill cap by October
2013.
 Objective 2 – Begin construction of the landfill cap by March
2014.
Goal 2: Implement a Franchise System for refuse collection.
 Objective 1 – Begin Franchise Agreement negotiations by
September 2013.
 Objective 2 – Finalize the Franchise Agreement by January
2014.
Goal 3: Improve recycling opportunities for County residents.
 Objective 1 – Implement program-based recycling goals for
Franchised Haulers by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Evaluate the County’s participation in the
Consolidated Waste Management Authority by June 2014.

Goal 4: Reduce the impact of illegally dumped tires and trash
within the County.
 Objective 1 – Evaluate participation with the Sheriff’s
Department in CalRecycle’s Farm and Ranch Cleanup
Grants by September 2013.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Improve the operational efficiencies of the County’s
system of landfills and transfer stations.
 Objective 1 – Initiate a Sheriff’s Work Alternative Program at
open landfills by October 2013.
 Objective 2 – Provide updated equipment operation training
to landfill staff by January 2014.
 Objective 3 – Implement Blue Ridge Services
recommendation by June 2014.
Goal 2: Improve contract performance for recycling activities at
the County’s landfills.
 Objective 1 – Complete a Construction and Demolition
Recycling Services Request For Proposals by October 2013.

Economic Well Being
Goal 1: Provide a safe and efficient sewer system to residents.
 Objective 1 – Provide ongoing and regular maintenance of
the collection system and treatment plant to preclude a
sewage spill by June 2014.
Goal 2: Ensure adequate funding for maintenance and repairs.
 Objective 1 - Place delinquent accounts on the County
Auditor’s Tax Roll by August 2013.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Decrease the risk to human health and the
environment in the event a sewer system overflow occurs.
 Objective 1 – Replace/upgrade malfunctioning equipment
and perform necessary repairs by June 2014.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Prepare and implement a five year Capital Improvement
Plan (CIP).
 Objective 1 - Conduct a comprehensive inventory of each
district including respective improvements for storm drain
and ponding basin systems, landscaping, and road
maintenance; make an assessment of each facility and
determine costs for operation and maintenance; develop a
CIP for the next five years, and prepare a financial model for
funding necessary improvements. This will be complete by
no later than June 2014.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Improve the water and wastewater facilities in Lemon
Cove to assure residents of a continued supply of safe water.
 Objective 1 – Work with the Lemon Cove Sanitary District to
assess alternative plans to locate a source of drinkable
water for the community by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Secure funding to implement storm runoff
project by June 2014.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Provide safe and cost effective water and sewer
services within County Service Areas No. 1 and 2.
 Objective 1 – Safely operate and maintain the County sewer
and water systems.
Economic Well Being
Goal 1: Continue to ensure adequate funding for operation and
maintenance of the water and sewer systems.
 Objective 1 – Place delinquent accounts on the County
Assessors’ Tax Roll by August 2013.
 Objective 2 – Increase user fees to offset expenses.
Quality of Life
Goal 1: Decrease risk to the environment and human health.
 Objective 1 – Replace/upgrade malfunctioning equipment
and perform necessary repairs by June 2014.
 Objective 2 – Complete a feasibility study to improve the
water quality in Yettem. The study will be complete in May
2014.
In order to create costs savings and staffing efficiencies, IHSS
was absorbed into the Health & Human Services Agency, Fund
001-142 by agreement of the PA and Board of Supervisors.
Safety and Security
Goal 1: Reduce or eliminate flood hazards in Tulare County.
 Objective 1 – Advance the design and construction of the
three flood control projects approved by the BOS.
 Objective 2 – Develop a flood control facilities management
plan.
Organizational Performance
Goal 1: Deliver flood control projects through a collaborative
working relationship with departments within the RMA.
Establish effective communication with stakeholders and
conduct outreach to affected communities.

Objective 1: Build project team within RMA including, in
particular, the environmental group within Planning and the
design group within Roads to prepare the EIR, process for
permits, design, and construction management of the flood
control projects.
 Objective 2: Meet with stakeholders periodically to facilitate
awareness and knowledge of the projects.
Goal 2: Prepare the annual update to SWMP and implement
the plan.
 Objective 1: Contract with a recognized expert consultant in
water quality to prepare the annual SWMP and implement
the plan based upon the availability of resources.
Goal 3: Prepare flood control facilities management plan.
 Objective 1: Assign Engineer III position to conduct the
inventory and assessment of facilities and to develop a
financial model to implement a five year capital improvement
plan.