
1. Proactively review over 125,000 properties to identify needed changes to assessed value.
2. Prepare databases for the migration to a new property tax system.
3. Complete Fit/Gap analysis on the new property system requirements.
4. Maintain business continuity for timely roll close and public service while implementing new property tax system

1. Taxpayer market perceptions, significant court decisions, legislative changes to property tax law.
2. Recovery of real estate markets requiring increases to temporary value reductions.
3. Increased legal resources for complex change in ownership, assessment, and institutional exemption issues.
4. Participation in statewide assessment issues such as exemptions and embedded software exclusions.


1. Safeguard county assets and ensure the best utilization of the County‘s resources
2. Provide accurate and timely financial reports and maintain records that are useful for citizens, county management,
and agencies/departments
3. Perform productive audits annually to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of County services, and increase
accountability
4. Improve services to the public and County agencies/departments
5. Streamline financial operations to be more efficient and effective
6. Increase the efficiency of government operations through additional automation of financial systems.

1. With the approval by the Board of Supervisors to move forward with the upgrade to the countywide financial system
and the county‘s property tax system, considerable effort will be required to ensure project delivery on time and within
budget.
2. The Supreme Court decision on AB1X26 upheld the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agencies (RDA). At this time, it
is unclear how these efforts may impact our office in anticipating financing/cash flow needs, accounting structure and
reporting requirements, as well as RDA audit requirements.
3. On January 1, 2013, the California Public Employees‘ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA) became effective. Due to
changing interpretations of the law continuing effort will be required to comply.
4. Implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) may require VCHRP programming effort to accommodate health
care reform provisions.
5. Reviewing, implementing and conforming to GASB pronouncements to the extent that it is applicable to the County of
Ventura.


PROPERTY TAXES:
1. Provide support to 11 Oversight Boards, the CEO, the State Controller, and the Department of Finance as part of the
RDA dissolution process.
2. Automate the preparation of property tax CAFR schedules.
3. Analyze options for the continued funding of the annual Teeter Buyout.
4. In conjunction with the Assessor and Tax Collector, begin implementation tasks for the new integrated property tax
system.
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING SYSTEM:
1. Continue to support the existing system using new internal management and operations tools to help compensate for
staff re-allocations to the VCFMS Upgrade Project.
2. Develop a Historical VCFMS data warehouse universe to provide visibility of historical VCFMS 2.2 data after the
implementation of the upgraded VCFMS system.
3. Work with ACIS and IT Services to implement the Historical VCFMS data warehouse using virtual servers, which will
allow for more longevity.
4. Develop and implement a VCFMS Data Warehouse process to compress (remove fragmentation) historical
warehouse data on a quarterly basis.
5. Work with Public Works, Payroll and IT Services to implement the new LCAB interface.
6. Work with Public Works and IT Services to complete the testing of the Unused Job Number purge process.
7. Create an automated weekly chart of account extract for placement on the Auditor-Controller's Office web page.
AUDITOR-CONTROLLER INFORMATION SYSTEMS:
1. Continue to publish on the Internet the property tax Tax Rate Book, AB8 TRA History Report, and the District Recap
Report, the County Adopted Budget Book, Budget Digest, Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, and audit reports.
2. Continue with Disaster Recovery analysis, including the researching, planning and initiating phases.
3. Provide technology guidance during the implementation of the new ?Property Tax? system, which is used by the
Auditor- Controller‘s Office, Assessor‘s Office and the Treasurer-Tax Collector.
4. Provide technology guidance during the implementation of the Ventura County Financial Management System
(VCFMS) system and Performance Budgeting upgrades.
5. In conjunction with ITSD‘s County wide migration from Groupwise to Microsoft Office, upgrade the Auditor-Controller‘s
workstations and provide user training to ensure a smooth transition.
6. Update the Five-year Capital Projects Plan and the Information Technology Strategy for fiscal year 2013-14.


Payroll:
1. Continue VCHRP improvement initiatives by: developing and improving time and labor queries and views; improve
banked holiday ?Paid Time Off? recording and reporting; prepare a payroll/time and labor manual for agency/ department
payroll clerks; and develop method for reporting compensable time earned and used within the same pay period.
2. Provide assistance to consultants and programmers in implementing the Public Works Labor Collection and Billing
(PW-LCAB) replacement application for the former PW-LDC system.
3. Provide payroll/compensation subject matter expertise and development support for the County VCFMS 3X and
Retirement VCERIS projects.
4. Resume countywide VCHRP Query training.
5. Continue to respond to Pension Reform initiatives as compensation definitions and interpretations are refined.
Accounts Payable:
1. Assist in the implementation of the VCFMS 3X upgrade and identify enhancements for Accounts Payable,
Procurement and Vendor Self-Service processes.
2. Continue to evaluate timeliness of vendor payments, and work with departments to meet disbursement goals.
3. Continue to verify new vendor names and Taxpayer Identification Numbers with IRS records to minimize the number
of vendor 1099 mismatches.

1. VCFMS 3X upgrade changes and their effect on VCHRP and Accounts Payable structures and processes.
2. Managing competing system upgrades and implementation priorities.
3. Ability to respond to Retirement (VCERIS) system configuration initiatives and revisions as a =work in progress.‘
4. Navigating workload volume associated with contract board letter review and keeping abreast of Counsel changes
related to uncommon contract payment terms.


FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT:
1. Issue the County‘s CAFR for June 30, 2013, including the implementation of GASB Statement Nos. 60, 61, 62, and 63.
2. Analyze the following GASB Statements and evaluate for implementation:
a. No. 65, Items Previously Reported as Assets and Liabilities;
b. No. 66, Technical Corrections-2012-an amendment of GASB Statements No. 10 and No. 62;
c. No. 67, Financial Reporting for Pension Plans – an amendment of GASB Statement No. 25;
d. No. 68, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Pensions – an amendment of GASB Statement No. 27;
e. No. 69, Government Combinations and Disposals of Government Operations.
3. Issue Annual Report of Financial Transactions to State Controller‘s Office.
4. Issue quarterly and annual reports to State Controller and monthly TC 31 filings for state distributions.
5. Complete FY 2012-13 Countywide Cost Allocation Plan and obtain approval for the plan and internal service fund
rates from the State Controller‘s Office.
6. Complete annual review of internal service fund rates and contract service rates and fees.
7. Complete the countywide filing of FY 2012-13 SB 90 claims.
8. Review board letters for complete disclosure of fiscal impacts.
9. Complete monthly reconciliations for all trust funds that Financial Management is responsible for.
10. Provide subject matter expertise in the areas of Chart of Accounts, General Accounting, Grant/Cost Accounting and
Fixed Assets for financial system upgrade project.
11. Continue to develop Caseware reports to aid in the preparation of various financial reports.
12. Identify additional process improvements for more efficient and accurate financial reporting.
FINANCIAL PLANNING:
1. Issue the Public Financing Authority Financial Statements for June 30, 2013 including the implementation of any
applicable GASB Statements.
2. Complete timely submission of the County‘s Adopted Budget for Fiscal Year 2013-14
3. Provide assistance to the County Executive Office for any new debt issuances.
4. Contribute cash management and budget formulation/execution subject matter expertise for financial and budget
system upgrade projects.
5. Continue to assist the County Executive Office in developing and implementing a new cash projection system.
6. Continue to assist the County Executive Office with Successor Agency reporting requirements.

1. Develop an annual Audit Plan that:
a. Emphasizes audits that impact on cost savings and/or result in additional revenues.
b. Focuses on performance audits to improve internal controls, promote operational economy and efficiency, and
mitigate risk to the County.
c. Seeks to maximize use of the Internal Audit team‘s competencies.
2. Meet audit mandates required of the Auditor-Controller.
3. Re-launch the Control Self-Assessment Program for 2013.
4. Maintain the integrity of the Employee Fraud Hotline.
5. Monitor the submission of audits of Federal award subrecipients, special districts, and joint powers authorities.
6. Facilitate auditors‘ compliance with continuing professional education requirements.
7. Develop a training schedule to complement planned engagements, and auditors‘ strengths and areas in need of
improvement.
8. Promote and encourage Internal Audit staff to actively seek professional certification (e.g., CPA, CIA, CFE).


Continued study of the Personnel Rules and Regulations to identify segments that are candidates for amendment.
Continue to keep appeal hearings both cost and time efficient while affording the parties a full and fair hearing. Continue
to study the processes utilized of other county Civil Service Commissions to further streamline the operations of the
Commission’s office, including the drafting of forms to be used by those requesting appeals and investigations. Efficiently
review proposed Memoranda of Agreements which are to be negotiated by the County with various recognized employee
organizations and advise the Board of Supervisors as to whether the terms of those Agreements would negatively impact
the Ventura County Personnel Rules and Regulations.


1. Fully implement the new SECURE electronic recording delivery system in Ventura County.
2. Establish a debit/credit card payment system at the Clerk and Recorder‘s public counter to facilitate additional and
more convenient customer payment methods.
3. Re-evaluate the market for available Land Information Management systems.
4. Evaluate vendor solutions for a comprehensive disaster backup and recovery system.
5. Evaluate vendor or in-house solutions to expand our new Courtesy Notice Program to include a notification to
homeowners when any type of deed is recorded related to their property.


1. As part of the Elections Division‘s ongoing goal, the Division will continue to evaluate and improve its procedures to
ensure that the voting process in Ventura County is increasingly user-friendly for voters and Election Officers while
remaining in compliance with changing federal and State requirements.
2. The Division will continue to utilize the county‘s Geographic Information System (GIS) to provide enhanced precinct
data utilized by the voter registration software and the county‘s election precinct maps, and also providing polling place
data to the GIS division for use in the GIS‘ County View mapping software available online to the public.
3. Maintain the Elections Division‘s interaction with GIS and Public Works Surveyor staff by sharing various district data,
i.e. meets and bounds, Assessor Parcel Numbers and boundary maps.

1. Legislation was passed to establish conditional voter registration, which will allow voters to register to vote in the
Elections Division after the 15th day prior to an election or on Election Day and cast a provisional ballot to be counted if
the conditional voter registration is deemed effective. This legislation is effective on January 1 of the year following the
year in which the Secretary of State‘s Help America Vote Act (HAVA) compliant statewide voter registration database is
certified, which is anticipated to be in 2015 or 2016. This new legislation is anticipated to increase election costs (official
ballots, staff labor and office space) due to the unforeseen number of voter‘s registering to vote and receiving a
provisional ballot on Election Day.
2. Electronic voting equipment (purchased in 2006) will eventually need to be replaced with ?next generation? voting
equipment when new voting equipment is available and certified by the Secretary of State.


1. Provide efficient and effective administration and attorney support services.

County Counsel expects to maintain a balance between administration and productive hours.


1. Continue to adopt technology advances to improve efficiency and effectiveness.
2. Maintain high success rate in litigated cases.

HSA funds most of the County Counsel's work in juvenile dependency through a cost shift. If the juvenile dependency
workload continues to increase, it may be necessary to add a full or part-time attorney, necessitating either additional cost
shift or an increase in net County cost.


1. Successfully defend the County from claims filed by Petrochem USA for inverse condemnation, environmental
pollution, and other legal violations; and provide useful and comprehensive advice as to the County‘s ability to compel
Petrochem USA to remove its abandoned oil refinery structure.
2. Provide legal guidance and support necessary for successful completion of Hospital Replacement Wing Project.
3. Advise Board of Supervisors and responsible administrators for the successful implementation of the Public Employee
Pension Reform Act.
4. Advise and represent the County in connection with city claims for payment of Property Tax Administration Fees
following the City of Alhambra case, to enable County staff to achieve prompt and fair resolution of all claims.
5. Consistent with changes in federal law, provide legal guidance and support necessary for adoption of regulations
governing placement and maintenance of wireless facilities in County rights of way and on private property.
6. Provide legal guidance on the County‘s jurisdiction over hydraulic fracturing, and any limitations thereon, to enable the
Board of Supervisors to fully understand and exercise its authority.
7. Successfully defend County‘s approval of an application to subdivide land on South Mountain Road in a lawsuit by
neighboring property owners who argue that a restrictive covenant to protect riparian habitat would interfere with their
easement rights.
8. Continue to obtain favorable results in all litigation matters.

County Counsel advisory and litigation services depend on receipt of revenue for legal charges and general fund
support. If departments reduce their use of County Counsel as cost saving measures, County Counsel may have to shift
its effort more toward traditional tort cases, or seek additional general fund support.


1) Continue to produce a structurally balanced budget while sustaining core public services.
2) Maintain or increase the County’s fiscal reserves.
3) Maintain and, where possible, achieve additional reductions in, County overhead and ISF costs.
4) Maintain the County’s highest possible debt and treasury pool ratings from nationally designated rating agencies.
5) Continue our increased focus on economic development by identifying additional actions and initiatives that the County
can pursue in this critical area; and further incorporate economic development as a major component of the County’s
Strategic Plan.
6) Continue to fulfill the County’s Strategic Plan ; and complete the Plan’s initial 24-month update.
7) Working with our public safety elected officials and department heads, continue to implement the County’s long-term
Public Safety Realignment Plan and supporting programs to realize the Plan’s goals.
8) Increase the County’s current $13 million in annual savings from process improvement.
9) Participate in the county redevelopment agencies’ Successor Agency Boards.
10) Work with the Board of Supervisors to take the next steps in updating the County’s pension system as part of this
year’s negotiations with our labor unions.
11) Continue to implement healthcare reform, both as a service provider and as an employer.
12) Oversee construction, and ensure fiscal sustainability, of the County’s Hospital Replacement Wing at Ventura County
Medical Center.
13) Continue to improve countywide automation and efficiencies by implementing the County Property Tax and Financial
Systems replacement projects; and by further expanding the County’s Accela land management and Electronic Content
Management systems and programs.
14) Continue to invest in our County workforce by establishing additional training programs for County leaders and staff,
including a new Leadership Academy Curriculum; establishing new mentoring and intern programs; and eliminating fees
for internal County training courses to minimize barriers to participation.
15) Ensure that consistent customer satisfaction rating mechanisms are available to all recipients of County services.


(1) Develop the 2014-15 Annual Plan.
(2) Prepare the 2013-14 Consolidated Annual Performance Report.
(3) Conduct compliance monitoring and program review system for all grants, including onsite monitoring of all open
HOME funded projects.
(4) Facilitate implementation of the relevant portions of the Ten-Year Strategy to End Homelessness including reviewing
requests for general funds set aside for homeless facilities.
(5) Continue to monitor adoption and implementation of HEARTH Act regulations and relationship to the unit‘s expanded
responsibilities for homeless programs.
(6) Develop policies, procedures, and strategies to improve likelihood of succeeding in applying for Continuum of Care
funding as a Unified Funding Agency.
(7) Senior staff to continue to serve as the Team A Liaison Officer on the Ventura County Emergency Operations Center
(EOC).
(8) Once CUPs are renewed and approved for tenants on Lewis Road, pursue an extension to Casa Pacifica‘s lease.
(9) Continue to explore new grant opportunities and pursue as appropriate and as staff resources allow.
(10) Utilize expertise of program staff to provide GIS services to the HUD program, Continuum of Care and existing CEO
staff.

(1) The assumption of responsibilities from the Ventura County Homeless and Housing Coalition is impacting current staff
and the full significance has yet to be realized. Continued reductions in grant funding have a corresponding adverse
impact on funding for program administration while demands for reporting, monitoring, and public outreach are
increasing. Financial and staff impacts will be monitored closely and the Board will be apprised of conditions that cannot
be absorbed within existing budgeted resources.


1) Continue efforts to achieve and maintain fiscal stability.
2) Issue $150 million in Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes through competitive bid process.
3) Evaluate alternatives for financing the construction of Juvenile Justice Center office building.
4) Continue to automate the Budget Development Manual process.
5) Continue development and implementation of program-based budgeting.
6) Continue development of a county-wide strategic facilities master plan.
7) Begin implementation of the upgrade of the County‘s Budget System and identify opportunities for improvement and
enhancement.
8) Expand the implementation of county-wide Performance Measures.
9) Continue evaluation of alternative energy opportunities for existing county infrastructure and new development.
10) Coordinate and plan the County‘s implementation of the public safety realignment as outlined in recently signed
legislation.
11) Assist in evaluating alternative incarceration programs in coordination with the Sheriff and Probation.
12) Continue to participate on the VCMC Hospital Replacement Wing Project Oversight Committee.
13) Develop and monitor increased Realignment programs.
14) Develop a replacement for our aging cash management and projection system.
15) Continue to work with the twelve successor agencies, of the former Redevelopment Agencies within Ventura County,
in order to wind down agency operations as outlined in ABx1 16) Assist the Sheriff in developing funding for a
vehicle/evidence storage facility and for a new CAD system for Sheriff Communications Center.
17) Provide oversight management of the Property Tax Assessment and Collection System (PTACS) as a CEO
representation to the project governance committee.
18) Continue to assess the County‘s demonstrated pilot project, Community Care Transitions Program, and provide
support, as needed.
19) Evaluate the program administration of the Tobacco Settlement Program and recommend program modification in
accordance to Ordinance 4428.
20) Continue to assist the Governor‘s RAC in developing a permanent allocation formula for realignment funds to
counties.


GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS:
(1) Develop State and Federal legislative Agendas and Platforms and pursue sound and effective local government
through the legislative process.
(2) Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through Proposition 84 (water bond) passed
by California voters in 2006.
(3) Manage the $485,000 Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Planning
Grant.
(4) Manage the $17.5 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management
Implementation Grant.
(5) Manage the $1 million Southern California Edison energy grant.
(6) Manage the completion of the $25 million State Water Resources Control Board water grant.
(7) Manage the Ventura County Regional Energy Alliance program.
(8) Manage the Climate Protection Plan activities and responsibilities.
SERVICE EXCELLENCE OFFICE:
(1) Facilitate the update or creation of three Agency Executive Planning Sessions by June 30, 2014.
(2) Develop on-line training options.
(3) Work with agencies to support continued cost savings.
(4) Work with agencies to develop agency-level dashboards.


1) Continue to provide fiscal, administrative and information technology services to County Executive Office, Board of
Supervisors, Civil Service Commission and the Grand Jury.
2) Continue to assist with the development of department program budgets, cost recovery rate calculations and workflow
models.


1) Publish Minutes and Minute Orders online where Departments/Agencies can obtain their copies of these documents
electronically for the Board of Supervisors; Air Pollution Control Board and Air Pollution Control District Hearing Board
meetings.
2) Continue to provide ongoing quarterly SIRE training regarding the Electronic Agenda Builder and upgrades to SIRE
gatekeepers, originators and reviewing agencies; and provide updates to the Board Letters Standards and Procedures.
3) Continue to provide live training sessions in January 2013 for ?Filing Officers? and ?Filers? of Boards/Commissions and
Committees; School Districts; Special Districts and County Department Heads regarding the online electronic filing of
Statements of Economic Interest Form 700.
4) Continue with the Lean Six Project with the Assessor‘s office to enhance the electronic filing of Applications for
Changed Assessment; scheduling and noticing of appeal hearings in order to achieve a paperless process.
5) Continue to provide bi-weekly the Board of Supervisors with ?Summary Official Minutes? from Board of Supervisors
meetings with votes for their approval.
6) Continue to review and implement improved process improvement programs and analyzing all the Clerk of the Board
functions.
7) Process all Applications for Changed Assessment that are received in the Clerk of the Board‘s Office during the filing
period and submit them to the Assessor‘s Office no later than November 15, 2013.


1. Develop/implement Strategic Leadership Academy.
2. Develop/implement Manager Nuts and Bolts Training Phase II.
3. Implement e-Performance to additional Agencies and Departments.
4. Transition all Benefits files to Enterprise Content Manager (ECM).
5. Continue implementation of Customer Service Model needs assessment.
6. Continue to provide guidance and training to agency/department staff on HR/Payroll Programs including
enhancements to VCHRP.
7. Continue evaluation of County-wide training needs.
8. Continue to represent the County in various administrative forums as necessary.


1. Complete Supplemental Retirement Plan comprehensive actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2013.
2. Prepare narratives for FY 2012-13 CAFR.
3. Research possible plan design changes and distribution alternatives.
4. Calculate department allocation of the Elected Department Head Annual Required Contribution (ARC) for the budget
development manual.
5. Complete Minimum Required Distribution payments as required under federal regulations.
6. Conduct eligible benefit mailing to provide application requests and necessary plan information.
7. Conduct semiannual investment reviews in adherence to the Investment Policy Statement.
8. Monitor 415 limits for Elected Department Head benefit recipients to ensure limit is not exceeded.


1) Complete bargaining with those unions/associations with contracts expiring in FY 2012-13 within the Board of
Supervisors‘ approved parameters and without disruption to county operations.
2) Continue to improve working relationships with county line agencies/departments and the ten (10) labor organizations
that represent county employees through thirteen (13) labor contracts.
3) Proceed with the continual update of the Labor Relations‘ grievance and discipline tracking system and develop
performance indicators.
4) Hire a quality labor relations professional at the management analyst level.
5) Continue to secure appropriate and necessary professional certification of Labor Relations staff.


1) Continue administration of the Mortgage Credit Certificate program.
2) Apply for new allocations as funds are depleted.


(1) Continue to refine and enhance the Treasurer-Tax Collector‘s on-line presence by utilizing social media.
(2) Promote the Treasurer-Tax Collector‘s Office and its functions by participating in special events held throughout the
County.


(1) Participate in the upgrade of the new Property Tax System.
(2) Continue to evaluate the use of available technology to provide increased efficiencies and to accomplish the goals
and  of the office.
(3) Continue to explore the utilization of existing equipment and staff to accept and process payments for other County
Departments and Agencies.


Continue to collaborate with ITSD, the Auditor-Controller's Office, and fiscal staff from other County Agencies and
Departments to expand the acceptance of on-line payments through the County E-Pay System.


Continued refinement of permitting in Cal Ag Permits Software.
Continue to complete the mapping of the crop layer.
Continue to provide in-house training and DPR sponsored training to current and new Inspectors.
Continue to provide assistance for newly hired inspectors in passing the two examinations that focus on Pesticide Use
Enforcement
Improve our tracking of complaints, PEIRs, and residue investigations.
Create a specialist on staff for residue investigations.

The DPR decided in 2012 to cancel the registration of Iodomethane a replacement produce for Methyl Bromide. While
this decision halts the political debate in California it puts increasing pressure on the existing fumigant materials, all of
which have recently undergone extensive review by USEPA with resulting changes in both Federal and State labels.
With regard to the State Budget, our partners are the California Department of Food and Agriculture and the California
Department of Pesticide Regulation. The California Department of Pesticide Regulation is not a general fund department
and we would not expect any reduction in subventions in this area.


To transition more nurseries to Master Compliance Agreements, thereby reducing the number of nurseries that require
100% inspection of nursery stock shipped to the non-infested areas.

In addition to the impacts from the ACP quarantine Ventura County compliance agreements issued in the PDCP may also
be affected by the quarantines for other exotic pests such as the Light Brown Apple Moth and the European Grapevine
Moth. The actual legislation allowing for the funding of PDCP changed in the beginning of 2011 to allow the Wine Grape
Growers to designate funding generated by them to any pest of wine grapes. Depending on how this industry decides to
distribute the available funding, Ventura County‘s program could be affected.


There are 140 Certified Producers in Ventura County. Our goal is to increase the frequency of inspection from once a
year to twice a year and to increase our presence at the fourteen Certified Farmers Markets (CFMs) in the county. The
increased focus on locally grown produce in the media has resulted in more public interest in purchasing produce at the
CFMs.

Most of the programs in this area are industry funded and we do not expect significant reductions in funding in the next
fiscal year.


We are increasing training and recruitment to mitigate the serious shortage of qualified inspectors certified as Federal
Cooperators.
The Agricultural Commissioner is working with various stakeholders to secure the best funding possible for programs that
protect the agricutlural industry from the influx of exotic pests.

We have experienced a sharp increase in workload due to the Quarantine requirements for Asian Citrus Psyllid ( ACP),
Light Brown Apple Moth (LBAM), Sudden Oak Death (SOD) Disease and European Grapevine Moth (EGVM) shipments
coming into Ventura County. We have also seen an increase in the workload attendant upon certifying shipments of
citrus and berries to Australia. The shipments to Australia are reimbursed through grower fees for inspection and
certification; however the workload attendant upon incoming shipments for LBAM, SOD and EGVM are not reimbursed at
this time and are creating a serious shortage of inspectors certified as Federal Cooperators.


Administrative workload in the Department is affected by the expansion from one central office in Santa Paula to an
administrative center in Ventura and district offices in Camarillo and Santa Paula. This expansion caused us to
reconsider the location of our server. As a result we moved our data to a terminal server in Saticoy so that all of our
offices would have access to the data in a timely manner. Data transfer from Santa Paula office is slower but we have
increased the transmission speed for the other two offices.
The Agricultural Commissioner recently upgraded his county website through cooperation with IT Services. The website
is more informative and easier to navigate. We plan to continue to monitor and maintain the website current so that the
public can learn and understand more about the Agricultural Commissioner's Office and about our county's agricultural
industry.

The Agricultural Commissioner is considering consolidating the Ventura Administrative Office and Camarillo Offices.
We are nearing the completion of the second phase of the remodel of our Santa Paula facility in order to create a safer
and more comfortable environment for our employees. While the initial plan was to upgrade the paint, carpet, and
furniture we have now partnered with GSA to upgrade other areas of the facility such as the restrooms, the entryway,
seismic and electrical. The next phase of this project will involve replacing the roof, upgrading the HVAC, and exterior
painting of the building.
We completed migration of our Pesticide Use and Permitting database to a terminal server offsite. Our staff is
implementing a new statewide program for issuing permits and grower operator identification numbers. While we are still
experiencing issues with data transfer speeds into the Santa Paula office, data transfer speeds have increased to
acceptable levels at our Ventura and Camarillo offices.


Go “live” with online license registration/renewals; develop a data base of commercial kennels and initiate an annual
inspection program. Increase animal licensing by 2% countywide.

There are an estimated 210,000 dogs in the county and less than one third of them are currently licensed. Other than a
seasonal canvassing program using part-time help, current staffing levels limit proactive licensing efforts.


Secure spay/neuter funding to continue half price promotional events; seek funding for spay/neuter education; continue to
expand volunteer opportunities. Continue to maintain current and develop new lifesaving programs to lower the
euthanasia rate.

A larger percentage of animals entering the shelter are in need of medical attention. Current staffing and resources are
at maximum capacity now. If this trend continues, the department will not be able to meet minimum acceptable levels of
care.


Complete the new receiving area to improve efficiency in field officer intake; computerize report inputting and real time
service in the field, steam line nuisance hearing process. Continue to work closely with Fish and Wildlife to develop new
protocols for wildlife handling, with additional education for wildlife trappers.

If the cities drop service hours, then field officers will be eliminated, which could impact service to the unincorporated
areas.


Full cost recovery on services provided at a low cost to the public.


Complete Year 3 of the FEMA-mandated 5-Year Recertification of the Community Rating System (CRS) program for
Unincorporated Ventura County.


Continue to administer and monitor the 30 franchises under Real Estate purview. Update Franchise Ordinances as
needed.


1. Scan field books, benchmark data sheets, and archival aerial photography to improve the public's research
capabilities.
2. Create polygon shapefiles for the record maps indexed in County View for more accurate retrieval, and add Certificate
of Correction documents so that any record maps that have corrections to them will be displayed along with the
corrections.
3. Revise the Guide for the Preparation of Maps.


1. Finalize the Non-Development Grading Standards.
2. Initiate a "Pay as You Go" Plan check service which has the potential to save customers time and money.
3. Initiate a reduced monthly payment program with a Promissory Note as guarantee for customers who are falling behind
on paying their inspection costs.
4. Initiate a small claims court process to collect monies from customers who have abandoned their projects and who
have not made any payments for 12 or more months. Small claims court allows for lawsuits to be filed for up to $5K in
damages.


1. Finalize the Flood Damage Mitigation Ordinance.
2. As an effort to reduce the total number of County permits on a project, initiate a Permit Rider system where the Flood
Damage Mitigation Ordinance requirements can be attached to other County permits.
3. Create a team approach to floodplain management which includes Environmental Health Division, Building and Safety
Division, Development and Inspection Services Division, Transportation Encroachment Permit Division, and the
Watershed Protection District Permits Division to accomplish Objective #2 above.


1) State Mandated Solid Waste Diversion Compliance: Comply with all aspects of the California Integrated Waste
Management Act (AB 939) and AB 341 for all non-exempted unincorporated area businesses meeting or exceeding
minimum thresholds. 2) Contract Administration: Continue administration of 20 franchised waste hauler contracts for
service within the UA, including enforcement of required reporting, payments, & services; continue multi-year process of
creating new commercial and residential solid waste collection agreements for all unincorporated areas of County. 3)
Annual Fee & Rate Increases: Implement annual adjustments in solid waste-related rates & fees pursuant both to solid
waste hauler agreements as well as the Simi Valley Landfill & Recycling Center operating agreement; 4) Ordinance
Administration: Administer existing agreements for Simi Valley Landfill, Toland Landfill, & OVO Recycling Center.
Condition all building projects meeting thresholds of the County's C&D debris recycling Ordinance 4421 while maintaining
enforcement & oversight of all other solid waste ordinance code (i.e., Ord. 4445) within division purview. 5) Community
Beautification: In cooperation with Supervisors' offices, conduct multiple community beautification & clean-up events
(CBEs) among the County's various supervisorial districts. 6) Pollution Prevention Center: Continue HHW collection
operations in compliance with state mandate;
7) Electronic Waste Collection: Continue e-waste collection per state mandate. 8) Regional Collaboration: Maintain
cordial dialogue and mutually beneficial collaboration amongst all County jurisdictions. 9) RMDZ Program Administration:
Maintain administration of RMDZ program to provide long-term, low interest loans to eligible Ventura County businesses.


FILM PERMITS:
 Use the Planning Division website and Accela Automation with a Citizens Access as a means of communication
between applicants and staff to further streamline the film permit process.
PERMIT AND SUBDIVISION ENTITLEMENT PROCESSING:
 Further refine, and implement the use of, the new Initial Study form and conduct training sessions on the new form and
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for other County staff.
 Continue updating the standard forms and templates, on which permit processing staff rely.
 Continue conducting training on permit processing-related tasks (e.g., CEQA). Conduct a holistic review of the Ventura
County Subdivision Ordinance and prepare draft ordinance text amendments for problematic sections of the existing
ordinance.
 Working with the County Surveyor‘s Office to streamline the processing of Preliminary Legal Lot Determination
applications.
 Continue to refine and improve upon the Discretionary Entitlement record in the Accela software program. As part of this
effort, Planning Division staff will be organizing a process improvement project (e.g., a Kaizen event) to further refine and
improve the software and procedures.
 Continue to review and update the Standard Conditions document that is used when preparing conditions of approval
for discretionary entitlements.
CUSTOMER SERVICE:
 Continue the efforts within the Planning Division to take immediate action to respond to public comments and survey
responses.
SMARA:
 Finalization of text amendments for the Non-Coastal Zoning Ordinance.
 Continued development of the SMARA Program website.
 Development of Reclamation Standards and Vested Rights Determination process.
 Development of mine operator Reclamation workshop/training.
CONDITION COMPLIANCE:
 Continue tracking of CEQA Mitigation measures to ensure long-term compliance.
 Perform regular reviews on sites with discretionary permits as staff time allows.

 Responding to changes in state law.
 Keeping pace with technological advancements in mapping and database management.
 Meeting Permit Streamlining Act deadlines with fewer staff.
 Keeping up with programmatic and administrative needs in light of ongoing revenue restrictions.


 Complete processing of and obtain Board approval for a Density Bonus Ordinance, as required by State law and as set
forth in the adopted Housing Element.
 Concurrent with the Housing Element, process amendments to the General Plan required by State legislation (SB244,
SB1241).
 Complete processing of, and obtain Board approval and State certification for, the 2014-2012 Housing Element as
required by State law.
 Complete the FY2013-14 work program for LCP Amendments funded through a CIAP (Coastal Impact Assistance)
grant, including preparation of a Draft Update to the County‘s Landscape Guidelines as required by State law.
 Complete (or obtain extension for) the Coastal Biology project funded through a CIAP grant.
 Complete the FY2013-14 work program for the Saticoy Area Plan update (Phase 2) funded through a Sustainable
Communities Grant.
 Prepare and obtain Board approval for a Non-Coastal Zoning Ordinance amendment for Wireless Communications
Facilities.
 Amend the General Plan and Area Plans to reflect LAFCO-approved annexations to the City of Santa Paula and the City
of Ventura. Complete the 2014 Annual Report and submit to OPR and HCD as required by State law.

 Responding to Board directives, changes in State law, and privately initiated applications in a timely manner with
existing staff.
 Keeping pace with technological advancements in mapping and database management.


GRANTS:
 Utilize approved CIAP grants for developing biological mitigation measures for the Santa Monica Mountains and
updating portions of the County's Local Coastal Program.
 Utilize the work under the CIAP grants to also update the County Landscape Guidelines.
 Apply for Round 3 Sustainable Communities Grant funds to update the North Ventura Area Plan or the El Rio Area Plan.
 Continue to seek grant funding opportunities.
MOBILE HOME PARK RENT REVIEW PROGRAM:
 Continue to provide staff support to the Rent Review Board (RRB) assuring compliance with Ordinance 4366.
 Ensure the RRB is properly trained to carry out their duties.
CULTURAL HERITAGE PROGRAM:
 Apply for a $25,000 State OPH (Historic Preservation Office) grant to prepare a historic context statement for the
eastern Oxnard Plain agricultural area.
 Continue to promote awareness and appreciation of historic resources and cultural heritage.
 Identify, document, and preserve historic resources.

 Responding to changes in state law
 Continue to seek grant funding opportunities.


 Improve next day processing of inspection requests to 99 - 100%.
 Continue current inspector/supervisor ride along program.
 Continue Safety Assessment Program (SAP) training for inspection staff.
 Continue overall training in the latest building codes and standards from both in-house instructors and out-of-house
educational opportunities.
 Continue training inspection staff on NPDES Surface Water Quality Requirements for construction sites.
 Continue training inspection staff on field enforcement of Floodplain construction standards.
 Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
 Continue to train staff on the California Green Building Code.
 Prepare field staff for the adoption of the 2013 California Building Standards Code (Title 24).

 Preparing for changes in state building standards and regulations.
 Improving use of technological advancements in GIS, mapping and processing field inspection data.
 Staying abreast of California Emergency Management Agency (CalEMA) and Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) training requirements for damage assessment.


 Pursue and maintain "Less than 15 Days" average turnaround standard for first plan checks while continuing to strive for
a ?Less than 10 Days? average turnaround time.
 Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
 Obtain Plan Checker Training and Certification for Accessibility Specialist (CASp)
 Obtain additional training and certification for plan check staff in floodplain management.
 Continue to train staff on the California Energy and Green Building Codes.
 Prepare Plan Check staff for the adoption of the 2013 California Building Standards Code (Title 24)

 Preparing for changes in state building standards and regulations.
 Staying abreast of California Emergency Management Agency (CalEMA) and Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) training requirements for damage assessment.


 Continue improving and adding to our public information handouts.
 Continue document imaging of division files.
 Maintain and improve our online Policy and Interpretation Manual.
 Complete development of an online Permit Processing Guide and Checklist for applicant use within Accela Automation.
 Continue training inspection staff on NPDES Surface Water Quality Requirements for construction sites.
 Maintain staff training on adopted codes, ordinances and appropriate State laws effecting building construction and
continue compliance with all State Laws.
 Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
 Continue to train staff on the California Energy and Green Building Codes.
 Prepare field staff for the adoption of the 2013 California Building Standards Code (Title 24).

 Preparing for changes in state building standards and regulations.
 Staying abreast of California Emergency Management Agency (CalEMA) and Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) training requirements for damage assessment.


ADMINISTRATION:
 Continue development of relevant business reports (Information Systems, Human Resources, and Fiscal data) for
agency use in operational decisions.
 Evaluate space needs and opportunities for electronically storing files.
FISCAL SERVICES:
 Complete implementation of credit card payment acceptance.
 Initiate manager training on fiscal policies and procedures.
PERSONNEL SERVICES:
 Complete update of agency job specifications to meet current standards and job requirements.
 Complete agency recruitment manual for managers.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY/GRAPHICS/WEB/ GIS:
 Complete full implementation of Accela Automation including: electronic plan and application submittal and electronic
document review workstations; Citizen Access; iPad application; and enhanced GIS web services.
 Develop wireless system for remote transfer of data (field notes to office).
 Implement new email system and its sharing components in coordination with Information Systems Technology
Department.

This budget unit provides administrative and technical support services to the agency and its costs are largely funded by
the agency‘s user fees. Staffing levels in the administrative support area have been reduced in an effort to control costs
and improve efficiencies; maintaining services and fiscal controls with a reduced staff remains a challenge. In the coming
year, the focus will be to hire and recruit for an agency Accela position that will coordinate service requests, system
changes, and workflow for the agency.


Continue monitoring of EIR accounts and timely closure as required by the contract and initiate administrative contract
amendments.

This program is cost-neutral as applicants pay for consultant costs.


 Continue providing input and program support to Cal-EPA and U.S. EPA to effect improvements in the State
Underground Fuel Tanks program.
 Continue review of all LUFT cases for progress toward closure.
 Continue detailed quarterly review of progress for older cases.

Due to the success of the LUFT program, the number of active site cleanup and closure projects managed by the LUFT
program is slowly decreasing. The ongoing challenge is to continue to provide an acceptable level of service with a
decreasing workload and staffing.


HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
 Continue to train and assist customers with the implementation of CERS.
 Incorporate new inspection and data software into the CUPA program to facilitate CERS implementation.
 Begin implementation of electronic submittal of program documents and inspection reports to our customers using email.
 Fill a vacant position in the CUPA program to maintain minimum service levels.
MEDICAL WASTE AND BODY ART:
 Continue to implement the new requirements of the Safe Body Art Act into the existing Medical Waste Body Art program
and identify additional businesses that are subject to these requirements.
 Provide outreach to medical waste generators on the safe handling and disposal of medical waste.
 Participate on a State wide Medical Waste and Body Art technical advisory committee to develop clean-up language to
the medical waste and body art legislation.
VOLUNTARY CLEANUP PROGRAM:
 Continue to provide outreach to local businesses regarding the advantages of the program.
 Use corrective action authority to provide enhanced protection to the public through cleanup of contaminated sites.
 Continue support and cleanup oversight for owners of methamphetamine-contaminated properties.

 State regulations became effective January 2013 that required the electronic submittal of data from facilities subject to
CUPA jurisdiction, directly to Cal/EPA. The CUPA section is tasked with training and assisting facilities with this data
transmittal. This will continue to add costs to the CUPA program in staff time dedicated to providing this assistance.
 Safe Body Art requirements became effective July 1, 2012 and require increased regulatory oversight of body art
practitioners and facilities. As additional facilities are identified that are subject to this oversight, additional staff time will
be required to provide this oversight.
 There is pending legislation that may increase regulatory oversight in both the Medical Waste program and the Body Art
program. This legislation will be tracked to determine potential impacts to these programs.
 The CUPA Forum Board has started reducing the amount of scholarship funding available each year to Environmental
Health Division staff to attend the annual CUPA conference and obtain required continuing education units. This
reduction will require an adjustment to the Division‘s annual budget.


 Continue providing monthly food handling training in both Spanish and English to food service employees working in
retail food facilities in Ventura County.
 Continue providing outreach promoting Environmental Health as a career to local high school and college students.
 Continue to work with local environmental health divisions and food industry representatives in a statewide effort to
uniformly apply the California Retail Food Code.
 Continue outreach efforts to local retail food facility community to assist them in gaining compliance with State safe food
handling requirements.
 Develop application for mobile devices that will allow public to review inspection results for retail food facilities.

State law was passed to allow the use of home kitchens to prepare and sell cottage foods. This law became effective
January 1, 2013 and has resulted in an increased workload in reviewing and processing the necessary registrations and
permits. Clean up legislation is anticipated to clarify issues that have resulted from the passage of the ?Cottage Food
Law?. This may result in an additional workload and resources for people interested in starting a food business in their
home.


 Continue mosquito breeding source inspections and control activities.
 Continue responding to public complaints and service requests for mosquito control activities.
 Continue mosquito transmitted disease surveillance efforts.
 Continue disease surveillance and/or provide public information for Hantavirus, Plague, and Lyme Disease.

 State regulations now require Registered Environmental Health Specialists to obtain Continuing Education Contact
Hours to maintain their registrations. This continues to add costs and increase staff time dedicated to training.
 Increase in purchases of mosquito control pesticides and compliance with State Water Resources Control Board
requirements pertaining to pesticide use will impact the amount of the per parcel benefit assessment necessary to
support ongoing mosquito control activities.


 Evaluate Liquid Waste Program standards and procedures, and commence alignment of these standards and
procedures with new statewide requirements.
 Implement enhanced data management through the use of Envision Connect in the Solid Waste, Liquid Waste, and
Land Use Programs to improve program efficiency and enhance inter-program communication and data sharing.
 Continue to secure additional State grant and other available funding for the Ocean Water Quality Monitoring Program
and conduct monitoring program consistent with available funding.

 State regulations have been implemented requiring Registered Environmental Health Specialists to obtain Continuing
Education Contact Hours to maintain their registration status. This adds costs and increase staff time dedicated to
training.
 State funding and other potential revenue sources for the Ocean Water Quality Monitoring Program are uncertain.
 Implementation of new State wide onsite wastewater treatment and disposal requirements may result in an increase in
program costs due to additional staff requirements to conduct more in-depth application review and water quality
monitoring/data management.


 Successfully recruit and hire a full time County Weights and Measures Inspector to fill recent vacancy.
 Work with Statewide Sealers organization (CACASA) to develop accurate data regarding individual device inspection
times. This data will be used as an assessment tool for legislative device fee increase adjustments.
 Increase focus on inspection training and updated procedures. Attending National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) HB 133 Class on ?Checking the Contents of Packages? and statewide training on proper Price
Verification procedures.
 Develop QC equipment proposal for CACASA Trust fund reimbursement.

 State of California Division of Measurement Standards (CA-DMS) budget cuts have resulted in the temporary loss of
county subvention contracts for Petroleum and Weighmaster inspections. Additionally, CA-DMS has discontinued
support, training, and coordination activities for county Price Verification and Quantity control programs. Several funding
concepts have been discussed to restore support including the imposition and collection of a new surcharge on county
consumer protection fees (price verification/scanner and packer).
 Development of specialized weights and measures equipment sharing agreements with neighboring county
departments to avoid or delay purchase of these expensive standards. Two examples will be our use of Los Angeles
County‘s mobile dynameters for taxi testing and Santa Barbara County‘s new high volume prover for aviation fuel meter
testing.


 To make Code Compliance more transparent, through Accela Citizen Access and ongoing outreach programs.
 Partner with community organizations (Habitat for Humanity, Humane Society) and other county agencies (Sheriff, Adult
Protective Services, Animal Services) to improve housing stock and the livability of neighborhoods.

AB2314 which reauthorizes the imposition of daily Civil Administrative Penalties in the Civil Code had the sunset removed
from it. Last year Ventura County collected nearly $300,000 in Civil Administrative Penalties which were deposited into
the county general fund.


1. Supportive services funded and provided under Title III B include: Information and Referral Services which link older
persons and their families to specific community services, in-home services such as personal care, homemaker and
chore services, adult day care, legal services to help identify legal problems and legal service needs of older persons,
case management, material aid, outreach, transportation to medical appointments, and transportation to the congregate
meal site.
2. The Older Americans Act mandates the operation of a long-term-care Ombudsman program, funded in part by Title III
B. A state-certified ombudsman is a trained individual who investigates and resolves complaints made by, or on behalf of,
older individuals who are residents of long-term-care facilities, nursing homes, and residential care homes. They do not
represent the facility. Complaints may relate to inadequate hygiene; physical abuse; personal items lost, stolen, or used
by others; understaffing of the facility; action, inaction, or decisions of long-term-care providers (or their representatives),
public agencies, or social service agencies that may adversely affect the health, safety, welfare, or rights of residents.
Ombudsmen are guaranteed access to facilities and must maintain strict rules of confidentiality for clients and
complainants.
3. Title IIID provides funding for evidence based health, prevention, wellness and medication management programs
aimed at providing seniors with the tools to maintain their health, reduce their risk of developing chronic diseases, and
manage their health to live as independently as possible.
4. Title IIIE provides funding for a range of support services which assist family and informal caregivers to care for their
loved ones at home for as long as possible. Families are the major provider of long-term care, but research has shown
that care-giving exacts a heavy emotional, physical and financial toll. Through contracts and direct service provision, the
following services may be provided: information to caregivers about available services, assistance to caregivers in
gaining access to the services, individual counseling, organization of support groups, and caregiver training, respite care,
and supplemental services.
5. Title V Senior Employment Services is dedicated to providing job training and employment opportunities for qualifying
adults age 55 and over.
6. Title VII provides funds to develop services and program to prevent elder abuse, neglect and exploitation.
7. The Senior Nutrition program (Title III C) provides both congregate and home delivered meals to seniors throughout
Ventura County. The purpose of the nutrition program is to: reduce hunger and food insecurity, promote socialization of
older individuals and promote the health and well-being of older individuals and delay adverse health conditions through
access to nutrition and other disease prevention and health promotion services. Meals and related nutrition services
(nutrition education and nutrition counseling) are provided to older individuals in a variety of settings including congregate
facilities such as senior centers; or by home-delivery to older individuals who are homebound due to illness, disability, or
geographic isolation. Services are targeted to those in greatest social and economic need with particular attention to low
income individuals, minority individuals, those in rural communities, those with limited English proficiency and those at
risk of institutional care. Nutrition Services Programs help older individuals to remain independent and in their
communities.
8. The Health Insurance Counseling Advocacy Program (HICAP) with substantial volunteer support, provides assistance
to help seniors choose the Medicare Plan to best suit their needs, and to assist them with other health insurance related
issues


Reduced and uncertain funding continues to threaten the safety net for Ventura County seniors and adults with
disabilities. The aging network does not have the necessary resources to serve its current clients let alone the growing
number of aging Baby Boomers. Adults with disabilities who are not eligible for services from other organizations have no
safety net. Funding reductions have been occurring in key program areas since FY 2008-09 when the State of California
reduced funding for Community Based Service Programs (CBSPs) by ten percent. In FY 2009-10 the State eliminated all
general fund support for CBSPs effective October 1, 2009. This has forced the non-profit providers: Senior Concerns, to
provide desperately needed on-site day care for Alzheimer‘s patients and their caregivers without external funding; and
FOOD Share, Inc., to strain its resources to try to meet the needs of hungry low-income seniors.
The AAA is committed to providing service while living within our means. In April 2013, this agency was advised of federal
sequestration funding cuts of $58,000 which will occur in May and June of 2013. In addition to this, more than $225,000
will be cut in FY2013-2014. The net county cost will increase by $45,000. This will help to partially offset federal funding
cuts.
Although the AAA is able to leverage resources and partner with other agencies to provide services to seniors, the
increased cost of business and funding cuts of our partners will lead to decreased services. However, we will continue to
seek alternative sources of funds and utilize the funds we receive to meet the needs of the neediest of our seniors.


MSSP provides extensive assessment and care planning services, which lead to linkage to existing community services,
such as transportation, housing, meals, in-home care, adult day health care programs, therapeutic counseling, money
management, emergency response units, etc. Each client is treated on an individual basis to meet the many different
needs that client faces.

The state reduced the Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) funding by 10% in FY 2008-09; in both FY 2009-10
and FY 2010-11 the program operated on the same reduced amount of funds. In FY 2011-12, funding for the MSSP
program was further reduced by 11% to $685,600. This funding was unchanged for FY 2012-13 and will be the same for
FY 2013-14.
Governor Brown‘s office has proposed integrating MSSP as an optional benefit under the County Managed Health Plans
(i.e. Gold Coast Health Plan).
This integration is anticipated to occur in January 2015.


The Area Agency on Aging will identify and address the emerging and changing needs of the 60+ population as well as
baby boomers (born 1946-1964). The Area Agency on Aging will continue to identify and explore the needs of special
populations as well as the changing and emerging needs of seniors, and will develop and expand programs to help meet
their needs. The VCAAA will be a leader in pursuing best practices and achieving results that benefit taxpayers and the
seniors and their caregivers that we serve.

The ability to secure funding from sources other than the California Department of Aging will be crucial to continue to
develop and provide innovative, cost effective direct services for seniors and their caregivers.


Reduce the hospital readmission rate by 20% for the medicare eligible population in Ventura County.

This reimbursement program is expected to be self funded in FY 2013-14 and thereafter.


1. Continue to improve and maintain the Accounts Receivables below 60 days in A.R.
2. On line training every three months for billers to keep skills and information current.
3. Quarterly billing and collection audits for compliance issues.
4. Continue to provide support for the FQHC enrollment and Change of Scope.
5. Clean up receivables for Cerner conversion, STAR, PLUS, and Medical Manager
6. Continuous review of Charge Master for compliance.
7. Prepare for implementation of ICD-10


Continue investigating deaths that occur for unknown causes or under suspicious circumstances professionally,
effectively, and efficiently.


1. Provide quality case management and treatment services to persons living with HIV/AIDS
2. Collaborate with community organizations and health care providers to enhance HIV/AIDS treatment, case
management and prevention services.

HIV/AIDS programs are largely funded via Federal grants and we do not expect significant funding changes on these
grants in FY 13-14.


CHP
1. Expand the Developmental Screening Collaborative to support community organizations and preschools in conducting
standardized developmental screenings and providing appropriate referrals and education for families.
2. Sustain developmental screening efforts and support even with reduced funding.
3. Seek additional funding opportunities for Childhood Injury Prevention efforts.
4. Establish wireless capability to provide application assistance and developmental screening electronically while in the
field.
Health Ed
Community Transformation Grant (CTG) will move into Implementation Phase of the CDC CTG grant process. Working
with CTG Leadership Team and Coalitions, VCPH staff will begin the work of policy and environmental changes expected
to reduce the number of residents with high blood pressure and high cholesterol.
2. The Network Local Project Grant will be implementing innovative outreach strategies by partnering with local food and
produce trucks to increase healthier options for the community. Additionally, the NLP will be working with these partners
to establish new routes for areas with limited healthy food access. As well as providing retailer education on the
importance of healthy food accessibility and CalFresh enrollment benefits.
3. Chronic Disease Prevention Program will expand early detection screenings among hard-to-reach communities
including agricultural workers and elderly.
AFLP
1. Continue to meet successful outcomes for school attendance and graduation, reduced repeat births, healthy birth
weights, and healthy lifestyle choices for the client and their baby.
2. Work to improve linkages and strengthen networks to support our expectant and parenting teen population.
3. All case managers will continue to be trained to increase their awareness and ability to provide intensive
comprehensive case management to the clients we serve.

CHP
Children‘s Health Promotion services are mostly funded by First 5 Ventura County and funds continue to decrease each
year. We continue to explore more efficient and effective ways to continue service levels even when staffing is reduced.
AFLP
In the 13-14 FY AFLP with re-negotiate our MOU with HSA Cal Works to increase our allocation. The State funding
allocation to Ventura County for Cal-Learn for the 12-13 FY was based on a partial year at 75% of the clients served in
the 10-11FY before the funding was suspended.
The impact of sequestration on the AFLP budget is unknown. The AFLP program is funded by Federal Title V and the
Federal AFLP PYD (Positive Youth Development) grants. AFLP also matches local agency funding with the Federal
Financial Participation Title XIX.
1. First 5 funding continues to decrease, therefore reducing the number of staff dedicated to conducting developmental
screenings.
2. Childhood Injury Prevention in general does not have dedicated funding. Therefore, we are seeking grant
opportunities, such as through The Office of Traffic Safety, to continue our efforts.
3. We have applied for a Covered California Outreach and Education grant that if awarded, would expand our work to
include informing the community on the Affordable Care Act.


1. Collaborate with SP Hospital to engage all births with PHN post-partum home visits ?Bright Beginnings?.
2. Increase targeted case management encounter rates.
3. Increase home visitation and outreach to senior population.

1. Potential for future funding to launch Bright Beginnings at other hospitals in county.
2. Increased Targeted Case Management (TCM) revenue.
3. Increased services to senior population.


IZ
Provide outreach to health providers and community partners on standards concerning immunization practices,
education, and laws for increased immunization rates.
2. Continue the effort to maintain 100% compliance for all future school years, that all students entering, advancing or
transferring into 7th grade have proof of an adolescent whooping cough booster immunization.
3. Educate and maintain compliance with state regulations that all child care centers, Preschools and Kindergartens must
keep a blue card with all required immunizations on file for every child enrolled.
4. Continue to work collaboratively with Fiscal and Billing staff to improve revenue billing and collection.
Clinical
1. Provide quality and easily accessible health screenings and preventive health services to clients throughout Ventura
County.
2. Continue working to decrease TB cases within Ventura County and State of California.
3. Continue working collaboratively with Clinic, Fiscal and Billing staff to improve revenue billing and collection.
4. Implement Electronic Healthcare Record (EHR) to improve quality and efficiency of Clinical Care delivery.
5. Continue preparing PH Clinics for PH Accreditation.
CD
1. Monitor and conduct surveillance in a timely manner for the detection, control and prevention of communicable
diseases in Ventura County.
2. Continue enhanced GC surveillance throughout 2013-14, including specific documentation of disease trending and
geo-coded census track mapping by our epidemiologist.
3. Provide training and education to health care providers on accurate and timely mandated reporting of communicable
diseases, and on the latest prevention and treatment guidelines from local, state and federal health authorities.

IZ
The state has reduced our funding for the last 3 fiscal years. We continue to expand ways to increase our revenue by
billing Medi-Cal and Medi-Care for flu clinics and collaborating with community partners to offset staffing cost to continue
to provide services to the community.
Clinical
PH Clinics are funded with County allocation funds, State and Local Grants, and with revenue generated from client fees.
If overall State and County funds are reduced significantly, we may have to reduce level and number of services provided
to clients.


PH Lab
1. Make every effort to assist with the building and integration of the new Cerner system as well as become proficient in
the system.
2. Ensure PHL is prepared and inspection ready for upcoming CLIA and ELAP inspections.
Vital Records
1. Fully implement ECM solution with all documents scanned and stored electronically.
2. All birth and death records will be transferred to the Recorder‘s office electronically.
3. Fully implement CA-FDRS to include all local mortuaries. This will afford improved fetal documentation and access to
data.

PH Lab
1. PHL continues to provide support for Animal Control free of charge and Environmental Health for a discounted price.
The increase in specimens and samples and reduction in pricing result in higher PHL costs.
2. VCMC may begin to perform in house HIV testing, which will result in a decrease in the number of specimens received
in the PHL. Confirmatory and Public Health Clinic specimens will still be tested at PHL.
Vital Records
The Vital Records office is funded primarily by revenue generated from the sale of certified copies of birth, death, fetal
death certificates and disposition permits. Fees for birth, death and fetal death certificates will increase by $2.00 per
certificate effective January 1, 2014.This will result in increased revenue for this office.


1. Convert the Service Authorization Request (SAR) system into the current CCS ECM/EHR process of authorizing
services.
2. Continue implementing best practice activities in health education and promotion to CCS clients based from goals
formulated in the Public Health strategic plan and CMS Scope of Work.
3. Provide an area for immediate electronic processing of Medi-cal applications for CCS clients.
4. Efficient operation of Medical Therapy units with clients accessing prescribed services at 80% attendance.
5. Medical Therapy Program staff will be trained and functional in use of Electronic Health Record (Cerner)
6. MTP will provide clinical instructors for 5 Physical/Occupational therapy interns/students.
7. MTP staff will efficiently access internet based programs such as CMSNET web, FileNet, EHR, PolicyTech, county
intranet sites for information and completion of job duties.
8. CCS Social Worker II attains Child Passenger Safety for Special Needs certification and organizes 1 safety
event/inspection for special needs children at a Public Health site.
9. CCS will continue collaborative efforts through increased provider outreaches and education to maintain the current
roster of local specialty providers.
10. CCS will facilitate and pro-actively implement annual review of clients‘ eligibility status to assure continuity of health
care services.
11. To locate children in Ventura County who may need specialized medical care
12. To prevent disabling conditions in children through early diagnosis and treatment
13. To help connect children to quality medical care and health coverage

 Cost to transition and maintain electronic health records systems.
 Transition of children covered by Healthy Families to Medi-Cal may increase obligated county share of cost for medical
cost of care.
 Increase of children with high medical cost which require county share.


**CHDP will evaluate the effectiveness of the CHDP ECM system in regards to cost and efficiency.
**CHDP will plan and implement electronic record transfer of CHDP data from external CHDP providers using the
operational CHDP ECM system. ** CHDP will continue and reinforce collaboration with Gold Coast Health Plan in order to
facilitate the health care of Medi-Cal Children.
** CHDP will continue to expand efforts to provide oral health education, prevention, diagnosis and treatment of children's
dental problems in Ventura County by establishing and strengthening collaborative efforts with community partners.
**CHDP will continue to actively participate with community partners and stakeholders to promote obesity prevention in
Ventura County.
**CHDP/HCPCFC will continue to refine documentation processes and facilitate care coordination for children in foster
care.

Cost to develop and maintain an electronic document system.
Affect of realignment


** CLPPP will implement the remainder of the 3-Year State Contract for FY 2011-2014
** CLPPP will maintain and expand community outreach efforts to educate medical providers, and the community
regarding the dangers of Lead Poisoning by strengthening coordination of activities with Oral Health Education and
CHDP.


2013-2014 Goals, Planned Achievements and Improvements
1. Maintain program participation at 97% of allocated caseload.
2. Continue to assess efficient location and delivery of WIC services.
3. Improve IT connectivity at South Oxnard location by participating with existing information technology infrastructure
upgrade.
4. Embrace, utilize and maximize all available technology-based tools for providing WIC services:
a. Utilize newly established web-based State WIC Extranet database to evaluate various measures and develop outreach
and service strategies.
b. Expand use of online education for WIC participants.
c. Increase number of participants who agree to receive text messages from the WIC Program.
d. Continue to utilize and expand use of internal ?WIC Intranet? by all WIC employees.
e. Continue baseline call-wait time of < 2 minutes. For Web based Call Center.
5. Pursue funding from State WIC to continue with year three of our Breastfeeding Peer Counseling Program.
6. Act as preceptor for between one and three Dietetic Interns for a Community Nutrition Rotation.
7. Utilize talent of 2-3 nutrition student volunteers to pursue various projects.

The threat of further funding cuts as a result of sequestration, combined with continued decreases in WIC participation
due to lower birth rates and less Medi-Cal eligible families contribute to challenges facing the WIC Program in the coming
fiscal year to meet participation goals.


1. Provide oversight and administration of the countywide EMS System to ensure compliance with local and state
regulations. EMS functions include providing oversight of the ambulance contracts, personnel certifications, policy
development and disaster preparedness.
2. Continue to provide coordination and planning for the countywide Trauma System.
3. Continue enhancements to the pre-hospital documentation system to include implementation of hospital based
STEMI, Stroke and Trauma registries.
4. Coordination and oversight of the newly established countywide Stroke Care System, involving all hospitals and EMS
providers.
5. Review and update the VCEMS Quality Improvement program.

EMS is funded through a combination of county allocation funds and revenue from various fees as well as court collected
assessments. No changes are currently anticipated, however, if our overall State and/or County funds are reduced
significantly, we would likely have to reduce staffing levels.


1. Coordinating healthcare preparedness activities to include conducting drills and exercises to assure effective disaster
response and mass surge capabilities.
2. Provide oversight for the operation of the Health Care Agency Department Operations Center and the HCA
Emergency Response Plan, including converting legacy plans from paper to electronic format.
3. Conduct biosurveillance activities in coordination with the Public Health Communicable Disease and Laboratory units
and countywide healthcare providers.
4. Support enhancements to disease surveillance and reporting programs in conjunction with Animal Health and
Environmental Health Departments.
5. Continue development and enhancement of EpiCenter data surveillance project in conjunction with countywide
healthcare partners.
6. Maintain oversight and support for the Medical Reserve Corps.

Emergency Preparedness activities are funded through Federal grants. With the current budget status, we anticipate
lower funding levels in FY13-14. Focus will be to continue to maintain existing countywide emergency preparedness
equipment and training levels.


1. Continue coordination of the EMS involvement in the Homeland Security grant program.
2. Continuing program to upgrade to a satellite connection for ReddiNet hospital emergency communication system.
3. Continue to support the medical/health component of the countywide gap analysis project.

Homeland Security programs are funded through Federal grants, however, due to significant cuts nationwide, we
anticipate lower funding levels in FY13-14.


a. Fully implement the Policy Tech software system.
b. Develop, implement new policies and a full cycle review of all existing policies.
c. Manage operations within allotted resources.
d. Oversee CenterPoint Mall tenant improvements and relocation.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service. It is unclear what the full impact of the shifting of Healthy Families to EPSDT will be, or the increased services
mandated with the implementation of Katie A.


a.Continue to improve productivity and Medi-Cal penetration rate.
b.Train staff as Stepping Stones to Recovery (SOAR) Trainers so as to increase countywide efforts to secure client
benefits in a timely manner.
c.Continue to work with Board and Care operators to improve the living environment, quality of care and nutrition.
d.Train staff and implement Treatment Planning and Progress Notes in new EHR
e.Expand Mind Body Spirit groups to all clinics for our medication only clients.
f.Completion of CEQA (California Environmental Quality Act) clearance and design of proposed new construction project
for a 15-bed Secure MHRC.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service. It is unclear what the full impact of the shifting of Healthy Families to EPSDT will be, or the increased services
mandated with the implementation of Katie A.


a.Utilize promotoras in Santa Clara Valley to increase Latino penetration rate.
b.Increased outreach to underserved populations and collaboration with primary care to increase Medi-Cal penetration
rates and referrals to/from primary care.
c.Continued implementation of programs in collaboration with HSA to meet the State requirements of Katie A.
d.Train all clinical staff to Electronic Health Record and have fully implemented across Division
e.Continue Niatx Performance Improvement projects.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service. It is unclear what the full impact of the shifting of Healthy Families to EPSDT will be, or the increased services
mandated with the implementation of Katie A.


a.Continue compliance with all county, state, and federal regulations through consistent application of outcomes
measures across all divisions, and ensure that progress is measurable, and that managers have reports developed by QI
that can be used for accountability.
b.Implement an instrument to determine functioning at intake for EPSDT Consumers.
c.Continue to expand the suite of standard reports into the Management Information System for operations and training.
d.Implement Behavioral Health Department dashboard by January 2014.
e.Complete outcome measure reports for Avatar (Management Information System.
f.Continue to expand QI participation at the Division level through embedding a liaison in each Division, providing a forum
for training, data reporting and analysis, and a furthering understanding of each program.
g.Continue the migration of databases to Avatar.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service. It is unclear what the full impact of the shifting of Healthy Families to EPSDT will be, or the increased services
mandated with the implementation of Katie A.


a.Transition managed care authorizations/ tracking from legacy system to new system.
b.Develop an authorization process in new system for the out of network authorizations for Foster youth, Adoption
Assistance and KinGap beneficiaries that will track the initial authorizations and provide the capability to report when reauthorizations
are due.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service. It is unclear what the full impact of the shifting of Healthy Families to EPSDT will be, or the increased services
mandated with the implementation of Katie A.


a.Implement an Evidence Based Practice specific to forensic population.
b.Expand Community Outpatient Treatment census by 10% (better education and coordination with hospital staff)
Continue treatment and supervision to provides for community safety.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service. It is unclear what the full impact of the shifting of Healthy Families to EPSDT will be, or the increased services
mandated with the implementation of Katie A.


a.Increase multidisciplinary involvement in treatment and milieu rehabilitation planning.
b.Develop Behavioral Health education for Probation staff
c.Increase # treatment groups
d.Increase restorative justice interventions

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service. It is unclear what the full impact of the shifting of Healthy Families to EPSDT will be, or the increased services
mandated with the implementation of Katie A.


The waiver contract has been negotiated and will extend the program similar to the current Coverage Initiative through
December 31, 2013. As such our goals for the future year are:
1. Administer the Low Income Health Plan (LIHP) according to contracted terms and required legislation.
2. Continue cost containment.
3. Continue to benchmark emergency room use and other key utilization components.
4. Ensure that we retain and grow enrollment at a level that we have cost containment and utilization management.
5. Continue collaboration with community partnerships including Clinicas Del Camino Real.

The current Health Care Coverage Initiative program, operated by the Health Care Agency, under the previous 1115
waiver, expired on October 31, 2010. The new 1115 waiver effective November 1, 2010, represents two programs, the
MCE and HCCI. We estimate that our ratio between the two programs would be 74% of the total LIHP enrollment would
be in the MCE and 26% in the HCCI. As the special terms and conditions of the new waiver have not yet been finalized
due to ongoing negotiations between the DHCS and CMS, the State is requested that counties provide a Letter of Intent.
This letter of intent was submitted in February as well as Ventura‘s application to participate in the Low Income health
Plan (LIHP).


a.Decrease late CalOMS submissions.
b.Standardize ADP’s quadrant three co-occurring disorder system wide by implementing the use of Integrated Services
for Substance Use and Mental Health Problems, an evidence-based treatment model, including staff training and variety
of fidelity checks and measures.
c.Achieve greater efficiency of ADP service resources by sustaining and enhancing system-wide NIATx projects to
increase attendance in ADP
d.Standardize ADP’s quadrant three co-occurring disorder system wide by implementing the use of Integrated Services
for Substance Use and Mental Health Problems, an evidence-based treatment model, including staff training and variety
of fidelity checks and measures.

Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant (SAPT-BG) allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and
Drug Programs are expected to remain consistent with previous years, however, there is some potential for "the
sequester" to have an impact if the budget impasse continues. The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP,
DUI and Prevention programs has been moved to a single agency under the 2011 Realignment. Tied to variable tax
revenue, the Behavioral Health Sub Account may be subject to fluctuations in the economy and insufficient funding would
impact service capacity.



a.Implement the ?Operation Hotbox? marijuana prevention campaign in cooperation with three (3) middle schools,
targeting youth and their parents with positive no-use messages, innovative ways of sharing information on the effects of
THC on the adolescent brain, and ?de-normalizing? youth marijuana use.
b.Carry out at least two (2) major community education events about the risks of Rx Drugs, in cooperation with Parent
Teacher Associations (PTA) countywide.

Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant (SAPT-BG) allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and
Drug Programs are expected to remain consistent with previous years, however, there is some potential for "the
sequester" to have an impact if the budget impasse continues. The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP,
DUI and Prevention programs has been moved to a single agency under the 2011 Realignment. Tied to variable tax
revenue, the Behavioral Health Sub Account may be subject to fluctuations in the economy and insufficient funding would
impact service capacity.


a.Establish an integrated Mental Health and ADP clinic pilot program at A New Start for Mom's program by June 30,
2014.
b.Participate in the evaluation of outcomes and recidivism rates (both residential and non-residential) for offenders in the
AB 109 re-alignment population through collaboration with AB109 partners.
c.Decrease no show rate to groups.

Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant (SAPT-BG) allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and
Drug Programs are expected to remain consistent with previous years, however, there is some potential for "the
sequester" to have an impact if the budget impasse continues. The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP,
DUI and Prevention programs has been moved to a single agency under the 2011 Realignment. Tied to variable tax
revenue, the Behavioral Health Sub Account may be subject to fluctuations in the economy and insufficient funding would
impact service capacity.


a.Participate in the evaluation of outcomes and recidivism rates (both residential and non-residential) for offenders in the
AB 109 re-alignment population through collaboration with AB109 partners.
b.Decrease dropout rate in first 30 days.

Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant (SAPT-BG) allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and
Drug Programs are expected to remain consistent with previous years, however, there is some potential for "the
sequester" to have an impact if the budget impasse continues. The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP,
DUI and Prevention programs has been moved to a single agency under the 2011 Realignment. Tied to variable tax
revenue, the Behavioral Health Sub Account may be subject to fluctuations in the economy and insufficient funding would
impact service capacity.


a.Increase number of clients successfully detoxed from methadone, heroin and Rx drugs.
b.Decrease late CalOMS submissions

Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant (SAPT-BG) allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and
Drug Programs are expected to remain consistent with previous years, however, there is some potential for "the
sequester" to have an impact if the budget impasse continues. The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP,
DUI and Prevention programs has been moved to a single agency under the 2011 Realignment. Tied to variable tax
revenue, the Behavioral Health Sub Account may be subject to fluctuations in the economy and insufficient funding would
impact service capacity.


a.Establish an integrated Mental Health and ADP clinic program at New Start for Moms by June 30, 2014.
b.Expand the NIATx improvement projects at each ADP site (County and Provider) in order to improve client access,
engagement and retention, and secure good outcomes.

Federal Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant (SAPT-BG) allocations to Ventura County Alcohol and
Drug Programs are expected to remain consistent with previous years, however, there is some potential for "the
sequester" to have an impact if the budget impasse continues. The role of the State in administering and monitoring ADP,
DUI and Prevention programs has been moved to a single agency under the 2011 Realignment. Tied to variable tax
revenue, the Behavioral Health Sub Account may be subject to fluctuations in the economy and insufficient funding would
impact service capacity.


a.Implement a modified version of the Evidence Based Program created by San Diego State University specifically for
Driving Under The Influence Programs by utilizing portions of the ?group? curriculum, including staff training and variety of
fidelity checks and measures.
b.Achieve greater efficiency of ADP service resources by sustaining and enhancing system-wide NIATx projects to
decrease disqualifications in DUI and increase attendance in ADP.
c.Increase DUI completions by decreasing disqualifications for absences and non- payment of fees.

Ventura County DUI is a State licensed, community-based program located at five sites throughout the county. It is
required to be and is financially self-sufficient using sustainable funding (participant fees) program costs. While revenues
will increase or decrease based on the need for DUI programs, funding presently correlates directly to the need for DUI
counter-measures and the subsequent need for the program in our community.


TRANSITIONAL ASSISTANCE:
(1) Continue relationships with partners to increase outreach and opportunities to apply for programs – and receive
assistance with completing applications – outside of traditional Agency distribution points so that office visits are not
always required
(2) Offer effective and convenient client customer service through the Enterprise Content Management (ECM) ?paperless?
filing solution for Medi-Cal and CalFresh cases.
(3) Begin implementation of Health Care Reform, providing comprehensive training resources for staff and offering
excellent customer service to residents who will be newly eligible for the Medi-Cal program
(4) Expand awareness and utilization of non-traditional service offerings (e.g., web-based application options, interactive
voice response systems, etc.)

(1) With implementation of health care reform, Medi-Cal cases will grow significantly, adding approximately 45,000 new
recipients to the program.
(2) Comparing FY 2011-2012 to FY 2012-2013 to date, CalFresh (Food Stamp) cases have grown by 6.6%. Like Medi-
Cal, the Food & Nutrition Services Program can impose financial sanctions for noncompliance in meeting accuracy
requirements. If California exceeds the national error rate, both the State and offending counties risk losing funding.
(3) The final State budget and implementation of Health Care Reform, which includes reductions in provider payments for
Medi-Cal, could have impacts on both clients and department funding levels.


ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES:
(1) Manage HSA‘s budget strategically to ensure that Federal, State and County dollars are leveraged effectively, and
that the agency is able to provide the best possible level of service to clients under any of several State budget scenarios
(2) Lead the agency in pursuing and implementing a strategic technology agenda that is cost effective and service
oriented, including further refinement of ECM and data management systems
(3) Manage facilities portfolio to effectively reduce leased facility cost overhead while enhancing county owned facility
infrastructure
(4) Leverage new strategies for service delivery such as remote/mobile worker opportunities to enhance client service
and employee productivity and performance
(5) Continue to gather ?voice of the customer? data, implement systems that meet customers‘ needs, and train staff
accordingly
(6) Expand public/private relationships and collaborations, as well as those among County agencies, to meet shared
missions and outcomes
(7) Continue to implement Get-To-Excellence process improvement priorities
(8) Expand awareness and utilization of non-traditional service offerings (e.g., web-based application options, interactive
voice response systems, etc.)

(1) The final State budget could have significant impacts on Agency funding levels.
(2) Program funding allocations are not finalized until 3-4 months into the Budget Year; variances from projected funding
allocation levels could have significant impacts on the Agency.
(3) The overall health of the economy will impact the level of Realignment revenues received; variances from projected
level could have significant impacts on the Agency.


ADULT & FAMILY SERVICES:
(1) Improve the delivery time of services to elders and dependent adults by employing state-of-the-art technological
advancements for field social workers.
(2) Increase skills, knowledge and abilities of Adult Protective Services staff by providing training on the latest research in
brain health and dementia.
(3) Expand outreach to elders and dependent adults, mandated reporters, financial institutions, partner agencies and the
general public to maintain visibility, support, collaboration and increased health and safety to at-risk elders and
dependent adults.
(4) Maintain collaboration with local university MSW Intern Program
(5) Increase staff efficiencies by in-the-field utilization of iPADS and maximum utilization of HMIS data base.
(6) Implement the CMIPS II system to streamline IHSS case management.

ADULT & FAMILY SERVICES:
(1) The dramatic growth of the older adult population and demand for mental health services will continue.
(2) As HSA prepares for the ?boomer? generation to age into the IHSS program, HSA needs to take the opportunity to
strengthen the IHSS infrastructure to be prepared to meet the needs of our vulnerable aged, disabled and blind
residents. The aging ?boomer? generation will also have an impact on Adult Protective Services.
(3)The Public Administrator/Public Guardian expects increased caseload and unfunded mandates for services again this
year and for many years into the future. Demand for estate administration will likely increase as will demands by Probate
court for the Public Guardian to take on additional, complex cases.
(4) Funding for IHSS activities was changed in the current year from cost reimbursement to a set MOE. This change is
projected to result in savings for the County (or slower growth in NCC). During the initial years of the change the State is
afforded opportunities to back out of the change. The Agency will closely monitor the situation.


BUSINESS & EMPLOYMENT SERVICES:
(1)Expand vocational education partnerships to provide client training for emerging occupations
(2)Increase the number of clients participating in federally mandated, work and work-related activities
(3) Maximize utilization of subsidized job placement opportunities leading to permanent unsubsidized employment
(4) Continue expanding outreach for the Financial Empowerment Partnership

BUSINESS & EMPLOYMENT SERVICES:
(1) Comparing FY 2011-2012 to FY 2012-2013 to date, CalWORKs cases have dropped slightly from an average of 7,221
served per month to an average of 6,812 served per month.
(2) While there are no significant programmatic changes to the structure of the CalWORKs program in the proposed
2013-14 budget, a number of changes stemming from previous budgets are still in the process of being implemented.
Because of the changes resulting from SB 1041 (Chapter 47, Statutes of 2012), the employment services caseload is
projected to increase; however, the overall CalWORKs caseload is projected to decrease slightly by 0.08%
(3)The State budget proposes funding of $8.5 million in 2012-13 and $62.3 million in 2013-14 for child care for those
cases being reengaged that had previously been exempt under the short-term young child exemption.
(4)The base funding for CalWORKs Administration has been decreased by $12.4 million to reflect the projected overall
caseload decrease.
(5) The State budget includes $35.9 million for Cal-Learn case management to reflect the full implementation of the
program in 2013-14.
(6) There are no changes to the current administrative structure of Childcare programs.
(7)Stage 1 child care reflects a net increase of $35.4 million. This increase is comprised of a decrease of $26.9 million to
the child care base funding, but an increase of $62.3 million for reengagement of cases as described above.
(8) Stage 2 child care reflects a decrease of $21 million non-Proposition 98 General Fund in the proposed 2013-14
budget, reflecting a total of $398.3 million. This decrease is the result of a projected decrease in CalWORKs families
eligible for Stage 2 care. This decline in eligible caseload is reflective of those families who were granted diversion
services in 2010-11, who will become eligible for Stage 3.
(9)Stage 3 child care is funded at $172.6 million, which includes an increase of $24.2 million non-Proposition 98 General
Fund. This increase is primarily due to the transfer of families into Stage 3 who had previously been granted diversion
services


CHILDREN & FAMILY SERVICES:
(1) Strengthen Emergency Response practices, including continuing training for CFS staff in the areas of mental health,
forensic interviewing, and sexual abuse dynamics
(2) Make steady progress on the State-mandated System Improvement Plan, which establishes plans for quantitative
improvements in several key areas
(3) Continue implementing legislation that extends foster care from age 18 to age 21
(4) Expand technology, tools, and resources to ensure that social workers are able to remain mobile and conduct their
work from the field to the extent necessary.
(5) Continue to recruit, license, train, and retain foster families to provide caring homes for vulnerable children.

CHILDREN & FAMILY SERVICES:
(1) Child welfare cases continue to rise. The complexity of many of these cases, which can involve multiple siblings and
allegations, require lengthy investigations.
(2) Monitor and mitigate overtime costs for Child Welfare social workers through scheduling and supervision practices
while ensuring that the safety of children remains the priority and that social workers are fairly compensated for hours
worked.


(1) Expand vocational education partnerships to provide client training for emerging occupations
(2) Increase the number of clients participating in federally mandated, work and work-related activities
(3) Maximize utilization of subsidized job placement opportunities leading to permanent unsubsidized employment
(4) Continue expanding outreach for the Financial Empowerment Partnership

(1) Comparing FY 2011-2012 to FY 2012-2013 to date, CalWORKs cases have dropped slightly from an average of 6,752
served per month to an average of 6,480 served per month.
(2) Although many factors contribute to caseload growth and decline, CalWORKs caseloads tend to increase as the
unemployment rate increases and decrease as economic conditions improve.


(1) Continue to meet program guidelines and regulations, maximizing the use of the Kin-GAP program in efforts to seek
home placements that are in the best interest of the foster children involved.

(1) The 2013-2014 State budget provides level funding for KinGAP and grants include a COLA of 2.65 percent based on
an increase in the CNI, effective July 1, 2013.


(1) Continue marketing and outreach efforts for new foster parents and families interested in adoption

(1) The Preliminary Budget Request assumes a continuance of the significant growth in case levels in recent years; a
variance from projected growth levels could significantly impact costs.


(1) Decrease the length of stay for all children who enter the child welfare system by analyzing the factors that lead to and
detract from permanency.
(2) Enhance services for transitional-age youth and increase housing opportunities for emancipated youth.
(3) Continue implementation of the Extended Foster Care Program, which extends foster care from age 18 to age 21.

(1) During Fiscal Year 2011-2012, caseloads increased, and for the first six months of Fiscal Year 2013-2013, that trend
has continued. The complexity of many of these cases, which can involve multiple siblings and allegations, require
lengthy investigations.
(2) Implementation of Extended Foster Care will continue to expand case management and services for youth who opt to
remain in the program.


(1) Program staff will continue to follow guidelines and regulations of this mandated program.

(1) The State budget will continue to be monitored to determine funding and/or programmatic impacts.


(1) Convert the FileNet Capture component of the General Relief Electronic Content Management system to Kofax
Capture/KTM.
(2) Continue oversight of General Relief program with a focus on client benefit lifetime limits that facilitates transition of
clients onto alternate and sustainable assistance programs.

(1) The State budget will continue to be monitored to determine funding impacts to other safety net programs that could
result in growth of the General Relief caseload.


The Department will continue to follow guidelines and regulations of these mandated programs.

(1) The State budget proposal for FY 13-14 includes the consideration of significant revisions/additions/changes related
to the realignment of funding streams/methodologies/levels for various Direct Aid programs.
(2) The Department will continue to monitor the FY 13-14 State budget to determine final impacts on the Department.


1) Maintain the average occupancy rate of 92%
(2) Maintain 100% enrollment of school-aged children in to school within 10 days of residency.
(3) Increase coordination with other transitional living centers to identify needs and build a system of housing and
services that address the needs of the homeless in Ventura County.
(4) Maintain the rate of residents employed at discharge at 91%

RAIN will continue to be a vital part of the County‘s Ten-Year Strategy to End Homelessness.


(1) The PA will maintain 100% response standard of 48 hours to initiate the investigation of decedent referrals
(2) The PG will maintain the response standard of 48 hours to initiate the investigation of conservatorship referrals at
100%.
(3) Maintain continuous educational credits for each Deputy PG in compliance with the 2006 Omnibus Act for 100%
Certification by the State Association.
(4) Use of technology by all staff to increase time management efficiency and service to clients by reducing or eliminating
duplicate tasks.

(1) The dramatic growth of the older adult population and demand for mental health services will continue.
(2) The Public Administrator/Public Guardian expects increased caseload and unfunded mandates for services again this
year and for many years into the future.
(3) Demand for estate administration will likely increase.
(4) Fees collected for large estate administration are expected to increase and could reduce the level of required County
General Fund contribution.
(5) Increased demands by the Probate Court for the Public Guardian to take on cases without choice are expected to
continue. These cases are typically very problematic and result from years of mismanagement by a prior conservator, or
cases of elder abuse becoming evident through the Probate proceedings.


The County Executive Office will continue to provide oversight program management and administration. The
administrative efficiency and effectiveness will be reviewed and assessed to ensure effective program outcomes.

MSA revenues are difficult to project because of the complex calculation and rules. Calculation of each year‘s MSA
payment from the Original Participating Manufacturer (?OPM?) begins with a base amount. The Independent Auditor
determines how much of the base amount each OPM is to pay by applying various adjustments and the relative market
share of each OPM. Although Ventura County‘s proportional share of the MSA payments is fixed at approximately 2.0%,
due to the decreased demand of cigarettes overall and the withholding of payments from OPMs, MSA payments have
significantly reduced over the years. The MSA revenues were not designed in such a way as to promote sustainable longterm
services nor have the ability to expand services. Care must be taken to maintain current service levels into the
future and that sustaining the level of current year services are expected without intense leveraging of the set-aside
designation.


FY 2013/14 Program 
1. Continue to enhance real estate fraud prevention and investigation activities to address the rise of sophisticated real
estate crimes over the last decade.
2. Continue to aggressively pursue consumer and environmental crimes committed against Ventura County‘s citizens and
resources.

In 2012 the California legislature passed SB 1342, which modestly increased the fee imposed for recording certain real
estate documents to more adequately fund the Real Estate Fraud Prosecution Trust Fund. The resulting funding
increase along with other revenues will offset the addition of a forensic accountant to be added to the real estate fraud
team and the consumer protection team to provide the financial expertise needed to combat these often voluminous,
complex and sophisticated financial crimes.


FY 2013/14 
1. Migrate the office‘s current network system to a Microsoft-based network structure.
2. Continue to explore the applications and feasibility of deploying an Electronic Content Management (ECM) system to
reduce paper flow.
3. Continue to aggressively pursue external funding sources to reduce general fund costs.
4. Continue the implementation of the General Management System model of workload and policy management to
ensure efficient resource distribution and enhance communications.

Increased Proposition 172 revenue, combined with increases in other revenues and the District Attorney‘s persistence in
pursuing grant opportunities will make it possible to fill a portion of its positions that have remained vacant as budget
mitigation over the last five years. These sorely needed positions will improve the effectiveness of the District Attorney‘s
efforts to secure justice in Ventura County. As the impacts of Public Safety Realignment are felt, these additional
resources will address anticipated increases in criminal filings in core criminal prosecutions, as well as efforts to combat
real estate fraud and consumer and environmental crimes.


FY 2013/2014 Program 
1. Preserve justice and protect the people of Ventura County and the State of California by aggressively and fairly
prosecuting those who violate the law.
2. Continue to implement Public Safety Realignment while holding those who commit crimes against our citizens
accountable.
3. Continue to review claims of factual innocence in completed cases as part of the District Attorney‘s 2012 Conviction
Integrity program.

The implementation of AB 109‘s Public Safety Realignment remains a concern as both the number of criminal filings and
severity of conduct alleged in those filings is anticipated to increase.


Continue to investigate and report fiscal, operational, and management issues in County departments and other local
government entities.


Impanel Criminal Grand Juries to hear evidence on criminal matters on an as-needed basis.


1. Continue to provide quality legal services to adult indigents in those cases in which the County Public Defender has a
conflict of interest or is unable to act.

1. The current economic climate will make it difficult to address any inflationary or legal defense cost increases.


 Provide leadership and administrative support to program operations to ensure success in achieving the Agency‘s
mission, vision, and values.
 Prioritize mandated services and successful programs, while strategizing the most efficient manner in which to deliver
them.
 Expand the Evidence Based Practices model throughout the Agency.
 Develop a Quality Assurance Strategic Implementation Plan to include a continuous improvement system throughout
the Agency.
 Continue to work with our justice partners to ensure the services Probation contributes to the system address the needs
of our partners.
 Strive to maintain critical programs for our juvenile offenders. This mission will help regulate the Juvenile Facilities‘
population, contain costs, and allow us to provide services that will positively impact the minors we serve, thus resulting in
reduced recidivism and costly out-of-home placements.
 Identify technology opportunities that increase operational efficiency and effectiveness.
 Provide timely financial status reports to ensure the Executive Committee obtains the information necessary for making
good business decisions.

 Our Agency is in the early stages of implementing Evidence Based Practices (EBP). EBP refer to supervision policies,
procedures, program, and practices demonstrated by scientific research to reduce recidivism among individuals under
probation or post-release supervision (or AB 109 Public Safety Realignment). Currently, EBP has been implemented
primarily in units supervising adult offenders in the community. The Agency‘s goal is to expand the practice throughout
the Agency. Funding streams such as the California Community Corrections Incentive Act of 2009 (Senate Bill 678) and
AB 109 Public Safety Realignment support and help to fund these efforts.
 An essential component to implementing EBP is quality assurance. Quality assurance systems are designed to support
implementation efforts and to create a culture of quality within the Agency. Critical to quality assurance is the collection
and analysis of data. Our Agency is data rich. Our focus in the following fiscal year will be to contract with qualified
research personnel to track, interpret, and analyze our date to ensure the effectiveness of our programs in achieving the
desired outcomes.


 Preparing quality pre-sentence reports in a timely manner and consistent with Judicial Council Rules, and local Superior
Court processes.
 Providing Courts with knowledgeable and resourceful court officers who will actively assist judges in Court.
 Accurately and thoroughly screening and assessing all minors and their families to determine the most appropriate level
and type of intervention needed to eliminate risk factors while supporting existing protective factors.
 Securing reparation for victims.
 Protecting society.
 Encouraging the minor to lead a law-abiding life and deter him/her from future offenses.
 Deterring others from criminal conduct by demonstrating the consequences.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial operations of the Juvenile
Investigations Division.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Coordinate with IT services to implement and interface our risk and needs assessment tool with our case management
system in an effort to streamline operations. Additionally, expand the use mobile devices to increase staff operational
efficiencies and safety, as well as communications between staff in the field and their supervisors in the office.
 Expand the use of evidence-based practices to streamline and improve the quality of supervision services.
 Maintain programs that reduce recidivism to ensure our custody populations do not increase.
 Continue to emphasize efforts in collecting victim restitution fees.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financials of the Juvenile Field
Services Division.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Prepare quality pre-sentence reports in a timely manner and in accordance with Judicial Council Rules.
 Protect society.
 Encourage the defendant to lead a law-abiding life and deter him/her from future offenses.
 Deter others from criminal conduct by demonstrating the consequences.
 Prevent new crimes by the defendant by isolating him/her for the period of incarceration.
 Secure reparation for a victim.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial operations of the Adult
Investigations Division.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Continue re-organization efforts to reduce targeted caseload sizes to further implement effective EBP practices.
 Complete automation and comprehensive administrative and user training of the ORAS case management and planning
system, including a ?train-the-trainer? component for sustainability.
 Develop a Quality Assurance Strategic Implementation Plan to include a continuous improvement system.
 Achieve targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of ORAS assessments on moderate to high risk cases.
 Automate and integrate a formalized graduated behavior response matrix.
 Develop operational Post Orders for new assignments created to effectively manage AB 109 probationers.
 Validate the ORAS assessment tools for the Ventura County population.
 Achieve targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of SARA assessments on domestic violence cases.
 Develop and implement an evidence-based pre-trial program that provides the Court with an actuarial risk assessment
at arraignment to determine risk to re-offend in the community pending Court and the failure to appear for subsequent
Court matters.
 Develop a pilot program supported by evidence that incorporates the comprehensive risk and needs assessment
(ORAS-CST) for the Court at sentencing which will allow conditions of probation to include treatment that targets
assessed risk factors.
 Implement a comprehensive training and coaching system that integrates both Motivational Interviewing techniques and
cognitive behavioral interventions.
 Incorporate a crime analyst (researcher) to the PRAS unit to enhance quality control of data collection, organization, and
analysis to improve data-driven decision making.
 Continue expansion efforts to accommodate an increasing number of AB109 probationers. This includes office space
and equipment considerations, training more armed officers, and assigning an officer in the Todd Road Jail. The
expansion of AB109 has significantly increased program growth and operational needs in the Oxnard region requiring the
relocation of two units and the addition of one additional supervision unit in an entirely new building.
 Facilitate the evaluation of the Evidence-Based Probation Supervision Program (EBPSP) through the National Council
on Crime and Delinquency.

 In the November 2012 ballot voting, the Governor was successful in obtaining voter approval for Proposition 30. This
proposition constitutionally protects funding for the AB 109 Public Safety Realignment Program.
 The California Community Corrections Performance Incentives Act (Senate Bill 678) was enacted in 2009 to support
more-successful probation supervision practices for felony offenders. The legislation established a system of
performance-based funding for county probation departments to implement and maintain evidence-based practices in
adult felony probation supervision. SB 678 is structured to save state General Fund monies while reducing criminal
behavior and alleviating state prison overcrowding.
 County funding allocations are based on the number of felony probationers who were revoked to state prison in a given
year compared to those revoked in the baseline period. However, enactment of the AB 109 Public Safety Realignment
program has significantly impacted the funding allocations because fewer offenders are now eligible for revocation to
state prison than in the baseline years. As a result, the Administrative Office of the Courts (AOC), the Department of
Finance, the Chief Probation Officers of California, and the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation
(CDCR) are working together to revise the SB 678 funding formula to account for any reduction in the number of
offenders revoked to state prison as a result of the realignment rather than successful probation supervision. The new
formula will ensure that county probation departments are incentivized to continue making program improvements but will
not artificially reward counties for changes that result from AB realignment.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


 Continue to work with partners to ensure the safety of youth in placement.
 Continue to focus efforts on family reunification, placing minors in the least restrictive setting (including adoption, legal
guardianship or placement with a relative), and provide independent living skills and transitional housing to those where
family reunification is not an option.
 Return the minor to a safe home and complete all necessary steps to finalize the permanent placement of the minor.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financials of the JF Detention Services
Unit.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Increase Work Furlough population to over 100 inmates by September 1, 2013.
 Add the Social Host Liability program to the Direct Work Program by April 8, 2013.
 If AB 752 is enacted, add PC 1170 (h) inmates to the program.

WF/WR/DW revenues continue to be impacted by the current economic downturn as offenders‘ ability to pay is affected.
With the addition of the job training program at Work Furlough, the percentage of inmates who are not paying any board
fees has increased to over 40%. Additionally, some of the contracted cities that utilize Work Release crews have
decreased their requests for paid work crews as a result of the current economic situation. We will closely monitor the
revenue collections and update the County Executive Office on any significant changes.


The objective of the JJCPA program is to provide services that will result in a reduction in the following areas:
 Arrest rate
 Incarceration rate
 Probation violation rate
 Probation completion rate
 Restitution completion rate
 Community service completion rate
 New law violation
 Time to first arrests
 Arrests for violent offenses

 The Governor was successful in passing Proposition 30 during the November 2012 elections. Proposition 30 secured
funding for the JJCPA beginning FY 2013-14. As a result, we can continue offering valuable programming that, over the
years, has helped to reduce crime in our County.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Hire only the best applicants that pass a rigorous background investigation. This ensures that the Agency retains only
those applicants that are of the highest integrity, possess superior interpersonal skills, and exhibit good decision making
and judgment.
 Complete Administrative Investigations in a manner that respects the rights of employees while protecting the Agency
and the County from liability. Thorough Administrative Investigations enable the Agency to take action against employees
that violate its policies and procedures and to exonerate the wrongly accused.
 Enhance the Agency‘s image and increase employee morale through the publication of the newsletter, conducting
swearing-in ceremonies, and keeping the Agency website up to date.
 Provide employees with initial basic skills and build a foundation for ongoing learning. Job skills, enforcement activities,
and casework services are core and essential to the STU training program. This approach not only compliments and
supports the Agency‘s mission, but reinforces the concept that our employees constitute our most valuable resource for
accomplishing our mission.
 HR strives to establish and maintain effective working relationships with management, employees, employee
representatives, staff in other agencies and the public.

 Currently, the State‘s Standards and Training for Corrections (STC) is included in the Governor‘s budget for FY 2013-
14. As such, there are no estimated cuts to the Agency‘s staff training program. The Ventura County Probation Agency
is projected to receive approximately $192,000 annually for staff training and development.
 STU is working with Santa Barbara and San Luis Obispo Counties to develop a ?Tri-Counties Deputy Probation Officer
Core?. This in-house Core training will cut back on the costs associated with sending staff to Core out of county and
paying for transportation, lodging and tuition. It will also save staff time in trying to locate Core courses accepting outside
agency enrollment. The first Core class is scheduled for September-October of 2013.
 Starting in FY 2013-14, HR will begin developing a structured internship program for both the Deputy Probation Officer
and Corrections Services Officer career paths working with the local universities, community and private colleges. This
will allow the agency to effectively accomplish creating a pool of qualified future candidates that are ready to meet
challenges of both demanding careers at the same time allow the agency to increase our employee retention by hiring
those that have a working understanding of their chosen career.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


 The Facility Inspection Team (FIT) has yet to be fully implemented. A deep and thorough cleaning of the facility has
been underway. Cleaning machines and products were purchased to assist with the upkeep of the facility. Regular
inspections by the FIT team will ensure the facility maintains a high level of cleanliness and will help keep expenses down
by ensuring that regular upkeep and maintenance of the facility is maintained. Due to staffing shortages in the Operations
Division, the development of this team has been delayed. An Operations employee has been tasked with this project and
is in the final stages of implementation.
 Last year a Capital Improvement Project (CAP) was submitted to the CEOs office. The plan called for the enclosure of
the upper tier in our Detention and Commitment Housing Units (Matilija, Sycamore, and Wheeler). The enclosure is
designed to provide a safer setting in the housing units and prevent minors from harming themselves by jumping off the
tier or attempting to hang themselves from the tier railing. CSA (now the Board of State and Community Corrections) and
Cal Fire approved the design for this project. Last year GSA oversaw the construction of this project in Sycamore Units 1
and 2. The Tier Project has been a success. Since the tier enclosure was added to Sycamore 1 and 2, there have been
no incidents of minors harming themselves on the tier or attempting suicide by jumping over the rail. This year we have
resubmitted the CAP to complete the remaining Detention and Commitment Housing Units, but will be setting aside yearend
money to complete the tier enclosure in Matilija Units 1through 4.
 At the conclusion of the tier project in the Matilija Housing Units, GSA will be contracting with vendors to have the
interior of Matilija and Wheeler 1 and 2 painted. Additionally, the exterior of all the Detention Housing Units will be sand
blasted and a sealer coat applied to the block walls.
 The Operations Division is developing a policy to ensure the Facility is in compliance with the Prison Rape Elimination
Act (PREA), which will go into effect in August 2013. All Facility staff, contract employees, vendors, volunteers, and
visitors will be trained and/or informed of their responsibilities regarding the prevention, detection, and reporting of sexual
abuse and sexual harassment. Additionally, a number of structural changes will need to be made to ensure the Facility is
compliant with PREA standards. GSA is working with Operations to provide a more private setting in the booking area for
youth brought into the facility. PREA mandates require staff to ask very specific and sensitive questions during the
admissions process. Privacy booths will need to be constructed to meet the PREA standard.
 Additional PREA related compliance issues are necessary to ensure compliance; including privacy screens in shower
areas and additional cameras to eliminate blind spots.
 Implement a new tracking system to increase the speed in which maintenance requests are delivered and processed.
Currently, we use a paper system in which staff hand write maintenance requests and place them in a mailbox slot for
delivery to Operations. Clerical staff collect and disperse the requests as they make their rounds (twice a day) about the
facility. A Trakit type tracking system will increase the speed of delivery and processing (from the time that staff complete
a maintenance request until it is approved by Operations and forwarded to GSA for handling) and provide feedback to the
reporting person, something which is not currently done. With the new tracking system, maintenance requests will be
submitted to GSA within 24 hours of receiving the request in the tracking system (with the current system, it can take 2-3
days for requests to be submitted to GSA).

 In the November 2012 ballot voting, the Governor was successful in obtaining voter approval for Proposition 30. This
proposition secured funding for the Juvenile Probation and Camps Funding (JPCF) beginning FY 2013-14. Passage of
this proposition was critical because the funds are used to cover the costs associated with providing behavioral health
treatment to youths held in the Juvenile Facilities (JF), and maintaining and operating the facilities.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


 Continue to provide housing for juveniles detained pending court hearings.
 Continue to hire CSOs to meet staffing requirements and overtime budget targets for the housing units.
 Provide programming to juveniles detained pending Court proceedings, primarily through Girls Inc of Carpinteria, and
the Volunteers-in-Probation Program, which includes numerous volunteers that provide lessons in music, chess, science,
etc.
 Continue the DMC project.
 Provide programming to youth detained pending court hearings. This will include Evidence Based Programming
provided through ART, Gender Specific Programming, Alcohol and Drug Counseling and Interactive Journaling.
 Continue to provide ART and train additional staff to facilitate ART training.

 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financials of the JF Detention Services
Unit.
 In FY 2013-14 we will continue to focus our efforts in filling behind position vacancies and increasing the efficiency of
staffing patterns in order to minimize the use of overtime.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Continue to provide programming and increase services to juveniles transitioned to the community.
 Continue to provide housing for juveniles serving Court-ordered commitments.
 Continue to hire CSOs to meet staffing requirements and reduce overtime costs for the housing units.
 Provide comprehensive transitional services for youth returning to the community.

 The Governor was successful in passing Proposition 30 during the November 2012 elections. Proposition 30 secured
funding for the Juvenile Probation and Camps Funding (JPCF) beginning FY 2013-14. This funding is used to pay for
personnel, and services and supplies costs throughout the JF.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Provide juveniles with vocational skills to be utilized upon release from the program.
 Reduce recidivism.
 Continue to increase programming to juveniles not participating in the Leaders Program.
 Provide comprehensive transitional services for youth returning to the community.

 The Governor was successful in passing Proposition 30 during the November 2012 elections. Proposition 30 secured
funding for YOBG beginning FY 2013-14.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.


 Provide the court with a thorough and detailed intake report so they may make informed decisions on suitable releases
into the community.
 Appropriately screen (through the use of a Risk Assessment Instrument) all youth brought to the JF to determine if
detention is necessary or if the youth can be safely supervised in the community using either community confinement or
EM. The screening of youth based upon a Risk Assessment Instrument (RAI) is a strategy which complies with EBP.
 Intake will continue to assist with reviewing all bookings and making recommendations for enhancements of VCPA
information technology for collection of JDAI/ DMC data to assist with reduction strategies.
 GPS monitoring was attempted in prior years, but the technology was found not to be quite sufficient enough for our
needs. We will be attempting a second pilot project with newer GPS equipment this year. We anticipate that this
equipment will provide better tracking of minors under our supervision.
 Increase the number of weekly field contacts by 10% this year.
 Percentage of minors/youth that successfully complete their Electronic Monitoring contract: 65%.
 Continue to keep the JF population down by keeping the number of youth on EM at a monthly average of approximately
55 youth.
 Continue to conduct daily field contacts of EM minors in the program, but to utilize staff in a more efficient manner so the
EM team is able to increase the number of weekly field contacts by 10% this year.

 In the November 2012 ballot voting, the Governor was successful in obtaining voter approval for Proposition 30. This
proposition secured funding for the Juvenile Probation and Camps Funding (JPCF) beginning FY 2013-14. Passage of
this proposition was critical because the funds are used to cover the cost of personnel responsible for supervising youths
in the community. The existence of such programs allows the County to alleviate the JF population and save on the
substantial cost of incarcerating youths at the JF.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.


(1) Continue to participate with other criminal justice agencies in the analysis, planning and implementation of AB 109,
Public Safety Realignment.
(2) Continue to manage court ordered attorney fees in adult criminal cases.
(3) Continue to develop and refine the Integrated Public Defender Case Management system.
(4) Continue to collaborate with IT Services to identify and develop new technology to assist with case management and
organizational efficiencies.
(5) Develop an agency strategic plan, continue to participate in the Lean Six Sigma program, review and follow-up on
goals and , and seek operational efficiencies.
(6) Transition new management staff and develop succession planning for management and administrative staff.
(7) Continue to develop and mentor staff by providing in-house training opportunities.


(1) Continue to provide quality representation to all indigent defendants at the least possible expense to the County.
(2) Continue to collaborate with other criminal justice agencies in the analysis and planning of the efficient operation of
the justice system, including implementation of AB109, Public Safety Realignment.
(3) Provide training to our social workers, enabling them to conduct risk/needs assessments to determine appropriate
evidence based services for clients.
(4) Utilize risk/needs assessments and evidence based practices to expand and explore alternative sentencing programs,
alternatives to jail, and ways to reduce recidivism and jail overcrowding.
(5) Continue to request court ordered attorney fees when appropriate.

(1) Public Safety Realignment will continue to impact our business process; although, the specific impacts are not yet
known.
(2) Beginning July 1, 2013, the Public Defender will be required to represent parole offenders in court, though the specific
impacts of this new responsibility are not yet known.


(1) Continue to provide quality representation to persons qualifying for Public Defender services.
(2) Continue to closely monitor Probate and LPS Conservatorship cases to ensure that annual accounting are accurate
and timely filed.
(3) Continue to request court ordered attorney fees, when appropriate.
(4) Continue to conduct mandated investigations of placements of clients under LPS and Probate conservatorships.
(5) Explore solutions to handling increased workload in both conservatorship and contempt cases.

(1) Aging elder population and increases in dementia and Alzheimer‘s diagnosis‘s will impact our workload on probate
conservatorship cases.


Begin utilizing a Predictive Index survey to assess a deputy sheriff applicant‘s unique talents and pre-determined genetic
behaviors as they relate to the skills and abilities necessary for a deputy sheriff. This highly scientific and reliable system
may have additional applicability within the organization as its usage expands. It provides previously untapped data
about an individual‘s strengths and developmental needs that can enhance both the individual and the organization.
Develop and implement an Active Shooter/Immediate Threat protocol to help protect professional staff and assign roles
and responsibilities to sworn personnel in the event of a violent attack.
Provide necessary support/training to local law enforcement agencies to assist with their implementation of the California
Courts Protective Order Registry (CCPOR) system for restraining orders.
Complete necessary changes to implement DOJ required Advanced Authentication.
Complete conversion from Sheriff‘s Personnel Tracking System to Ventura County Human Resources and Payroll
(VCHRP).
Continue to pursue opportunities to target the recruitment of women, minorities and veterans into all positions.
Working collaboratively with CEO-Risk Management to determine ways to reduce injured workers‘ time off work.
Have all investigators trained in Internal Affairs Investigations and Officer Involved Shooting Protocols. In addition,
attend as many I.A. specific trainings as can be accomplished within budgetary and workload constraints.
Implement and coordinate meetings with local law enforcement agency Professional Standards investigators/managers
to discuss best practices, trends, etc.
Continued improved coordination with Risk Management in reducing Sheriff's Office liability.
Continue to utilize County Counsel to proactively assess I.A. complaints and issue.
Distribute the POBOR video developed last year for in-service training for sergeants throughout the department.
The Crisis Intervention Team program is working towards securing grant funding to offset the costs of the CIT program.
CIT staff will attend monthly briefings in all stations/departments to update on CIT practices and bring in resources
during on-going briefing trainings.
Present three CIT Academies in FY13-14 to train 100+ individuals.
Increase the compliance of completing CIT cards for all mental health contacts and 5150 holds.
CIT will provide up to date current statistical data with an updated and stream-lined data base system. This data will be
used to review statistics on a monthly basis for each station/department.
Liaison with all stations / Departments to empower their CIT Coordinators to address area specific CIT issues.
Coordinate with Crime Analysis to modernize the CIT database.
Coordinate with Crime Analysis and SSB to create and electronic CIT card app for iPhones.
Integrate Mental Health First Aid into STC training.
Peer Support Marketing to family members of department personnel (Utilization of PSP Contact number / Cellphone).
Conduct briefing training & Peer Support newsletters.
Increase the resource pool available for peer team members and department personnel.
Accurately capture number of peer contacts and category.
Seek additional revenue sources to offset costs for a Criminal Justice Training Center classroom facility for the firearms
range to replace the existing dilapidated building.
Create additional training center parking on adjacent lot to accommodate staff, visitor and student needs.
Upgrade Force Options Simulator (FOS) theater.
Continue to integrate features of the Wellness Program department wide.


Conduct an analysis of files maintained by Sheriff‘s Records Unit to determine feasibility of electronic storage vs. hard
copy.


Increase our on-campus safety at the schools within the area. We will be working with the City of Moorpark and
Moorpark School Unified District to reinstate a full time School Resource Officer.
Improve the Moorpark Police Station security. We will be working with the City of Moorpark and vendors to spec and
purchase a new up-to-date surveillance system for our station interview rooms.
Increase field supervision for the Moorpark patrol operations.
Prevent Marijuana and other drug use in schools. We will examine the possibilities to require high school sports students
to take mandatory or voluntary drug testing.
Develop stronger community policing in Moorpark. Continue implementation of the beat coordinator philosophy while
increasing crime reduction efforts.
Add one Senior Deputy position to the City of Moorpark so that each city beat would have a beat coordinator.
Reduce Commercial Vehicle accidents in Moorpark.
Maintain railroad-crossing safety. Conduct traffic education training by using a program called ?Operation Lifesaver.? The
City of Moorpark has seven railroad crossings in the city limits, of which five have traffic control devices in place. Two of
the crossings are un-controlled.
Refine the Beat Coordinator program by working closely with the Intel Unit in the implementation of Intelligence Led
Policing (ILP).
Continue Threat Assessment and Active Shooter training.
Participate in Office of Traffic Safety DUI checkpoints.
Put all East County Field Training Officers through a SFST Course.
Increase 11550 H&S drug arrests based on expansion of the Drug Recognition Expert (DRE) cadre.
Conduct Women's' Symposium focusing on sexual assault prevention and women's health.
Purchase and deploy License Plate Readers (LPRs) and other crime prevention-apprehension equipment.
Expand the use of technology in combating crime as well as enhance our employees in the utilization of this new
technology.

Ongoing education to the public on subjects related to alcohol and drugs (heroin, bath salts).
Collaboration with Probation and other agencies in the management of the Post Release Offender Program.
Maintaining the lowest possible operating costs while ensuring public safety.
Encourage patrol deputies to establish and maintain closer working relationships with outside agencies, in line with beat
coordinator and Intelligent Lead Policing (I.L.P) philosophy.
Keeping pace with the technology costs associated with I.L.P.


Continue to enhance anti-graffiti program through technological improvements to reduce graffiti.
Increase interaction and instruction in schools and community on current issues such as underage drinking, Internet
safety, drug abuse, prescription medication abuse, and graffiti.
Implement additional crime prevention programs and strategies.
Reduce the total number of traffic collisions in the city through Education, Enforcement and Engineering.
Implement Cop in a Box, an Internet Predator investigative program.

The City of Camarillo's loss of revenue due to the termination of the Redevelopment Agency will have an ongoing impact
on the city's general fund, thus impacting their ability to fund future contracted police services at current levels.
The increase of contract rates with no additional services may require the City of Camarillo to reduce services.
Increased city population without additional funding sources may impact providing additional police services.
The planned increase in residents/clients at Casa Pacifica, a privately run shelter for abused and neglected children, will
have a significant impact on calls for service to the unincorporated area around Camarillo.


CEO Focus Area #4, ?Provide quality healthcare and social services supporting healthy communities.? Our objective is to
improve the mental health of our citizens by supporting the crisis-intervention ?C.I.T? program and reviewing monthly
deputy mental health contact reports. The efforts will increase our mental health resources and responses at all four West
County Patrol stations.
Help the homeless population by working with community based organizations in order to reduce the impact of their
encampments on the Santa Clara and Ventura River watersheds. CEO Focus Area #3, ?protect our agricultural and
natural resources, preserve private property rights, and protect the common good.?
Provide ?end-user? representation on county processes such as the VCSO committees: Automatic Field Reporting,
Vehicle and Employee Performance Evaluation projects.
Improve community safety with public outreach and awareness of our Beat Coordinator program to solicit more
community input.
Use the philosophy of ?Intelligent Lead Policing? to incorporate the public in our system to fight crime and keep
communities safe.
Continue the process to improve the automated field reporting system for patrol.
Reduce gang violence in the Santa Clara Valley by continuing the Fillmore Cal Grip youth violence reduction grant.
Use the Office of Emergency Services (O.E.S) to improve the county‘s ability in capturing eligible FEMA and State
reimbursement. In addition, OES will meet the federal mandates for agency NIMS disaster training compliance report.
The Office of Emergency Services will continue to ensure the effectiveness of the Emergency Preparedness Council.
Promote campus safety as we work with each of the respective school districts to continue deputy staffing of embedded
school resource officers.
Stabilize state funding of 911 emergency systems. The Sheriff‘s Communication Center will maintain a leadership
position with VCSO Communications Manager representation on the executive board of the California National
Emergency Number Association (CALNENA). CALNENA represents more than 500 public safety communications agency
professionals that meet regularly with local, state and national policy makers.
The Communication Center will also complete the second phase of the Hosted Regional 9-1-1 Project with the
implementation of wireless 9-1-1 routing by X/Y coordinates while also developing the, ?next generation,? Computer Aided
Dispatch project.

The decline in federal preparedness funding will impact OES, local cities and our Operational Area capabilities. As a
result, the costs to maintain current capabilities and resources are increasing, while resources at the local, state and
federal levels continue to decrease.
The State 9-1-1 Office has proposed changes to the current state funding model that could adversely impact the Sheriff's
Office's ability to update or replace its 911 equipment in the future. Most of our historic 911 improvements were
purchased using these State 9-1-1 funds.
The State Cal Grip Gang Prevention Grant is due to expire December 31, 2013.


Seek additional revenue sources to offset costs for recent approval to go forward with Bomb Robot and Bomb Suit; send
four bomb technicians to Explosive Breacher School; send two of our bomb trainees to Basic Hazardous Devices School
to fill existing team shortages.
Continue to enhance our ability to solve and predict criminal activity through Intelligence Led Policing.
Continue and expand our Cold Case Team and bring investigators in from allied agencies in Ventura County.
Continue to develop procedures and obtain equipment through the DRMO project that will enhance our ability efficiently
respond to criminal investigations.
Continue to seek revenue offset sources to support Major Crimes.
Replace ballistic helmets for all SWAT members.
Finish SWAT policy updates (started 1/13).
Assist County fire with County wide force protection training for active shooter protocol.
Add a technical deputy collateral position to assist with SWAT equipment.
Continue to update SWAT command post operations.
Additional training with the Tactical Dispatchers.
Additional Training with the Tactical Negotiations team.
Complete C.I.T. training for entire team.
Replace marksmen weapons.
Active shooter exercise with County fire and EMS.
Dispose of expired chemical agents.
Fill three collateral team vacancies.
Plan attendance of negotiators at SWAT training, and vice-versa, to facilitate better team inter-operability.
TNU will develop two joint team trainings annually with SWAT.
Develop more tangible relationships with negotiations teams from other Ventura County law enforcement agencies.
Identify and attend additional negotiator/crisis based training conferences.
Increase the level of expertise through training and mentoring.
Provide training for patrol personnel on DEC, Prop 215, etc.
Add additional investigator from outside agencies to increase the effectiveness of the VCAT task force.
Add a narcotics K-9 for interdiction investigations. The K-9 will be assigned to a VCAT investigator who will work side by
side with our Asset Forfeiture Investigator. The VCAT K-9 will focus his/her efforts in interdiction investigations.
Create and add a Pharmaceutical Diversion Task Force (PDTF) to the narcotics umbrella. The PDTF will be supervised
by an additional Sheriff‘s sergeant and include investigators from a variety of agencies.
Increase the number of marijuana plants seized and arrests from the National Forest cultivations utilizing an extra-help sergeant and specially trained Detention Services deputies.
Complete real time mapping project.
Develop and implement patrol briefing training to address various crime trends and general law enforcement issues.
Begin taking select crime reports through I-Cop App.
Start county wide I-Cop program.
Develop training plan for beat coordinators and begin pushing intelligence data to them.
Implement joint training plan for Sheriff Office SED teams.
Offer timely phone analysis crime mapping for all area stations.
Finish VCIJIS wants project which will allow entry of PC wants and other vital information into VCIJIS.


Begin to modernize the fleet by replacing an aging helicopter with a suitable, modern helicopter; estimated cost
$8,000,000.
Replace second aging Jet Fuel Tanker Truck; estimated cost $300,000.
Build-up small Bell Long Ranger airframe; estimated cost $700,000.
Seek additional revenue sources to offset Air Unit operational costs.
Expand the partnership between Sheriff and Fire to include shared costs on staffing and aircraft
development/replacement.


Migrate to Office 365.
Implement Patch Management.
Implement CJIS Compliance.
2-Factor Authentication in vehicles.
Cable in ceiling instead of in the floor in the EOC.
Disaster Recovery – East & West.

these classes.

Build cooperative relationships with the Courts and the offices of the Public Defender and District Attorney to facilitate
efficient trial operations while maintaining jail security and safety.
Continue to maintain constitutionally valid jail operations.
Continue with realignment implementation and evaluation.
Reorganize and consolidate many facility policies into a single Divisional policy thereby reducing redundancy and
enhancing consistency. This process is almost complete.
Review the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) standards and create new policies if it is determined necessary.
Continue to evaluate the housing operation to ensure we are meeting all standards of reasonable care.
Respond, monitor, and evaluate critical incidents in the jail to help reduce liability. Facilitate information exchange with
Risk Management, County Counsel, Special Counsel, and others regarding such incidents.

Realignment continues to have a significant impact on the Divisional budgeting and operations. The expansion of
services associated with Realignment has been costly. State funding at the current level, and thereafter adjusted
annually for inflation, will be vital to maintaining effective services consistent with Governor Brown‘s Realignment vision.
Unlike state prisons, local jails were not designed to house inmates for multiple year sentences. There is growing
concern that litigation will arise challenging confinement conditions in county jails. Due to physical plant constraints, we
are unable to offer many programs available in state prisons.


Upgrade the medical X-Ray machine to digital technology.
Obtain a wheelchair that is certified for use to transport wheelchair-bound inmates in a vehicle.
Research the viability of obtaining a full entry screening body scanner to control the entry of contraband by persons
being booking into the facility.
Review the process and handling of personal jail-house property kept by inmates while in custody.
Research the possibility of adding video and audio equipment to the roof exercise areas.


Continue with the daily evaluation of our deployment of resources to ensure maximum safety for our judges, attorneys,
defendants and public.
Continued training of court security personnel with a concentration on active shooter/critical incident response and
management should we encounter such an event.
Review and assess security measures for the purpose of ?target hardening? specifically as it relates to active shooter
situations.


Expand vocational options for the female inmates and associated staffing.
Continue partnership with GSA to complete water recycling project.
Develop a landscaping plan with native plants that are drought tolerant (xeriscaping).
Continue partnership with CEO/PWA/GSA to build the forensic evidence warehouse on TRJ grounds.
Secure funding match and state approval for 64 bed Medical/Mental Health expansion through SB1022 process.
Evaluate options with facility staff deployment.
Evaluate options for medical services as it relates to dental and optometry for 1170 inmate population.
Continue to obtain surplus Connex storage containers to replace rental boxes.
Complete installation of the VoIP phone system.
Evaluate upgrade of door controls in housing units, cluster and central control (upgrade to touch screen technology).
Continue to evaluate the use of technology to improve efficiencies.
Continue to evaluate existing inmate Classification plan.
Continue partnerships within the criminal justice system and other County agencies to improve communication, creating
smooth transitions for inmates as they reintegrate into the community.

Housing inmates at the county jail under realignment will continue to challenge our operations. We have incurred an
increase in grievances related to optometry and preventative dental services that the inmate would otherwise been able
to obtain if in prison.
Housing of the mentally ill within our facilities continues to impact our operations.


- TECP will be used to finance projects as approved.
- Issue TRANs to meet the FY 2014-15 cash requirements.
- Ongoing update of debt service capacity analysis.


Once upgrade is complete benefits to the County are as follows:
1. Increased reporting strength, with reports that meet GASB and Cost-Based healthcare requirements
2. Improved potential for future grant awards and increased opportunities for expense tracking, resulting in maximization
of grant reimbursements
3. Move County towards paperless financial processes – leveraging/utilizing the County’s investment in Enterprise
Content Management programs
4. Business friendly Vendor Self Service for bidding on County procurements
5. Enable Program and Performance Budgeting in support of County’s Strategic Plan


1. Hall of Justice, Waterproof Exterior Walls; Waterproof Underground Parking Garage; Replace Three Fulton Boilers;
Public Defender, Entire Office, Upgrade Ceiling; Cathodic Protection, Discontinuity Pile Group; Exterior Building Panel
Water Proofing; Upgrade Break Rooms, Room 118 and 210
2. Hall of Administration: Switchgear Testing Outage; Switchgear Distribution Sections Replacement; Quad 2, Fourth
Floor, WRR Upgrade; Board Room, Cover Chairs; Board Room HVAC Upgrade; ITSD Ceiling and Lights Upgrade; ITSD
Carpet; ITSD Restroom Upgrade
3. PTDF: HVAC Modernization Plan, Construct Phase 2; Upgrade Elevator B Interior; Upgrade H5 Restrooms; Repair bus
ramp down to Sallyport; Medical Restrooms Upgrade; Booking, Upgrade Men's Showers
4. Juvenile Facility: Upgrade HVAC Controls Program, Phase 2; Multipurpose Building, Floor Repair; Waterproof Exterior
Walls, Phase 2, Housing; Interior and Exterior Painting, Phase 2; Walkway Addition; Epoxy Coat Condenser Tube Sheet
5. Todd Road Jail: HVAC Master Plan, Construct Phase 3; Irrigation Well and Tank Filter System; Vacuum Toilet
Upgrade, Phase 2; Replace Class Room Split Systems; Replace Refrigerator/Freezer Cooling Units
6. Government Center: Repair Parking Lot C, D, F and I; Survey and Comply with Arc Flash Requirements; Main
electrical service preventive maintenance, Phase 2.
7. Vanguard Building: Elevator Upgrade; Public Area Flooring Replacement; Restroom Upgrade
8. East Valley Sheriff's Station: Lower Parking Lot Asphalt Upgrade; Elevator Upgrade; Fire Life Safety System Upgrade
9. Telephone Road Building: Landscape Upgrades and Smoking Shelter Relocation; Replace Doors and Frames
10. Camarillo Animal Services: Upgrade Staff Restrooms; Doors and Frames
11. Partridge Building: Upgrade Fire Life Safety System; Install Flag Pole
12. 669 CSD: Replace Roof Mansard Overhang; Paint Building Exterior
13. East County Court House: Parking Lot Repair and Resurfacing
14. FPD, Headquarters and 911: Re-Commission Lighting/HVAC
15. Moorpark Road Yard: HVAC Upgrade
16. PTDF Annex: Probation, Third Floor Restroom Upgrade.
17. Royal Avenue Building: Upgrade Building Interior and Exterior
18. Santa Paula Agriculture: Exterior Paint, Phase 4
19. Simi Behavioral Health: HVAC System Upgrade
20. Work Furlough: Parking Lot Asphalt Repair; Paint Building Exterior
21. Work Release: Paint Building Exterior


1. The VCDCSS Call Center staff is committed to responding to calls within 60 seconds.
2. To provide full resolution for 90-95% of the calls at the first point of contact.


1. Increase State and Federal Performance Measures related to child support collections
A. Increase percentage of Collections on Current Support – Federal Performance Measure # 3
B. Increase percentage of Cases with Arrears Collections – Federal Performance Measure # 4
2. Develop and implement new business strategies and ?Key Initiatives? to support the mission of increasing collections
3. Continue to meet all State compliance and data reliability requirements
4. Respond to customer inquiries within 3 days

The current economic situation may pose challenges to our goal of increasing child support collections in the upcoming
year, however, VCDCSS will continue to pursue every possible avenue to support children and families.


(1) Continue to improve system processes for centralized CDBG grant program administration.
(2) Encourage more efficient use of funding by focusing allocations to high priority projects and to subrecipients with the
administrative capacity to comply with reporting requirements and use funds in a timely manner.
(3) Align funding recommendations with  in the Updated Ten Year Strategy to End Homelessness adopted by
the Board in January 2013.

(1) Continued reduction in CDBG funding will have increasing adverse effects on availability of funds for county and city
programs in the entitlement area.
(2) In order to ensure the most effective use of limited resources, greater emphasis will need to be placed upon
performance outcomes, necessitating overhaul of contracts and enhanced monitoring and reporting.


(1) Facilitate the implementation of the Emergency Solutions Grant Program under new HEARTH Act requirements,
whereby programs and activities funded are aligned with the Ten Year Strategy to End Homelessness and produce
positive lasting outcomes for persons served directly or indirectly with this funding.
(2) Conduct program reviews and perform program monitoring.
(3) Facilitate the administration of the Continuum of Care to ensure new requirements as described in the HEARTH Act
are instituted. Activities to include, but not be limited to: developing programs, policies and procedures, performing
extensive outreach to entitlements and organizations who encounter the homeless population, endorse the recalibrated
Ten Year Strategy to End Homelessness, and conducting monitoring to ensure program compliance.

(1) The County expects to apply for designation as a Unified Funding Agency in the FY 2014-15 Continuum of Care
funding cycle whereby funding from this program is entitled to the County for subsequent distribution to subrecipients in
much the same way as the CDBG and HOME programs are currently administered.


(1) Maintain high-quality HOME program performance.
(2) Conduct onsite monitoring of all current project properties covered by affordability periods, at present numbering
twenty-eight, for baseline establishment of new HOME Rule standards for annual certifications.

(1) New HOME rules, found at 24 CFR 92.107 indicate that HUD may revoke a Participating Jurisdiction’s designation if a
formula allocation falls below $750,000 (or $500,000 when Congress appropriates less than $1.5 million for this program)
for three consecutive years or below $625,000 (or below $410,000 as above) for two consecutive years. This funding year
represents the second consecutive year of funding below $410,000. Given increased vulnerability for loss of our
designation, it may be prudent to explore reinstating the HOME Consortium with the City of Ventura which is experiencing
similar challenges. Continued reduction in HOME funding will have increasing adverse effects on availability of funds for
projects within the county.


(1) Continue to administer the Piru Housing Conservation Program.

(1) Several ?cleanup bills? to clarify and revise the language of AB 1x 26 are under consideration by the State
Legislature. If enacted, they may impact the operations and actions of the County Successor Housing Agency.


Given the limited funds available, only funding to the District Attorney for vertical prosecution is included in the
Preliminary Budget as an objective for this Fund.


Provide education opportunities to the public on the benefits of spaying and neutering companion animals. Find new
ways to augment this fund with doner contributions and grants.

This program is funded through F&A 30804.7(a) and 31751.7(a), which states that owners of non-spayed or unneutered
cats or dogs that are impounded by a county shelter shall be fined. If these mandates were to be repealed, funds would
not be available for spay/neuter programs such as those described above.


a. Expand Transitions Program to the Santa Clara Valley region.
b. Implement Promotoras to increase enrollment in the Fillmore Community Project.
c. For the juvenile mental health court: increase % of clients successfully completing the program by 15%; and increase
family therapy interventions by 20%.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a.Integrate MHFA training for new county law enforcement officers.
b.Expand WellnessEveryday.org and increase use by other HCA departments.
c.Expand Triple P Training, especially to parents of children in foster care, preschools and homeless shelters.
d.Implement PEI 5-year strategic plan, with measurable outcomes for each program.
e.Host Safe Talk Suicide Prevention Training through state-wide project efforts.
f.Expand Mental Health First Aid to Santa Clara Valley.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a.Mental Health Certificate Program: Complete 2nd cohort of Mental Health Certificate Program; begin 3rd cohort.
b.High School Outreach: Expand High School Mental Health class to other high schools.
c.Language Assistance Project: Implement a continuous improvement process to measure consumer satisfaction with
language assistance services provided.
d.Staff Training: Continue to provide training to build competence with electronic resources, increase implementation of
evidence based practice, and improve leadership and management skills.
e.Internship/Stipend programs: Continue/expand new internship programs (Mental Health Associate Internship Program
and Psychiatric/Mental Health Nurse Practitioner program) with continued stipend program to support recruitment of
bilingual (Spanish-English) student interns.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a.MHSA Capital Facilities funds will partially support site improvements, landscaping and the creation of safe and
attractive outdoor environment, for the replacement Crisis Residential Treatment (CRT) Facility on the VCMC campus.
b.Continue to seek opportunities to partner with community-based housing partners to provide supportive housing for
seriously mentally ill clients.
c.IT Goals listed under Administration

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a.Update and manage a new 5-year Management System Implementation plan, including the Personal Health Record.
b.Improve functionality in the Electronic Health Record for managing acuity levels.
c.Develop Strategic Plan for working with IT as it relates to upgrading patches to the system

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


a.Continue to improve productivity and Medi-Cal penetration rate.
b.Reduce the number of individuals placed in out of county IMDs, through the use of intensive, wraparound services
c.Continue the implementation of evidence based treatment and improve fidelity.
d.Fully implement the electronic health record.
e.Continuous NiaTx process improvement projects to improve client access, engagement and retention.
f.Expand older adult day treatment programming to East County.
g.Implement Quality of Life project (through a contract with Turning Point) to provide non-clinical adjunct programming to
2 of our counties largest board and cares.

The FY 2013-14 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by
the Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of
service.


(1)Children & Family Services (CFS) will continue to actively monitor and improve strategies that are intended to
decrease the rate of domestic violence and spousal abuse.
(2)CFS domestic violence contractors intend to maintain level services to include but not limited to the following:
-Provide a shelter 24 hours/day, seven days/week in an undisclosed and secure location.
-Provide 24 hours/day, seven days/week telephone hotline for crisis calls.
-Provide temporary housing and food facilities.
- Provide psychological support and peer counseling in accordance with Section 1037.1 of the Evidence Code.
- Provide referrals to existing services in the community.
- Provide a drop-in center that operates during normal business hours to assist victims of domestic violence who have a
need for support services.
- Provide arrangements for school age children to continue their education during their stay at the domestic violence
shelter-based program.
- Provide emergency transportation as feasible (vehicles and drivers shall be available to transport victims and their
children to appropriate services as needed with a maximum two (2) hour response to such calls for assistance).
- Provide referrals to legal assistance and medical care.
- Provide information regarding other available social services.
- Work with social services agencies, schools, and law enforcement agencies in an advocacy capacity for those served
by the domestic violence shelter-based programs.
- Provide services to, or assist in referring, physically disabled victims of domestic violence to services in the community
where assistance may be obtained.

(1) We anticipate level funding to be available for the domestic violence services as linked to the county marriage license
fees and court fines.


(1)Reduce the wait time for processing new referrals by 50% by developing a direct referral process to the Public Authority
(2)Implement new training opportunities for providers and consumers
(3)Employ technology options (iPad) for field use to improve efficiency and effectiveness in service delivery

(1) The growing senior population will likely continue to have an impact on IHSS caseloads.
(2) The current State budget proposes to maintain current law to restore the 3.6 percent across-the-board reduction on
June 30, 2013, and provides a $59.1 million increase to reflect the restoration. Recent settlement of federal lawsuits,
which call for smaller reductions, will impact the State budget. Those impacts will be reflected in the May revise.
(3) Details of the federal lawsuit settlement include:
-Replacing the permanent 20% cut in IHSS hours (blocked by previous federal court) with a temporary 8% cut in that
would begin July 1, 2013. (This is the 3.6% across-the-board cut in IHSS service hours that was scheduled to end June
30, 2013 but instead will be continued and increased by 4.4%.)
-Reducing that 8% cut to 7% (3.4% on top of the 3.6% current across-the-board reduction) in July 2014.
-Restoring the hours lost from the 7% cut as early as the spring of 2015 if the State obtains federal approval of a long
delayed IHSS provider fee which could bring significant new federal revenue to California.
(4) Beginning in FY 12/13 the funding for the program has been moved to an MOE approach. Under this funding
methodology Ventura‘s share of costs to be covered by local discretionary funds (Realignment and General Fund
Contribution) is set at $8.2m for FYs 12/13 and 13/14 (less than the FY 12/13 Adopted Budgeted amount). Beginning FY
14/15, this amount will increase 3.5% annually (a growth rate that is less than what Ventura‘s actual growth rate has been
in recent years).
(5) It is possible for the State to undo the MOE funding approach and return to a share of cost methodology. Doing so
would likely result in increased costs for Ventura County. The Agency will monitor the situation closely.
(6) Ventura County is scheduled to be upgraded to a new Statewide IHSS payroll system. Over time, this upgrade could
result in a savings in staff time related to these functions.
(7) The State is in the process of centralizing PA roles and negotiations statewide. This change is being rolled out over
an extended period of time (is not yet scheduled for Ventura). This change (once accomplished) could have eventual
impacts (years down the road) on the roles and responsibilities of the IHSS-PA staff of Ventura. The Agency will closely
monitor the status and progress on these changes.


(1) Continue to demonstrate accountability and performance, whether funded by WIA or other sources.
(2) Continue to focus on job awareness and training within our priority industry sectors (allied health, technology-based
manufacturing, and clean/green) and to identify appropriate opportunities for non-WIA resources for these sectors.
(3) Continue youth career awareness outreach initiatives and advocacy for youth internships and college and career
readiness programs.
(4) Continue to identify and leverage resources to help hire workers and upgrade incumbent worker skills.
(5) Plan for a collaborative workforce development effort in Ventura County—beyond WIA funding.

(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency
will manage to the actual level of funding received.


(1) The Workforce Investment Board of Ventura County will continue to implement three major goals to address the
ongoing challenges of workforce development in the local area:
- Relevance: Job seeker readiness to respond to current and future employment opportunities
- Quality: Program content and service delivery to meet the needs and expectations of job seekers and employers
- Sustainability: Partnerships to secure ongoing support for workforce and business development

(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency
will manage to the actual level of funding received.


(1) Secure Partnerships to sustain ongoing support for workforce and business development

(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency
will manage to the actual level of funding received.


-Colloborate with external groups to build a meeting room at the Fillmore library
-Collaborate with external groups to build a meeting room at the Ojai library
-Manage a Ventura County Library bookmobile
-Expand external library services

Any increases to property tax revenue-the Ventura County Library's main revenue source-will be used to improve the
library collection, children and adult programming, and technology. The FY 2013-14 circulation benchmark target has
been adjusted for the decrease in circulated items due to the departure of the Simi Valley library.


-New online library catalogue
-Install new staff PC's
-Upgrade telecom network
-Accept online payments for fines and fees from library customers paying with their credit cards
-Sending text messages for library notices
-Continue removing circulation desks and replacing it with kiosks for self service.
-Install web-based modules for library functions
-Where feasible, outsource routine phone interactions
-Implement the use of tablets and Ipads at the libraries to increase staff mobility and customer service
-Explore adding additional databases


-Develop a library collection, in all formats, for children & teens, that complements our database resources and addresses
the needs of the communities.
-To continue with early literacy based Storytimes using the 5 practices.
-Increase visibility in the community and to use the new Children‘s Services Mascot as a promotional tool.
-Continue to evaluate the Summer Reading Program and make adjustments that will encourage children & teen success.
-Partner with First 5/NFL to establish a ?Grandparent? program to assist the children‘s librarian with bilingual Storytime.
Bilingual Storytimes will be early literacy based and led by the children‘s librarian, assisted by the Spanish speaking
?grandparent.?


-Saticoy Library - Acquire new modular facility or relocate to new location
-Shift 75% of libraries to new service model with new service desk configurations
-Train 100% staff in new service model
-Realign Piru Library to separate adult and juvenile collection per 2013 plan with Fillmore School District
-Work with City of Ventura on Big Read programming in March 2014
-Fillmore Library – Explore creation of a public community room
-Analyze magazine collections for additions and replacement in online service
-Establish centralized supplies
-Ojai Library – proceed with construction of public community room


-Open more tutoring sites
-Explore the possibility and if possible provide Family Literacy programs
-Increase the public's awareness and participation in the READ Program Tour

Expansion of the program is contingent on receiving annual funds from the California State Library, and, future
fundraising by the Ventura County Library Foundation for the Adult Literacy Read program.


Perform a cost analysis for the staffing of the facilities coordinator to determine the cost savings of outsourcing versus
funding a staff position.

The results derived from a cost analysis for outsourcing the management of the facilities will determine if we fill the staff
vacancy, or transfer this function to GSA.


In FY 2013-14 all interest earned by this fund will be transferred to the Ventura County Library's operating fund and used
to purchase books for the EP Foster library.


1. Revise Encroachment Ordinance 2041.
2. Apply and compete for as many as state and federal funds and grant funds available (BTA, CMAQ, HBRRP, HSIP,
RAC, SR2S, SRTS, STP, and TDA).
3. Resurface approximately 30 miles of County roads, which will improve the existing Pavement Condition index (PCI)
from 71 to 74 by the end of FY 2014.
4. Construct the realignment of Donlon Road to the nearby intersection of HW 118 in Somis.
5. Construct new sidewalks on El Roblar Dr, near Sunset School and near Rio Mesa High School
6. Construct bike lanes along Santa Clara Ave, Las Posas Rd, Pleasant Valley Road.
7. Complete the Safe Routes to School traffic signal project at Rose Avenue and Collins Street and install sidewalk on the
south side of Rose Avenue.
8. Complete the traffic signal modification at Rice Avenue and Wooley Road.

Uncertainty caused by the State budget crisis
2. Additional regulatory requirements continue to increase cost of operations. These requirements include the
Countywide Municipal Storm Water Requirements (NPDES), Diesel Particulate measures, and others. These additional
costs will reduce Road funds available for road maintenance, repair and operations. This will continue to exacerbate the
already unsatisfactory situation of road maintenance, repair and operations funding, and will likely cause road conditions
in general to deteriorate further.


Next fiscal year, the UA County‘s stormwater quality program will continue to work closely with the Ventura Countywide
Stormwater Quality Management Program and the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board in implementing
the fourth year of the 5-year MS4 Stormwater NPDES Permit. The County Program plans to provide overall program inter-
County agency coordination, with the following  and goals planned:
1. Completion of water quality monitoring and initiation of construction for the County Government Center Parking Lot
Green Streets Retrofit project.
2. Installation of full capture trash devices in Ventura River and Revolon Slough to meet 100% point-source compliance
for County UAs.
3. Design of concept Low Impact Development/Green Street Retrofit projects for County Unincorporated areas and
applications for funding opportunities.
4. Development of implementation tools for Hydromodification Control Plan requirements in the County Uas.
5. Update of the long-term cost estimate and develop 5- and 10-year Capital Improvement Project (CIP) list for County‘s
compliance with TMDLs.
6. Continued TMDL assistance to County Agencies (Planning, Monitoring, Implementation) to meet TMDL compliance.
7. Establishment of stakeholder/ Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) group to develop Ventura River Algae Monitoring
Plan.
8. Coordination of RWQCB review of Ventura River Estuary Trash TMDL monitoring program.
9. Administration of Santa Clara Bacteria TMDL MOA group and commencement of compliance monitoring as approved
by the RWQCB.
10. Continuation of monitoring and Best Management Practices (BMPs) implementation towards 40% (Malibu Creek) and
60% (Revolon Slough) trash reduction milestones.
11. Compliance evaluation of Calleguas Creek TMDLs.
12. Completion of Malibu Creek Bacteria Source Identification Study.
13. Completion of Malibu Creek Nutrients and Bacteria BMPs design and location/siting study.
14. Participate in development of the statewide trash and nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) policies.
15.Continue implementation of the Permit‘s requirements including education and outreach, project conditioning for water
quality protection, conducting stormwater inspections and post-construction project tracking through Accela, preparation
of 2012/2013 County Stormwater Annual Report, provide annual stormwater pollution prevention training for County
employees, and maintenance of County Stormwater Hotline.

As described in the Accomplishments and  a new MS4 Stormwater Permit was adopted by the RWQCB on July
8, 2010. The newly adopted Stormwater Permit has significantly increased both County and city responsibilities resulting
in a comparable increase in financial obligations for all jurisdictions. The RWQCB incorporated a number of TMDLs into
the new Ventura Countywide MS4 Stormwater Permit to provide for an enforcement mechanism. In 2013, U.S. EPA is
obligated to develop and adopted two new TMDLs. As presented by the County Program to the Board of Supervisors in
August 2010, the County‘s obligations and costs have increased to ensure compliance with adopted and new TMDLs.


Operation and Maintenance for the Santa Rosa Road Traffic Signals will continue.


Continue to evaluate new technology to increase efficiencies with ordering commissary.
Continue to evaluate pricing and inventory to address inmate requests while also meeting the security needs of the
facilities.
Evaluate the use of existing technology in respect to changes in the standard operating systems of workstations and
VCIJIS.
Evaluate purchasing options regarding vehicle replacement


Continue to monitor and evaluate  to create efficiencies in program operation.
Continue to enhance Reentry Planning Program to improve successful reentry into the community.
Continue to strengthen existing partnerships, while increasing our community-based resources.
Explore additional educational resources to supplement existing programs.
Deploy assessment tools for inmates to identify job skills.

The shift in the inmate population from prison to long-term incarceration within our jails provides an opportunity to
encourage meaningful engagement from inmates in learning and developing pro-social skills. Assessment tools are being
implemented to assist inmates in identifying education, vocation, and treatment areas needed be addressed to increase
their successful reentry into the community.


1. Continue to maintain viable enterprise fund by balancing rate increases and cost reductions.
2. Continue Lean Six Sigma Process Improvement.
3. Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.


1. Maintain noise compatibility program to result in a low number of noise complaints from aircraft operations.
2. Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.
3. Begin formal design of Phase I NE hangar complex at CMA.

1. The continued planned development of new residential areas in the proximity of the airports will result in an increase in
the number of residents exposed to aircraft noise. Although such developments will be considered acceptable within the
guidelines of the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, it is likely that the Department will be impacted with additional
responses to an increased number of noise complaints. The environment of potential conflict between airport operations
and residential uses will continue to force focus on the acquisition of avigation easements over new development parcels.
2. Create additional hangar inventory to meet the demand for hangars. The waiting list for hangars at Camarillo Airport is
greater than 150, and it takes approximately 8 years to move through the list.


1. Continue with painting of hangar rows.
2. Continue the rebuild of hangars that have aged.
3. Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.

Camarillo Airports is a former Department of Defense facility that was constructed prior to the 1950‘s. A continued focus
on long-range planning is needed for maintenance and replacement of aging infrastructure, and to accomplish projects in
a manner that is financially sustainable, while not compromising safety, security, and the quality of services.


1. Continue to maintain viable enterprise fund by balancing rate increases and cost reductions.
2. Continue Lean Six Sigma Process improvement
3. Maintain Contract Tower operations.


1. Meet all federal and state regulations to maintain airport certification for air carrier operations.
2. Maintain noise compatibility program resulting in low number of noise complaints from aircraft operations.
3. Restore viable Air Service to Oxnard Airport.

1. The continued planned development of new residential areas in the proximity of the airports will result in an increase in
the number of residents exposed to aircraft noise. Although such developments will be considered acceptable within the
guidelines of the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, it is likely that the Department will be impacted with additional
responses to an increased number of noise complaints. The environment of potential conflict between airport operations
and residential uses will continue to force focus on the acquisition of avigation easements over new development parcels.
2. Restoring scheduled passenger air service to Oxnard Airport is a top priority.


1. Continue with painting of hangar rows.
2. Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.

Oxnard Airports is a former Department of Defense facility that was constructed prior to the 1950‘s. A continued focus on
long-range planning is needed for maintenance and replacement of aging infrastructure, and to accomplish projects in a
manner that is financially sustainable, while not compromising safety, security, and the quality of services.


Obtain closure of the Condor LUFT sites at Oxnard Airport.


Rehabilitate section of Durley, Aviation Drive, and Skyway.


1. Rehabilitate ramp area south of taxiway ?G? at Camarillo Airport.
2. Attempt to maintain level of funding from FAA, as the federal share for AIP has been reduced to 90%.

Federal funding for capital projects via the Airport Improvement Program may be reduced through the federal budget
process, resulting in a cutback of projects. May require re-prioritization of projects.

1. Improve parking area for large equipment in maintenance yard.
2. Partner with EAA for new midfield restroom.


1. Acquire property on north edge of airport to bring the object-free area into compliance with FAA standards.
2. Attempt to maintain level of funding from FAA, as the AIP funding is less stable than previous years and may be
reduced.

Federal funding for capital projects via the Airport Improvement Program may be reduced through the federal budget
process, resulting in a cutback of projects. May require re-prioritization of projects.


1. Continue upgrading electrical service to a row of hangars.
2. Replace roof section on canopy at front of terminal bldg.


1. Operation of Piru Town Square and Skate Park
2. Striping (Steckel, Faria, Hobson and Rincon)
3. Restrooms fixture upgrades to low-flow (Steckel, Oak and Soule)
4. Install new roof at Oak View Community Center

Revenues are predicated on Parks facilities use levels. Levels below current projections may require adjustments to
staffing, parks projects and other services during the fiscal year.


1. Completion of Construction of Piru Skate Park
2. Roger Jones Park Upgrades
3. Replacement of Soule Park Area 1 & 2 Play Equipment
4. Santa Rosa Grass and Irrigation

With the closure of the Redevelopment Agency, transfer of the Piru Skate Park project is expected to occur by fiscal year
2013-14. This asset transfer involves management of the construction project for the Skate Park and associated grants.
The Parks System also has a current backlog of deferred maintenance in excess of $3,750,000 for which some funding
has been identified. Revenues and appropriations for some of these projects are currently projected in the FY 2013-14
budget.


1. Paint window trim of north side of buildings
2. Install new fence for Park Host site
3. Install fire alarm system for kitchen/auditorium
4. Add HVAC unit to Auditorium, replace existing heater unit
5. Drought tolerant landscaping project
6. Empowerment Workshops for girls and boys
7. Reestablish kitchen use as certified kitchen

Funding for youth programs continues to be an issue for some lease tenants. Smart Start, the program for prekindergarten
children was recently acquired by Child Development Resources and a new lease has been established.
The standard lease agreement has been revised slightly taking into account the economic impact of state budget cuts to
these types of programs.


1)Complete construction of Public Launch Ramp;
2)Commence construction of Beach Restroom and Lifeguard Tower;
3)Work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Office of Management and Budget, and Congressional delegation to
achieve a supplemental dredge cycle in 2013-14, intended to move between one and two million cubic yards of sand
down-coast, and funding for breakwater and jetty repair.
4)Complete design of Santa Barbara Island Park and Harbor Boulevard Monument sign.
5)Achieve Board approval of lease option for Fisherman‘s Wharf.

Administration‘s major focus during the next year or two will be the identification of opportunities to generate revenue with
few, if any, added expenditures. Administration is also focused on revenue collection and revenue reviews to ensure full
and timely payment of rents. Finally, Administration will be reviewing Maintenance Division priorities to minimize
expensive repairs through preventive measures as much as possible.


1)Continue to support Harbor educational and promotional events.

Revenue decreases have resulted in employees with other full-time duties taking on this time-consuming, but important,
part of the Harbor operations. With a lingering recession, adjustments may need to be made because employees may
not be able to handle the additional work load over the long term.


1)Maintain ongoing training schedule to maximize both employee and public safety, in spite of reduced supervisory
staffing.

The delayed economic recovery results in no increase in revenue. This creates a real challenge for management to
continue to find ways to offer needed services. These factors require more intensive management attention while they
are already spread thin.


1)Maintain the longstanding beach cleaning program for the safety of the general public.
2)Continue twice daily maintenance of public restrooms for general health and safety.
3)Provide beach lifeguard services between Memorial Day and Labor Day between approximately 10am and 6pm.

As with other areas, costs are increasing and resources are static.


1)For the fuel dock, maintain competitive pricing with other fuel terminals.
2)For CISCO, develop long term plans for facility replacement.

Sportfishing revenue has held steady or increased over the past few years, contributing to the Harbor‘s fiscal health and
offering recreational services to the public. The fuel dock operation is an essential service, so the goal is to ensure that
revenues and expenditures result in no cost to the Harbor, and are set to generate net revenue.


1)Develop project priorities within the maintenance division.
2)Maintain maintenance crew safety.
3)Update a five-year projection of capital needs Harbor-wide, with priorities.

Future issues for the Maintenance Division are the same as for all other Harbor work areas: declining or flat revenues,
increasing costs, and an aging facility. Careful work to identify priorities for repairs and maintenance is critical, as are
decisions regarding the level of repairs that should be undertaken: e.g., should these be short-term repairs, or ten-year
repairs?


1)Continue to manage maintenance costs carefully, while watching for structural issues, because of the higher average
cost of marine-based maintenance and construction.

These slips may be rebuilt as part of the Fisherman‘s Wharf redevelopment. Judging the timing of that reconstruction will
drive maintenance decisions in the short term.


1)Minimize larger maintenance requirements through diligent preventive maintenance.

Administration‘s major focus during the next year or two will be the identification of opportunities to generate revenue with
few, if any, added expenditures. Administration is also focused on revenue collection and audits to ensure full and timely
payment of rents. Finally, Administration will be reviewing Maintenance Division priorities to minimize expensive repairs
through preventive measures as much as possible.


1)Evaluate benefit/detriment of bidding out Commercial Fishing facility to private operator.

Future issues for the Commercial Fishing Marina are the same as for all other Harbor work areas: declining or flat
revenues, increasing costs, and an aging facility. Careful work to identify priorities for repairs and maintenance is critical,
as are decisions regarding the level of repairs that should be undertaken: e.g., should these be short-term repairs, or tenyear
repairs?


1)Complete design and engineering for replacement of Harbor Administration Building.
2)Commence and complete Public Launch Ramp construction.
3)Commence construction of Silver Strand restroom and lifeguard tower.
4)Bid out a reseal coat and striping of the Phase III parking lot.
5)Evaluate repair/rehabilitation alternatives for groin wall at Kiddie Beach; develop cost estimates and a potential plan for
construction.

The Department‘s ability to pursue capital projects in the form of refurbishment or replacement of public facilities is
dependent upon availability of grant funds or Harbor Enterprise retained earnings, and the ability to ?quickly? process
Coastal and construction permits.


1. Maintain Fiscal Discipline. Continue efforts to enhance revenue streams and implement identified cost efficiencies
2. Continue to cost effectively manage and meet increasing demand for safety-net inpatient, specialty and primary care
services.
3. Maintain continuous compliance with The Joint Commission accreditation.
4. Increase census in the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit by establishing a transport team, which will provide critical care
transport from other hospitals in the county to VCMC.
5. Continue to strengthen the Performance Improvement activities in each respective department of the hospital using
methods such as Lean Six Sigma.
6. Expand opportunities for medication savings through the Patient Assistance Program, Drug Replacement Program,
and 340B federal discount pricing.
7. Continue to improve and monitor physician and hospital billing practices to ensure compliance.
8. Continue recruitment and retention efforts for quality physician staff with a focus on Geriatrics, Endocrinology,
Gastroenterology, Cardiology, Rheumatology, and radiology services.
9. Continue to improve patient/client satisfaction through on-going employee and clinic based training programs as well
as leadership methodology that includes walking rounds in the hospital locations.
10. Continue to seek accreditation as a center of excellence in areas such as Stroke, Cancer treatment and the Patient
Centered Medical Home.
11. Continue to enhance medical equipment.
12. Continue to enhance information technology capabilities, with the implementation of a fully integrated Electronic
Health Record for the in-patient and out-patient system.
13. Continue to improve the environment of care.
14. Continue to expand community outreach efforts .
15. Continue to raise money with the capital campaign for the HRW. This campaign will raise monies to in kind donations
for equipment needs, as well as establish a giving process to off sett the needs of this project.

The impact of the Affordable Care Act is not yet known. More patients will have coverage, some who are currently using
our systems and some who may not be. This is a potential positive impact, however, these patients will have choices and
it is imperative that VCMC is prepared to take more patients into the hospital and provide more ancillary services
particularly in the Lab and Radiology. VCMC will continue to enhance services in the PICU by providing transportation of
patients from other hospitals in the county to our PICU. This is a program that will be established during FY 13/14.


1. Maintain Fiscal Discipline. Continue efforts to enhance revenue streams and implement identified cost efficiencies.
2. Evaluate the benefit of and potentially establish a Psychiatric Emergency Service (PES)
3. Maintain continuous compliance with The Joint Commission accreditation.
4. Continue to strengthen the Performance Improvement activities in each respective department of the hospital (Lean
Six Sigma) .
5. Maintain and expand opportunities for medication savings through the Patient Assistance Program, Drug Replacement
Program, and 340B federal discount pricing.
6. Continue to improve patient/client satisfaction through on-going employee training programs.
7. Continue to provide a safe environment for our patients and staff in this locked psychiatric unit.
8. Continue to enhance information technology capabilities, with the selection and implementation of a fully integrated
Electronic Health Record for the in-patient and out-patient system.
9. Continue to expand community outreach efforts working with Stakeholders to be certain all needs of this community
are met.

The IPU has struggled with finding suitable housing for patients who are no longer in need of acute care. This has
brought us to evaluate the benefit of establishing a Psychiatric Emergency Service (PES)in the unit. This would provide
care for patients on a short term, observational status. Having a PES allows for a different billing structure. As well it
provides round the clock psychiatrist care to provide better stabilization of the patient. As we evaluate this for the care
and cost benefit we will meet with stakeholders and others to arrive at an outcome that is collaborative.
The impact of the Affordable Care Act is not yet known. More patients will have coverage, some who are currently using
our systems and some who may not be. This is a potential positive impact, however, these patients will have choices and
it is imperative that the IPU is prepared to take more patients into the hospital.


1. Maintain Fiscal Discipline. Continue efforts to enhance revenue streams and implement identified cost efficiencies
2. Maintain continuous compliance with The Joint Commission accreditation.
3. Continue to strengthen the Performance Improvement activities.
4. Support the implementation of a system-wide compatible inpatient and outpatient Electronic Health Record (EHR)
system.
5. Maintain and expand opportunities for medication savings through the Patient Assistance Program, Drug Replacement
Program, and 3408 federal discount pricing.
6. Continue to monitor and manage physician and hospital billing practices to ensure compliance.
7. Continue to improve patient/client satisfaction through on-going employee training programs and leadership strategies
such as leadership rounding and engagement with patients.
8. Continue to meet increasing demand for safety net hospital , specialty and primary care services.
9. Develop a program to enhance census at SPH. This includes having the ability to transfer patients into this facility for
care that are at other hospitals and patients who are at VCMC.
10. Establish branding of SPH in the Santa Clara Valley. Increase advertising process to people who live in this area and
develop strengthened partnerships with the private physicians in this area.
11. Expand specialty services in Santa Paula, including Urology and Podiatry.

The impact of the Affordable Care Act is not yet known. More patients will have coverage, some who are currently using
our systems and some who may not be. This is a potential positive impact, however, these patients will have choices and
it is imperative that SPH is prepared to take more patients into the hospital and provide more ancillary services
particularly in the Lab and Radiology. We are developing a process to allow for more patients to be cared for in the
hospital as well as expanding availability of the operating room to provide increased volume in that area.


To be the health plan of choice for the County‘s community of employees and individuals with the opportunity to select
our plan.
Obtain National Committee Quality Assurance (NCQA)accreditation
Recontract with providers as necessary to meet Quality Health Plan (QHP) accreditation
Modify DMHC license agreement to sell to the individual market.
Acceptance to provide insurance on the Health Benefit Exchange/Cover California
Implement a case management module in QNXT.

VCHCP contracts with the State of California to make healthcare services available to children enrolled in the Healthy
Families program, currently the enrollment is anticipate to transfer under the Medi-Cal system beginning September 2013.


1. Conduct annual Flexible Benefits program open enrollment period and retiree re-enrollment.
2. Implement employer required Affordable Care Act (ACA) for 2014 and continue to review, analyze other provisions and
impacts of Health Care Reform.
3. Continue plan and program audits.
4. Develop and conduct additional training for managers, department/agency staff and coordinators in Absence
Management.
5. Conduct annual health fair.


1. EAP direct service  325 new clinical assessments
2. 1000 follow-up visits
3. 720 hours of specific trainings and presentations to departments including support groups/ workshops/ organizational
support projects
4. 200 supervisory consultations (office visits)
5. 200 telephone consultations
6. Apply revision to the EAP website with emphasis on resources and links.
7. Develop an online digital library or books and articles on pertinent topics.
8. Expand support groups provided by EAP staff on topics considered pertinent to the County employee population.


1. Provide participants with a health risk appraisal including Wellness Profile results report and follow-up.
2. Provide ongoing follow-up and coaching to new Health Track high-risk clients.
3. Increase educational class sessions.
4. Serve as member of Sheriff‘s Lifetime Wellness Committee and HCA‘s Be Well Committee to collaborate in efforts to
reduce health risks among County employees.


1. Develop an online resource for Lactation Rooms at all County sites and the appropriate contacts for each site.
2. Enhance web page features.
3. Increase number of Child Care/Preschool Discount Program listings.


1. Continue to monitor claims experience and review rate requirements.
2. The County will evaluate eliminating this plan and utilize reserves for alternate or replacement options, the option of
replacing the plan with a group policy, which will remain fully funded by participating employees.

If the direction is to replace this current short-term disability plan with a group policy, the rate structure and employee
participation may materially change.


1. Continue to monitor claims experience.
2. Continue to review the fiscal impact of EDD quarterly reimbursements and the UIB rate suspension period to ensure
UIB cost recovery and rate stabilization.


Continue to monitor and facilitate the alcohol and drug testing required under the Department of Transportation.


1. Continue review of core funds, and funds within the mutual fund window, for available changes to institutional funds.
2. Examine In- Plan Roth Conversion as possible enhancement to the 457 Plan.
3. Incorporate consultant recommendations into current Investment Policy Statement
4. Enhance participant education outreach by expanding educational workshops in coordination with Fidelity.
5. Complete application and submittal for Internal Revenue Service favorable determination letter.
6. Develop fee disclosure statement.
7. Analyze responses from employee survey and make plan modifications as necessary.
8. Continue streamlining and improving processes to enhance customer service, and meet fiduciary responsibility and
compliance issues.
9. Increase one-on-one consultations and onsite presence of Fidelity.
10. Prepare annual statements in coordination with VCERA and Towers Watson.


1. Continue development of training curriculum based on Department/Agency staffing development needs.
2. Continue with implementation and performance measurement of Nuts & Bolts for Managers training courses.
3. Support the implementation of a new Strategic Leadership series in alignment with the Strategic Plan.
4. Design and implement ?Real Colors-Team Building? to offer more training opportunities to agencies.
5. Redesign ?Ethics Training for Managers? curriculum in accordance with AB1234 and Board Policy.
6. Implement program re-organization in alignment with Strategic Plan.


1. Complete Disability Management training for all managers.
2. Continuing developing ECM solutions for Work Comp and Safety divisions.
3. Develop loss prevention resource library on CEO intranet site.


1. Transition the restructured administration of the Hazardous Materials Abatement Program.
2. Enhance training for new County Safety Officer and agency Safety Coordinators.


1. Implement changes in claims administration process following passage of significant Workers‘ Compensation
legislation.
2. Evaluate the efficacy of alternative Return to Work programs.
3. Incorporate Agency Safety Coordinators in claim review meetings to enhance trend analysis and identification of loss
prevention opportunities.


1. Upgrade claims administration and content management software.
2. Develop improved reporting and workflow enhancements with new software.
3. Enhance training of claims personnel following retirement of manager and hiring of new Risk Analyst.


1. Continue the implementation of FM Systems, eliminating the need for multiple facilities management applications,
providing increased reporting capabilities to operational managers and other County users, and allowing them to better
and more efficiently manage their operations.
2. Complete implementation of Ecova, ensuring all utilities paid by the County are migrated to the web-based system that
will allow timely, accurate and complete consumption and payment information. Consumption information is particularly
important in order to monitor and report the County‘s progress in meeting the Board of Supervisor‘s Sustainability goals.
3. Provide enhanced fuel purchase reporting to departments in accordance with Management responses to the fuel audit.
4. Create and distribute an Annual Vehicle Validation Report to County agencies so that department directors can
efficiently evaluate their future vehicle needs based on historical information.
5. Complete fiscal and operational audits of 3 of the County‘s lessees.
6. Prepare financial and other analysis to evaluate additional solar projects in support of the Board of Supervisor‘s
Sustainability Plan and goal to reduce green house gas emissions.
7. Continue to strengthen the collaborative relationship between GSA Fiscal and the operational managers in order to
ensure that operations continue to be managed with fiscal responsibility.
8. Implement the latest web based version of Surveyor (Desktop Power Management solution).
9. Continue job analysis and specification revisions.
10. Continue to monitor and ensure compliance with mandated training.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Continue to pursue and implement GSA‘s strategic plan .
2. Continue to pursue and implement the County‘s strategic plan .
3. Implement GSA/HCA staffing changes.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Continue to pursue and implement GSA‘s strategic plan .
2. Continue to pursue USGBC LEED Green Building Certification for the Telephone Road Building. (Strategic Plan, Focus
Area 3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 3)
3. Continue the inventory, condition analysis and proactive maintenance for all GSA maintained facilities and associated
services. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 2, Objective 1)
4. Continue installing low flow water fixtures at the Hall of Administration and Hall of Justice. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area
3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1)
5. Submit the 2013 CCFSA Award of Excellence application package for the Maintenance Division.
6. Work with the Procurement Division to competitively bid the HVAC and Elevator contracts.
7. Procure and implement Maintstar Work Order System software upgrades for on-line work order requests and time
cards.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Evaluate, design and install a 1MW solar photo-voltaic array at the Government Center, Juvenile Facility or other
County facility. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1)
2. Continue to work towards earning Southern California Edison‘s Gold Level Energy Leader Partnership which will
increase incentives from SCE by enrolling at least 25% of our eligible buildings in a Southern California Edison Demand
Response Program. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1 and 2)
3. Continue to install low flow water fixtures. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1)
4. Develop and implement a plan to audit and retro-commission existing building systems to ensure their efficient
operation. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1)
5. Develop an energy management and equipment modernization plan for the Hall of Administration and Hall of Justice.
(Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1)

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Streamline the inspection process to enable the Department to handle the additional assignment of the HCA Clinics
without an increase in resources.
2. Continue recycling campaign and reduce solid waste disposal by 5 percent.
3. Complete new contract transition from Kelly Cleaning to Universal Building Maintenance.
4. Convert equipment ordering process from period purchasing to on demand. Potential saving projected is $20,000
annually.

Once the transition of the new HCA sites is complete, Departmental staffing levels may need to be reevaluated to
determine whether they are adequate to support the additional contract management workload.


1. Manage GSA and other Client-funded Facilities and Interiors projects, on-time and on-budget. We anticipate ever
increasing priority for energy conservation and other green projects. We anticipate continuing Client TI and system
furniture remodeling projects by HSA and Probation upgrading their service offices Countywide. We anticipate continuing
VCMC projects for selected infrastructure upgrades of existing functional spaces interim to HRW completion.
2. Continuing GSA budget priority next FY will be additional solar power installations at selected facilities which support
GSA and County goals for reduction of energy use and greenhouse gas footprint.
3. Proceed to construction phase for several other GSA infrastructure and Client projects as requested.
4. Support GSA Strategic Plan goals and .
5. Participate with GSA Fiscal Manager to implement new FM Systems software as a primary tool to document project
management.

Variations to Client Facilities and Interiors furnishings budget levels and workload may entail adjustments to staffing
levels or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Upgrade graphics high speed production output black & white and color devices with higher quality, enhanced
productivity and lower customer cost.
2. Purchase wide format printing device to reduce Countywide expense and improve service level.
3. Increase number of eForm workflow applications by 15 before June 30, 2014.
4. Increase Docushare document management customer base by 10% by January 1, 2014.
5. Implement five Smart Process Business Applications (to support collaborative business process solutions) using
existing resources and research tools to improve customer workflows. These applications are incremental, interactive
deliverables to meet a business need such as the integrated document capture solution developed for HSA using a
combination of business tools. These applications are not out of box but rather adaptive and reactive to empowered
employees improving initial designs.
6. Ensure that all DM enterprise systems support mobile interaction.
7. Using upgraded print to mail interface, compose and design new templates that will drive all ongoing print-to-mail jobs
with inline USPS automation conformance routines and NCOA incorporation including acceptance of customer provided
PDF‘s with embedded customer addresses.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the budget unit will be impacted by service level
reduction requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Remodel surplus storage warehouse in order to increase space availability for a growing pallet storage program.
2. Upgrade inventory management system to latest software version to incorporate customer web access to inventory
detail.
3. Perform Kaizen involving three co-located GSA inventory management operations to define process improvements and
administrative/labor savings.
4. Perform Kaizen between GSA and IT to analyze existing procurement needs related to 1.5 million in IT Network
Services parts ordering and management. Goal will be to assess opportunity to leverage GSA Procurement expertise
and thereby increase ability of existing IT network service resources to meet core charter obligations.

Coordinating surplus reuse and disposition is done at no cost to County departments. Cost recovery from recycling and
surplus sales to support surplus administration efforts can vary. Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a
possibility that the budget unit will be impacted by service level reduction requests. This may entail adjustments to our
staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Continue efforts to gain support for reclass of couriers to mail processing technicians.

Despite best efforts to project postage costs, growing USPS deficits, combined with the ability of the USPS to implement
annual CPI indexed rate increases and specially approved rate changes, may necessitate mid-year budget adjustments.
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Continue efforts to stabilize standard deviation in requisition processing.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


Security:
1. Upgrade cameras to HD specifications and take advantage of IT‘s existing network for IP transmission.
2. Upgrade analog Panic Alarm Panels to digital to allow for better location identification, response and billing information.
3. Continue workplace shooting campaign of education, training and drills to improve County response should an event
occur. In addition, the annual training has been increased to twice a year. Individual training has been provided to RMA,
Assessors, Gonzales Road building tenants and HCA.
Special Services:
1. Conform new vending RFP which includes incentives for healthy food choices.

The expansion of the security systems program may require greater infrastructure; however, continuous evaluation of
potential obsolescence allows for forecasting and better planning.
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Replace nineteen gas vehicles with low emission technology vehicles.
2. Introduce fractional share Remote Motor Pool vehicles at two additional County facilities.
3. Continue developing a fuel-efficient and environmentally friendly fleet through the utilization of alternative fuel
technology and lower emission vehicles.
4. Take advantage of in-source opportunities in the Prep Shop.

Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year. To
lessen the potential impact, Fleet Services is holding several positions vacant.


1. Replace compact gas vehicles due for replacement with low emission PZEV or Hybrid technology vehicles.
2. Increase the number of medium duty trucks using hybrid technology.
3. Continue developing a fuel efficient and environmentally friendly fleet through the utilization of alternative fuel
technology and lower emission vehicles.
4. Continue to exceed minimum CARB benchmarks for lowering emission standards for off road heavy equipment. Fleet
Services is currently compliant until January 2018.

The cost for retrofitting vehicles and equipment for adherence to new diesel emission standards could be substantial.
Early replacement of some diesel equipment will be considered in lieu of retrofitting if deemed economically prudent. Due
to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.


1. Implement contracual and technology support for increased utilization of cloud services.
2. Refresh technology policies to address expanding technology frontiers.
3. Complete the project to update the County-wide technology strategic plan.

1. Increased consumerization of technology will continue to drive demand for mobile access to government services.
2. Increased adoption of mobile devices will drive new business solutions and the requisite infrastructure to support
management, security, and protection of data.
3. The number of retirements over the past three years is anticipated to be significantly higher and will result in loss of
significant County business knowledge and experience.


1. Replacement of County email and calendaring solution, collaboration, and office productivity tools.
2. Refresh technology policies to address expanding technology frontiers – (i.e. social media, mobile devices, cloud
computing, etc).
3. Implement an IT Services Service Catalog providing County users with self-service capabilities to request and monitor
services being provided.
4. Implement a Single Sign-on solution to provide County users access to multiple systems with one common login.
5. Upgrade enterprise storage infrastructure to accommodate ever-increasing data demands, while improving end-user
performance and supportability.

1. Increased consumerization of technology will continue to drive demand for mobile access to government services.
2. Increased adoption of tablet devices will drive new business solutions and the requisite infrastructure to support
management, security, and protection of citizen data.


1. Refresh of County public facing internet site and technology platform
2. Replacement of the County's Criminal Justice System (VCIJIS) database technology with Microsoft SQL Server


1. Replace the ERP systems used by Risk Management
2. Continue migration and implementation support for new land tax system and county financial system upgrades
3. Complete Service Level Agreement for GIS with the County GIS Oversight Committee
4. Develop PeopleSoft Strategic Road Map

Numerous large technology initiatives will introduce business and organization changes to several County agencies and
departments. IT Services will be required to provide significant training to their workforce in order to support these new
technologies.


1. Continue the Nortel Replacement Project and replace all non-supported Nortel equipment with Cisco VoIP within our
voice and data network.
2. Increase the number of WLAN access points in various County facilities where required by our client
agency/departments and upgrade our current WLAN infrastructure to handle the increased demand for wireless
connectivity.
3. Assist with the HCA improvements to VCMC by completing the Telecom Hub move and re-cabling the VCMC Campus
to account for planned construction scheduled as part of the Hospital Reconstruction Project.
4. Upgrade our Microwave Network to increase bandwidth capabilities from 100 to 300 Megs.
5. Continue to increase our Public Safety Radio Network coverage.

1. The legislative move to give Public Safety a national wireless license in the 700 MHz range will create an opportunity to
build a dedicated wireless data network with interoperability functionality nationwide. This has now been redefined as
FirstNet and Network Services is following the progress of FirstNet to determine how the County of Ventura can leverage
this opportunity to improve our wireless capabilities for Public Safety.
2. The County of Ventura has shown an ever increasing demand for bandwidth and access to the Internet. This will
eventually drive the County to higher speed Microwave and the need for development of a Fiber Network. We are
currently reviewing options for access or constructing a Fiber Data Network.
3. Information Security - National Cyber/security Initiative will likely become the standard by which all governmental
agencies IT Security activities are measured. It includes the following:
i. Intrusion prevention and detection systems
ii. Security classification of network data


A.) Implement the newly designed Labor Collection And Billing system. B.) Continue digitizing document records based
on available funding.


A. Participate in 'Water Awareness' Month programs; sponsor the annual 'Water Awareness' poster contest; provide
water audits for our large water users, including large landscape, commercial, industrial and institutional customers;
provide Water Wise Gardening workshops.
B. Implement on-line and over-the-phone payment options.
C. Compare water and sewer rates with other utilities in Ventura County for benchmarking purposes.
D. Annual review of water loss in each of the water systems to assure efficient operations of the water systems.


1) Upgrade the Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system hardware and software.
2) Develop and implement workflow for the Fire District's purchase requisition process.
3) Automate the CAD System Status Management to improve deployment of emergency response units.


1) Transition the Fire Hazard Reduction Program (FHRP) records to the Accela Land Management platform.
2) Implement Accela Citizen Access to enable customers to apply for permits online and track application progress.
3) Implement the Fire Safety Inspection (FSI) program to provide periodic inspections of existing businesses to help
reduce the number of fire incidents.
4) Conduct 12 CERT (Community Emergency Response Team) classes to provide training for an estimated 375 citizens.


1) Enhance the 9-1-1 Dispatch business continuity site to provide Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system backup
capabilities.
2) Implement a "Rescue Under Force Protection" Active Shooter training program.
3) Implement the Buena Ventura Prescription Burn Project for fuels reduction to protect the incorporated and
unincorporated communities of Ventura and Santa Paula from wind-driven wildfires.
4) Implement the radio infrastructure upgrades to the final 4 locations of the 14 planned stand-alone backup radio system
sites.


1) Complete design of new FS35 Newbury Park fire station.
2) Begin construction of two fire stations - FS20 Summit in Santa Paula and FS27 in Fillmore.


1. Core Services Analysis: Complete the process begun in FY 12-13 by which the District‘s ?Core Services? are clarified,
bounded, described and integrated in order to optimize the alignment of Mission-critical projects and programs with Boardapproved
priorities, and available structural funding resources.
2. ALERT Flood Warning System Operations: Continue Quality Control/Quality Assurance (QA/QC) work and system
enhancements required to ensure accurate, reliable and timely real-time rains and stream gauge data in support of
forecast models and emergency preparedness work.
3. Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Coordinate the preparation and timely submittal of the District‘s inputs into the
PWA FY 14-19 5-Year Capital Improvement Project Document process projecting appropriate programmed CIP work
effort through June 30, 2014, and for the remaining four year planning horizon through June 30, 2019 across all zones,
countywide.
4. FEMA Community Rating System Program: Complete Year 4 of the FEMA-mandated 5-Year Recertification of the
Community Rating System (CRS) program for Unincorporated Ventura County.
5. FEMA Cooperative Technical Partners (CTP) Program: Coordinate the integration of completed Technical Study Data
Notebooks (TSDN) and preliminary Flood Insurance Study (FIS) mapping products for the East Ojai Alluvial Fan, Happy
Valley Drain, Jepson Wash and Orcutt Canyon CTP projects in order to produce a FEMA-approved Physical Map
Revision (PMR) successfully.
6. Grants Program Administration: Aggressively pursue available Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization
(NGO) grant opportunities for funding assistance in support of the District‘s mission, and to leverage timely completion of
District priority capital projects contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP.
7. Groundwater Programs: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities. Complete 2013 Groundwater Level/Quality
Report. Continue regional implementation of CASEGEM program. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and
provide timely and effective processing of monitoring well and new water well permit submittal requests.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment on and where appropriate,
condition proposed development projects. And provide timely and effective processing of encroachment and watercourse
permit submittal requests.


1. Annual Zone 1 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $2.5 Million in major capital improvement
and operation and maintenance design and construction project work in the zone including: Concrete Channel Invert and
Wall Repairs, Fresn o Canyon Flood Mitigation Project, Matilija Ecosystem Restoration Project (Pre-Construction
Engineering and Design, TAC Fine Sediment Study, and Santa Ana Bridge Modification Projects), (V-2) San Antonio
Creek Spreading Grounds Rehabilitation Project Construction, Design engineering work on two Ventura River Levee
Rehabilitation Projects (VR-1 in Ventura, and VR-2 in Casitas Springs) and Zn 1 Pipe Infiltration Repair projects. These
projects may change based on higher priority needs (e.g. storm damage), operational factors and/or the unanticipated
availability and/or loss, of offsetting revenue.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 1 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M
facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County
and the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program
deployment. Submit seventeenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura
County‘s eleven general purpose governments.
4. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO)
grant opportunities for funding assistance in support the District‘s mission and to leverage timely completion of priority
projects in Zone 1 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
5. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2013 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 1. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 1, as required.
6. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required
condition proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 1, as
required.
7. Matilija Dam Ecosytem Restoration Project: Continue Pre-construction Engineering and Design work in accordance
with existing USACE agreements, and discharge the District‘s project completion obligations under the terms of the Board
approved Matilija Project Grant Agreements.
8. O&M Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District‘s O&M MaintStar work order based tracking system to
ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department‘s systems, and
achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency‘s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades. Complete: (1) a
Sediment Management Plan for county-owned debris basins, (2) an Engineering Analysis of county-owned dams as part
of the dam safety program, and (3) a Baseline lifecycle cost analysis of flood control infrastructure including a schedule
for major facility repairs.
9. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 50 and/or 84 Grant projects in
and/or impacting Zone 1 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.

During Fiscal Year 2009-10, the District completed Federally-mandated (i.e. 44 CFR 65.10) engineering evaluations of
eleven Provisionally Accredited Levees (PALs) located along defined reaches of the Calleguas Creek, Santa Clara and
Ventura Rivers. These levees total 17 miles in length, provide flood protection for approximately 20,000 residents living
on 6,336 parcels. The District estimates that nearly $600 Million in flood damages could occur should these levees fail to
provide adequate flood protection.
The District is currently engaged in preliminary and final design engineering work in support of levee retrofit and/or floodprotection
enhancement projects required to certify all of its levees in full-compliance with Federal Levee Certification
requirements. A planning-level estimate of the total costs required to complete necessary levee retrofit work is upwards of
$130 Million. Countywide, approximately $30 Million in levee rehab work has been or is in the process of being
completed. As of July 1, 2014, countywide, funding for approximately $100 Million in levee rehab project work remains to
be identified and ultimately secured in order to complete the planned levee rehab project work.
The District is working closely with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as well as affected cities, residents and
property owners throughout Ventura County to marshal scarce Federal, State and local funding resources necessary to
complete this very important levee retrofit public safety and flood protection projects. Once all of the District‘s levee
retrofit projects are completed, the District's levees will fully comply with applicable Federal Levee Certification
requirements found in 44 CFR 65.10.
At best, full completion of the District‘s levee rehab projects will require a minimum of five years, and could take up to ten
years or longer, depending on final design plans, environmental considerations and project funding availability.


1. Annual Zone 2 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $8.2 Million in major capital improvement
and operation and maintenance design and construction project work in the zone including: Arundell Barranca Channel
Invert Repairs, Arundell Barranca: Ventura Harbor to Harbor Boulevard Project Design, Arundell Barranca Dam
Emergency Spillway Modification Work, Beardsley Drop Structure Project Construction, Brown Barranca Repairs at RR
Bridge Construction, Clark Barranca Repairs, Fagan Canyon and Harmon Barranca PL 84-99 Project Construction,
Franklin Barranca Repairs,
J-Street Drain Ormond Beach to Hueneme Road (Phase 1) and Hueneme Road to Pleasant Valley Road (Phase 2)
Project Work, SCR-1 and SCR-3 Levee Rehab Project Design Engineering and Environmental Documentation Work,
Santa Paula Creek Channel Improvement Project Work, Sespe Creek Levee Rehab Construction Project Work and
Warring Debris Basin Spillway Retrofit Project Work. These projects may change based on higher priority needs (e.g.
storm damage), operational factors and/or the unanticipated availability and/or loss, of offsetting revenue.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 2 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M
facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County
and the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program
deployment. Submit seventeenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura
County‘s eleven general purpose governments.
4. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO)
grant opportunities for funding assistance in support the District‘s mission and to leverage timely completion of priority
projects in Zone 2 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
5. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2013 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 2 Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 2, as required.
6. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required
condition proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 2, as
required.
7. O&M Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District‘s O&M MaintStar work order based tracking system to
ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department‘s systems, and
achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency‘s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades. Complete: (1) a
Sediment Management Plan for county-owned debris basins, (2) an Engineering Analysis of county-owned dams as part
of the dam safety program, and (3) a Baseline lifecycle cost analysis of flood control infrastructure including a schedule
for major facility repairs.
8. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 50 and/or 84 Grant projects in
and/or impacting Zone 2 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.

During Fiscal Year 2009-10, the District completed Federally-mandated (i.e. 44 CFR 65.10) engineering evaluations of
eleven Provisionally Accredited Levees (PALs) located along defined reaches of the Calleguas Creek, Santa Clara and
Ventura Rivers. These levees total 17 miles in length, provide flood protection for approximately 20,000 residents living
on 6,336 parcels. The District estimates that nearly $600 Million in flood damages could occur should these levees fail to
provide adequate flood protection.
The District is currently engaged in preliminary and final design engineering work in support of levee retrofit and/or floodprotection
enhancement projects required to certify all of its levees in full-compliance with Federal Levee Certification
requirements. A planning-level estimate of the total costs required to complete necessary levee retrofit work is upwards of
$130 Million. Countywide, approximately $30 Million in levee rehab work has been or is in the process of being
completed. As of July 1, 2014, countywide, funding for approximately $100 Million in levee rehab project work remains to
be identified and ultimately secured in order to complete the planned levee rehab project work.
The District is working closely with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as well as affected cities, residents and
property owners throughout Ventura County to marshal scarce Federal, State and local funding resources necessary to
complete this very important levee retrofit public safety and flood protection projects. Once all of the District‘s levee
retrofit projects are completed, the District's levees will fully comply with applicable Federal Levee Certification
requirements found in 44 CFR 65.10.
At best, full completion of the District‘s levee rehab projects will require a minimum of five years, and could take up to ten
years or longer, depending on final design plans, environmental considerations and project funding availability.


1. Annual Zone 3 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $1.025 Million in major capital
improvement and operation and maintenance design and construction project work in the zone including: Arroyo Simi
Channel at Moorpark Avenue Repairs, Arroyo Simi – Hitch Boulevard to Tierra Rejada Road Stabilization Project, Arroyo
Simi Stabilizer Construction Project, Bus Canyon RCB Repair at Confluence with Arroyo Simi, Calleguas Creek –
Pleasant Valley Road to Hwy 101 – East Bank Channel Improvement Project, Calleguas Creek at Upland Road Clean-
Out Project, Conejo Creek at Leisure Village Repair Project, Conejo Creek Levee Repair at Camarillo WWTP, Ferro Ditch
Channel Improvement Project, Gabbert Channel Pilot Test Construction Project, Marr Diversion Channel Repairs Project,
Somis Drain Repair Project, Sycamore Canyon Debris/Detention Basin Retrofit Construction Project, and White Oak
Channel Repair Project.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 3 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M
facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County
and the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program
deployment. Submit seventeenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura
County‘s eleven general purpose governments.
4. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO)
grant opportunities for funding assistance in support the District‘s mission and to leverage timely completion of priority
projects in Zone 3 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
5. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2013 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 3 Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 3, as required.
6. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required
condition proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 3, as
required.
7. O&M Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District‘s O&M MaintStar work order based tracking system to
ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department‘s systems, and
achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency‘s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades. Complete: (1) a
Sediment Management Plan for county-owned debris basins, (2) an Engineering Analysis of county-owned dams as part
of the dam safety program, and (3) a Baseline lifecycle cost analysis of flood control infrastructure including a schedule
for major facility repairs.
8. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 50 and/or 84 Grant projects in
and/or impacting Zone 3 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.

During Fiscal Year 2009-10, the District completed Federally-mandated (i.e. 44 CFR 65.10) engineering evaluations of
eleven Provisionally Accredited Levees (PALs) located along defined reaches of the Calleguas Creek, Santa Clara and
Ventura Rivers. These levees total 17 miles in length, provide flood protection for approximately 20,000 residents living
on 6,336 parcels. The District estimates that nearly $600 Million in flood damages could occur should these levees fail to
provide adequate flood protection.
The District is currently engaged in preliminary and final design engineering work in support of levee retrofit and/or floodprotection
enhancement projects required to certify all of its levees in full-compliance with Federal Levee Certification
requirements. A planning-level estimate of the total costs required to complete necessary levee retrofit work is upwards of
$130 Million. Countywide, approximately $30 Million in levee rehab work has been or is in the process of being
completed. As of July 1, 2014, countywide, funding for approximately $100 Million in levee rehab project work remains to
be identified and ultimately secured in order to complete the planned levee rehab project work.
The District is working closely with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as well as affected cities, residents and
property owners throughout Ventura County to marshal scarce Federal, State and local funding resources necessary to
complete this very important levee retrofit public safety and flood protection projects. Once all of the District‘s levee
retrofit projects are completed, the District's levees will fully comply with applicable Federal Levee Certification
requirements found in 44 CFR 65.10.
At best, full completion of the District‘s levee rehab projects will require a minimum of five years, and could take up to ten
years or longer, depending on final design plans, environmental considerations and project funding availability.


1. Annual Zone 3 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $1.025 Million in major capital
improvement and operation and maintenance design and construction project work in the zone including: Arroyo Simi
Channel at Moorpark Avenue Repairs, Arroyo Simi – Hitch Boulevard to Tierra Rejada Road Stabilization Project, Arroyo
Simi Stabilizer Construction Project, Bus Canyon RCB Repair at Confluence with Arroyo Simi, Calleguas Creek –
Pleasant Valley Road to Hwy 101 – East Bank Channel Improvement Project, Calleguas Creek at Upland Road Clean-
Out Project, Conejo Creek at Leisure Village Repair Project, Conejo Creek Levee Repair at Camarillo WWTP, Ferro Ditch
Channel Improvement Project, Gabbert Channel Pilot Test Construction Project, Marr Diversion Channel Repairs Project,
Somis Drain Repair Project, Sycamore Canyon Debris/Detention Basin Retrofit Construction Project, and White Oak
Channel Repair Project.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 3 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M
facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County
and the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program
deployment. Submit seventeenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura
County‘s eleven general purpose governments.
4. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO)
grant opportunities for funding assistance in support the District‘s mission and to leverage timely completion of priority
projects in Zone 3 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
5. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2013 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 3 Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 3, as required.
6. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required
condition proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 3, as
required.
7. O&M Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District‘s O&M MaintStar work order based tracking system to
ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department‘s systems, and
achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency‘s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades. Complete: (1) a
Sediment Management Plan for county-owned debris basins, (2) an Engineering Analysis of county-owned dams as part
of the dam safety program, and (3) a Baseline lifecycle cost analysis of flood control infrastructure including a schedule
for major facility repairs.
8. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 50 and/or 84 Grant projects in
and/or impacting Zone 3 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.

During Fiscal Year 2009-10, the District completed Federally-mandated (i.e. 44 CFR 65.10) engineering evaluations of
eleven Provisionally Accredited Levees (PALs) located along defined reaches of the Calleguas Creek, Santa Clara and
Ventura Rivers. These levees total 17 miles in length, provide flood protection for approximately 20,000 residents living
on 6,336 parcels. The District estimates that nearly $600 Million in flood damages could occur should these levees fail to
provide adequate flood protection.
The District is currently engaged in preliminary and final design engineering work in support of levee retrofit and/or floodprotection
enhancement projects required to certify all of its levees in full-compliance with Federal Levee Certification
requirements. A planning-level estimate of the total costs required to complete necessary levee retrofit work is upwards of
$130 Million. Countywide, approximately $30 Million in levee rehab work has been or is in the process of being
completed. As of July 1, 2014, countywide, funding for approximately $100 Million in levee rehab project work remains to
be identified and ultimately secured in order to complete the planned levee rehab project work.
The District is working closely with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as well as affected cities, residents and
property owners throughout Ventura County to marshal scarce Federal, State and local funding resources necessary to
complete this very important levee retrofit public safety and flood protection projects. Once all of the District‘s levee
retrofit projects are completed, the District's levees will fully comply with applicable Federal Levee Certification
requirements found in 44 CFR 65.10.
At best, full completion of the District‘s levee rehab projects will require a minimum of five years, and could take up to ten
years or longer, depending on final design plans, environmental considerations and project funding availability.


1. Annual Maintenance Work: Continue to perform necessary maintenance, repair, and construction activities in the Simi
Sub-Zone required to ensure the optimal operational capability of WPD flood protection facilities.


1. Annual Zone 4 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: There is no CIP work programmed in Zone 4 during the next
fiscal year.
2. CEQA Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 4 CIP and O&M construction projects as required. Complete
project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County
and the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program
deployment. Submit seventeenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura
County‘s eleven general purpose governments.
4. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue available Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District‘s mission, and to leverage timely completion of priority projects
in Zone 4 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
5. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2013 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 4 Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 4, as required.
6. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required
condition proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 4, as
needed.
7. O&M Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District‘s O&M MaintStar work order based tracking system to
ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department‘s systems, and
achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency‘s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades. Complete: (1) a
Sediment Management Plan for county-owned debris basins, (2) an Engineering Analysis of county-owned dams as part
of the dam safety program, and (3) a Baseline lifecycle cost analysis of flood control infrastructure including a schedule
for major facility repairs.
8. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 84 Grant projects in and/or
impacting Zone 4 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.


1. Annual Zone 4 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: There is no CIP work programmed in Zone 4 during the next
fiscal year.
2. CEQA Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 4 CIP and O&M construction projects as required. Complete
project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain USACE permit for O&M facilities.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County
and the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program
deployment. Submit seventeenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura
County‘s eleven general purpose governments.
4. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue available Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District‘s mission, and to leverage timely completion of priority projects
in Zone 4 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
5. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2013 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 4 Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 4, as required.
6. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required
condition proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 4, as
needed.
7. O&M Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District‘s O&M MaintStar work order based tracking system to
ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department‘s systems, and
achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency‘s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades. Complete: (1) a
Sediment Management Plan for county-owned debris basins, (2) an Engineering Analysis of county-owned dams as part
of the dam safety program, and (3) a Baseline lifecycle cost analysis of flood control infrastructure including a schedule
for major facility repairs.
8. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 84 Grant projects in and/or
impacting Zone 4 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.


A. Complete the design of the Moorpark DeSalter Project.
B. Finalize Land Purchase for the Moorpark DeSalter.
C. Complete the design for the Stockton Reservoir.
D. Maximize the production of local water to reduce the cost of imported water in the district.
E. Reduce electrical costs at District facilities by revising system operations.

Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of
our water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years.


A. Complete construction of the Reclaimed Water Distribution System Phase IV project.
B. Complete construction of the Moorpark Office Bldg and Remodel.
C. Increase the number of customers using recycled water.

Proposed rate increases for electricity and increased Regional Water Quality Control Board permit requirements and
costs may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our sewer systems and consequently on the sewer
rates to our customers over the next few years.


Continue to provide uninterrupted water service for domestic and fire protection services along Pacific Avenue in the
community of Piru.


A. Complete design of the high pressure pipeline connecting Zones 1712W and 1712E.

Proposed Rate increases for imported water and electricity and potential reduction in GMA allocations may have a
significant impact on the cost of the operations of our water systems and consequently on the rates to our customers over
the next three years.


A. Complete construction of the Balcom Canyon Turnout Project
B. Complete design and construction of the District 19 $5 million pipeline replacement projects.
C. Complete construction of the Well 2 Iron and Manganese Removal Facility.

Proposed Rate increases for imported water and electricity and potential reduction in GMA allocations may have a
significant impact on the cost of the operations of our water systems and consequently on the rates to our customers over
the next three years.


Complete the annexation process (if necessary) of several island parcels surrounded by the Lake Sherwood Service
District and include them in the District to clean up the District boundaries

Proposed Rate increases for imported water and electricity and potential reduction in GMA allocations may have a
significant impact on the cost of the operations of our water systems and consequently on the rates to our customers over
the next three years.


Continue to monitor the county road and provide maintenance.


Lighting of the Oak Park Community entrance sign is still under consideration.


Continue to monitor street sweeping and street sweeping contracts and street lighting.


Seek funding to complete the Force Main Replacement.


Propose to clean the collection system.


Ensure all properties within CSA #34 are billed through the property tax roll.


 Continue electronic imaging of completed project files.
 Prepare for implementation of anticipated statewide OWTS regulations.
 Amend the County Building Code Ordinance to be consistent with these regulations after they are adopted by the State.

Anticipated adoption of new State regulations could result in increased oversight of Onsite Wastewater Treatment
Systems.

