Objectives
O
-Implement Commercial & Industrial Valuation module.
-Implement new property tax system.

Objectives

-Review over 30,000 properties to identify needed changes to assessed value due to changing market conditions.
-Implement new property tax system.

Objectives
-Complete scanning of restricted property files (excluding Williams Act) and implementation of day forward paperless
procedures.
-Work with RMA on strategies for improved compliance with LCA contract requirements.
-Implement new property tax system.

Objectives

-Continue to reduce the mailings of Business Property Statements by an additional 25% to encourage e-file.
-Participate in ongoing studies for statewide assessment issues on embedded software exclusion.
-Implement new property tax system.

Objectives
-Review 2000 institutional claim forms annually to verify continued compliance with exemption law.
Future Program/Financial Impacts

-Significant court decisions and/or legislative changes to property tax law. In particular, a recent court decision could lead to
a significant amount of administrative work necessary to remain in compliance with the law.
-Increase in number of exemption claimants due to new construction.
-Implement new property tax system.

Objectives

-Resolve all assessment appeal applications for changed assessment within the required two-year time period.
-Appear at hearings before the Assessment Appeals Board to defend assessed values.
-Work with the Clerk of the Board to improve case administration.
-Implement new property tax system.
Future Program/Financial Impacts

-Taxpayer market perceptions will impact the number of appeals filed for residential properties.
-Stagnant commercial market will impact the number of filings.

Objectives
-Complete all roll changes in the assessment year they are discovered.
Future Program/Financial Impacts

-New property tax system will greatly improve processing timelines
-Maintain software to track and inventory transfer documents.
-Recovery of residential real estate market will increase transfers and deed recordings.

Objectives

-Maintain comprehensive maps to inventory taxable property in Ventura County.
-Implement new property tax system.
Future Program/Financial Impacts

-Transition from AutoCAD to GIS as a tool for parcel management.
-Increase in new subdivisions due to recovery of the residential real estate market.

Objectives

-Provide real-time person-to-person assistance to taxpayer inquires in an efficient manner.
-Provide clerical assistance to the Assessor's Office.
-Implement new property tax system.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F-Provide office-wide implementation of Automated Call Distribution software to improve communications.

Objectives
O
1. Remain independent, objective and accountable to the public.
2. Improve transparency to the public and County Agencies/Departments.
3. Provide accurate and timely financial reports and maintain records that are useful to the public, County management, and
agencies/departments.
4. Ensure accountability to the public through the performance of efficient and effective audits of County services.
5. Hire, train, motivate and retain the highest quality work force.
6. Safeguard County resources and assets.
7. Increase operational efficiency through additional automation or process improvements.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. Continue to expand functionality of the Countywide financial system.
2. Review, interpret, and implement GASB pronouncements to the extent applicable to the County of Ventura.
3. Interpret and implement the California Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act (PEPRA) in collaboration with VCERA.
4. Upgrade the Property Tax System working in collaboration with the Assessor’s Office and Treasurer-Tax Collector’s
Office.
5. Continue to monitor the potential impacts of legislation introduced as part of the Governor’s 2016-17 Budget.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to provide support to 11 Oversight Boards, the CEO, the State Controller, and the Department of Finance as
part of the RDA dissolution process.
2. Automate the preparation of property tax CAFR schedules.
3. Automate the preparation of biannual Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund distributions.
4. Automate pass-through calculations for 36 Redevelopment Project areas.
5. Automate RDA Assessment Roll Change True-up and Tax Rate Area audit adjustment calculations.
6. Continue to analyze options for the continued funding of the annual Teeter Buyout.
7. Update and provide additional informative property tax information on the Auditor-Controller’s webpage.
8. Continue to work with ITSD, the Treasurer-Tax Collector and Assessor’s Offices to implement the Property Tax
Assessment and Collections System (PTACS).

Objectives
O
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE:
1. Complete the first fiscal year-end processes in VCFMS 3.10.
2. Implement the future document triggering function in VCFMS to improve vendor payment processing.
3. Implement the tax intercept feature in VCFMS to offset vendor payments due to tax levies received from the IRS, FTB,
EDD, etc.
4. Implement the multiple vendor GAX feature in VCFMS to allow one payment documents for vendors with the same
backup documentation (e.g., Retiree Health, Grand Jury, and Rent payments).
5. Continue to train department Accounts Payable staff in processing vendor and payment transactions in VCFMS 3.10.
6. Continue to roll-out EFT to vendors to reduce the volume of checks issued and reduce check processing costs.
7. Continue department collaboration to further refine VCFMS 3.10 business processes and procedures.
8. Conduct research and analysis in support of GSA AIM and HSA Mileage auxiliary business systems.
PAYROLL:
1. Continue to enhance the custom Time and Labor rules and Payroll calculations.
2. Conduct post-implementation testing and minor adjustments to Retirement VCERIS (V3 PAS) project.
3. Resume Countywide VCHRP query training.
4. Conduct analysis, development, testing and implementation in support of a proposed VCHRP PeopleSoft 9.2 upgrade.
5. Conduct research and analysis in support of various proposed County VCHRP initiatives, including Health Care Agency,
Fire Protection District and CEO/HR projects.
6. Develop a 3rd party interface in support of the United Way Campaign.
7. Complete redesign and implementation of Auditor-Controller Internet content.
8. Continue record retention digital archive initiatives.

Objectives
O
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT:
1. Issue the County’s CAFR for June 30, 2016, including the implementation of GASB Statement Nos. 72, 73, 76, and 82, as
applicable.
2. Analyze the following GASB Statements and evaluate for implementation: GASB No. 77, Tax Abatement Disclosures,
GASB No. 80, Irrevocable Split-Interest Agreements, and any other new GASB issued for implementation in FY 2016-17.
3. Prepare and file the FY 2015-16 Countywide Cost Allocation Plan in accordance with the new Super Circular guidelines.
4. Prepare and file the Counties Financial Transactions report in accordance with new guidelines to be issued by the State
Controller’s Office.
5. Continue to provide subject matter expertise and training in the areas of Chart of Accounts, General Ledger/Budget,
Grant Accounting, and Fixed Assets for VCFMS.
FINANCIAL PLANNING:
1. Issue the Public Financing Authority Financial Statements for June 30, 2016 including the implementation of any
applicable GASB statements.
2. Complete timely submission of the County’s Adopted Budget for Fiscal Year 2016-17.
3. Provide assistance to the County Executive Office for any new debt issuance.
4. Analyze GASB 72 and prepare updates to cash note disclosures as applicable.
5. Continue to provide subject matter expertise and training in the areas of Cash Management, Accounts Receivable, Cost
Accounting and Budget for VCFMS and BPS.
6. Provide support for the roll-out of the AR module and Cost Accounting functionality to additional County departments.
7. Define requirements for a new Interest Apportionment System.
8. Continue to assist the County Executive Office in developing and implementing a new cash projection system.

Objectives
O
1. Develop and accomplish an annual Internal Audit Plan that:
a. Emphasizes audits that have an impact on cost savings and/or result in additional revenues.
b. Focuses on performance audits to improve internal controls, promote operational economy and efficiency, and mitigate
risk to the County.
c. Seeks to maximize use of the Internal Audit team’s competencies.
2. Meet audit mandates required of the Auditor-Controller.
3. Maintain the integrity of the Employee Fraud Hotline.
4. Monitor the submission of audits of Federal award subrecipients, special districts, and joint powers authorities.
5. Validate departments’ 2015 CSA responses.
6. Facilitate auditors’ compliance with continuing professional education requirements.
7. Develop a training schedule to complement planned engagements, and auditors’ strengths and areas in need of
improvement.
8. Promote and encourage Internal Audit staff to actively seek professional certification.

Objectives
O
INFORMATION SYSTEMS:
1. Replace aging hardware and software in the Auditor-Controller's Office to keep the office operations current and
accessible.
2. Continue to integrate the use of virtual technology to reduce administrative and Infrastructure costs.
3. Work with IT Services to replace Symantec Full Disk Encryption software with their recommendation of Choicepoint Full
Disk Encryption for Laptops.
4. Continue to support the implementation and upgrades of subsidiary systems.
5. Pilot and support the rollout Skype for Business in the Microsoft Office 365 suite to ensure a smooth internal transition.
6. Support and assist in the transition of select Information Technology services to the IT Services Department and
coordinate ongoing services.
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING SYSTEM:
1. Work with each County Department and Special District to address needs related to the Implementation of the upgraded
Financial Management System, infoAdvantage and Vendor Self Service (VSS).
2. Continue to support Content Manager On Demand (CMOD) to provide VCFMS users with historical access to VCFMS 2.2
reports.
3. Work with ACIS and IT Services to rollout the Virtual Server version of the VCFMS 2.2 warehouse to ensure long-term
user access to the historical relational data.
4. Support the rollout of the Accounts Receivable and Cost Accounting modules to County departments.
5. Continue to work with our vendor to test and implement system patches to the baseline software as they become
available.
6. Continue to work with GSA Procurement to co-administrate the Vendor Self Service (VSS) module.
7. Continue to provide user training, Change Management and Help Desk services to VCFMS users.

Objectives
O
1. Evaluate the marketplace for new, improved and cost-effective land record Information management system alternatives.
2. Evaluate vendor solutions and costs for a comprehensive disaster backup and recovery system.
3. Expand the Recorder’s Courtesy Notice Program to notify homeowners when any type of deed is recorded on their
properties.
4. Expand the SECURE Version 3 electronic recording participants to include the California Department of Child Support
Services, Internal Revenue Service and the Franchise Tax Board.
5. Complete Phase 2 of the East County Office remodel to offer additional services including official record public inquiry
terminals, election services, and wedding ceremonies.
6. Complete the electronic conversion of confidential marriage records.
7. Provide optional, real-time remote viewing of civil marriage ceremonies for families and friends of wedding participants.
8. Relocate offsite microfilm storage from the Access facility in Oxnard to their Moorpark facility.
9. Complete the conversion of Coroner’s Inquest files (1873-1965) to microfilm.
10. Implement a major system upgrade to the Clerk and Recorder’s Land Records Information Management System.

Objectives
O
1. Evaluate new State-certified voting systems to replace the current voting system that was purchased in 2006.
2. Engage in enhanced multilingual voter registration outreach to identify target populations that may require voting assistant
in one of the four additional languages (Spanish, Tagalog, Chinese, and Hindi) in which Ventura County is required to
provide ballot materials.
3. Develop and implement a plan for conducting elections under the new Conditional Voter Registration requirements
effective January 2017.
4. Participate with the California Association of Clerks and Election Officials (CACEO) to evaluate future voting options.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. Beginning in 2017, Conditional Voter Registration (CVR) will allow voters to come to the Elections Division and register to
vote and receive a provisional ballot beginning 14 days prior to an election through Election Day. This new law only allows
CVR in the Elections Division office and satellite offices. States which have already adopted Election Day registration
experienced a change in voter behavior in which 10% to 20% of voters delay registering to vote until Election Day. If this
same percentage of voters registered or re-registered to vote during a 14-day period, the Elections Division will need to
prepare for 20,300 to 40,700 voters in the office during this time period. This translates to an average of 1,455 to 2,910
voters per day registering or re-registering to vote and voting a provisional ballot. In addition, adding 20,300 to 40,700
additional provisional ballots to the canvass period will require additional space, computer terminals, and staff to complete
the canvass in the 30 days required by law.
Since the New Motor Voter legislation (AB1461) was signed into law, it is anticipated there will be a reduction in the amount
of CVR voters registering to vote; however, this is not expected to significantly reduce the number of CVR voters who will
change their voter registration or request a provisional ballot beginning 14 days before Election Day.
2. The current voting system is 10 years old and is approaching the end of its useful life. It is becoming obsolete from the
standpoint of replacement parts and software operating systems. The voting system must be replaced with “next generation”
voting equipment when new voting equipment is available and certified by the Secretary of State. It is estimated a new
voting system may cost approximately $7,000,000. The Elections Division currently has $3,390,000 in federal and State
grant money allocated for the purchase of a new voting system.
3. Once VoteCal is the official record, persons at least 16 years may pre-register to vote. This will require the elections
official to send a pre-registration notice to the voter notifying him/her they are pre-registered to vote. This legislation also
requires Public Health to notify the Elections Division as to all deaths of individuals 16 years of age and over.
4. New legislation (AB 1461) requires the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) to electronically provide to the Secretary of
State (SOS) the records of persons who are issued an original or renewal driver license or identification card, if the
information provided by the person to prove their eligibility for a driver license or identification card, also established that the
person is a United States citizen.
Since various provisions of the State’s election laws are dependent on the numbers and percentages of registered voters,
this new legislation has the potential to substantially increase the number of registered voters in California. Many of the
current election law provisions may need to be re-evaluated and adjusted to reflect the increase in registered voters that is
likely to occur with this legislation. For example, existing law limits each precinct to a maximum of 1,000 voters as of the 88th
day before the election. Unless that figure is adjusted, Ventura County could be required to create hundreds of new precincts
to reflect the increase in voter registration that could occur. Additional precincts and additional registered voters will
substantially increase the cost of elections, as a higher number of official ballots, sample ballots, and polling sites will be
required. Currently, the Elections Division does not have the voting system capacity to increase the number of precincts, so
there will be a legal compliance issue to address,
5. (CACEO)-has established a legislative subcommittee to explore the future of voting options in California in an effort to
reduce costs and increase voter participation. The possibility of a hybrid of Vote By Mail ballots and local Vote Centers
(larger, regional polling places) instead of local polling places is being explored, along with new voting system technology.
Local Vote Centers are often setup in several locations in each city and serve between 10,000 and 30,000 voters.

Objectives
O
1) Continue to produce a structurally balanced budget while sustaining core public services.
2) Maintain or increase the County’s fiscal reserves.
3) Continue to maintain and, where possible, achieve additional reductions in County overhead and ISF costs.
4) Maintain the County’s highest possible debt and treasury pool ratings from nationally designated rating agencies.
5) Continue our increased focus on economic development by identifying additional actions and initiatives that the County
can pursue in this critical area; and further incorporate economic development as a major component of the County’s
Strategic Plan.
6) Continue to fulfill the County’s Strategic Plan objectives and oversee the implementation and reporting of the economic
vitality strategic plan results.
7) Align budget performance measures with strategic plan measures.
8) Utilize the county strategic plan to drive process improvements.
9) Continue to collaborate with our public safety elected officials and department heads, implement the County’s long-term
Public Safety Realignment Plan and supporting programs to realize the Plan’s goals.
10) Continue to further implement healthcare reform, both as a service provider and as an employer.
11) Continue to utilizing the county strategic plan to drive process improvement and promote county efficiencies and annual
cost savings.
12) Continue to facilitate the transition of the Oversight Board functions for the County of Ventura to its successor entity.
13) Facilitate implementation of the relevant portions of the Ten-Year strategy to End Homelessness.
14) Continue to oversee construction, and ensure fiscal sustainability, of the County’s Hospital Replacement Wing at Ventura
County Medical Center which is planned to be completed by the mid-2017.
15) Continue to improve countywide automation and efficiencies by, collaborating with our Auditor Controller’s Office on the
implementation of additional enhancements to the Financial Management System and Budget Preparation System;
continuing work on the Property Tax System Replacement Project; and further expanding the County’s Website, Accela land
management and Electronic Content Management systems and programs, among others.
16) Continue to invest in our County workforce by establishing additional training programs for County leaders and staff,
including the development and implementation of the Strategic Leadership Academy; grow new mentoring and intern
programs, and further implementation of the County-wide e-Performance system.
17) Continue to ensure that consistent customer satisfaction rating mechanisms are available to all recipients of County
services and collaborate with agencies and departments in this area.
18) Continue to research, write and produce informative videos for the online program “Featuring Ventura County” to be
viewed on the VCNC.
19) Continue to update news releases, website, social media, presentations for community outreach and information.
20) Facilitate the implementation of a new countywide leave tracking system.
21) Develop and implement “Developing Cultural Competency” workshop to workforce.
22) Roll out expanded Workplace Security Awareness Training for staff and managers.
23) Complete conversion from paper personnel files to Electronic Content Management (ECM).

Objectives
O
1) Continue efforts to achieve and maintain fiscal stability.
2) Issue $180 million in Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes through competitive bid process.
3) Refinance 2009 Certificates of Participation to achieve reduction in interest costs.
4) Continue to automate the Budget Development Manual process.
5) Coordinate capital projects and long term debt
6) Continue development and implementation of program-based budgeting.
7) Continue development of a county-wide strategic facilities master plan.
8) Continue upgrade of the County’s Budget System and identify opportunities for improvement and enhancement.
9) Expand the implementation of a county-wide Performance Management program.
10) Continue the implementation of VCREA programs and seek further funding to expand services.
11) Continue to manage the emPower comprehensive energy efficiency financing program.
12) Coordinate and enhance the County’s implementation of the public safety realignment plan.
13) Assist in evaluating alternative incarceration programs in coordination with the Sheriff, District Attorney, Public Defender
and Probation.
14) Develop more grant opportunities, such as the Pay 4 Success grant, for funding programs to reduce recidivism and
address the counties homelessness issue.
15) Continue oversight of the various public safety capital projects schedule for FY 2016-17: Vehicle & evidence storage
warehouse, Day Reporting Center, Todd Road Jail expansion - Medical & Programming facility.
16) Direct the implementation of the PFS grant program through its first year.
17) Develop a replacement for our aging cash management and projection system.
18) Continue to work with the twelve successor agencies, of the former Redevelopment Agencies within Ventura County, in
order to wind down agency operations as outlined in ABx1
19) Continue providing oversight management of the Property Tax Assessment and Collection System (PTACS) as a CEO
representation to the project governance committee.
20) Continue to assist the Governor’s RAC in developing a permanent allocation formula for realignment funds to counties.
21) Continue to provide financial oversight on HCA’s VCMC Hospital Replacement Wing Project and its operations.
22) Continue to assist the CCP to develop a dashboard of system wide recidivism data to evaluate the success of the
County’s public safety realignment plan and the programs being funded.

Objectives
O
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS:
1. Develop State and Federal legislative Agendas and Platforms and pursue sound and effective local government through
the legislative process.
2. Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through Proposition 84 (water bond) passed by
California voters in 2006.
3. Pursue regional funding for the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County through the passage of Proposition 1 (water
bond) passed by California voters in 2014.
4. Manage the $17.5 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Round 1
Implementation Grant.
5. Manage the $18 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Round 2
Implementation Grant.
6. Manage the $8.4 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Drought
Implementation Grant.
7. Manage the $12.3 million Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County Integrated Regional Water Management Final Round
Implementation Grant.
8. Manage the Ventura County Regional Energy Alliance program.
9. Manage the Climate Protection Plan activities and responsibilities.
10. Manage the emPower comprehensive energy efficiency financing program in collaboration with Santa Barbara and San
Luis Obispo Counties.
11. Serve as the County representative for the Tri-County Community Choice Energy (CCE) feasibility study, an effort to
determine the feasibility of developing a Tri-County CCE program in order to procure alternative energy supplies.
PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICE:
1. Continue to research, write and produce informative videos for the online program “Featuring Ventura County” to be
viewed on the VCNC.
2. Continue to write, coordinate and edit material for the VCNC.
3. Research, write, print and distribute the County of Ventura annual reports and other publications.
4. Ongoing: News releases, website, social media, presentations, etc.
5. Work with the Emergency Planning Council on public information matters.
6. Redesign CEO pages on the County’s public website.
SERVICE EXCELLENCE OFFICE:
1. Facilitate the update or creation of two Agency Executive Planning Sessions
2. Provide at least 20 days of training for County staff
3. Continue to provide training and outreach to partner organizations
4. Work with agencies to support continued cost savings of at least $2 million each year
5. Align budget performance measures with strategic plan measures.
6. Utilize the County strategic plan to drive process improvements.
7. Coordinate the creation of a County economic vitality strategic plan
8. Oversee the implementation and reporting of the economic vitality strategic plan results
9. Participate in the economic development portion of the General Plan update

Objectives
O
CEO- Fiscal and Administration:
1) Continue to provide fiscal, administrative and information technology services to County Executive Office, Board of
Supervisors, Farm Advisor, Civil Service Commission and the Grand Jury.
2) Continue to assist with the development of department program budgets, cost recovery rate calculations and workflow
models.
3) Continue to collaborate with the CEO-Budget Division and Auditor-Controller’s Office on the VCFMS 3.10 process
improvement and identify the necessary reports to be developed.
CEO Information Technology Services:
1) Perform various CEO IT projects as prioritized and approved by management.
2) Continue to review the County of Ventura Continuity of Operations system “COOP.” Establish a road map for all agencies
to ensure all COOP content is up to date. Planning for continued agency COOP training.
3) Continue to provide IT support to CEO, Civil Service, Grand Jury, Board of Supervisors desktop/Server users and various
system applications.
4) Facilitate implementation of a new Countywide leave tracking system.

Objectives
O
1. Adopt local rules for the Assessment Appeals Board.
2. Upgrade COB Public with improvements for Assessment Appeals.
3. Initiate imaging project for Board of Supervisors records.
4. Request each agency to review their Conflict of Interest Code as part of the biennial review by the Board of Supervisors
and post each agency’s Conflict of Interest Code on the Clerk of the Board’s Internet web page.

Objectives
O
1. Streamline recruitment processes to maintain and improve customer service, and in doing so, improve performance in
regard to recruitment metrics.
2. Transition recruitment processes toward more electronic records and less paper records.
3. Continue working toward staffing and retention approaches that support goals and needs of agencies County-wide while
applying best practices in Human Resources.
4. Continue adding e-Performance to additional remaining Agencies and Departments.
5. Continue to represent the County in various administrative forums, as necessary.
6. Continue to improve/maintain recruitment metrics turnaround times and decrease standard deviation.
7. Continue to administer the County’s classification/compensation plan.
8. Continue to maintain a market-based compensation system through compensation studies/surveys, research and
analysis.
9. Continue to maintain compliance with State and Federal employment laws regarding compensation.
10. Continue to update existing classification specifications and delete those which are no longer used.
11. Develop and implement performance measures for reclassification requests and classification specification changes.
12. Finalize and implement the County-wide Market-Based Adjustment compensation study for unrepresented job
classifications.
13. Continue development of training curriculum based on Department/Agency staffing development needs.
14. Continue with implementation and performance measurement of Nuts & Bolts for Managers training courses.
15. Continue to provide, as needed, “Real Colors-Team Building” to offer more training opportunities to agencies.
16. Implement Leadership Excellence and Action Program, initiative 2 cohorts
17. Develop and implement “Developing Cultural Competency” workshop to workforce.
18. Roll out expanded Workplace Security Awareness Training for staff and managers.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. Refine social media and recruiting strategy plan to better support excellence in hiring resources County-wide, which may
create savings through employee retention and increased potential of staff hired.
2. Conduct Lean Six Sigma events to streamline recruitment processes in alignment with customer service related metrics.
Potential savings is anticipated due to a decrease in lost productivity experienced during replacement of trained employees.
3. Provide training opportunities for public employees in other jurisdictions where appropriate, which may result in some
potential program cost recovery.
4. Provide customized Customer Service training for IT Services, which will result in a cost savings to IT Services through
the elimination of an outside vendor contract.
5. Implement 3 cohorts a year of the Leadership Excellence and Action Program (LEAP).

Objectives
O
1. Develop/implement strategies to streamline hiring processes.
2. Investigate and resolve allegations of misconduct within 30 days of notification, unless extenuating circumstances
develop.
3. Continue to represent the County in various administrative forums, as necessary.
4. Continue to improve/maintain recruitment metrics turnaround times.
5. Provide training and development opportunities for staff.
6. Continue implementation of automated employee relations tracking system.
7. Complete conversion from paper personnel files to Electronic Content Management (ECM).
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. Provide training and development opportunities for employees.
2. Implementation of improved IT infrastructure to assist in generating increased work productivity.
3. Recruitment advertising costs for attracting qualified and diverse candidates.
4. Executive recruiting costs for using specialized recruiting firms.

Objectives
O
1. Complete Supplemental Retirement Plan comprehensive actuarial valuation as of June 30, 2016.
2. Review options to lower employer costs.
3. Prepare plan information for FY 2015-16 CAFR.
4. Research possible plan design changes and distribution alternatives.
5. Research alternative solutions for plan beneficiary record keeping.
6. Calculate department allocation of the Elected Department Head Annual Required Contribution (ARC) for the budget
development manual.
7. Complete Minimum Required Distribution payments as required under federal regulations.
8. Conduct annual benefit mailing inclusive of application requests and pertinent plan information.
9. Conduct semiannual investment reviews in adherence to the Investment Policy Statement.
10. Monitor 415 limits for Elected Department Head benefit recipients to ensure limit is not exceeded.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FPotential costs associated with update to plan beneficiary record keeping.

Objectives
O
1. Plan for and engage in collective bargaining over the terms of seven (7) labor contracts due to expire in mid-2016.
2. Continue to improve working relationships with county line agencies/departments and the ten (10) labor organizations that
represent county employees through thirteen (13) labor contracts.
3. Establish an effective grievance and discipline tracking system.
4. Hire a second quality Labor Relations Manager.
5. Continue to secure appropriate and necessary professional training and certification of Labor Relations staff.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F1. Continuation of labor law consulting agreement with William F. Kay

Objectives
O
1. Continue to utilize the available resources in the development of the Disability Management Division.
2. Upon selection and implementation of the Disability Management system, develop a curriculum to integrate the program
as part of the ongoing “Nut’s & Bolts” mandatory training to inform and update managers and line supervisors on the
regulatory standards.
3. Establish a mechanism to track all absences in order to provide a means to help produce a viable performance measure
based on actual data and the potential to reduce litigation in the Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act of 2008
(ADAAA) regulation compliance.
4. Collaborate with the Auditor-Controller’s office to incorporate required VCHRP adjustments to assist tracking employee
leave of absences.

Objectives
O
1. Maintain relationship with Cal HFA’s MCC program.
2. Continue administration of the Mobile Home Replacement program for CalHome.

Objectives
O
 Work with IT Services to maintain and complete future documentation of the Commission’s meetings, formal hearings and
appeals.
 Evaluate utility of agenda management software.
 Continue study of the Personnel Rules and Regulations to identify segments that may be candidates for amendment in
order to clarify the rules governing all County employees.
 Continue working on other measures to control both costs and time needed to afford all parties a full and fair hearing.

Objectives
O1. Provide efficient and effective administration and attorney support services.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FCounty Counsel expects to maintain a balance between administrative and productive hours.

Objectives
O
1. Develop legal framework for effectively and efficiently litigating cases and advising agency staff in light of significant
challenges presented by implementation of the Continuum of Care Reform for the child welfare system.
2. Continue to adopt technology advances to improve efficiency and effectiveness.
3. Maintain high success rate in litigated cases.
4. Handle increasing appellate workload within budgetary constraints.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FHSA funds the majority of the County Counsel's work in juvenile dependency through a cost shift.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to develop expertise in water law issues, including Groundwater Sustainability Act.
2. Continue effective and efficient representation of County’s interests in juvenile dependency and conservatorship matters.
3. Continue to provide legal guidance and analysis of potential impacts of implementing Laura’s Law in Ventura County.
4. Continue to obtain favorable results in all litigation matters.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
County Counsel advisory and litigation services depend on receipt of revenue for legal charges and general fund support. If
departments reduce their use of County Counsel as cost saving measures, County Counsel may have to shift its effort more
toward traditional tort cases, or seek additional general fund support.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to refine and enhance the Treasurer-Tax Collector’s on-line presence by utilizing social media and digital
marketing.
2. Continue to expand public relations through the presence at special community events and brand management.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The mandated requirements for both tax collections, treasury and investment are increasingly becoming complex in nature.
The Executive Management is actively engaged in and partnered with various state and national organizations to stay
abreast of any legislative changes and/or practices.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to provide East County taxpayers a convenient location to make inquiries of tax payments during the security
December and April collection cycles.
2. Continue to proactively engage in business process improvements that result in increased efficiencies to meet the goals
and objectives of the Office.
3. Engage and partner with Information Technology Services Department, ACO and the Assessor’s Office to design, test,
and implement the Integrated Property Tax Assessment and Collections System Project.
4. Improve efficiencies in taxpayer service through on-going personnel training and optimum use of technology, including the
outsourcing of our remittance processing to become more focused on our core mission.
5. Increase public awareness of programs available to senior citizens and disabled persons.
6. Produce a certified Cash Handling Manual and provide in service training for all Deputy Tax Collectors to be certified Cash
Handlers using this manual.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to maintain the highest possible Standard and Poor’s rating of AAAf/S-1 + for the County’s investment pool.
2. Market the investment pool to local agencies to increase the size of the pool and reduce the basis points which will
leverage its operations for increased efficiency.
3. Expand the number of agencies/departments that participate in online payments through the County EPay system by
collaborating with Information Technology Services Department and the ACO and coordinating services with the County
bank.
4. Continue to issue annual audited financial statements in accordance with GAAP.
5. Plan and host the California Association of Tax Collectors and Treasurers Area V conference in March 2017.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to transition permittees to electronic pesticide use reporting (PUR) through 2016, creating a more efficient PUR
system.
2. Continued refinement of permitting in Cal Ag permits software through 2016 to better manage the department’s largest
data base.
3. Implement the Cal PEATS software program by the end of the calendar year of 2016 or as soon as made available state
wide. Train respective staff to operate the software program.
4. Continue to complete and update the mapping of the crop layer in 2016, in part, to assist with the field fumigation
evaluation process.
5. Continue to provide in-house training and DPR sponsored training to current and new inspectors in 2016 to assist in staff
development.
6. In 2016, continue to provide assistance for newly hired inspectors so that they may pass the two examinations that focus
on PUE to assist in staff development.
7. Create a specialist on staff for residue investigations in 2016 who can assist in training additional staff in this discipline
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. We spend a large number of hours responding to and investigating public complaints and requests. In 2015, the PUE
program had a total of 81 public complaints, spending a total of 255 staff hours towards responding and investigating. The
PUE program also has a large number of hours dedicated in response to various public information requests. In 2015, we
had a total of 78 public information requests, spending a total of 74 staff hours for completion. Lastly, the PUE program
responded to 123 public records requests, spending a total of 294 staff hours for completion. The increased workload from
these public complaints and requests over the past few years has put an additional strain on a relatively small department
which handles a very wide variety of time consuming and sensitive tasks.
2. The DPR has implemented new regulations which will have a direct impact on our inspectors’ workload. In July 2015, the
DPR designated chlorpyrifos as a restricted material. This new regulation will affect about 30 products used in agriculture.
Chlorpyrifos is an organophosphate. The adopted new regulations are geared to help safeguard people and the
environment. Also, these regulations will help to maintain more control of the use of this product in the agricultural setting. It
is estimated that after this regulatory change is fully implemented, our office will incur an additional 500 hours of evaluation
time spent in compliance with the regulations put in place by the DPR on the use of chlorpyrifos in 2016.
3. In May 2015, the DPR releasedthe new recommended fumigation permit conditions for metam sodium and potassium.
The CAC has adopted these recommended conditions. As a result, all fumigations will be reviewed for compliance with the
new conditions before approval of the fumigation Notice of Intent. This requires more time to be spent by staff on
fumigations, especially fumigations using metam, during the evaluation process. As methyl bromide is phased out for use in
fumigations, metam and chloropicrin are being used more and taking more time to evaluate with stricter and more complex
conditions in place. This is especially time consuming when dealing with fumigations near schools. Additionally, fumigations
near schools require multiple days of planning to be carried out safely pursuant to regulations and local permit conditions.
4. Many of our PUE inspectors are newer to the department as well as to the position. This means it willtake a considerable
amount of time devoted towards training, time which could otherwise be spent on maintaining and improving PUE programs
funded at the state level.

Objectives
O
We will update and reissue compliance agreements for all Master Permit, Approved Treatment Protocol and Program
Regulation nurseries, in accordance with the California Department of Food and Agriculture’s Pierce’s Disease Program’s
protocol.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
As more Master Permit Program nurseries convert to the Approved Treatment Protocol Program, our funding may change.
As the drought continues, nurseries may reduce shipments, which would in turn, could impact our workload.

Objectives
O
1. To increase response time to lead agencies by assigning a Senior Agricultural Inspector to assist with Agricultural Land
Use Planning.
2. To inspect Swap Meets on a quarterly basis.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
We do not expect significant reductions in funding from the industry funded and state funded programs within this Division. In
fact, with the increased workload from the new programs, we were able to increase our state funding for FY 16/17 through
three different cooperative agreements.

Objectives
O
To continue to increase the competencies of relatively new staff and keep older staff up to date with the latest program
developments through a combination of in-house training and attend-ance at workshops offered by the CDFA and the USDA.
To improve and simplify data collection by the department. The Agricultural Commissioner continues to work with various
stakeholders to secure funding for programs that protect the industry from the influx of exotic pests. This will continue to be
an ongoing effort as pest pressure increases due to changing climate condi-tions and increased worldwide movement of
products which may harbor harmful pests.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
We have had new markets open for export. While this presents exciting opportunities for our local industry and our
economy, it puts increased strain on existing staff. The export require-ments for some of these new markets are done by
“systems approach.” This requires our in-spectors not only to inspect the presented product but also to review
documentation of re-quirements met during the crops growing season. This greatly increases the amount of time to certify
these types of shipments. Our existing trading partners continue to place more stringent export requirements on our
products which increases our workload. Certification of exports are reimbursed through fees for inspection and certification;
however, inspections of incoming plant products designed to protect local agriculture and maintain export viability through
early detections and eradication of exotic and harmful pests continue to receive little to no reim-bursement. While staff
turnover rate has slowed, we still face the challenge of bringing newer inspectors up to journeymen skill levels, a process
that takes several years to do. This currently puts strain on our remaining experienced inspectors and managers, as they
attempt to fill in the gaps to continue to do inspections of perishable products in a timely manner.

Objectives
O
1. Streamline billing process measures through automation.
2. Continue to build staff capacity by identifying strengths and weaknesses, and providing training/mentoring opportunities.
3. Study organizational structure and improve workload balance.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Food and Agricultural Code Section 224.5 (g) provides that counties may receive funding through reimbursement of the
unclaimed gas tax (UGT). In order to collect the UGT, counties are required to:
“Maintain county general fund support for agricultural commissioner services at least equal to the average amount expended
for the five preceding fiscal years, unless the county is facing unusual economic hardship that precludes that support.”
Over the last seven (7) years, the total UGT received by the county has averaged over $727,800.00. For Fiscal Year
2014-2015 the county general fund for agricultural commissioner services met the average amount expended for the five
preceding fiscal years.

Objectives
O
Continue to enhance the image of animal sheltering by being progressive, decrease the amount of owned animals that enter
the system by creating the Pet Retention program, expand upon our already useful website to help pet owners receive
assistance in various areas, continue to improve community relationships by partnering with businesses and retail chains,
continue to educate the community on how they can rely on their local animal services for assistance and increase the
amount of volunteers and programs we have.

Objectives
O
Implement an email license renewal system to reduce printing costs and to make the process convenient to our customers,
create more outreach programs by continuing our rabies and license clinics, create a campaign for pet licensing that
encourages pet licensing and highlights the benefits of owning a licensed pet using social media and print campaigns.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
There are an estimated 210,000 dogs in the county and less than one third of them are currently licensed. Other than a
seasonal program using part-time help, current staffing levels limit proactive licensing efforts.

Objectives
O
Renovate the back of the Simi Valley Shelter, update the outdated cages at the Camarillo Shelter, and continue to work on
master plan for the potential upgrade of the Camarillo Shelter.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FThe renovation of the Camarillo and Simi shelters is crucial to the success of the Department to remain a no-kill facility.

Objectives
O
Further utilize Chameleon software to enhance the level of efficiencies, and continue our outreach and partnership with local
veterinarians and student interns to assist with spay and neuter and animal examinations at no cost to the County.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The renovation of the veterinarian office and surgical unit is crucial to the success of the Department performing spays and
neuters and remaining a no-kill facility.

Objectives
O
Continue to get all officers through required training, fully utilize software to have a more accurate reporting process, install
GPS devices in trucks to report on locations, times at calls and vehicle error reporting that coincides with County Fleet and
continue to work closely with Fish and Wildlife to develop new protocols for wildlife handling.

Objectives
O
Complete Year 1 of the FEMA-mandated 5-year Recertification of the CRS-Program for Unincorporated Ventura County as a
Class 5 County and submit the Recertification document package to FEMA within the required time frame by October 1,
2016.

Objectives
O
Prepare a new a new Water Pipeline Franchise Ordinance for adoption by the Board of Supervisors. Work with
Transportation and Environmental Health to establish protocols for abandonment of oil pipelines within County Roads.

Objectives
OManage lease portfolio and respond to department needs for new space as required.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to improve map review turnaround times.
2 Continue scanning survey documents/images and make them available online.
3. Revise and update Guide for the Preparation of Maps.
4. Develop performance metrics for Certificates of Compliance.
5. Preserve historic survey monuments.
6. Develop and implement multi-year plan for maintenance of vertical control network.

Objectives
O
1. Meet with stakeholders and finalize the Non-Development and Development Grading Standards.
2. As a recommendation from our customers to improve customer service, the following items will be investigated, selected,
and implemented:
a. Create an electronic delivery system using e-plan check and Accela that allows engineering consultants to upload their
grading plans and engineering reports for their clients and receive faster plan reviews by Development and Inspection
Services Division staff.
b. Update an invoice format for monthly statements that will provide information that the customers want to see regarding
staff time and charges on grading permits.
3. Work with the Resource Conservation District to improve Best Management Practices for Agricultural Grading permits that
minimize topsoil loss during the rainy season.

Objectives
O
1. Create an electronic delivery system using e-plancheck and Accela that allows civil engineers and land surveyors to
upload their floodplain development permits and elevation certificates for their clients and receive faster plan reviews by
Development and Inspection Services Division staff.
2. Pass without issue a Community Assistance Visit (audit) by FEMA.
3. Maintain a high level of customer satisfaction at the Public Works Permits Counter on floodplain and flood insurance
inquiries.

Objectives
O
1) State Mandated Solid Waste Diversion
Compliance: Comply with all aspects of the California Integrated Waste Management Act (AB 939), AB 341 (AB 32) and AB
1826 for all non-exempted unincorporated area businesses meeting or exceeding minimum thresholds.
2) Contract Administration: Administer 19 residential and commercial solid waste collection agreements for service within
the UA, including enforcement of required collector reporting, payments & services. Administer existing agreements for Simi
Valley and Toland Road Landfills, and Agromin, Peach Hill Soils and Ojai Valley Organics greenwaste recycling facilities.
3) Annual Fee & Rate Increases: Implement annual adjustments in solid waste-related rates & fees pursuant both to solid
waste hauler agreements as well as the Simi Valley Landfill & Recycling Center operating agreement;
4) Ordinance Administration: Condition all building projects meeting thresholds of the County's C&D debris recycling
Ordinance 4421 and State’s CALGreen building codes, while maintaining enforcement & oversight of all other solid waste
ordinance code (i.e., Ord. 4445) within division purview.
5) Closed Dumpsite Monitoring: Maintain multi-year gas monitoring and analysis project at a closed County dumpsite, per
State directive;
6) Community Beautification: In cooperation with Supervisors' offices, conduct 12 Community Beautification & clean-up
Events (CBEs) among the County's various supervisorial districts.
7) Pollution Prevention Center: Continue HHW collection operations in compliance with state mandate; host 9 HHW
collection events at PPC;
8) Electronic Waste Collection: Continue e-waste collection per state mandate and a new multi-year contractor agreement.
9) Regional Collaboration: Maintain cordial dialogue and mutually beneficial collaboration amongst all County jurisdictions.
10) RMDZ Program Administration: Maintain administration of RMDZ program to provide long-term, low interest loans to
eligible Ventura County businesses;
11) Represent County on Resource Recovery and Waste Management Committee of CEAC (County Engineers Assoc. of
CA).

Objectives
O
FISCAL SERVICES:
- Enhance/expand the credit card payment acceptance to include billing services.
- Recruit and fill Accounting Officer vacancy.
PERSONNEL SERVICES:
- Review HR section roles, responsibilities, and workload within decentralized HR program.
- Ergonomic Evaluations - working on assuring an ergonomic evaluation is on file for each employee and kept current within
the last five years.
- Training – Schedule and follow up on all mandatory training for staff to stay in compliance with county policy
- Managers’ Nuts and Bolts Training – Schedule and follow up on each managers’ required classes per County policy.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY/GRAPHICS/WEB/ GIS:
Complete upgrades and software enhancements for the following RMA business software packages:
- Land Use Management Software - Accela Automation, Accela Citizen Access, Accela GIS, Accela Mobile Office, as well as
Mobile applications Accela Inspector and CodeOfficer for mobile devices.
- Environmental Heath Envision Business Software – upgrade of present system creates online connection to California
Environmental Resources Evaluation System (CERS).
- Operations/Planning Financial Software – Research and review replacement software for Financial Planning billing system.
- RMA Website - Leverage the latest technologies to redesign the user interface to help make information easier to find with
the new and focused ‘How to’ selections that are specific to the individuals land use questions.
- Complete Electronic Document Review/On-line (WEB) application submittal for plan check review.
- Upgrade RMA hardware and software technology infrastructure to ensure optimum system operations and service to our
customers.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
This budget unit provides administrative and technical support services to the agency and its costs are largely funded by the
agency’s user fees.
Objectives
O
Continue monitoring of EIR accounts and timely closure as required by the contract and initiate administrative contract
amendments.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FThis program is cost-neutral as applicants pay for consultant costs.

Objectives
O
- Use the Planning Division website and Accela Automation with Citizens Access as a means of communication between the
public, applicants and staff to further streamline the processing of all permit types.
- Further refine and improve Accela Automation records and reports that are utilized by the Permit Administration Staff.
- Create new, more tailored, applications for wireless communication facilities and oil and gas permitting projects.
- Reduce the processing time for film permits requiring waivers by migrating the ArcGIS mapping and address list creation
function from the RMA-GIS staff to the Film Permit Coordinator in the Planning Division.
- Further improve the film permit application process in Accela Citizen Access. This would allow submittal of film permit
applications and related materials outside of regular business hours to better meet customer needs.
- Add a Live Chat function to the Film Permit website that would allow production companies or interested parties to use an
online chat function to communicate with the Film Permit Coordinator when he is available.
- Continue to review and update the Standard Conditions document that is used when preparing conditions of approval for
discretionary entitlements.
- Conduct training for Planning Division and other County agency staff on permit processing-related topics (e.g., CEQA,
select topics of the Ventura County Initial Study Assessment Guidelines).
- Monitor and, if found to be appropriate, revise permit processing procedures in accordance with new sea-level rise
information published by the California Coastal Commission and other organizations.
- Prepare standard Initial Study responses to address common environmental issues and standard policy narratives for use
in staff reports.
- Recruit a new Senior Planner and possibly two Planner I/II’s to assist with the processing of ministerial and discretionary
entitlement applications and serve the Planning Counter.
- Continue the efforts within the Planning Division to take immediate action to respond to public comments and survey
responses.
- Develop County-specific Reclamation Standards and a Vested Rights Determination process and complete annual financial
assurance process for each mining operation.
- Create a stand-alone CUP application for mining and Oil and Gas projects.
- Review and implement improvements in the oil and gas permitting and condition compliance program.
- Coordinate with other County agencies and the State Division of Oil and Gas and Geothermal Resources (DOGGR) on the
inspection and monitoring of oil and gas facilities.
- Process the proposed CEMEX mining facility conditional use permit modification.
- Continue tracking of CEQA Mitigation measures to ensure long-term compliance.
- Perform regular reviews on sites with discretionary permits to confirm compliance with approved conditions as staff time
allows.
- Prepare a list of, and process, required amendments to the Ventura County Initial Study Assessment Guidelines and the
Ventura County Administrative Supplement to CEQA, given recent changes in state law and court decisions.
- Perform a comprehensive review of the Liquor License Review process with the intent to update procedures, fees,
application materials and website information for Public Convenience or Necessity Determinations required by the
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for new “off sale” alcohol licenses.
- Development of a website “badge” or seal to be distributed and used by approved wedding venues on their websites. This
digital badge will include the permit number and expiration date of the Conditional Use Permit. The purpose is to distinguish
legally permitted venues from illegal wedding venues for reference by prospective brides and grooms.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
- Respond to changes in state law.
- Keep pace with technological advancements in mapping and database management.
- Meet California Permit Streamlining Act deadlines.
- Keep up with programmatic and administrative needs.

Objectives
O
GENERAL PLAN AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS:
Grant Funded Programs:
- Complete the CCC certification process for Phase 2A amendments to the Local Coastal Program (LCP), including
necessary Board hearings. Phase 2A includes substantial updates to the Coastal Area Plan (CAP) and Coastal Zoning
Ordinance (CZO) in six topic areas. In addition, complete the Board adoption process for the Phase 2B amendments to the
LCP prior to the December 31, 2016 deadline. The Phase 2B amendments include substantive updates to the CAP for the
Coastal Trail and updates to CAP and CZO for Environmentally Sensitive Habitat Areas (ESHA).
- Complete all CIAP grant-funded projects (Coastal Biology, LCP amendments) by the December 2016 deadline. Completion
of the LCP amendments project does not require completion of the CCC certification process.
Plans and Ordinances:
- Complete the Board adoption process for LCP amendments related to Wireless Communication Facilities and initiate the
CCC certification process concurrently with other LCP amendments.
- Complete the first phase of work on the Special Needs Housing projects, which include four separate programs that
implement State law, housing Element programs, or additional Board-directed programs.
- Complete the first phase of work on the Inconsistent Zoning project, which will correct mapping errors and rezone parcels
that are inconsistent with the General Plan. Includes approximately one thousand parcels located in all Districts of the
County.
- Complete the first phase of work on the Habitat Connectivity Protection Overlay Zone. Includes a review before the Board
of Supervisors of initial options as well as project milestones necessary to complete the project by December 2017.
- Process Board pre-screenings for privately-initiated General Plan amendments or Coastal/Non-Coastal Ordinance text
amendments, which are brought forward twice each year for Board review. In addition, process privately-initiated ordinance
amendments approved by the Board during a pre-screening process.
- With assistance from County Counsel, staff will initiate the public review process upon completion of the draft Subdivision
Ordinance amendments.
RELATED PROGRAMS:
- Complete the 2017 Annual Report for submittal to the State Office of Planning and Research and State Housing and
Community Development, as required by law.
- Complete the 2016 Annual CIP Review (countywide General Plan conformance review), as required by law.
- Complete two, federally financed CIAP grants (Coastal Biology, LCP Amendments) by the December 31, 2016 deadline.
- Continue to monitor changes to State legislation and update the pending projects list in response to new State mandates.
Pending available staff resources:
- Continue to review and prepare written comments on projects proposed by the federal or state governments or by other
Ventura County jurisdictions.
- Continue to participate in various regional planning programs.
- Complete an update to the Locally Important Species (LIS) and continue part-time support for related Permitting Program
functions.
- Continue to review/process updates to the General Plan or Area Plans due to LAFCO annexations.
- Monitor projects awarded through the Tree Mitigation Fund Distribution Program.
- Monitor and pursue grant funded opportunities for Plans and Ordinance projects.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
- Fiscal reliance on state or federal grants to complete program responsibilities or Board directives has become more
challenging given the lack of available grants, a poor fit between grant and program objectives, and limited staff resources to
prepare grant applications.
- Maintaining up-to-date regulations, and responding in a timely manner to changes in State law or privately-initiated
amendment applications, is challenging due to limited staff and fiscal resources.
- Maintaining a coordinated approach, as required by law, to the concurrent development of multiple amendments to General
Plan and Ordinance-level documents.
- Keeping pace with technological advancements in mapping, public outreach programs, and database management.

Objectives
O
- Continue to provide staff support and training to the Mobile Home Park Rent Review Board (RRB), assuring compliance
with Ordinance 4366.
- Update all existing Mobile Home Park Rent Review Board resolutions to correspond with the numbering of the codified
Mobile Home Park Rent Control ordinance through Board action.
- Review and update Cultural Heritage Board Resolution 2009-1.1 (Exemptions and Administrative Approvals) to include
criteria for the use of substitute materials when repairing, updating, or maintaining historic structures.
- Finalize a process to review demolition requests for properties/structures over 50 years old that are not designated Cultural
Heritage Sites.
- Create a map of the Points of Interest and make it available to the public on the Cultural Heritage Board website.
- Convert the 1989 Ventura County Landmark slides to a digital format and make them available as a reference tool for staff
and the public.
- Continue to promote awareness and appreciation of historic resources and cultural heritage via the Ventura County Fair
and other community events.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
- Responding to changes in state law
- Completion of grant-funded programs with limited staff resources.
- Continue to seek grant funding opportunities.

Objectives
O
- Complete Phase 2 and 3, and begin Phase 4 of the General Plan Update. Phase 2 milestones will include the preparation
of the General Plan background Report with focus group and Planning Commission workshops to gather input on the Report;
community, focus group and Planning Commission workshops to gather input on the county's assets, issues, and
opportunities; and preparation of an Assets, Issues, and Opportunities Summary Report. Phase 3 milestones will include
community, Planning Commission and Board of Supervisor workshops to establish/affirm the General Plan Vision and
Guiding Principles. Phase 4 activities will include commencing the preparation of land use alternatives and policy options
based on analysis developed and input gathered during Phases 2 and 3; and commencing the preparation of the
Alternatives Concepts and Policy Options Report.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FResponding to changes in state law

Objectives
O
- Maintain next day processing of inspection requests of 99%.
- Improve our current inspector/supervisor follow up and ride-along program.
- Maintain existing Safety Assessment Program (SAP) certifications and training for inspection staff as well as certification
attainment for new staff.
- Continue training and updating inspection staff on changes to NPDES Surface Water Quality Requirements for construction
sites.
- Continue ongoing training on the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
- Continue training inspection staff on field enforcement of California Title 24 Building Standards.
- Continue construction related training for buildings located in the county’s many floodplains.
- Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
- Expected changes in state building standards and regulations will take place this coming fiscal year. There will be a
significant need for additional training, books, support materials, while serving the ongoing workload.
- Improving use of technological advancements in GIS, mapping and processing field inspection data by transitioning to
iPhone-based inspection documentation which will allow real-time updates to the database.
- Staying abreast of CalEMA and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) training requirements for damage
assessment.
- Tracking current drought conditions/regulatory responses and preparing for potential future impacts upon development in
the unincorporated area.

Objectives
O
- Pursue and maintain "Less than 15 Days" average turnaround standard for first plan checks while continuing to strive for a
“Less than 10 Days” average turnaround time.
- Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
- Continue Plan Checker Engineer Training and Certification for Accessibility Specialist (CASp)
- Obtain additional training and certification for plan check staff in floodplain management.
- Continue to train staff on the California Energy and Green Building Codes.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
- Preparing for continuing changes in state building standards and regulations, particularly in Green Building, Water
Conservation, and Energy Efficiency.
- Staying abreast CalEMA and FEMA training requirements for damage assessment.
- Tracking current drought conditions/regulatory responses and preparing for potential future impacts upon development in
the unincorporated area.

Objectives
O
- Continue improving and updating our public information handouts.
- Continue document imaging of division files, including migration of document images to File Net for access through Accela
Automation.
- Maintain and improve our online Policy and Interpretation Manual.
- Maintain staff training on adopted codes, ordinances and appropriate State laws effecting building construction and
continue compliance with all State Laws.
- Continue training in our Injury and Illness Prevention Program.
- Continue to train staff on the California Energy and Green Building Codes.
- Continue public outreach and education on topics such as graywater and energy conservation.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
- Preparing for continuing changes in state building standards and regulations, particularly in Green Building, Water
Conservation, and Energy efficiency.
- Staying abreast of CalEMA and FEMA training requirements for damage assessment.
- “No-Fee” Solar Photovoltaic permits have tapered off about 7% so far this fiscal year. It may be that a saturation point has
been reached for unincorporated properties and these permit levels could remain steady and become more predictable.
- Tracking current drought conditions/regulatory responses and preparing for potential future impacts upon development in
the unincorporated area.

Objectives
O
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
- Continue to train and assist customers with the implementation of CERS.
- Incorporate new inspection and data software into the CUPA program to facilitate CERS implementation, and continue the
transition toward a more “paperless” office.
MEDICAL WASTE AND BODY ART:
- Provide outreach to medical waste generators on the safe handling and disposal of medical waste.
- Collaborate with industry groups to provide outreach to Ventura County middle school, high school, and college students
related to the legal and safety requirements for body art.
VOLUNTARY CLEANUP PROGRAM:
- Continue to provide outreach to local businesses regarding the advantages of the program, and.
- Continue to provide cleanup oversight for owners of non-underground storage tank contaminated properties.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
State regulations became effective January 2013 that required the electronic submittal of data from facilities subject to CUPA
jurisdiction (CERS). The CUPA section is tasked with training and assisting facilities with this data transmittal, which will
continue to add costs to the CUPA program.
Continued reductions in the amount of scholarship funding available to Environmental Health Division staff to attend the
annual CUPA conference and obtain required continuing education units will require adjustments to the Division’s annual
budget.
New regulations to the CUPA’s above ground petroleum storage tank (APSA) program will require that CUPA inspectors
obtain additional training and continuing education units.

Objectives
O
- Continue providing outreach promoting Environmental Health as a career to local high school and college students.
- Continue to work with other County Environmental Health divisions and food industry representatives in a statewide effort
to uniformly apply the California Retail Food Code.
- Continue outreach efforts to local retail food facility community to assist them in gaining compliance with State safe food
handling requirements.
- Continue mobile Food/TFF operator outreach and program streamlining.
- Continue program reviews to improve permit processes and reduce costs without compromising public health.
- Continue encouraging Backflow Device testers to use the Cross-Connection portal system and mobile phone applications
for test result reporting.
- Update and improve the Community Services webpages to be more user-friendly.
- Develop training modules for food facility operators or the Certified Food Safety professionals at each facility to use to train
food handlers on safe food handling procedures.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The potential passage of a Recreational Use Marijuana initiative in November 2016 will likely require Division involvement
when edible marijuana is used and sold in food products offered to the public.

Objectives
O
- Continue mosquito breeding source inspections and control activities.
- Continue responding to public complaints and service requests for mosquito control activities.
- Continue mosquito transmitted disease, plague and Lyme disease surveillance and public education efforts.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
- State regulations require Vector Control Technicians to obtain Vector Certification Continuing Education Units to maintain
their certifications. This continues to add costs and increase staff time dedicated to training.
- Increased costs for the purchases of mosquito control pesticides and compliance with State Water Resources Control
Board requirements pertaining to pesticide use may impact the amount of the per parcel benefit assessment necessary to
support ongoing mosquito control activities.
- Increase in monitoring, surveillance, and public outreach activities related to invasive mosquito species potentially entering
Ventura County.

Objectives
O
- Evaluate OWTS program standards and procedures, and complete alignment of these standards and procedures with new
statewide requirements.
- Continue permitting and enforcement activities pertaining to solid waste activities to insure protection of human health,
safety and the environment.
- Continue review of land use projects to insure conformance with applicable State and County requirements and evaluate
environmental impacts associated with these projects.
- Continue to pursue and secure State grant and other available funding for the Ocean Water Quality Monitoring Program
and conduct monitoring program consistent with available funding.
- Continue to evaluate State small water systems and individual/shared water supplies to insure conformance with State
primary drinking water standards.
- Continue data management through the use of Envision Connect and Accela to improve program efficiency and enhance
inter-program communication and data sharing.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
- State regulations require that Registered Environmental Health Specialists obtain Continuing Education Contact Hours to
maintain their registration status. This adds costs and increased staff time dedicated to training.
- State funding and other potential revenue sources for the Ocean Water Quality Monitoring Program remain uncertain from
year to year.
- Implementation of new statewide Onsite Wastewater Treatment and disposal requirements may result in increased
program costs due to more in-depth application review and water quality monitoring/data management.
- The Environmental Health Division will continue to be engaged in the local response to Onsite Wastewater Treatment
System water quality concerns identified in a Total Maximum Daily Loads adopted by the Regional Water Quality Control
Board. This will continue to add costs associated with increased staff time dedicated to this effort.

Objectives
O
- Continue our partnership with community organizations (Habitat for Humanity, Humane Society) and other county agencies
(Sheriff, Adult Protective Services, Animal Services) to improve housing stock and the livability of neighborhoods.
- Continue sending staff to training such as the week long training academy accredited by the CACEO, training seminars and
conferences.

Objectives
O
Supportive services funded and provided under Title III B include: Information and Referral Services which link older persons
and their families to specific community services, in-home services such as personal care, homemaker and chore services,
adult day care, legal services to help identify legal problems and legal service needs of older persons, case management,
material aid, outreach, transportation to medical appointments, and transportation to the local congregate meal site.
- The Older Americans Act mandates the operation of a long-term-care Ombudsman program, funded in part by Title III B (as
well as Title VII and CA state funds). A state-certified ombudsman is a trained individual who investigates and resolves
complaints made by, or on behalf of, older individuals who are residents of long-term-care facilities, nursing homes, and
residential care homes. The ombudsman does not represent the facility. Complaints may relate to inadequate hygiene;
physical abuse; personal items lost, stolen, or used by others; understaffing of the facility; action, inaction, or decisions of
long-term-care providers (or their representatives), public agencies, or social service agencies that may adversely affect the
health, safety, welfare, or rights of residents. Ombudsmen are guaranteed access to facilities and must maintain strict rules
of confidentiality for both clients and complainants.
- The Senior Nutrition Program (Title III C) provides both congregate and home delivered meals to seniors throughout
Ventura County. The purpose of the nutrition program is to: reduce hunger and food insecurity, promote socialization of older
individuals, promote the health and well-being of older individuals and delay adverse health conditions through access to
nutrition and other disease prevention and health promotion services. Meals and related nutrition services (such as nutrition
education and nutrition counseling) are provided to older individuals in a variety of settings, including congregate facilities
such as senior centers; or by home-delivery to older individuals who are homebound due to illness, disability, or geographic
isolation. Services are targeted to those in greatest social and economic need, with particular attention to low income
individuals, minority individuals, those in rural communities, those with limited English proficiency and those at risk of
institutional care. Nutrition Services Programs help older individuals to maintain independence, and to remain in their
communities.
- Title IIID provides funding for evidence based health, prevention, wellness and medication management programs aimed at
providing seniors with the tools to maintain their health, reduce their risk of developing chronic diseases, and manage their
health to live as independently as possible.
- Title IIIE provides funding for a range of support services which assist family and informal caregivers to care for their loved
ones at home for as long as possible. Families are the major providers of long-term care, but research has shown that caregiving
exacts a heavy emotional, physical and financial toll on the caregivers. Through contracts and direct service provision,
the following services may be provided: information to caregivers about available services, assistance to caregivers in
gaining access to the services, individual counseling, organization of support groups, and caregiver training, respite care,
and supplemental services.
- Title V Senior Employment Services Program is dedicated to providing job training and employment opportunities for
qualifying adults age 55 and over.
- Title VII provides funds to develop services and program to prevent elder abuse, neglect and exploitation.
- HICAP (Health Insurance Counseling Advocacy Program) with substantial volunteer support, provides assistance to
seniors in choosing the Medicare Plan to best suit their needs, and to assist with other health insurance related issues.
The Area Agency on Aging will identify and address the emerging and changing needs of the 60+ population as well as baby
boomers (born 1946-1964). The Area Agency on Aging will continue to identify and explore the needs of special populations
as well as the changing and emerging needs of seniors, and will develop and expand programs to help meet their needs.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The Older Americans Reauthorization Act 2016 will be signed into law in April 2016. While this is expected to assist with
additional funding for some senior programs, uncertain funding continues to threaten the safety net for Ventura County
seniors and adults with disabilities. The aging network does not have the necessary resources to serve its current clients, as
well as the ever growing number of aging Baby Boomers. Adults with disabilities who are not eligible for services from other
organizations have no safety net. Funding reductions have been occurring in key program areas since FY 2008-09 when the
State of California reduced funding for Community Based Service Programs (CBSPs) by ten percent. In FY 2009-10 the
State eliminated all general fund support for CBSPs effective October 1, 2009.
The AAA is committed to providing services while living within our means. This agency is expecting a similar amount of
federal and state funding as last year.
Although the AAA continues to leverage resources and partner with other agencies to provide services to seniors, the
increased cost of business and funding cuts of our partners will lead to decreased service levels. However, we will continue
to seek alternative sources of funds and utilize the funds we receive to meet the needs of the neediest of our seniors.

Objectives
O
MSSP provides extensive assessment and care planning services, which lead to linkage to existing community services,
such as transportation, housing, meals, in-home care, adult day health care programs, therapeutic counseling, money
management, emergency response units, etc. Each client is treated on an individual basis to meet the many different needs
of that client faces.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The state reduced the Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) funding by 10% in FY 2008-09; in both FY 2009-10
and FY 2010-11 the program operated on the same reduced amount of funds. In FY 2011-12, funding for the MSSP program
was further reduced by 11% to $685,600. This funding has not changed and will be the same for FY 2016-2017. Governor
Brown's office has proposed integrating MSSP as an optional benefit under the County Managed Health Plans.

Objectives
O
The County Executive Office will continue to provide administration and oversight of program management. The
administration efficiency and effectiveness will be reviewed and assessed to ensure effective program outcomes.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
MSA payments have significantly reduced over the years. The MSA revenues were not designed in such a way as to
promote sustainable long-term services nor have the ability to expand services. Therefore, a gradual annual program
funding reduction plan has been instituted to align program expenditures with the actual MSA funding received.

Objectives
O
Continue investigating deaths that occur for unknown causes or under suspicious circumstances professionally, effectively,
and efficiently with compassion. Continue to participate in multiagency working groups including the elder death review team,
child death review team, and mass disaster preparedness team. Maintain awareness for possible adoption of national
investigative standards, technological advancements, and judicial expectations. Train new investigators and continue to
standardize the departmental approach to death investigation. Training new investigators will ultimately decrease
departmental overtime. However, this training process is approximately one year depending upon the skill level and
experience of the new employee. Continue educational outreach to specific county agencies, various hospital administration
staff, and funeral home staff.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
“End of Life Options Act”
This is the new assisted suicide legislation with unclear implementation. Typically, we certify all suicide cases through this
office. The new law makes suicide end of life option for terminal illnesses legal via prescription medications to speed up the
terminal period. We have no idea what impact this will mean to our case load by legalizing assisted suicide. The volume of
suicides to investigate is unknown; this new law could potentially attract people from surrounding states.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, 95% of trauma patients who triage into Step 1, 2, or 3 trauma will be directly transported to a trauma
center.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
EMS is funded through a combination of county allocation funds and revenue from various fees as well as court collected
assessments. No changes are currently anticipated, however, if our overall State and/or County funds are reduced
significantly, we would likely have to reduce staffing levels

Objectives
OBy June 30, 2017, 98% of Public Health Employees will have received disaster preparedness training.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Emergency Preparedness activities are funded through Federal grants. We currently anticipate consistent funding levels in
FY16-17, however some minor funding changes may occur at the Federal level as a result of the response to the Zika Virus.
Focus will be to maintain existing staffing and countywide emergency preparedness capabilities.

Objectives
OBy June 30, 2017, the Ventura County Health Care Coalition (VCHCC) will increase membership by 20 facilities.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Homeland Security programs are funded through Federal grants, however, due to significant cuts nationwide, we anticipate
there may be lower funding levels in FY16-17.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, the HIV/AIDS program will offer Narcan to 100% of clients at the syringe replacement sites throughout the
county to help prevent deaths from opioid overdoses.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
HIV/AIDS programs are largely funded via Federal grants and we do not expect significant funding changes on these grants
in FY16-17.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, Ventura County Public Health (VCPH) will train 100% of managers and coordinators on the Health in All
Policies (HiAP).
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
We do not anticipate significant revenue changes from our FY 15-16 Federal or State budgets. Our overall FY16-17 budget
for all of PH is expected to be very tight due to increasing staffing and operational costs.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, Health Education will collaborate with at least one jurisdiction to incorporate a ban on e-cigarette use
within their comprehensive outdoor smoking ordinance.
By June 30, 2017, Ventura County Public Health will implement universal Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ) screening
for children 0-6 years.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Health Promotion & Health Coverage services are funded by First 5 Ventura County, MCAH match, Department allocation
and Court fines. We will sustain the same funding level with First 5 from FY16-17 through FY18-19. All other funding
amounts will stay consistent. We continue to explore more efficient and effective ways to provide all of our services.
1. First 5 funding will stay consistent through FY18-19 at $593,300.
2. Childhood Injury Prevention in general does not have dedicated funding other than minimal funds through court fines.
Therefore, we are seeking additional grant opportunities and greater collaboration with the court system to enhance such
funds.
3. We received a CCHI allocation of $25,000 from April 2016 through February 2017. We also have another grant
submission with CCHI that could potentially add another $25K this next year.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, 60% of Bright Beginnings (BB) clients that completed the program will be exclusively breastfeeding at the
3rd home visit.
By June 30, 2017, Adolescent Family Life Program (AFLP) clients, enrolled in the program for 12 months, will have a repeat
birth rate of 5% or less.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Field Nursing:
1. Potential for future funding to launch Bright Beginnings at other hospitals in county.
2. Increased Targeted Case Management (TCM) revenue.
3. Increased services to senior population.
Adolescent Family Life Program (AFLP):
The AFLP program is funded by MCAH Federal Title V and the Federal AFLP PYD (Positive Youth Development) grants.
AFLP also matches local agency funding with the Federal Financial Participation Title XIX. While current AFLP funding is
flat funded for FY16-17, advocacy efforts are in place to restore $6 million in State General Funds for AFLP in FY16-17. If
that happens it is unclear how this funding would be distributed among the existing AFLP sites throughout the State, but
would result in an increase to revenue for our county.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, Ventura County Public Health (VCPH) Communicable Disease will initiate an investigation for all
diseases, covered by the Public Health Emergency Preparedness (PHEP) surveillance grant, within 24 hours of receiving a
confidential morbidity report (CMR).
By June 30, 2017, the Immunization program will audit four schools with a high % of conditional entry students to increase
vaccine compliance.
By June 30, 2017, Ventura County Public Health (VCPH) Clinics will offer dental varnish to 100% of clients 0-5 yrs.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Clinical Services:
Public Health Clinical Services are funded with County allocation funds, State and Local Grants, and with revenue generated
from client fees. If overall State and County funds are reduced significantly, we may have to reduce level and number of
services provided to clients.
Financial reports are currently not readily available through the EHR to project cost vs revenue impact.
Immunization Program:
Senate Bill (SB) 277 changed immunization requirements for children entering child care or schools. Parents or guardians of
students in any school or child-care facility, whether public or private, will no longer be allowed to submit a personal beliefs
exemption (PBE) to a currently-required vaccine. This will negatively affect our compliance rate, but will increase actual
vaccination rates. One challenge will be the surge of students that were consider up to date with a PBE will now need to be
vaccinated. This will be a fiscal impact to our program with the need nurses to provide addition school based clinics.
We continue to expand ways to increase our revenue by billing Medi-Cal and Medi-Care for flu clinics and collaborating with
community partners to offset staffing cost to continue providing services to the community.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, the Public Health Laboratory (PHL) will collaborate with the HIV/AIDS program to increase the number of
HIV screening tests ordered by physicians at Ventura County Medical Center (VCMC) and Santa Paula Hospital (SPH)
emergency departments (EDs) by 5%.
By June 30, 2017, Vitals Record will decrease the percent of birth certificates that are returned to the birth clerks for errors
by 5%.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Public Health Laboratory continues to be open to doing new and additional testing for county and non-county organizations,
as long as corresponding revenue sources are secured.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, the Women, Infants, and Children Program (WIC) will offer an oral health education session to 100% of
the WIC families with an infant.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Participation with the WIC Program continues to decline at the national, state and local levels. California WIC is strategizing
on ways to boost program participation. Our goal is to pursue outreach strategies, utilize technologies that resonate with
young participants, maintain program participation and keep all eight WIC sites open during this contract period.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, Medical Therapy Program (MTP) clients will have a current exercise program plan that includes a
community exercise activity.
By June 30, 2017, California Children's Services (CCS) clients will have medical homes regardless of payor source.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Legislative changes have created process changes to CCS. State changes to increase the role of managed care and
electronic processes will impact the processes and work load. These include:
 SB75 and SB4.
 CCS Whole Child Model Redesign.
 Electronic Service Authorization Request (E-SAR) Redesign.
 Coordinating Affordable Care Act benefits for clients.
 Transition to Medi-Cal managed care effects on providers wanting to continue care for clients.

Objectives
O
By June 30, 2017, Child Health Disability Prevention (CHDP) Program will partner with the Oral Health Collaborative to
encourage providers to conduct an oral health risk assessment on all patients and provide education, referrals, and fluoride
varnish applications.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Several legislative changes impact the workload of the programs within CHDP. Modification will require increase education
to providers for best practices to meet the requirements. These include:
 1115 Waiver components
 AB 403
 SB 4
 Potential changes in program activities.
 Affect of realignment

Objectives
O
By June 2017, CLPPP will establish MOU with GSA/Environmental Health and implement a housing lead abatement project
by hiring an Environmental Health Specialist to provide extensive outreach, education and networking with cities, and
districts throughout the county, in order to identify homes at risk of exposing children to lead.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FIncrease of $96,000 allocation but no county cost impact.


Objectives
O
a. Manage operations within allotted resources.
b. Oversee the development of a secure Mental Health Rehabilitation Center (MHRC).
c. Oversee the development of the Children’s Crisis Continuum of Care.
d. Oversee the development of Laura’s Law.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
a. Expanded use of evidence-based practice to include CBOs.
b. Instituted pilot project to standardize fidelity checks and outcome measures in select evidence-based programs.
c. Centralized benefits in order to coordinate and increase access to programs like Medi-Cal and SSI.
d. Continuous NIATx process improvement projects to improve client access, engagement, and retention.
e. Continue progress on opening a locked mental health recovery center in county.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
YOUTH AND FAMILY SERVICES
a. Fully implement Katie A. screening and referral process, ensuring all youth entering foster care are assessed and
appropriately referred for mental health services. Increase access to services for this population by adding specialty
supports to the 0-5 population as well as the 18-21 year olds community (NMD). Continued expansion and implementation
of programs in collaboration with HSA to meet the State requirements of Katie A.
b. Develop full continuum of mental health care under CCR-foster Care in collaboration with HSA and other agency
providers. This will include youth and families in Family Maintenance and Reunification.
c. Continue to support and outreach to the South Oxnard community to increase access to MH services in the newly opened
Oxnard YFS Clinic at CenterPoint Mall in South Oxnard, which is a co-located with Adult MH services. 170 clients served in
the EPSDT program when the clinic opened in November 2014. Currently 280-300 clients served within the last quarter
d. Further training and implementation of EBPs including Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) throughout the YFS Division
and to CBOs.
e. Continue expansion of ISES services in all school districts to meet the mental health needs of children with IEPs. This
includes the underserved communities in Santa Clara Valley and Oxnard.
f. Implement a Continuum of Crisis Stabilization services county-wide to decrease hospitalizations through the
implementation of both CSU and Short Term Crisis Residential programs.
g. Develop series of outcome measurements for Crisis Continuum of Care for youth, focusing on reduced hospitalization,
reduction in recidivism and enhanced quality of life with reduced incidence of crisis episodes for children.
h. Developing measurement outcomes of EBP implementation, developing internal structures which will be used to pull
outcome data reports.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
QUALITY ASSURANCE
a. Implement department level Evaluation plan for all contractors.
b. Complete Katie A evaluation
c. Develop evaluation metrics for CCR
d. Develop Code Book and Data Dictionary for VCSO evaluations.
e. Develop a metric for measuring the Cultural Appropriateness of the VCOS and CBT.
f. Develop and implement an evaluation plan for the upcoming CSU.
g. Develop and implement an evaluation plan for HHRC.
h. Automation of MHSA report needs.
i. Implementation of Insight, the analytic software.
j. Fully implement the collection of and reporting of data on referrals, crisis calls and time-to-service into Avatar.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
MANAGED CARE SERVICES
a. Evaluate clients who have mild to moderate functional impairments and are currently receiving outpatient mental health
services funded under the VCBH MCP who could be more appropriately served by their Medi-Cal MCP for non-specialty
mental health services.
b. Utilization Review compliance monitoring for foster programs.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
JUVENILE JUSTICE PROGRAM
a. Increase participation and multidisciplinary involvement in treatment and milieu rehabilitation planning for incarcerated
youth as well as the discharge planning process.
b. Implement a trauma-informed care model in collaboration with the Probation Agency.
c. Increase the number of treatment groups offered, including a group to address criminal thinking errors.
d. Increase restorative justice interventions to include process for ongoing RJ circles.
e. Continue to increase family therapy services.
f. Continue to streamline the crisis intervention documentation process for the Officer of the Day to maximize resource
availability.
g. Increase collaboration with Probation regarding commitment and detention programming to enhance overall safety and
well-being in the facility for youth.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or state funding, utilized by the
Department for federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.7

Objectives
O
Seek to increase referrals for ADP treatment services from Primary Care Providers as consistent with Health Care Reform’s
mandate for improvement in integrated services along with obtaining provider status with private insurance panels.
Continue to develop the components for the Electronic Health Record, for example, the ADP Admission Note and other
required documentation moving toward a 2017 federal deadline.
Improve rates of successful completions as evidenced by CalOMS data.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
On August 13, 2015, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services approved California’s Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery
System (DMC-ODS) Waiver amendment. The state’s DMC-ODS waiver amendment to the current section 1115
demonstration project, authorizes the state to implement a new substance use disorder (SUD) benefit and delivery system.
According to the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), the waiver gives the state flexibility to establish a continuum
of care to help ensure services and treatment are delivered in the right place at the right time and in the right setting for each
Medi-Cal member’s needs. California is the first state in the nation to receive federal approval of an ODS waiver.
Counties have the choice of opting into the waiver in a phased regional approach; 53 of California’s 58 counties have
indicated an interest in participating including Ventura County. Ventura County will design, implement and administer the
DMC-ODS waiver program locally, providing and arranging for SUD treatment for Medi-Cal beneficiaries. The DMC-ODS
demonstration waiver is effective for five years.
Ventura County Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug Programs (ADP) has taken the lead in our county to hold required
stakeholder input meetings, organize an in-house program development team. Goal is submission of the Ventura County
DMC-ODS plan for review (all plans must be approved by DHCS) in April 2016.
Ventura County Behavioral Health Fiscal is currently working on the new rates and modifying the billing system to
incorporate the new services for the coming fiscal year.

Objectives
O
a. Continue community discussions about marijuana harms, especially to adolescents in terms of brain development, and
enhance parent messaging about the abuse of THC products.
b. Investigate and pursue policies which reduce the public health and safety consequences of easily-abused prescription
drugs, and expand the places and times for prescription drug take-back programs countywide.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
On August 13, 2015, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services approved California’s Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery
System (DMC-ODS) Waiver amendment. The state’s DMC-ODS waiver amendment to the current section 1115
demonstration project, authorizes the state to implement a new substance use disorder (SUD) benefit and delivery system.
According to the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), the waiver gives the state flexibility to establish a continuum
of care to help ensure services and treatment are delivered in the right place at the right time and in the right setting for each
Medi-Cal member’s needs. California is the first state in the nation to receive federal approval of an ODS waiver.
Counties have the choice of opting into the waiver in a phased regional approach; 53 of California’s 58 counties have
indicated an interest in participating including Ventura County. Ventura County will design, implement and administer the
DMC-ODS waiver program locally, providing and arranging for SUD treatment for Medi-Cal beneficiaries. The DMC-ODS
demonstration waiver is effective for five years.
Ventura County Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug Programs (ADP) has taken the lead in our county to hold required
stakeholder input meetings, organize an in-house program development team. Goal is submission of the Ventura County
DMC-ODS plan for review (all plans must be approved by DHCS) in April 2016.

Objectives
O
a. Continue the integration of mental health and alcohol/drug services at ANSFM perinatal treatment program.
b. Continue Evidence-Based Programs for clients with co-occurring disorders, adolescent clients, and court-mandated
clients.
c. Establish an annual training schedule to reorient clinical staff to our Evidence-Based Programs and Practices.
d. Continue to provide clinical support to clinicians by track with one time per month clinical team meetings (PC1210,
Adolescent Services, Co-occurring).
e. Increase adolescent treatment services at school sites, including Conejo Valley High School, Frontier High School, Pacific
High School, and Recovery Classroom on the grounds of Gateway High School. In addition to this, we will seek to increase
services for the East County with a submission to the Department of Health Care Services for ADP treatment in Apollo High
School.
f. Increased successful completions from 43% to 45%.
g. Participate in the planning and implementation of the DMC ODS (organized delivery system) for Medi-Cal enrollees in the
outpatient system of care.
h. As a member of the DMC ODS system of care in Ventura County, demonstrate that care is modeled after ASAM
(American Society of Addiction Medicine).
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
On August 13, 2015, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services approved California’s Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery
System (DMC-ODS) Waiver amendment. The state’s DMC-ODS waiver amendment to the current section 1115
demonstration project, authorizes the state to implement a new substance use disorder (SUD) benefit and delivery system.
According to the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), the waiver gives the state flexibility to establish a continuum
of care to help ensure services and treatment are delivered in the right place at the right time and in the right setting for each
Medi-Cal member’s needs. California is the first state in the nation to receive federal approval of an ODS waiver.
Counties have the choice of opting into the waiver in a phased regional approach; 53 of California’s 58 counties have
indicated an interest in participating including Ventura County. Ventura County will design, implement and administer the
DMC-ODS waiver program locally, providing and arranging for SUD treatment for Medi-Cal beneficiaries. The DMC-ODS
demonstration waiver is effective for five years.
Ventura County Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug Programs (ADP) has taken the lead in our county to hold required
stakeholder input meetings, organize an in-house program development team. Goal is submission of the Ventura County
DMC-ODS plan for review (all plans must be approved by DHCS) in April 2016.
Ventura County Behavioral Health Fiscal is currently working on the new rates and modifying the billing system to
incorporate the new services for the coming fiscal year.

Objectives
O
a. Decrease client drop-out rate in first thirty days of treatment.
b. Ensure contracted Residential Treatment Providers are DMC certified in anticipation of the DMC-ODS Waiver.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
On August 13, 2015, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services approved California’s Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery
System (DMC-ODS) Waiver amendment. The state’s DMC-ODS waiver amendment to the current section 1115
demonstration project, authorizes the state to implement a new substance use disorder (SUD) benefit and delivery system.
According to the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), the waiver gives the state flexibility to establish a continuum
of care to help ensure services and treatment are delivered in the right place at the right time and in the right setting for each
Medi-Cal member’s needs. California is the first state in the nation to receive federal approval of an ODS waiver.
Counties have the choice of opting into the waiver in a phased regional approach; 53 of California’s 58 counties have
indicated an interest in participating including Ventura County. Ventura County will design, implement and administer the
DMC-ODS waiver program locally, providing and arranging for SUD treatment for Medi-Cal beneficiaries. The DMC-ODS
demonstration waiver is effective for five years.
Ventura County Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug Programs (ADP) has taken the lead in our county to hold required
stakeholder input meetings, organize an in-house program development team. Goal is submission of the Ventura County
DMC-ODS plan for review (all plans must be approved by DHCS) in April 2016.
Ventura County Behavioral Health Fiscal is currently working on the new rates and modifying the billing system to
incorporate the new services for the coming fiscal year.

Objectives
O
a. Increase the number of opiate-involved clients in ADP treatment sites who receive Overdose Prevention Education
sessions and complete associated questionnaire about overdose response capability.
b. Increased components of the Electronic Health Record, including the ADP Admission Note, ASAM, Stages of Change,
Screening, and Assessment.
c. Test new paradigm for the organized delivery of health care services for Medi-Cal enrollees with a Substance Use
Disorder (DMC-ODS system of care waiver).
d. Ensure that all levels of DMC-ODS waiver demonstrate care modeled after ASAM, increased administrative oversight,
improve care and manage resources, use Evidence- based practices, coordinate with other systems of care.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
On August 13, 2015, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services approved California’s Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery
System (DMC-ODS) Waiver amendment. The state’s DMC-ODS waiver amendment to the current section 1115
demonstration project, authorizes the state to implement a new substance use disorder (SUD) benefit and delivery system.
According to the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), the waiver gives the state flexibility to establish a continuum
of care to help ensure services and treatment are delivered in the right place at the right time and in the right setting for each
Medi-Cal member’s needs. California is the first state in the nation to receive federal approval of an ODS waiver.
Counties have the choice of opting into the waiver in a phased regional approach; 53 of California’s 58 counties have
indicated an interest in participating including Ventura County. Ventura County will design, implement and administer the
DMC-ODS waiver program locally, providing and arranging for SUD treatment for Medi-Cal beneficiaries. The DMC-ODS
demonstration waiver is effective for five years.
Ventura County Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug Programs (ADP) has taken the lead in our county to hold required
stakeholder input meetings, organize an in-house program development team. Goal is submission of the Ventura County
DMC-ODS plan for review (all plans must be approved by DHCS) in April 2016.
Ventura County Behavioral Health Fiscal is currently working on the new rates and modifying the billing system to
incorporate the new services for the coming fiscal year.

Objectives
Oa. Increase Medically Assisted Therapy to Medi-Cal Expansion Clients.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
On August 13, 2015, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services approved California’s Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery
System (DMC-ODS) Waiver amendment. The state’s DMC-ODS waiver amendment to the current section 1115
demonstration project, authorizes the state to implement a new substance use disorder (SUD) benefit and delivery system.
According to the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), the waiver gives the state flexibility to establish a continuum
of care to help ensure services and treatment are delivered in the right place at the right time and in the right setting for each
Medi-Cal member’s needs. California is the first state in the nation to receive federal approval of an ODS waiver.
Counties have the choice of opting into the waiver in a phased regional approach; 53 of California’s 58 counties have
indicated an interest in participating including Ventura County. Ventura County will design, implement and administer the
DMC-ODS waiver program locally, providing and arranging for SUD treatment for Medi-Cal beneficiaries. The DMC-ODS
demonstration waiver is effective for five years.
Ventura County Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug Programs (ADP) has taken the lead in our county to hold required
stakeholder input meetings, organize an in-house program development team. Goal is submission of the Ventura County
DMC-ODS plan for review (all plans must be approved by DHCS) in April 2016.
Ventura County Behavioral Health Fiscal is currently working on the new rates and modifying the billing system to
incorporate the new services for the coming fiscal year.

Objectives
O
a. Continue the NIATx improvement projects at each ADP site (County and Provider) in order to improve client access,
engagement and retention, and secure good outcomes.
b. Expand NIATx improvement projects at all ADP sites to include charting timeliness, and service standards.
c. Enhance the continuum of services in the East County with the submission of an application to the Department of Health
Care Services for site certification for the Conejo Valley.
d. Increase services to newly eligible Medi-Cal Expansion clients.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
On August 13, 2015, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services approved California’s Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery
System (DMC-ODS) Waiver amendment. The state’s DMC-ODS waiver amendment to the current section 1115
demonstration project, authorizes the state to implement a new substance use disorder (SUD) benefit and delivery system.
According to the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), the waiver gives the state flexibility to establish a continuum
of care to help ensure services and treatment are delivered in the right place at the right time and in the right setting for each
Medi-Cal member’s needs. California is the first state in the nation to receive federal approval of an ODS waiver.
Counties have the choice of opting into the waiver in a phased regional approach; 53 of California’s 58 counties have
indicated an interest in participating including Ventura County. Ventura County will design, implement and administer the
DMC-ODS waiver program locally, providing and arranging for SUD treatment for Medi-Cal beneficiaries. The DMC-ODS
demonstration waiver is effective for five years.
Ventura County Behavioral Health, Alcohol & Drug Programs (ADP) has taken the lead in our county to hold required
stakeholder input meetings, organize an in-house program development team. Goal is submission of the Ventura County
DMC-ODS plan for review (all plans must be approved by DHCS) in April 2016.
Ventura County Behavioral Health Fiscal is currently working on the new rates and modifying the billing system to
incorporate the new services for the coming fiscal year.

Objectives
O
a. Continued improvement in DUI Program internal fidelity scores for evidence-based practice through the use of clinical
observations established during PM rounds, with feedback to the counselor.
b. Continue to improve revenue management of a self-supporting program through pro-active enrollment strategies, realtime
use of data reports in the Compliance Manager data tracking system, etc.
c. Decrease the percentage of DUI dismissals through the use of NIATx projects focused on reducing program dismissals for
21 day loss of contact.
d. Enhance online visibility of the DUI program to increase ease of access for DUI clients.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Ventura County DUI is a State-licensed, community-based program located at five sites throughout the county. It is required
to be and is financially self-sufficient using sustainable funding (participant fees). While revenues will increase or decrease
based on the need for DUI programs, funding presently correlates directly to the need for DUI counter-measures and the
subsequent need for the program in our community.

Objectives
O
(1) Manage HSA’s budget strategically to ensure that Federal, State and County dollars are leveraged effectively, and that
the Agency is able to provide the best possible level of service to clients under any of several State budget scenarios.
(2) Streamline employee recruitment, selection and onboarding processes to ensure more timely recruitment cycles and
maximum utilization of funding.
(3) Complete the permanent relocation of the America’s Job Center in Oxnard, and continue to support green/sustainable
facilities projects.
(4) Lead the Agency in pursuing and implementing a strategic technology agenda that is cost effective and service oriented,
including further refinement of ECM, automation of routine processes, and exploration of unified case management systems.
(5) Continue leading the Agency’s cross collaborative planning process to prepare for implementation of Child Welfare
Continuum of Care Reform.
(6) Continue to gather “voice of the customer” data, assess customer service and implement systems that meet customers’
needs, and train staff as necessary.
(7) Continue to leverage new strategies for service delivery, including the expansion of client self-service tools.
(8) Expand public access to information regarding the Agency’s services, service levels and other data through web-based
dashboards, maps, and other tools.
(9) Expand public/private relationships, communication and collaborations, as well as those among County agencies, to
meet shared missions and outcomes.
(10) Continue to implement Get-To-Excellence process improvement priorities.
(11) Continue to increase internal staff communications, including sharing information regarding personal safety and
security, and disaster preparedness / response roles.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) The final State budget, particularly costs associated with the implementation of AB 403, Child Welfare Continuum of Care
Reform, could have significant impacts on Agency funding.
(2) Program funding allocations are not finalized until 3-4 months into the Budget Year; variances from projected funding
allocation levels could have significant impacts on the Agency.
(3) The overall health of the economy will impact the level of Realignment revenues received; variances from projected level
could have significant impacts on the Agency.

Objectives
O
(1) AFS Administration/HMIS: In partnership and with support from the Ventura County Continuum of Care, launch,
“Pathways to Home” Coordinated Entry System.
(2) AFS Administration: Develop framework for county wide aging population strategic plan to ensure services and county
resources are in alignment to support the increase in the aged and dependent population within our community.
(3) Veteran Services increase in claims over PY by 5%.
(4) APS: 100% case reviews to monitor compliance state mandates for in person response and duration of case remaining
open.
(5) Homeless Services: 80% of clients housed will continue to be stably housed 6 months after obtaining housing. (HPRP
programs: BOS, ESG, CHSP)
(6) Public Authority: Increase web tools for IHSS providers regarding training opportunities, program updates, etc.
(7) PAPG: Increase efficiency and timeliness via standardization of processes and training.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) Potential increase in services to the elder population as the number of people turning age 65 is increasing daily.
(2) The prevalence rate of Alzheimer Disease could impact service demands.
(3) Decrease in rental-housing, county wide will impact the rate of homelessness and the ability to rapidly re-house
individuals and families who experience homelessness.
(4) Increase in complexity of cases for Veteran Services due to prolonged and increased “tours of duty” assigned to military
personnel.
(5) Decrease in access to county facilities such as skilled nursing facilities, lock-down facilities (for clients with Dementia),
board and cares and supportive housing for clients who cannot live safely without support will impact many AFS clients.

Objectives
O
(1) Continue to collaborate with Ventura County Behavioral Health to strengthen mental health services for foster children
and children at risk of foster care as required by the State’s Katie A. lawsuit settlement
(2) Make steady progress on the State-mandated System Improvement Plan, which establishes plans for quantitative
improvements in several key areas
(3) Implement Case Review methodology as required by the State
(4) Continue to improve usage of available technology, tools, and resources to ensure that social workers are able to remain
mobile and conduct their work from the field to the extent necessary.
(5) Continue to recruit, license, train, and retain resource families to provide caring homes for vulnerable children.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
CHILDREN & FAMILY SERVICES:
(1) Child welfare continues to work with large numbers of families with complex family problems, which can involve multiple
siblings and allegations, and require lengthy investigations and family intervention. Efforts will continue to implement Safety
Organized Practice to work with families in a strength-based way to address the safety concerns that led to their referral to
the child welfare system.
(2) Continue to participate in State-led initiatives to review the Continuum of Care available for foster care placements, to
reduce reliance on placement in congregate care facilities
(3) Establish protocols and training to identify and serve Commercially Sexually Exploited Children (CSEC).
(4) Monitor and mitigate overtime costs for Child Welfare social workers through scheduling and supervision practices while
ensuring that the safety of children remains the priority and that social workers are fairly compensated for hours worked.
(5) The Agency will work with the CEO to determine and pursue appropriate approaches for using 2011 Realignment funds
to accomplish long-term stability for this and the other programs funded under Realignment.

Objectives
O
(1) Effectively administer CalWORKs Services Homelessness Prevention funds to reduce homelessness amongst
CalWORKs recipients.
(2) Work with County partners including Sheriff, Probation, and HCA to enroll as many newly eligible people into Medi-Cal
and CalFresh as possible.
(3) Increase the number of clients participating in federally mandated, work and work-related activities.
(4) Maximize utilization of subsidized job placement opportunities leading to permanent unsubsidized employment.
(5) Continue expanding outreach for the Financial Empowerment Partnership.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) With the implementation of health care reform, Medi-Cal cases and workload will continue to grow. Cases are projected
to grow to an expected total of 221,000 individuals in the program. The rapid growth experienced with the implementation of
the Affordable Care Act is expected to stabilize.
(2) CalFresh (Food Stamp) cases continue to expand, but at a slower rate. Last year’s growth rate was 1%, compared to 6%
the prior year.
(3) CalWORKs cases have continued to decrease, total recipients decreased from 14,076 in February 2015 to 13,246 in
February 2016; a decline of 5.9%.

Objectives
O
(1) Expand vocational education partnerships to provide client training for emerging occupations
(2) Increase the number of clients participating in federally mandated, work and work-related activities
(3) Maximize utilization of subsidized job placement opportunities leading to permanent unsubsidized employment
(4) Continue expanding outreach for the Financial Empowerment Partnership
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) Comparing February 2015 to February 2016, CalWORKs cases have decreased from 5,990 served per month to 5,527
served per month.
(2) Although many factors contribute to caseload growth and decline, CalWORKs caseloads tend to increase as the
unemployment rate increases and decrease as economic conditions improve.

Objectives
O
(1) Continue to meet program guidelines and regulations, maximizing the use of the Kin-GAP program in efforts to seek
home placements that are in the best interest of the foster children involved.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) While the program will grow as Foster Care grows, the growth rates should slow as the transfer of cases from CalWORKs
(lower cost) to Foster Care (higher cost) has likely occurred.

Objectives
O(1) Continue marketing and outreach efforts for new foster parents and families interested in adoption.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) The Preliminary Budget Request assumes a continuance of the significant growth in case levels in recent years; a
variance from projected growth levels could significantly impact costs.

Objectives
O
(1) Decrease the length of stay for all children who enter the child welfare system by analyzing the factors that lead to and
detract from permanency.
(2) Enhance services for transitional-age youth and increase housing opportunities for non-minor dependents participating in
Extended Foster Care.
(3) Continue implementation of the Extended Foster Care Program, which extends foster care from age 18 to age 21.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) During Fiscal Year 2013-2014, caseloads increased; since that time, the trend has appeared to stabilize. The complexity
of many of these cases, which can involve multiple siblings and allegations, require lengthy investigations.
(2) Implementation of Extended Foster Care will continue to expand case management and services for youth who opt to
remain in the program.

O(1) Program staff will continue to follow guidelines and regulations of this mandated program.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F(1) The State budget will continue to be monitored to determine funding and/or programmatic impacts.

Objectives
O
(1) Continue oversight of General Relief program with a focus on client benefit lifetime limits that facilitates transition of
clients onto alternate and sustainable assistance programs.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) The State budget will continue to be monitored to determine funding impacts to other safety net programs that could
result in growth of the General Relief caseload.

Objectives
OThe Department will continue to follow guidelines and regulations of these mandated programs.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) Many of the programs in Direct Aid Budget Department are now funded by 2011 Realignment funds and 1991
Realignment funds that have replaced State funding. The Agency will continue to monitor Realignment funding levels and
manage Realignment revenues for the long-term stability of the programs involved.
(2) The Agency will continue to monitor the FY 15-16 State budget to determine final impacts on the Department.

Objectives
O
(1) 100% of school aged children will be enrolled in school within 10 days of entry (Strategic Goal)
(2) 80% of clients housed will remain stably housed after 6 months (Strategic Goal)
(3) RAIN will maintain a 90% occupancy rate (Strategic Goal)
(4) Implement ECM for case management and intake (Strategic Goal)
(5) Develop revised staff scheduling model.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
RAIN TLC will continue to be a vital part of the County’s Ten-Year Strategy to End Homelessness. RAIN will maintain its
commitment to provide immediate support and gap assistance to stabilize homeless Ventura County residents and families
at risk of homelessness while providing resources and referrals assistance to transition to permanent housing.

Objectives
O
(1) Maintain the mandated response standard of two business days to initiate the investigation of decedent referrals and the
investigation of conservatorship referrals at 100%.
(2) Maintain the continuous educational requirements for each Deputy PG in compliance with the 2006 Omnibus Act for
100% Certification by the PAPGPC state Association.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) The dramatic growth of the older adult population and demand for mental health services will continue.
(2) The Public Administrator/Public Guardian expects increases caseload again this year and for many years into the future.
From 2014 to 2015 there was a 29% increase in referrals for LPS. From 2013 to 2015, there was an increase of 37% in the
Probate (elderly with Dementia) caseload.
(3) Demand for estate administration will likely increase. From 2014 to 2015, there was a 67% increase in referrals for the
Public Administrator.
(4) Court proceedings, including continuances and trials increase the need for transportation of clients. It should be noted,
57% of conserved clients are placed out of county due to a lack of available appropriate licensed placement within the
county.
(5) Increased demands by the Probate Court for the Public Guardian to take on cases without choice are expected to
continue. These cases are typically very problematic and result from years of mismanagement by a prior conservator, or
cases of elder abuse becoming evident through the Probate proceedings.

Objectives
O
Improve inter-agency and intra-agency collaboration resulting in enhanced prosecution resources and comprehensive
enforcement.
Continue our focused and intense investigation and prosecution of environmental crimes that endanger our community’s
health and safety.
Continue our work with regulators and other law enforcement agencies within Ventura County and its cities to hold
accountable those who mishandle hazardous waste.
Ensure all incoming complaints are timely reviewed and prioritized by attorneys so as to allocate limited investigative
resources effectively and efficiently.
Utilize our partnerships with other counties and the Attorney General’s Office to hold unscrupulous businesses accountable
for unlawful or deceptive business practices perpetuated against unknowing consumers across the State.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Based on the most current data available, revenue into the Real Estate Fraud Trust Fund, as generated by real estate
transaction activity, is falling short of projections. Actual revenue is predicted to come in at $960,000, while the projected
revenue was $1,375,000. Other recurring grant-funded programs, such as those to fund Workers’ Compensation and
Automobile Insurance Fraud prosecutions, are generally expected to be stable in the upcoming fiscal year.

Objectives
O
Implement an Enterprise Content Management (ECM) system to improve the receipt, organization and distribution of the
Office’s hardcopy and electronic workflow.
Continue to find efficiencies in the area of human resources to reduce unwanted vacancies.
Continue to aggressively pursue external funding sources to reduce general fund costs.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Negotiated labor cost increases without proportionately increased salary appropriations and revenue will pose challenges in
the coming year.

Objectives
O
Continue to target child predators who utilize the internet to harm underage victims.
Expand countywide efforts to combat and prevent human trafficking via training and collaborative investigations among local
law enforcement agencies and prosecutors.
Continue to target and disrupt criminal street gang leadership to reduce gang violence.
Continue to focus on the organized distribution of traditional street drugs as well as newer synthetic designer drugs.
Establish a team to investigate and prosecute computer intrusion crimes committed against Ventura County government as
well as local businesses
Continue to aggressively combat auto theft and maintain our 100% conviction rate at jury trial on auto theft. Continue to
enhance efforts to contend with a rise in vehicle theft crimes through our membership in the Ventura County Auto Theft Task
Force.
Enhance Ventura County’s local law enforcement ability to collect and utilize digital forensic evidence through continued
membership in the Southern California High Tech Task Force.
Continue to strive to reduce the abuse of pharmaceutical drugs through our membership in the Ventura County Combined
Agency Narcotic Task Force, and to increase public awareness of the harmful effects and deadly overdoses of heroin.
Continue to aggressively prosecute drivers driving under the influence of drugs, both illegal and prescription, through
renewal of an ongoing OTS grant. Continue providing training for law enforcement officers and the public about the dangers
of drugged driving.
Increase participation in Camp Hope by sponsoring 12 child victims of family violence to Camp HOPE Lopez Lake 2016 in
June.
Hold a strategic visioning and planning meeting involving all local government and community-based service provider
stakeholders to develop a framework for the establishment of Family Justice Center in Ventura County providing co-located
and integrated services for victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, child abuse, elder abuse, dependent adult abuse
and human trafficking victims.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The Crime Victim’s Assistance Program has aggressively pursued state and federal grant funds with the expectation that
receipt of these funds in the coming fiscal year will dramatically increase the resources available for victims of crime in
Ventura County and begin development of a Family Justice Center.
The passage of Proposition 47 in November 2014 reduced a large number of former felonies to misdemeanors, including
narcotics possession cases and grand thefts under $950. As a result, thousands of petitions for resentencing have been
filed on behalf of local convicted felons seeking reduction of their convictions to misdemeanors. As predicted during last
year’s budget process, based upon the combined effects of Criminal Justice Realignment and the passage of Proposition 47,
the number of jury trials increased significantly during Fiscal Year 2016, as did the number of filed criminal cases, requiring
increased staffing to meet demands.

Objectives
O
Continue to adapt to the changing landscape of state criminal law as reflected in Public Safety Realignment and the
passage of Proposition 47.
Continue to assume the additional victim services responsibilities formerly performed by CDCR to ensure victims are
notified of appeal status, providing victim support at revocation hearings, developing an adequate plan to collect restitution
from defendants, and helping to develop plans to ensure compliance with Marsy’s Law when offenders are released on
home detention or other alternative sentencing forums.
Continue to contend with increased caseloads and court calendar appearances in Specialty Courts such as Veterans’ Court,
Mental-health Court, Drug Court, Domestic Violence Court and Homeless Court.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The Office remains committed to maintaining current service levels to Realignment cases and programs and will adapt to
additional changes in workload associated with the passage of Proposition 47.

Objectives
O
1) Continue to investigate and report fiscal, operational, and management issues in County departments and other local
government entities.

Objectives
O1) Impanel Criminal Grand Juries to hear evidence on criminal matters on an as-needed basis.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to cooperate with the Court to ensure quality legal services in those cases which the Public Defender has a
conflict of interest or is unable to act is provided to indigents in a timely, efficient, and cost-effective manner within the budget
passed by the Board.
2. Staff will continue to collaborate with the District Attorney’s Office to obtain the necessary court orders for defense costs
recovery from defendants found guilty and found to have potential resources for repayment.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The uncertainty of future multiple defendant cases make it difficult to manage for indigent defense cost increases. The staff
will continue to work with the Court to implement improvements to the current system and still maintain quality defense
representation for indigents.

Objectives
O
(1) Continue to participate with other criminal justice agencies in the analysis, planning and implementation of AB 109, Public
Safety Realignment, and Proposition 47.
(2) Continue to manage court ordered attorney fees in adult criminal cases, probate, and mental health.
(3) Continue to develop and refine the Integrated Public Defender Case Management system.
(4) Continue to refine paperless pilot program to assist with case management and organizational efficiencies.
(5) Develop an agency strategic plan, continue to participate in the Lean Six Sigma program, review and follow-up on goals
and objectives, and seek operational efficiencies.
(6) Continue to develop and mentor staff by providing in-house training opportunities.
(7) Improve department’s Emergency Preparedness Plan.
(8) Participate in the County E-Performance program.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
New financial management system has increased the workload and has negatively impacted the workflow of administration
staff.

Objectives
O
(1) Continue to provide quality representation to all indigent defendants at the least possible expense to the County.
(2) Utilize risk/needs assessments and evidence based practices to expand and explore alternative sentencing programs,
alternatives to jail, and ways to reduce recidivism and jail overcrowding.
(3) Continue to request court ordered attorney fees when appropriate.
(5) Continue to file Proposition 47 petitions and applications.
(4) Continue to participate in community events to assist community members with Proposition 47 petitions and
expungements.
(5) Advocate for expansion of successful Realignment programs such as Reentry Courts and Pretrial Detention.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) Proposition 47 will continue to impact our workload due to the increased number of misdemeanor trials and the
requirement of petitions/applications to reduce eligible felony convictions.
(2) Public Safety Realignment will continue to impact our business process as we continue to require office wide efforts to
obtain non-jail alternatives.
(3) Expanded opportunities for Veteran diversion may impact current workload; although the specific impacts are not yet
known.
(4) Potential Passage of Public Safety and Rehabilitation Act of 2016 Measure may increase the current juvenile workload
and there will likely be an increase in parole violations. Judges will decide fitness hearings that will require extensive
preparation and many state prisoners will be subject to early parole after they complete their base terms.

Objectives
O
(1) Continue to provide quality representation to persons qualifying for Public Defender services.
(2) Continue to closely monitor Probate and LPS Conservatorship cases to ensure that annual accounting are accurate and
timely filed.
(3) Continue to request court ordered attorney fees, when appropriate.
(4) Continue to conduct mandated investigations of placements of clients under LPS and Probate conservatorships.
(5) Explore solutions to handling increased workload in both conservatorship and contempt cases.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) Aging elder population and increases in dementia and Alzheimer’s diagnosis’ will impact our workload on probate
conservatorship cases.
(2) Laura’s Law will likely result in an increase in mental health appointments.

Objectives
O
 Upgrade Lifetime Fitness field.
 We are working to get our Incident Command System courses POST approved. We would be the first agency in California
to do this.
 Improving the course content on Dealing with Mentally Ill and Developmentally Disabled and submitting to POST for
certification.
 We will train all department managers and sergeants about the Force Training and Analysis committee.
 Training all patrol personnel on new Body Worn Cameras and New X-2 Tasers from Taser International.
 Conduct an audit of 11550 H&S arrests and Detention Services Grievance/Citizen Complaints process
 Sheriff’s Policy Manual will be completely up to date on all pending revisions and we will continue to review all policies for
“best practice” revisions
 Update the Sheriff’s Office citizen complaint forms to comply with Assembly Bill 953.
 Create Regional Meetings among Internal Affairs Units of different agencies within and around Ventura County. This will
improve working relationships among different agencies and allow for sharing of procedures and methods to conduct
investigations.
 Implement the on-line Sheriff’s Performance Appraisal department-wide (Detention Services July 2016 and Patrol in
October 2016).
 Complete scanning of terminated and retired personnel, training and background files
 Assess current volunteer process to identify and institute appropriate changes to improve efficiency and effectiveness

Objectives
O
 Ongoing development of training program for Records personnel utilizing POST, CA-DOJ and Ventura County in-house
courses and trainings.
 Cross-train Senior Supervisor allocation to respond to both monthly DOJ validation report, subpoenas, and court orders.
 Develop uniform Records policies and procedures to ensure and provide a consistent quality level of service to citizens
and law enforcement.
 Create a tracking method for requests and responses to complex subpoenas and California Public Records Requests.
 Update processes to efficiently transition the change in field reporting software and report writing procedures.
 Continuation of CLETS development and compliance: pooling, internal controls, and update of documentation of other
agencies ACC information and connectivity to County Message Switch.

Objectives
O
 Work with social services and city attorneys to reduce homelessness and panhandling in Thousand Oaks.
 Complete compliance checks on local businesses involved in message, alcohol, and tobacco sales.
 Install a new camera system covering several exterior locations at the Thousand Oaks station.
 Increase the number of covert and overt cameras deployed in East Valley patrol in partnership with the Technical Services
Unit and ARTIC.
 Continue to develop and implement suicide prevention training for school aged children.
 Develop an app to streamline the evaluation and training process for the FTO program.
 Establish an online leadership program for all department employees.
 Apply the technical resources necessary to downlink real time video footage from Sheriff’s helicopters to the smartphones
of field deputies.
 Coordinate with other Explorer posts to increase activities and training.
 Increase the amount of training provided to DART, in conjunction with Sheriff’s OES, related to after incident damage
assessments.
 Thousand Oaks will pursue discussions with city attorney regarding an ordinance for possession of alcohol via
consumption.
 Decrease response times for the 9D beat by using Opticom technology in emergency situations to ease traffic at densely
controlled intersections along Thousand Oaks Blvd.
 Continue to conduct countywide active shooter training.
 Explore options to fence the Thousand Oaks station employee parking area.
 Work with Behavioral Health to educate the public through school presentations and message boards regarding the
dangers of driving under the influence of marijuana.
 Install a new video and audio system in the Moorpark station interview rooms.
 Install a new telephone system at the Moorpark station.

Objectives
O
 Continue to work on a reduction of property and violent crimes with focus on intelligence led policing (ILP) through an
increase in the use of technology and intelligence sharing among other local law enforcement agencies.
 More focus on prolific offenders in conjunction with ILP and the Special Enforcement Detail.
 Appoint a Casa Pacifica Liaison Beat Coordinator senior deputy to help address the high volume of calls for service and to
ensure the quality of service remains high – continue to meet with probation on “dual status” for Casa Pacifica residents.
 Coordinate with County IT to facilitate a computer program portal for Casa Pacifica to document all non at risk runaways.
 Increase the use of social media in all areas to further educate and keep the various communities informed of public safety
issues and of crime prevention measures.
 Community Resource Unit to develop parent information meetings (twice yearly) to inform parents with teens on social
media issues, alcohol, drugs, and bullying.
 Traffic Unit to work with elementary schools in areas of high volume traffic calls for service at peak times – work to reduce
traffic related issues – congestion and collisions on local streets.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 Continued growth of Cal State Channel Islands and the availability of student housing in the City of Camarillo and the
potential for increased calls for service.
 Increasing costs of technology: cameras, computer technology, etc. including body worn cameras.
 Increased awareness of human trafficking in and among businesses such as massage establishments.

Objectives
O
 Identify and refer five at-risk youths to the Transformation Works program whose purpose is to intervene with teens 15
years and older who are in danger of joining or being negatively influenced by gang members (either familial or
neighborhood).
 Ensure all SGU members attend 40 hours of specialized training beyond the standardized gang conference or narcotics
conference. SGU will dedicate one 10-hour shift every other month for in-house training.
 Provide directed enforcement eight hours each week for contacting known gang members in the Sheriff’s jurisdictions. The
emphasis will be to hold gang members accountable to their probation/parole terms and utilize zero tolerance for any
identified criminal activity.

Objectives
 Continue to support and expand the Advanced Real-Time Information Center (ARTIC) by increasing workspaces and
adding personnel to the program. ARTIC improves our ability to provide quality law enforcement to the communities we
serve by supplying patrol and investigative personnel with comprehensive information.
 Continue to actively research grant opportunities that have the potential to enhance our law enforcement capabilities and to
provide a high quality of life for the communities we serve.
 Expand our responsible use of social media communications.
 Continue to expand social media following.
 Obtain mobile ALPR camera for deployment within electronic message board to increase investigative leads in crime
reports.
 Continue partnership with Watershed Protection District and other private property owners to routinely notify and remove
campers/trespassers in the Santa Clara riverbed.
 Create and provide an informational pamphlet to residential rental companies outlining laws and ordinances for beach
rentals.
 Maintain a 6 minute response time for emergency calls and a 11 minute response time for non-emergency calls in the City
of Fillmore.
 Continue to work with City staff to provide high-quality law enforcement and public service activities to Fillmore residents.
 Obtain funding and purchase a new Volunteer in Policing Vehicle for the City of Fillmore.
 Expand the number of members and activities of the Volunteers in Policing.
 Work with the community and community based organizations to provide greater resources and opportunities for young
adults to succeed in school and employment opportunities.
 Bring Restorative Justice Programs into the City of Fillmore and expand the program into the unincorporated areas.
 Reduce Crime to historic low levels achieved in 2013-2014
 Obtain grant funding to build better community relations and combat gang criminal activity.
 Purchase additional Community Cameras to help prevent criminal behavior and solve crimes after they occur.
 Upgrade Fillmore Station phone system.
 Develop an Explorer type program in the middle school to give student an identity away from joining a gang.
 Work with the City of Fillmore and the County transportation agency to develop public transportation to Moorpark and
Santa Clarita to provide work and educational opportunities to many of our at risk youth.
 Ojai PD acquired a new vehicle for the Ojai Volunteers in Policing (VIPs).
 Ojai PD conducted one Citizen Academy and had 14 people graduate from the program which helped to strengthen policecommunity
partnerships and the graduates’ understanding of police work.
 Ojai PD created a Public Outreach Collateral Sergeant assignment. This position has been very successful and
communicates with the public on Facebook, Twitter and Nixel regarding police work, crime trends and community issues.
 Ojai PD acquired a new Message Board / Radar Trailer. This has already been used to notify the public of disaster
information related to possible El Nino conditions as well as traffic issues / speed enforcement.
 ARTIC fully functioning with 2 full time dispatchers.
 Go-Live with new CAD (Versaterm) and MDT systems which included many hours of customization, training for all
dispatchers and supervisors, and obtaining 2 laptops for critical incidents in a command post with fully functioning CAD
capabilities.
 Maintained a 5.5 minute response time for emergency calls and an average 10.9 minutes response time for nonemergency
calls in the City of Fillmore.
 Obtained a grant and other funding for the purchase of a total of five hi tech microwave cameras installed in high crime
areas.
 Increased attention to parking and nuisance issues throughout the City of Fillmore.
 Completed refurbishment activities at the Police Station including interior/exterior repainting, installation of water saving
fixtures, improved security equipment, and refurbished interview rooms.
 Completed a bicycle safety course and handed out free bicycle helmets to all that participated.
 Continued a reduction of overall Part 1 Crime and Part-2 Crime in the unincorporated areas surround the City of Fillmore.
 Closed the successful use of the 2013-2014 CALGRIP grant.
 Revised and streamlined the dispatch training program into a 4 phase system for better manageability.
 Completely revised and streamlined SCC policies.
 We created a 7 person recruitment team to attend job fairs.
 Reinstated quarterly Dispatch / Patrol meetings for information sharing.
 We created a more efficient system for accepting audio requests from the DA’s Office (through VCIJIS).
 Maintenance of effort – Responded to multiple incidents, to include brushfires, winter storms, Harbor shoaling and the
Somis Oil Spill. Completed 2 ICS 300/400 courses, 2 EPC and 3 ECC meetings.
Somis Oil Spill. Completed 2 ICS 300/400 courses, 2 EPC and 3 ECC meetings.
 Completed El Niño Task Force Preparations.
 Completed the 5-year Hazard Mitigation Plan update.
 Obtained preparedness and homeland security grants.
 Implemented new planning cycle and process.
 Continued EOC section specific training.
 OES Duty Officer Vehicle replaced.
 Recovery pamphlet for public distribution has been completed. Recovery website is being created.
 Implemented new EOC logistics process.
 Implement county employee alert and warning system (VC Notify).
 Downsize Ojai’s current F-250 pick-up truck to a smaller F-150 pick-up truck to be used by station cadet and save on fuel
costs.
 Acquire License Plate Reader (LPR) technology to be used in conjunction with the station’s new Message Board / Radar
Trailer to bolster investigative ability.
 Conduct one Citizen’s Academy to educate the public on police work and to possibly increase the VIP membership.
 ARTIC fully functioning with 2 full time dispatchers.
 Go-Live with new CAD (Versaterm) and MDT systems which included many hours of customization, training for all
dispatchers and supervisors, and obtaining 2 laptops for critical incidents in a command post with fully functioning CAD
capabilities.
 Filled the Training Coordinator position with Rayen Davidson following the retirement of Michelle Baylis. Actively recruit,
hire, and successfully train at least 3 – 4 dispatchers.
 Reassign two more dispatchers into ARTIC.
 Complete ARTIC expansion – construction build out from current ARTIC office of 99 sq ft to 270 sq ft. Install 4 ARTIC work
stations and wall monitors in newly created build out.
 Fill the SCC supervisor vacancy.
 Work towards the implementation of text to 9-1-1.
 Increased training for SCC supervisors through conventional and on line supervisory coursesMaintenance of effort for
existing programs and projects – EOC Activations, ICS Training and regional Exercises, EPC, ECC and Grants.
 Complete the 3-year Emergency Operations Plan update.
 Obtain preparedness and homeland security grants.
 Complete the Ventura County section of the Southern California Catastrophic Response Plan.
 Integration of cyber-security / cyber-resilience into all hazard program.
 Improve Recovery Program to include disaster assistance and public assistance.

Objectives
 Purchase ballistic vest carriers for the entire Major Crimes Unit to ensure all team members executing search warrants are
wearing the same color and type of vests.
 Continue to implement the Owner Applied Number (OAN) Program in Ventura County with the goal of getting 100%
compliance (1,400 ranches) within the next two years.
 Continue to bring Training to Ventura County that can be utilized by area stations, saving costs for travel to out of area
training.
 Provide Ubiquiti UBWA & UBRSS training to all Technical Services Unit (TSU) members. Course is a one week training
course geared towards personnel tasked with the programming, installation and maintenance of current and future
expansion of microwave and camera networks.
 Outfit the East and West county command posts, as well as SWAT truck with Ubiquiti microwave systems.
 Update the Camarillo Metrolink camera system.
 Expand the Ubiquiti microwave network service to Westlake Village and Northwest Fillmore, and provide better coverage in
the Moorpark and Ojai areas.
 Better organize and streamline distribution of DRMO assets to department members and other agencies.
 Research, develop and deploy new covert camera styles and recording equipment.
 Obtain access to a designated District Attorney to review search warrants and work collaboratively on major crimes cases.
 Create a Fraud/Forgery task force to include a District Attorney Investigator.
 Replace the Case Management System.
 Develop a 15 minute briefing video for patrol deputies explaining how to initially document a large forgery fraud case and
what preliminary information is essential to gather.
 Expand the 290 PC / Sex Registrant Compliance Program to include a partial deputy allocation to assist the dedicated
investigator with 290 PC compliance enforcement. By expanding this program, VCSO can increase the amount of criminal
prosecutions and community education / outreach to better conform with SAFE ELEAS Project Objectives.
 Expand the CPS Cross Report / Missing Persons-Runaway Juvenile Programs to include a partial deputy allocation to
replace the current Investigative Assistant Allocation. This will greatly enhance the accountability of the cross reporting and
missing persons-runaway juvenile programs.
 Actively pursue grant funding to maintain operational tempo in TSU.
 Increase the collateral staffing and full-time staffing of the TSU.
 Add an analyst from the National Guard to manage marijuana related intelligence so detectives can work more efficiently
on cases by utilizing good sound processed intelligence information.
 Change team dynamics to increase number of completed cases.
 Utilize Copter 3 to assist in identifying illegal marijuana growing operations in the Los Padres National Forest. Copter 3
would utilize FLIR and thermal imaging at night to identify camps and areas where the suspects can be located.
 Utilize LPR systems on Highway 33 to capture data, utilize Crime Analysis and National Guard to review data and attempt
to identify target vehicles/suspects and times of operation.
 DEC (Drug Endangered Children) training for patrol and station detectives.
 Conduct Stonegarden grant overview training for patrol and detectives at each station. Provide personnel training on
smuggling indicators and methods of operation.
 Continue to network with Stonegarden allied agencies and the various entities so we have a more cohesive working
partnership.
 Secure Stonegarden funding for 2017.
 Secure Byrne/Justice Assistance Grant Funding for 2017.
 Secure funding for a Strongwatch surveillance vehicle through Stonegarden grant funding.
 Continue to expand the Stonegarden Jail Deputy program by utilizing deputies to conduct surveillance operations with
seasoned narcotics detectives.
 Continue to conduct coastal interdiction operations within our coastal communities.
 Develop a two person team who will investigate drug overdose deaths.
 Reestablish a parcel interdiction schedule with FedEx and UPS locations
 Conduct four Interdiction checkpoints within the year and possibly introduce interdiction patrols on Hwy 126.
 Conduct financial investigations on established and newly opening massage parlors within the County. There has been a
rise in businesses opening throughout the county. This would have to be done as a joint criminal investigation of Human
Trafficking with the assistance of Special Crimes Unit, local detectives and the DA’s office.
 Additional training in highway, hotel, airport, and parcel interdiction.
 Additional training on conducting financial and money laundering investigations.
 Continue the focus of investigations targeting “major” drug trafficking organizations, which directly impact Ventura County,
and maintain a high level of productivity related to arrests and seizures.
 Supplement quarterly training with more advanced tactical training to related entries and covert movements.
 Upgrade the detectives’ investigative software to include access to the upgraded NVLR (license plate reader system).
 Obtain new trackers that utilize the 4G technology as the 2G are being phased out by the vendors and cell phone
providers. Also provide all VCAT detectives with a “Whooster” account to access cell phone reverse look up / porting
information.

Objectives
O
 Implement new electronic document control software Qualtrax. All the SOPs, training, competencies, proficiencies, work
authorization, court testimony, vendor approval, customer complaints etc. will be stored and tracked electronically.
 Implement a new Laboratory Information Management System BEAST for evidence tracking and case management system
 Complete the validation of the iS50 Raman module in Drug Section
 In Forensic Alcohol Section – verify 5 new Alco Sensor V-XL @POA instruments for implementation into the current breath
alcohol program.
 Purchase and validate a new headspace GC for blood alcohol.
 Validate the LC-TOF instrument to expand the screening for DUID cases
 Complete the expanded benzodiazepines validation by LCMSMS
 Validate the current Carisoprodol confirmatory method on the Agilent 6460 instrument. Currently, the old instrument API
2000 instrument will be retired.
 Complete the DUID testimony training for all senior (full-time) scientists in Toxicology.
 Get all staff trained and competency tested on QuantifilerTrio / Globalfiler/3500/Genemapper IDX
 Initiate validation of STRmix.
 Streamline the process of intake and enter property, in Property and Evidence Section.
 Have a search function in place that pulls from VCJIS for the disposition of property.
 Vehicle and homicide evidence reorganized in a more orderly and accessible fashion at the new warehouse.
 Wi-Fi system in place at the new warehouse to better track items as they are stored and moved. The new BEAST system
will supposedly have a hand held scanner that operates via Wi-Fi. We currently do not have this capability.
 Increase the amount of drug destruction runs we complete each year, to keep up with the ever increasing volume of
discarded pharmaceuticals we receive.
 Fill the vacant Supervisor position in latent Fingerprint.
 Fill vacant DNA Forensic Scientist position.
 Fill vacant Fingerprint Forensic Scientist position
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 Create a new Forensic Scientist position in DNA section to help control the backlog of touch DNA cases. ($150,000)
 Upgrade a Forensic Scientist position to Supervising Forensic Supervisor position to take on the DNA technical lead role
and be involved in validating newer DNA technology ($18,000)
 Upgrade 1 SST II position to Forensic Scientist III (FS III) position. All fingerprint examiners like other comparative analysis
examiners to help re-open the fingerprint section which has been shut down since 2012 ($40,000)
 Upgrade Forensic Scientist I in Latents to FS III position. If this change is not made our lab will continue to be a training
ground for Fingerprint examiners. Just like a firearm examiner, the role, depth and complexity of a fingerprint examiner
continues to grow and needs to be compensated accordingly. ($20,000)
 Send a Forensic Scientist to a 5 month concentrated latent print academy hosted by Ron Smith and Associates ($27,000)
in place on 2 year mentored in-house training in fingerprint section.

Objectives
O
 Sign a short term (3 year) lease with the Department of Airports for Hangar Three. This will enable us to be flexible should
other housing options open up over that time span. We are currently waiting for the Department of Airports to deliver a lease
document (an MOA) to us.
 Move forward with the CEO and Board of Supervisors to acquire funding for a new helicopter to replace our current Bell
212.
 Work with the Fire Protection District to streamline our reimbursement process from Fire.
 Reconfigure our locker room/medic room/IR room to better accommodate both sexes in individual locker rooms, provide
rudimentary air conditioning to our medic room, and provide a fully light protected IR room for IR goggle work.
 Replace two helicopter medical decks with the two light weight med decks.

Objectives
O
 Replace current Linux Zenworks platform to Windows server environment for better support
 Implement Active Directory password reset software solution
 Install Shadow Copy solution in Special Services, Todd Road Jail, East Valley and Moorpark for 10 day restores at the
desktop
 Replace Imageware workstations for photo imaging system as they are more than 7 years old
 Convert patrol scheduling from the Intranet to Sharepoint
 Create Time Off Requests in Sharepoint
 Create the SSB Order System in Sharepoint
 Move Academy Training modules to Sharepoint so they can be managed by the Academy
 Develop Postings in Sharepoint to be managed by administrative staff in Personnel
 Deploy the electronic performance appraisal system department wide
 Implement overtime system in VCHRP PeopleSoft
 Upgrade to Internet Explorer 11 on all desktops
 Finish the Reorganization of the Crime Analysis Unit to include adding intelligence capabilities and a program administrator.
 Complete integration with Special Crimes Unit as part of a Ventura Regional Intelligence Center.
 Acquisition and full deployment of department wide analytics (Wynyard).
 Add contract or full time analyst to perform open source/social media investigations.
 Increase data sets, such as Carfax.
 Continue offering signal intelligence with quick return to area detectives.
 Create a conduit to receive human intelligence on criminal activities from informants and arrestees.
 Open department-wide dialogue on civilianizing some investigative positions with analysts.
 Continue to provide analysts with training
 Implementation of Versaterm field reporting module and successful integration with VCIJIS and mandated reporting
 Continued promotion of sharing information with local agencies

Objectives
O
 The Main Jail would like to make an effort to decrease the amount of illegal narcotics being brought into the jail. The plan
is to continue training and education in this area and to increase the use of our body scanner located on Level 1. A plan to
accomplish this goal is being created and will soon be implemented.
 The Main Jail would like to implement a program that is currently being used at the Todd Road Jail. The program will
educate inmates that are getting ready for release and share with them information regarding health insurance, benefits
such as Medicare and Medical, along with programs such as Cal Fresh and Food Share that might assist them integrating
back into society. The main jail is meeting with staff from the Ventura County Human Services Agency and developing a
plan of action to meet this goal.
 The Main jail would like to recognize the outstanding work performed by their employees each and every day. Our plan is
to establish an Employee of the quarter recognition program and present our outstanding employees with a token of
appreciation.

Objectives
O
 State Commitment tracking / audit network. Develop and implement new tracking procedures for court orders directing
VCSO to transport inmates to State run mental health facilities. The new tracking system will be held on a specific database
where all the involved professionals can access it in real time. The system will have fail safes built into it to ensure inmates
are transported to the State facility within the ordered time. If the State does not comply within the ordered time frame, we
will be able to identify the delay and make proper notification to the originating court. The network will also be able to identify
specific inmate time tables for their mental health needs while awaiting transportation to a State facility.
 Continuing our work with GSA and the California Judicial Council on plans to construct a new security kiosk with a raised
platform / work station for a deputy located at the entrance to the HOJ. The project goal is to retrofit the current space by
integrating ballistic material in several areas to provide cover in an active shooter situation, install a raised platform / work
station for a deputy and install barriers to provide a funnel effect for pedestrian traffic entering HOJ. The ultimate goal is to
provide a safe and secure lobby area for people working and conducting business in HOJ. GSA has assigned an engineer
to the project to develop blue prints, which should be completed in the near future. The engineer will also give a final
projected cost for the project.
 Obtain ballistic helmets for all sworn Sheriff Courts personnel for use during active shooter / active bomber incidents,
inmate riot control / civil unrest control/Patrol Overtime assignments.
 Obtain ballistic shields for the Ventura Courthouse & JJC.
 Continue efforts to obtain funding for a deputy dedicated to Lobby Screening.
 Continue work on the creation of a database that contains information on significant incidents and trials that have been
planned for and executed in the past. This database will help future Court Services staff and us from having to “re-invent the
wheel” when presented with similar situations.
 Complete the Judicial Intelligence Unit database, which will help us quickly locate and track the progress of JIU
investigations.
 Arrange meaningful and useful training for all sworn Sheriff Personnel within the bureau on court holidays. Help PTDF &
TRJ on court holidays with staffing and overtime issues.
 Continue the radio transition for all Sheriff Personnel in the bureau.
 Continuing to research and develop with GSA and the California Judicial Council a new inmate movement camera system
to include upstairs in holding areas and Civil system.
 Work continues with GSA and California Judicial Council on obtaining a new video security camera system for Inmate
Movement area.
 Install Plexiglas or a clear barrier on the elevator gates and top portion of the cage, so inmates will not be able to spit on
deputy.
 Block visibility of inmates being housed in condos so they cannot communicate with others in holding tanks, tint windows
so inmate cannot look out but deputy can look inside condo.
 New radio chargers/ batteries for handhelds.
 The Court Services Bureau, in all areas, will continue to look for more efficient ways to conduct business, improve delivery
of service, while reducing costs whenever possible.

Objectives
O
 Replace aging water heaters for the housing units.
 Complete the construction of the Todd Road Jail Orchard project. This orchard will be used for an inmate vocational
training and certification opportunity. Fruit will be available for use by our food services staff in the preparation of meals for
inmates and staff.
 Work with GSA to develop and complete a water recycling project to be tied into the on-site waste water treatment plant.
Water will be used for landscaping and orchard irrigation in place of well water currently being used.
 Complete the construction of the Vehicle Storage building to store vehicles being held as evidence in serious criminal
cases. Construction began this past year and should be completed soon.
 Continue the process to complete 64-bed Todd Road Jail Health and Programming Unit.
 Construct door enclosures for inmate visiting booths in Housing-Unit C in order to increase the use and efficiency by
inmates with differing classifications.
 Upgrade of door controls in facility to touch-screen technology.
 Remodel the Public Reception counter/work station for easier accessibility by staff.

Objectives
O
 Provide leadership and administrative support to program operations to ensure success in achieving the Agency’s mission,
vision, and values.
 Prioritize mandated services and successful programs, while seeking the most efficient manner in which to deliver them.
 Continue to expand the Evidence Based Practices model throughout the Agency.
 Develop a Strategic Implementation Plan to include a continuous improvement system throughout the Agency.
 Continue to work with our justice partners to ensure the services Probation contributes to the system address the needs of
our partners.
 Strive to maintain critical programs for our juvenile offenders. This mission will help regulate the Juvenile Facilities’
population, contain costs, and allow us to provide services that will positively impact the youth we serve, thus resulting in
reduced recidivism and costly out-of-home placements.
 Identify technology opportunities that increase operational efficiency and effectiveness.
 Provide timely financial reports to ensure the Executive Committee has the information necessary for making good
business decisions.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
A contract will be established with a vendor to provide end-to-end administration in claiming reimbursement for activities
provided to Medi-Cal beneficiaries under the federal programs titled Medi-Cal Administrative Activities (MAA) and Targeted
Case Management (TCM). We estimate receiving a combined total of $1.5 million from these new revenue sources in FY
2016-17.

Objectives
O
Ensure that facility infrastructure remains up-to-date and provides a safe setting for youth in our custody. The following
measures have been planned to improve safety and security for youth:
 The Detention Unit recreation yards will be retrofitted to increase the safety and security of the youth. A youth was able to
obtain access to the fencing over the Unit recreation yard by means of the basketball rim and attempt suicide. The 12
Detention Unit recreation yards will be retrofitted to prevent a youth from gaining access to the security fencing.
 Coordinate with GSA on scheduling interior painting for the facility and the Detention corridor.
 Implement an electronic tracking system to increase the speed in which maintenance requests are delivered and
processed. Currently, staff submit paper maintenance requests and place them in a mailbox slot for delivery to Operations.
GSA allowed Operations access into their electronic work orders system, resulting in expedited submission and processing
of the maintenance requests with the new tracking system. Maintenance requests are submitted to GSA within 24 hours of
receipt. The next step in this process would be to develop the electronic submission of the maintenance requests to further
reduce the submission time to GSA.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF-Operations
Unit in FY 2016-17.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.

Objectives
O
 Provide programming to youth detained pending Court proceedings, primarily through Girls Inc. of Carpinteria, and the
Volunteers-in-Probation Program, which includes numerous volunteers that provide lessons in music, chess, science, etc.
Said youth will also be offered evidence based programming provided through ART, Gender Specific Programming,
Interactive Journaling, and Alcohol and Drug Counseling.
 Continue to improve on and implement DMC/JDAI practices, policies and procedures that strive to reduce
disproportionality, for both detention and commitment populations.
 Continue to provide youth serving court-ordered commitments with evidence based programming that addresses their
criminogenic needs and comprehensive transitional services that will assist them upon release, back into the community.
 Continue to provide ART and train additional staff to facilitate ART training.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Detention or
Commitment Services.
 Due to attrition and promotions, the JF continues to experience CSO vacancies. Efforts will continue to focus on filling
behind position vacancies to minimize the use of overtime, which includes staffing CSO II relief positions.
 We will continue with current programming, while seeking to improve and expand those services offered to youth that will
focus on their transition back into the community and reduce recidivism.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government. This includes revisions to Title 15 Regulations which were adopted and published in April 2014.

Objectives
O
 Provide the court with a thorough and detailed intake report so they may make informed decisions on suitable releases into
the community.
 Appropriately screen all youth brought to the JF utilizing a Risk Assessment Instrument to determine if detention is
necessary or if the youth can be safely supervised in the community using CC/EM. The screening of youth based upon a
Risk Assessment Instrument (RAI) is a strategy which complies with EBP.
 Intake will continue to assist with reviewing all bookings and making recommendations for enhancements of VCPA
information technology for collection of JDAI/ RED data to assist with reduction strategies.
 Continue to keep the JF population down by keeping the number of youth on CC/EM at a monthly average of
approximately 40-50 youth. Continue efforts to provide resources to youth while on CC/EM to increase their success in the
program.
 Continue to conduct daily field contacts of CC/EM youth in the program, but to utilize staff in a more efficient manner so the
CC/EM team is able to increase the number of weekly field contacts by 10% this year.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Juvenile
Intake and Community Confinement Unit.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.
This includes revisions to Juvenile Title 15 Regulations, which were adopted and published in April 2014. While there are no
significant changes known, JF policies and procedures will be reviewed and compared to ensure compliance.

Objectives
O
 Provide juveniles with vocational skills to be utilized upon release from the program.
 Reduce recidivism.
 Continue to increase programming to juveniles not participating in the Leaders Program. Programming will involve
additional male youth housed in the same housing area as the youth participating in the Leaders Program potentially
doubling the number of youth receiving services.
 Provide comprehensive transitional services for youth returning to the community.
 Refer more incarcerated teen youth to the Just Beginning program.
 Purchase additional Paxton-Patterson modules to include: electrical, roof framing, hand tools, concrete, and wall framing
instruction.
 Expand the current Chess program which is currently limited to staff participation with youth and seek volunteer help
teaching/expanding Chess to a larger variety of JF youth.
 Procure a contract with Dr. Lee Reid to provide one-on-one sex offender treatment to select JF youth.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 We do not anticipate any changes that will significantly impact the programs and financial condition of the JF Detention or
Commitment Services.
 Development and implementation of a Canine Program wherein youth work with trainers and local rescue programs to
learn to train and foster canines. The goal of the program is to help youth develop skills in the areas of leadership,
teamwork, responsibility for others and accountability. In addition, the presence of a therapy canine in the units will help
reduce tension and create empathy in the youth. Youth who participate in the program will be able to earn school credit.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government. This includes revisions to Juvenile Title 15 Regulations which were adopted and published in April 2014.

Objectives
O
 Prepare quality pre-disposition reports in a timely manner, which are consistent with Judicial Council Rules and local
Superior Court processes.
 Provide Courts with knowledgeable and resourceful court officers who will actively assist judges in Court.
 Accurately and thoroughly screen and assess all youth and their families to determine the most appropriate level and type
of intervention needed to eliminate risk factors while supporting existing protective factors.
 Secure reparation for victims.
 Encourage youth to lead law-abiding lives and deter them from future offenses.
 Deter others from criminal conduct by demonstrating the consequences.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 We are in the process of restructuring and reorganizing our Agency. In that process, we have decided to relocate the
Juvenile Investigations unit to the Juvenile Facilities located at the Juvenile Justice Complex, which will help streamline
operations and improve coordination of services provided to youth by staff from both the Juvenile Investigations Unit and
Juvenile Facilities.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.

Objectives
O
 Complete the Citation and Petition Kaizen, with a goal of reducing the time of receiving a law enforcement citation to the
time of issuing a consequence from 40 days to 24 days.
 Work with the VCPA IT to find ways to move citations electronically, in an effort to become more efficient and begin moving
towards paperless processing.
 Work with the VCPA IT in developing a community portal within the Agency’s website that will allow for access to diversion
classes and thus follow the evidence based principals of delivering faster consequences for at risk youth.
 Eliminate the YCOP contract that serves far too few youth and move to a Restorative Justice Model, such as a Victim
Offender Reconciliation Program or a Community Review Board.
 Maintain programs that reduce recidivism to ensure our custody populations do not increase.
 Continue to streamline fiscal items such as contracts, letters to the Board of Supervisors, and purchase order requests.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 Our Agency is working very diligently with our vendor, Justice Benefits, Inc. (JBI), to ensure compliance with Title IV-E
requirements and maximize Title IV-E revenues. Ongoing training provided by JBI has proven to reduce the amount of
coding errors that were being made.
 A key component of field supervision is to conduct unannounced home visits of medium/high risk offenders to complete
compliance checks and search for contraband. This operation is inherently unpredictable and dangerous. Officers who
supervise medium risk offenders currently carry pepper spray as a non-lethal force option. To provide officers with a more
effective non-lethal weapon to defend themselves in the field, explore the option of expanding Tasers to all active field
supervision officers as a force option.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.

Objectives
O
 Continue to work with the Human Services Agency’s Children and Family Services department and other partners in
developing and implementing programs in support of AB403/Continuum of Care Reform.
 Continue to focus efforts on family reunification, placing youth in the least restrictive setting, and arranging for independent
living skills and transitional housing to those where family reunification is not an option.
 As placement stability for our youth has greatly improved, PLAU will focus efforts on improving the rate at which placement
youth are discharged to permanency.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 It is expected that a full-time SrDPO will be added to PLAU to work a fixed position, prior to the end of FY 2015-16 and
through FY 2016-17. This SrDPO will work solely on AB403/Continuum of Care Reform efforts and once in place, will be
moved into another SrDPO position within the Probation Agency.
 Costs related to the RFA and CSEC programs will be largely covered by the Human Services Agency. There are no
expected costs to the Probation Agency, at this time. ILP services are covered under the MOU between the two agencies.
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.

Objectives
O
The objective of the JJCPA program is to provide services that will have the following results:
 Reduction in the arrest rate
 Reduction in the incarceration rate
 Reduction in the probation violation rate
 Increase in the probation completion rate
 Increase in the restitution completion rate
 Increase in the community service completion rate
 Reduction in new law violation
 Reduction in time to first arrests
 Reduction in arrests for violent offenses
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 As previously stated, ROPP has been expanded to incorporate all cities within Ventura County. This allows for more youth
to receive services. However, due to the expansion, there is a need for an additional full time counselor, a full time youth
advocate and a .5 SrDPO position. A request was made to the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council (JJCC) for these
additional resources.
 The THRIVE program will provide additional Parent Project classes that will be offered throughout the County in both
English and Spanish.
 The future of the Recovery Classroom and Juvenile Drug Court is being discussed and debated among stakeholders.
Therefore, future financial impacts are unknown at this time. However, should the JJCC decide to not continue with the
programs, the creation of alternative programs, to better meet the needs of a changing population, will likely be implemented
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal
government.

Objectives
O
 Prepare quality pre-sentence reports in a timely manner and in accordance with Judicial Council Rules.
 Protect society.
 Encourage the defendant to lead a law-abiding life and deter him/her from future offenses.
 Deter others from criminal conduct by demonstrating the consequences.
 Prevent new crimes by the defendant by isolating him/her for the period of incarceration.
 Secure reparation for victims.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 We will continue to closely monitor and respond to changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.
 We will be restructuring the Interstate Compact (ICOTS) process to meet all Federal and State requirements. Additional
resources may be needed.

Objectives
O
 When a client requests to move out of the state or if a probationer from another state wishes to reside in Ventura County,
the request be formally requested and approved by Interstate Compact Offender Tracking System (ICOTS). Recent changes
to ICOTS rules and regulations require Probation to establish probable cause hearings for these clients. Establish policy and
protocol to conduct probable cause hearings though the Courts for ICOTS clients.
 Implement the newly created client survey which targets performance measures of services delivered.
 Exceed targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of ORAS assessments within 45 days of intake on moderate to
high risk cases.
 Exceed targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of the SARA assessment within 45 days of intake.
 Integrate a formalized graduated response matrix.
 Incorporate the Incentives Program within the database system to provide fiscal accountability of funds and to track the use
and effectiveness of the program.
 Validate the ORAS assessment tools for the Ventura County population.
 Implement a comprehensive training program and coaching system that integrates both Motivational Interviewing
techniques and cognitive behavioral interventions.
 Develop a "Chrono Wizard" system which allows for guided and "click box" entries to more accurately collect data.
 Implement Targeted Case Management (TCM) and Medi-Cal Administrative Activities (MAA) reporting for state
reimbursement.
 Develop a web based Community Based Organization (CBO) Network to interface with officers and integrate with case
plans.
 Develop a web based "Client Portal" for clients to utilize to check case information.
 Develop and publish an Annual Report for the Division.
 Develop a Continuous Improvement Plan.
 Incorporate a crime analyst (researcher) to the PRAS unit to enhance quality control of data collection, organization, and
analysis to improve data-driven decision making.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 At current capacity, the projected operating deficit for AB 109 services, programming and operations county-wide for
FY2016-2017 is $1,469,402 with a year-end reserve of 5,737,350. It’s anticipated that the CCP will be approving a budget for
FY 2016-2017 in June of 2016. Budget impacts will be known at that time. The population served by this funding are those
released from prison (PRCS) and those sentenced to felony jail locally by the courts and released on Mandatory Supervision
(MS). It is anticipated that in Fiscal Year 2016-2017, PRCS releases will remain constant. However, court sentencing
practices have changed under Penal Code 1170(h)(5)(A) which as of January 1, 2015, the court must order Mandatory
Supervision unless it is found not to be suitable in the interest of justice. As a result, Probation has seen a moderate increase
in Mandatory Supervision cases and anticipate this growth to continue through 2016-17.
 Probation will be capturing case management practices that qualify for Targeted Case Management (TCM) and Medi-Cal
Administrative Activities (MAA) state reimbursement. The potential increase in revenue could be significant.
 The Governor is taking steps to place the “Public Safety and Rehabilitation Act of 2016” on the November ballot. If passed,
this Act will allow inmates to earn custody credits for good behavior, education and rehabilitative achievements. Although the
impact is too early to determine, the result may be that PRCS inmates are released earlier to Probation.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.

Objectives
O
 Implement inter-rater reliability test for assessment to ensure proper use of the tool.
 The Interstate Compact for Adult Offender Supervision (ICAOS) oversees the interstate movement of probationers
between states. Recent changes to ICAOS rules require Probation to establish probable cause hearings for probationers in
our County from another state. Probation will work with stakeholders to establish policy and protocol related to probable
cause hearings and conduct training to educate all parties on the rules of ICAOS.
 Implement the newly created probationer survey which targets performance measures of services delivered.
 Exceed targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of ORAS assessments within 45 days of intake on moderate to
high risk cases.
 Exceed targeted goal of more than 70% completion rate of the SARA assessment within 45 days of intake.
 Integrate a formalized graduated response matrix into the case management of probationers.
 Incorporate the Incentives Program within the database system to provide fiscal accountability of funds and to track the use
and effectiveness of the program.
 Validate the ORAS assessment tools for the Ventura County population.
 Implement a comprehensive training program and coaching system that integrates both Motivational Interviewing
techniques and cognitive behavioral interventions.
 Develop a program to document probationer contacts, "Chrono Wizard", which allows for guided and "click box" entries and
the ability to more accurately collect data.
 Implement Targeted Case Management (TCM) and Medi-Cal Administrative Activities (MAA) reporting for state
reimbursement.
 Develop a web-based Community Based Organization (CBO) Network to interface with officers and integrate with case
plans.
 Develop a web-based "Client Portal" for clients to utilize to check case information.
 Develop and publish an Annual Report for the Division.
 Develop a Continuous Improvement Plan for the Division.
 Support and facilitate the move of Domestic Violence Providers towards evidence-based practices.
 Provide a higher level of service and supervision for high risk multiple DUI offenders.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 Probation will be capturing case management practices that qualify for Targeted Case Management (TCM) and Medi-Cal
Administrative Activities (MAA) state reimbursement. The potential increase in revenue could be significant. This practice will
also be conducted by other Divisions within the Agency so projections for this Division alone is difficult.
 We will continue to monitor and respond to applicable changes in the laws and budget of the State/Federal government.

Objectives
O
 Continue to increase the number of participants in the Work Release program.
 Increase the number of contracted work crews, thereby increasing revenue for the program.
 Oversee tenant improvements for the DRC and successfully open the DRC.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Following a competitive bid process, Probation entered into a contract with Geo Re-entry Services, LLC to operate the DRC
for one year in the City of Ventura, with an option to extend for up to two additional one year periods. It is anticipated this
program will be operational in FY 2016-17.

Objectives
O
 Hire only the best applicants that pass a rigorous background investigation. This ensures that the Agency retains only
those applicants that are of the highest integrity, possess superior interpersonal skills, and exhibit good decision making and
judgment.
 Complete Administrative Investigations in a manner that respects the rights of employees while protecting the Agency and
the County from liability. Thorough Administrative Investigations enable the Agency to take appropriate action concerning
employees that do not comply with Agency policies and procedures and exonerate the wrongly accused.
 Enhance the Agency’s image and increase employee morale by conducting swearing-in ceremonies, and keeping the
Agency website up to date.
 Provide employees with initial basic skills and build a foundation for ongoing learning. Job skills, enforcement activities,
and casework services are core and essential to the STU training program. This approach not only compliments and
supports the Agency’s mission, but reinforces the concept that our employees constitute our most valuable resource for
accomplishing our mission.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 The plans of the STU for next fiscal year include: enhancing the online training program through a new site from the
Standards and Training for Corrections (this may result in the eventual elimination of the Relias contract for a an annual
saving of approximately $33,000); improving training opportunities for civilian staff; conducting agency-wide safety training;
and bringing in new and relevant training.
 Currently, the State’s Standards and Training for Corrections (STC) is included in the Governor’s budget for FY 2016-17.
As such, there are no estimated cuts to the Agency’s staff training program. The Ventura County Probation Agency is
projected to receive approximately $187,720 this fiscal year for staff training and development.
 There are no anticipated changes to the expenditures for the PSU Unit.
 PSU will begin conducting swearing-in/promotion ceremonies on a quarterly basis in order to deliver these ceremonies in a
time-frame closer to the actual hiring/promotion date of our employees.

Objectives
O
 Standardize and streamline policies and procedures for clerical and records support staff.
 Establish and maintain effective working relationships with management, employees, employee representatives, staff in
other agencies and the public.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
 Standardize and streamline policies and procedures for clerical and records support staff.
 Establish and maintain effective working relationships with management, employees, employee representatives, staff in
other agencies and the public.

Objectives
O
1. Hall of Administration: Thermal Energy Storage System Repairs; Fourth Floor, Quad 1, MRR, County Counsel ADA
Restroom Upgrade; Department Directory Replacement; Security Enhancements Outside Public Envelope; Ceiling
Replacement; Storm Drain Replacement
2. Pre-Trial Detention Facility: Grease Pit Replacement; Women’s Booking Remodel
3. Government Center: Replace Exterior Water Valves; Upgrade Cameras to HD Digital; Courtyard Tile Replacement
4. Todd Road Jail: Public Parking Lot Upgrade; Replace Vacuum Toilet System Holding Tanks; HVAC Master Plan,
Construct Phase 4, Intake Bldg; Add Mastertrol System to Showers
5. Juvenile Facility: Retrofitting Housing Rec Yard Fencing; Repair/Replace Grease Trap; Chiller Epoxy Coating; Upgrade
HVAC Controls Program, Phase 2
6. Partridge Bldg: Upgrade Fire Life Safety System
7. East Valley Sheriff's Station: Hot Water Heater Upgrade; Exterior Painting; Interior Painting; Fire Life Safety System
Upgrade
8. Gonzales Road: Roof Coating
9. Animal Services: Install Automatic Water Feeders
10. Saticoy, GSA: Card Access System Upgrade
11. Vanguard: ADA Restroom Upgrades
12. Hall of Justice: Replace Three Fulton Boilers; Install Security Platform; HVAC Controls Replacement
13. 669 County Square Drive: ADA Restrooms Upgrades; Farm Advisor Remodel
14. Santa Paula Ag Commissioner: Exterior Painting, Garage Facility

Objectives
O
1. Transfer of the current functionality from an aged mainframe to a new and modern platform.
2. Improve workflow, streamline business processes and enhance information exchange among the departments.
3. Upgrade technological capabilities to take advantage of current industry standards.
4. Effective management of computer platform costs.

Objectives
OContinue to monitor Piru Housing Conservation Program homeowner compliance.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Several “cleanup bills” to clarify and revise the language of AB 1x 26 are under consideration by the State Legislature. If
enacted, they may impact the operations and actions of the County Successor Housing Agency.

Objectives
O
1. Maintain high-quality HOME program performance.
2. Expand staff involvement in other housing-related activities, including participation on the Continuum of Care Housing
Subcommittee, serving as a member of the Technical Advisory Committee for the County General Plan Update, and reengaging
in House Farmworkers.
3. Conduct annual desktop and onsite monitoring of all project properties covered by affordability periods per HOME Rule
schedule.
4. Monitor all new projects during the construction phase ensuring compliance with all HOME regulations.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
New HOME rules, found at 24 CFR 92.107 indicate that HUD may revoke a Participating Jurisdiction’s designation if a
formula allocation falls below $750,000 (or $500,000 when Congress appropriates less than $1.5 million for this program) for
three consecutive years or below $625,000 (or below $410,000 as above) for two consecutive years. Given increased
vulnerability, enhanced requirements for regulatory compliance and reduced funding, it may be prudent to explore reinstating
the HOME Consortium with the City of Ventura which is experiencing similar challenges. Continued reduction in HOME
funding will have increasing adverse effects on availability of funds for projects within the county.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to improve system processes for centralized CDBG grant program administration.
2. Encourage more efficient use of funding by focusing allocations to high priority projects and to subrecipients with the
administrative capacity to comply with reporting requirements and use funds in a timely manner.
3. Align funding recommendations with priorities of the Countywide Continuum of Care.
4. Prepare the 2015-16 Consolidated Annual Performance Report and the 2016-17 Annual Action Plan, as required by HUD.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. Continued reduction in CDBG funding will have increasing adverse effects on availability of funds for county and city
programs in the entitlement area.
2. In order to ensure the most effective use of limited resources, greater emphasis will need to be placed upon performance
outcomes, necessitating overhaul of contracts and enhanced monitoring and reporting.
3. It is anticipated that greater regional coordination and collaboration with other Entitlement jurisdictions will improve
operational efficiencies for both staff and non-profit entities receiving funding under this program.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to improve system processes for CoC grant program administration.
2. Encourage more efficient use of funding by focusing allocations to high priority projects and to subrecipients with the
administrative capacity to comply with reporting requirements and use funds in a timely manner.
3. Align funding recommendations with objectives in the priorities and policies endorsed by the Countywide Continuum of
Care
4. Pursue best practices to enhance system operations, while endorsing a Housing First Strategy.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. CoC is implementing the Coordinated Entry system in order to be competitive for additional funding; comprehensive
implementation will necessitate dedicated HMIS resources and cooperation and participation from both CoC grantees and
other organizations serving homeless who may or may not be receiving federal grant funding.
2. In accordance with HUD requirements and in order to ensure effective use of limited resources, greater emphasis will
need to be placed upon performance outcomes, necessitating overhaul of contracts and enhanced monitoring and reporting.
Monitoring and reporting will require increased participation of the HMIS team to generate the data and reports necessary to
perform this work.

Objectives
O
1. Increase overall collections for the families we serve while providing consistent and excellent customer service
2. Continue to focus resources that support our key business strategies
3. Continue to meet all State compliance and data reliability requirements
4. Respond to customer inquiries within 3 days
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The current economic situation and continued flat funding poses challenges to our goal of increasing child support
collections in the upcoming year, however, VCDCSS will continue to pursue every possible avenue to support children and
families.

Objectives
O
1. The VCDCSS Call Center staff is committed to responding to calls within 60 seconds.
2. To provide full resolution for 90-95% of the calls at the first point of contact.

Objectives
O
1. Commence repairs beginning with the overlay of the parking lot
2. Complete other high priority deferred maintenance projects
3. Survey outdoor irrigation for potential leaks
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
A deferred maintenance fund was approved by the Board of Supervisors. GSA’s inspection of the property resulted in a
short list of suggested repairs and improvements that will commence once funding and appropriations are established. We
will be partnering with vendors to accept donations and in kind services to accomplish some of this work.

Objectives
O
Given the limited funds available, only funding to the District Attorney for vertical prosecution is included in the Preliminary
Budget as an objective for this Fund.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FNo major changes are anticipated.

Objectives
O
Provide education opportunities to the public on the benefits of spaying and neutering companion animals. Find new ways to
augment this fund with donor contributions and grants.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
This program is funded through Food and Agriculture Code sections 30804.7(a) and 31751.7(a), which state that owners of
non-spayed or unneutered dogs or cats that are impounded by a county shelter shall be fined. If these mandates were to be
repealed, funds would not be available for spay and neuter programs such as those described above.

Objectives
O
COMMUNITY SERVICES AND SUPPORTS YOUTH AND FAMILY SERVICES
a. Expand the implementation of the Promotoras Project to increase enrollment in the Fillmore Community Project and to
reduce stigma within the community.
b. For the juvenile mental health court, increase percentage of clients successfully completing the program by 15%, and
increase family therapy interventions by 10%.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by the
Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
PREVENTION AND EARLY INTERVENTION (PEI)
a. Continue tracking new Promotora Model Program.
b. Expansion of EDIPP East County and Santa Clara Valley.
c. Suicide Prevention Training for all media and PIO’s County wide.
d. New implementation of Level 2 Seminars and Level 4 Groups for Triple P.
e. Update all contacts in accordance with new PEI statewide reluations and data collection expectations.
f. Hold a half day Suicide Prevention Conference in partnership with CSUCI.
g. Contract with CBO Rainbow Umbrella to provide coordinated services for the LGBTQ community to access mental health
services, reduce stigma and prevent suicide.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by the
Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
WORKFORCE EDUCATION AND TRAINING (WET)
a. Continue implementation of PMHNP grant, maintaining goal of 14 training positions each year and will include
documentation of supervision hours provided by department supervisors, collecting feedback from clinic sites and school
faculty regarding the program, and documenting number of hours of clinical services provided by PMHNP students.
Continue to educate staff and address system protocol and structure to ensure a successful integration of PMHNP’s into
service delivery throughout the department to address the psychiatrist resource shortages.
b. Continue to support sustainability of Evidence-Based Practice (EBP) training and treatment throughout the department;
set up process for charting types of EBP’s utilized in the department, number of staff trained, and explore additional EBP’s to
add to the treatment approaches to address gaps.
c. Increase financial incentive programs to include psychiatrists in Loan Assistance Program and increase number of
scholarships that are awarded.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by the
Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
CAPITAL FACILITIES/TECHNOLOGY (CFTn)
a. Implementation of Client Document Scanning & Storage.
b. Implementation of selected Data Analytics solution.
c. Implementation of Integrated Laboratory Services.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by the
Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
INNOVATION (INN)
a. Fully evaluate Health Navigation and Quality of Life to conclude these innovated projects.
b. Evaluate and implement new Innovation Programs through the stakeholder process.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by the
Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
ADMINISTRATION
Create and implement an updated annual report to the 3-Year State MHSA plan, ensuring long-term program sustainability,
stakeholder input, and health equity.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by the
Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
COMMUNITY SERVICES AND SUPPORTS ADULT SERVICES
a. Continue to improve productivity and Medi-Cal penetration rate.
b. Reduce the number of individuals placed in out-of-county IMDs through the use of intensive, wraparound services.
c. Continue the implementation of evidence-based treatment and improve fidelity.
d. Fully implement the EHR.
e. Work towards implementation of assisted outpatient treatment (AKA Laura’s Law) following the recommendation from the
Behavioral Health Advisory Board and approval of the Ventura County Board of Supervisors.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The FY 2016-17 preliminary budget projects optimizing revenues by increasing billable units of service and assuring that
Medi-Cal applications are filed timely for potential recipients. Unforeseen decreases in local or State funding, utilized by the
Department for Federal Medi-Cal match, would challenge the Department's ability to maintain its current level of service.

Objectives
O
(1) Business and Industry Goal: Meet the workforce needs of high-demand sectors in the Ventura County regional economy.
(2) Adults Goal: Increase the number of adults in the Ventura County region who obtain a marketable and industryrecognized
credential or degree and are placed in a related sector job, with a special emphasis on unemployed,
underemployed, low-skilled, low-income, veterans, individuals with disabilities, and other at-risk populations.
(3) Youth Goal: Increase the number of high school students in the Ventura County region who graduate prepared for postsecondary
vocational training, further education, and/or a career, with an emphasis on at-risk youth and those from lowincome
communities.
(4) System Alignment and Accountability Goal: Support workforce development system alignment, service integration and
continuous improvement in the Ventura County region, using data to support evidence-based policymaking.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency will
manage to the actual level of funding received.

Objectives
O
(1) Ensure that pre-apprenticeship, and apprenticeship training is coordinated with one or more apprenticeship programs
registered by the U.S. Department of Labor Employment Training Administration and approved by the California Department
of Industrial Relations of Apprenticeship Standards for the occupation and geographic area.
(2) Prioritize training for occupations in priority industry sectors in the regional economy—training which results in completion
and attainment of a degree and/or other credentials valued by priority-sector employers within the region.
(3) Emphasize career pathways as a framework through which learners can connect their skills and interests with viable
career options.
(4) Provide opportunities to help adults make transitions relating to education, training, and/or employment.
(5) Collaborate with key stakeholders to establish a regional workforce and economic development partnership to leverage,
braid, and/or obtain resources that will sustain the operation of regional workforce and economic development networks over
time.
(6) Partner on strategies to reduce the overall high school dropout rate in the Ventura County region by one percent.
(7) Partner to develop and execute strategies to re-engage disconnected youth.
(8) Partner with employers, educators and others to help youth understand career pathway options and workforce pipelines.
(9) Partner to encourage youth to focus on attainment of post-secondary degrees and other credentials important to sector
employers in the regional labor market.
(10) Partner to ensure that every youth has the opportunity to develop and achieve career goals through education and/or
workforce training.
(11) Partner to promote youth services system collaboration to better serve youth with barriers and connect them to
education and employment.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) The level of Federal funding and the allocation of these funds by the State to the County are uncertain. The Agency will
manage to the actual level of funding received.

Objectives
O
(1) Hold the Annual Provider conference
(2) Increase provider enrollment numbers by 10%
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) Increase workload as a result of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) decision. Resulting cost increases are fully covered
under the IHSS MOE.
(2) The need for providers continues to increase based on the 5% caseload growth of In Home Supportive Services (IHSS)
caseload. The Affordable Health Care act increased the eligibility for services by a population not previously served.
(3) Provider wages negotiated by the County will result in adjustment(s) to the County’s MOE for the program.

Objectives
O
(1)Children & Family Services (CFS) will continue to actively monitor and improve strategies that are intended to decrease
the rate of domestic violence and spousal abuse.
(2)CFS domestic violence contractors intend to maintain level services to include but not limited to the following:
- Provide a shelter 24 hours/day, seven days/week in an undisclosed and secure location.
- Provide 24 hours/day, seven days/week telephone hotline for crisis calls.
- Provide temporary housing and food facilities.
- Provide psychological support and peer counseling in accordance with Section 1037.1 of the Evidence Code.
- Provide referrals to existing services in the community.
- Provide a drop-in center that operates during normal business hours to assist victims of domestic violence who have a
need for support services.
- Provide arrangements for school age children to continue their education during their stay at the domestic violence shelterbased
program.
- Provide emergency transportation as feasible (vehicles and drivers shall be available to transport victims and their children
to appropriate services as needed with a maximum two (2) hour response to such calls for assistance).
- Provide referrals to legal assistance and medical care.
- Provide information regarding other available social services.
- Work with social services agencies, schools, and law enforcement agencies in an advocacy capacity for those served by
the domestic violence shelter-based programs.
- Provide services to, or assist in referring, physically disabled victims of domestic violence to services in the community
where assistance may be obtained.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
(1) We anticipate level funding to be available for the domestic violence services as linked to the county marriage license
fees and court fines.

Objectives
O
1. Complete Priority 1 and 2 roads in the multi-year paving plan.
2. Complete scheduled federally funded projects in a timely manner.
3. Complete a review and update to the Encroachment ordinance and procedures.
4. Process completed and reviewed Road Standards through the Board of Supervisors for approval.
5. Update the Transportation Department Strategic Master Plan and present to the Board of Supervisors for approval.
6. Complete design and construct bike lanes along Santa Ana Road.
7. Collaborate with the City of Thousand Oaks on mutual assistance and sharing of resources.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. Uncertainty caused by the lack of a long term solution for Federal Transportation funding.
2. Reduced state gas tax revenue and no viable proposed solution. FY15-16 reduction of roughly 25% of our state gas tax
revenues is expected to continue.
3. Additional regulatory requirements continue to increase cost of operations. These requirements include the Countywide
Municipal Storm Water Requirements (NPDES), Diesel Particulate measures, and others. These additional costs will reduce
Road funds available for road maintenance, repair and operations.

Objectives
O
Next fiscal year, the County Stormwater Program will continue to work closely with the Ventura Countywide Stormwater
Quality Management Program and the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board in adoption of the new 5-year
Ventura Municipal Stormwater Permit. The County Stormwater Program plans to provide overall program inter-County
agency coordination, with the following objectives and goals planned:
1. Participate and assist with Permit renewal process.
2. Develop Capital Improvement Program (CIP) project list for stormwater treatment and capture in the County
unincorporated areas towards TMDL and Permit compliance.
3. Seek future grant funding opportunities and fee revenue sources; develop project concepts eligible for funding to treat
and/or capture stormwater and urban runoff.
4. Complete grant funded educational outreach and effectiveness monitoring of El Rio Retrofit for Groundwater Recharge
project.
5. Complete design and prepare for construction of grant funded Oak Park Green Streets Retrofit project.
6. Conduct grant funded Watershed Friendly GardenTM Seminars and Workshops at the communities of Meiners Oaks and
Oak Park.
7. Continue implementation of the Permit’s requirements including education and outreach, project conditioning for water
quality protection, conducting stormwater inspections and post-construction project tracking through Accela, preparation of
2015/2016 County Stormwater Annual Report, provide annual stormwater pollution prevention training for County
employees, and maintenance of County Stormwater Hotline.
8. Continue TMDL planning, monitoring, and implementation assistance to County Agencies to meet TMDL compliance.
9. Continue stakeholder participation and complete implementation strategy for Calleguas Creek TMDL’s (trash, pesticides,
metals, toxics and others).
10. Meet TMDL implementation requirements for Malibu Creek Bacteria and Trash TMDLs; and develop strategy to comply
with new implementation schedule for Malibu Sedimentation and Benthic Community/Nutrients TMDL.
11. Cooperate with stakeholders and develop strategies to implement Santa Clara Bacteria TMDL requirements.
12. Cooperate with stakeholders and develop strategies to implement Ventura River Algae TMDL requirements.
13. Meet implementation requirements for Ventura Coastal (Kiddie and Hobie Beaches) Bacteria TMDLs including
completion of long-term MOA with Channel Island Beach Community Service District for dry-weather urban runoff diversion.
14. Develop strategy for County unincorporated areas to implement the statewide Trash Basin Plan Amendment.
15. Participate in development of the statewide Nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) policy.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
As described in the Accomplishments and Objectives a new Municipal Stormwater Permit was adopted by the RWQCB on
July 8, 2010. This Stormwater Permit has increased compliance responsibilities of both County and cities resulting in a
comparable increase in financial obligations for all jurisdictions. The RWQCB incorporated a number of TMDLs into the new
Ventura Municipal Stormwater Permit to provide for an enforcement mechanism. In 2013, RWQCB adopted new Ventura
River Algae TMDL and U.S. EPA developed Malibu Creek Benthic Impairments (Nutrients and Sedimentation) TMDLs. As
presented by the County Stormwater Program to the Board of Supervisors in August 2010, the County’s obligations and
costs have increased to ensure compliance with adopted and new TMDLs. A planning level compliance cost analysis
discussed in the Board Letters (dated May 6, 2014, October 7, 2014 and May 5, 2015), provided estimates of costs required
towards TMDL and Permit compliance. The County Stormwater Program will continue its efforts towards planning, concept
design, stakeholder cooperation, and seeking future funding opportunities.

Objectives
Operation and Maintenance for the Santa Rosa Road Traffic Signals will continue.

Objectives
O
1. Implement certified Culinary Arts program.
2. Enroll 45 inmates into the “Bridges 2 Work” grant project administered by Ventura County Human Services Agency. This
program links inmates with job counselors and employers.
3. Implement on-line testing to provide inmates opportunity to obtain ServSafe Food Handler Certification.
4. Continue efforts to obtain secured access to web-based instructional curriculum for High School Equivalency certification
and Burlington English for ESL.

Objectives
O
1. Continue ordering and evaluation of products for longer term sentenced inmates.
2. Fill one vacant full-time positions.
3. Provide training opportunities for staff interaction with inmates.
4. Continue evaluation of vending machines and kiosks.
5. Conduct a price comparison study to determine appropriate retail pricing.
6. Implement electronic commissary ordering through inmate tablet equipment.

Objectives
O
1. Complete building projects: Ojai meeting room, Fillmore meeting room.
2. Increase community partnerships by 20%.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.

Objectives
O
1. Create and/or update VCL’s Strategic Plan.
2. Continue restructuring budget to focus on individual community needs.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.

Objectives
O1. Assess effectiveness of Library Collection Development and Processing procedures
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library’s main revenue source, will be used to improve
the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.
Electronic materials require less staff handling and maintaining which should decrease costs. However, electronic materials
are very expensive at this early stage.

Objectives
O
1. Implement additional laptop dispensers at select libraries
2. Enhance wireless services
3. Implement VoIP (voice over IP) at Administrative office
4. Outsource patron account services
5. Expand minecraft.edu to other libraries
6. Expand social media presence using various new apps
7. Expand use of tablets at libraries
8. Green initiative to reduce paper notices and use alternative communications
9. Complete upgrade to self check units
10. Migrate to new Sharepoint site for staff Intranet
11. Purchase inventory wand for collection inventory using RFID
12. Upgrade reporting software and server
13. Upgrade authentication server
14. Create DMZ for staff access to helpdesk
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
New gigabit network will allow VCL to offer a wide range of bandwidth-intensive services as well as to expand wifi coverage
to other areas. New network can be leveraged for greater involvement with other County agencies. Further movement to
cloud-based services will lessen the need for hardware. New mobile technologies will expand services for staff and
customers.

Objectives
O
 Update the Children & Teen Services Vision
 Update Children & Teen webpages to expose activity that is going on at the branches and to create and maintain summer
reading webpage.
 Create Early Learning Centers at all VCLS branches.

Objectives
O1. Increase community engagement.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library’s main revenue source, will be used to improve
adult programming.

Objectives
O
 Increase number of tutoring partners at Port Hueneme
 Open new tutoring site at Ojai Library
 Open new tutoring site at Fillmore Library
 Increase public awareness of the READ program
 Increase number of learners served
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Expansion of the program is contingent on receiving annuals funds from future fundraising by the Ventura County Library
Foundation for the Adult Literacy Read Program.

Objectives
OIn FY16-17 our objective is to complete the Fillmore Library Meeting Room build.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FExpansion and improvements are contingent on needs, cost, and balance in the Assigned Education Fund.

Objectives
O1. To create efficiencies while increasing effectiveness.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Any increases to property tax revenue, which is the Ventura County Library's main revenue source, will be used to improve
the library collection, children and adult programming, and technology.

Objectives
O
During the FY 16-17, interest earned on this fund will be transferred to the Ventura County’s Operating Fund S060 and used
to purchase books.

Objectives
O
1) Continue to maintain viable Enterprise Fund by balancing rate increases and cost reductions.
2) Continue Lean Six Sigma Process improvement
3) Continue to maintain Contract Tower operations.
4) Restore Airline Service.

Objectives
O
1) Meet all federal and state regulations to maintain airport certification for air carrier operations.
2) Maintain noise compatibility program resulting in low number of noise complaints from aircraft operations.
3) Restore viable Air Service to Oxnard Airport.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1) The continued planned development of new residential areas in the proximity of the airports will result in an increase in the
number of residents exposed to aircraft noise. Although such developments will be considered acceptable within the
guidelines of the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, it is likely that the Department will be impacted with additional
responses to an increased number of noise complaints. The environment of potential conflict between airport operations and
residential uses will continue to force focus on the acquisition of avigation easements over new development parcels.
2) Restoring scheduled passenger air service to Oxnard Airport remains a priority.

Objectives
O
1) Continue with painting of hangar rows.
2) Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Oxnard Airport is a former Department of Defense facility that was constructed prior to the 1950’s. A continued focus on
long range planning is needed for maintenance and replacement of aging infrastructure and to accomplish projects in a
manner that is financially sustainable while not compromising safety, security, and the quality of services.

Objectives
O
1) Continue to maintain viable Enterprise Fund by balancing rate increases and cost reductions.
2) Continue Lean Six Sigma Process improvement.
3) Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.

Objectives
O
1) Maintain noise compatibility program to result in a low number of noise complaints from aircraft operations.
2) Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.
3) Complete the Environmental Assessment and Design for the NE hangar complex at CMA.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1) The continued planned development of new residential areas in the proximity of the airports will result in an increase in the
number of residents exposed to aircraft noise. Although such developments will be considered acceptable within the
guidelines of the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, it is likely that the Department will be impacted with additional
responses to an increased number of noise complaints. The environment of potential conflict between airport operations and
residential uses will continue to force focus on the acquisition of avigation easements over new development parcels.
2) Create additional hangar inventory to meet the demand for hangars. The waiting list for hangars at Camarillo Airport is
greater than 130 and takes approximately 5 years to move through the list.

Objectives
O
1) Continue with painting of hangar rows.
2) Continue to maintain airport with safety, security, and tenant enjoyment in mind.
3) Continue development of staff by providing proper tools and training, and organizational development.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Camarillo Airports is a former Department of Defense facility that was constructed prior to the 1950’s. A continued focus on
long range planning is needed for maintenance and replacement of aging infrastructure and to accomplish projects in a
manner that is financially sustainable while not compromising safety, security, and the quality of services.

Objectives
1) There is no grant project planned for FY 2016-17.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Federal funding for capital projects via the Airport Improvement Program may be reduced through the federal budget
process, resulting in a cutback of projects, which may require re-prioritization of projects.

Objectives
Conduct minor maintenance.

Objectives
O
FY 2016-17 Objectives
1. Opening of camping at Toland Park
2. Striping (Steckel, Faria, Hobson and Rincon).
3. Toland asphalt repairs.
4. Foster Park restroom ADA compliance renovations
5. Soule slurry seal and restripe
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Revenues are projected based on Parks facilities use levels. Actual use levels below current projections may require
adjustments to staffing, parks projects and other services during the fiscal year.
Objectives
O
FY 2016-17 Objectives
1. Replace domestic water line at Foster Park.
2. Replace water main loop at Soule Park.
3. Repair parking lot asphalt at Camp Comfort.
4. Replace ball field fencing and add foul ball fence at Saticoy Park.
5. Foster restroom fixture upgrades low flow and ADA
6. Oak View Community Center Parking Lot
7. Steckel Park road repairs
8. Warring Park road and parking lot repairs
9. Oak Park play equipment replacement
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The Parks System has a current backlog of maintenance projects in excess of $2,259,400 for which some funding has been
identified. Revenues and appropriations for some of these projects are currently projected in the FY 2016-17 budget.

Objectives
1. Add HVAC in Multipurpose room, replace existing heater unit.
2. Establish rental or lease of the Day Care room.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Use of the certified kitchen continues to grow now that we have reached a new agreement with the Resources Management
Agency. Local artisans are renting the space to prepare food and beverages for sale outside of the facility. The use fees
associated with the rental of this space continue to grow. After the day care room is upgraded with a new fire alarm system,
we will be seeking a new tenant to replace Child Development Resources who vacated the premises in August 2015.

Objectives
O
1) Work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the President’s Office of Management and Budget, and the California
Congressional delegation regarding future funding allocations to move sand down-coast, and funding for breakwater and
jetty repair.
2) Work towards Coastal Commission hearing and approval of both the hotel replacement and Fisherman’s Wharf projects.
3) Complete Administration Building design, obtain building permits, and bid.
4) Complete the building permit process for the replacement Casa Sirena Hotel.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Administration’s major focus during the next year or two will be to pursue projects to generate revenue. Administration is
also focused on revenue collection and revenue reviews to ensure full and timely payment of rents to the County.

Objectives
Continue to support Harbor educational and promotional events.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
For the last eight years, this program has operated with no staff, and no cost increases. The Preliminary Budget includes
one restored staff allocation to address operational needs.

Objectives
O
1) Maintain ongoing training schedule to maximize both employee and public safety.
2) Certify new Patrol officers to stand solo shifts and return the Department to minimal overtime.
3) Completely refurbish Patrol Boat #5 to maintain service and extend useful life.

Objectives
O
1) Maintain the longstanding beach cleaning program for the safety of the general public and to minimize claims against the
County, which were zero again in FY2015-16.
2) Continue twice daily maintenance of public restrooms for general health and safety.
3) Provide beach lifeguard services from Memorial Day to Labor Day between approximately 10am and 6pm, subject to
available funding.
4) Complete periodic maintenance for beach restrooms, including plaster repair, paint, and replacement of metal surfaces.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
As with other areas, costs are increasing and resources are static. The Department has been doing its best to keep costs
within revenue, while still providing an acceptable level of service. The gap between cost and available funding continues to
increase. Staff will be evaluating options to manage expenses to available funding levels.

Objectives
O
1) Maintain competitive pricing with other fuel terminals, while covering all Department costs and complying with regulatory
requirements.
2) Repair and refurbish fuel dock landside building to extend useful life with limited investment.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Both the sport fishing and fuel facilities are aging and need consistent investment. These operations provide limited revenue
to fund any major repairs that may arise.

Objectives
O
1) Re-certify all staff on pesticide handling and application training.
2) Continue weekly safety meetings and maintain current minimal lost time record.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Future issues for the Maintenance Division are the same as for all other Harbor work areas: flat revenues, increasing costs,
and an aging facility. Careful work to identify priorities for repairs and maintenance is critical, as are decisions regarding the
level of repairs that should be undertaken: e.g., should these be short-term repairs, ten-year repairs, or fifty-year repairs.

Objectives
O
1) Submit new proposed project to the California Coastal Commission and move forward with the project.
2) Complete planned maintenance on offloading facility.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FReplacement of this facility will generate additional revenue that will pay for additional public improvements.

Objectives
OMinimize larger maintenance requirements through diligent preventive maintenance.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Over the last few years, significant projects have been completed in the state improvement areas. At this time, only routine
maintenance is required. Department staff plans to consolidate this budget unit with other Harbor facilities next fiscal year. It
is no longer necessary to maintain a separate unit.
Objectives
OReplace light poles on docks. Evaluate LED or other energy efficient lighting for the project.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Future issues for the Commercial Fishing Marina are the same as for all other Harbor work areas: declining or flat revenues,
increasing costs, and an aging facility. Careful work to identify priorities for repairs and maintenance is critical, as are
decisions regarding the level of repairs that should be undertaken: e.g., should these be short-term repairs, or ten-year
repairs?

Objectives
O
1) Evaluate repair/rehabilitation alternatives for groin wall at Kiddie Beach; develop cost estimates and a potential plan for
construction.
2) Complete construction drawings, bid for contractor, and obtain building permits for replacement of Harbor Administration
Building.
3) Replace Harbor Patrol pier head and reset revetment.
4) Replace East Bank guest dock gangway.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The Department’s ability to pursue capital projects in the form of refurbishment or replacement of public facilities is
dependent upon availability of grant funds or Harbor Enterprise retained earnings, and timing of Coastal and construction
permits.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to meet increasing demand for safety net inpatient, specialty, and primary care services.
2. Continue to improve the culture of quality and safety within the hospitals.
3. Continue to improve recruitment and retention efforts, and decrease use of premium pay scheduling.
4. Continue to maintain Joint Commission accreditation and other regulatory requirements through a continuous Regulatory
Survey Readiness process.
5. Continue to improve fiscal performance of each and every department to achieve an overall improvement in FTEs per
adjusted occupied bed through the expanded use of best practice staffing and scheduling analytics.
6. Continue to strengthen and expand the Quality Assurance and Performance Improvement (QAPI)
7. Establish a Data Warehouse / Data Analytics solution that can manage the data from multiple data sources and develop
meaningful and actionable outputs such as reports, metrics, and analytics.
8. Continue to improve the environment of care.
9. Finalize recruitment of a Chief Nurse Executive and strengthen nursing culture. Finalize implementation of the Operations
Excellence plan and begin a robust strategic planning process.
10. Finalize implementation of the Operations Excellence plan and begin a robust strategic planning process.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to meet increasing demand for mental health care needs.
2. Continue to provide a safe environment for our patients and staff in this locked psychiatric unit.
3. Continue to maintain Joint Commission compliance and continue readiness efforts for first unannounced Joint
Commission survey.
4. Continue to improve fiscal performance
5. Continue to strengthen the performance improvement program.
6. Continue to improve the environment of care.
7. Continue to expand community outreach efforts working with Stakeholders to be certain all needs of this community are
met.
8. Enhance utilization of a fully integrated in-patient and out-patient Electronic Health Record within VCMC, SPH and
Ambulatory Care system.
9. Develop a Psychiatric Emergency Services product line within the walls of the current Inpatient Psychiatric Unit.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to meet increasing demand for safety net hospital, specialty and primary care services.
2. Develop a program to enhance census at SPH. This includes having the ability to transfer patients into this facility for care
that are at the hospitals and patient who are at VCMC.
3. Establish branding of SPH in the Santa Clara Valley. Increase advertising process to people who live in this area.
4. Maintain Joint Commission compliance and continue readiness efforts for unannounced surveys.
5. Continue to improve fiscal performance in all areas of care.
6. Continue to strengthen the performance improvement program.
7. Continue to improve the environment of care.
8. Continue to support and improve the environment of care.
9. Enhance utilization of a fully integrated in-patient and out-patient Electronic Health Record within VCMC, SPH and
Ambulatory Care system.
10. Expand specialty services in Santa Paula, including Urology and Podiatry.
11. Expand outreach in the community to continue to build relationships with private physicians.

Objectives
O
 Completion of DMHC Fiscal Audit
 Roll out of Customer Service training to all of VCHCP
 Call Recording and Call Reporting for areas outside of Member Services (Claims and UM)
 Reduce Providers Dispute Resolution Mechanism (PDRM) volume – Reduce % of overturned PDRM volume by 10-15%
 Capture/Collect member e-mail addresses and the ability to communicate with members electronically.
 Update Provider Directory requirements, as mandated by DMHC (July, 2016 and July 2017)

Objectives
O
1. Debut beta test site for electronic incident and accident/near-miss reporting and investigation.
2. Establish Risk Management Nuts and Bolts training program.
3. Implement ECM solution for Workers’ Compensation documents.
4. Perform Request for Proposal for Workers’ Compensation claims administration.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to coordinate efforts with the new County Disability Management program.
2. Conduct RFP for third party claims administrator.
3. Continue to develop electronic claims reporting.

Objectives
O
1. Update claims locating coding allocation to assist in accurate rate development.
2. Complete development of "Risk Management 101", perhaps to take the place of Disability Management for Nuts and Bolts
training.
3. Evaluate effectiveness of increased Self-Insured Retention.
4. Work with Health, Safety and Loss Prevention program to focus vehicle driver training efforts.

Objectives
Continue to monitor and facilitate the alcohol and drug testing required under the Department of Transportation.

Objectives
O
1. Continue review of core funds and funds within the mutual fund window for available changes to institutional funds, and
other cost savings for plan participants.
2. Develop and implement Financial Wellness program.
3. Examine the suitability of the Mutual Fund Window offering.
4. Enhance the DC Program website.
5. Conduct Fiduciary training for the Deferred Compensation Committee.
6. Conduct annual business and educational outreach planning in partnership with Fidelity.
7. Develop campaign for 2016 National Retirement Security Week.
8. Prepare annual benefit statements in coordination with VCERA and Towers Watson.
9. Serve on Fidelity Client Panel.
10. Review 401(k) hardship and 457 emergency withdrawal processes.
11. Review continuation of participant fee suspension.
12. Conduct quarterly Deferred Compensation Committee meetings.
13. Conduct annual review of Investment Policy Statement.
14. Examine in-Plan Roth Conversion as possible enhancement to the 457 Plan.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to monitor claims experience.
2. Continue to review the fiscal impact of EDD quarterly reimbursements and the effectiveness of the UIB rate to ensure
program cost recovery and rate stabilization.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FPotential State budget cuts to the County’s programs and workforce will have a fiscal impact to the UIB program.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to analyze health plan options to ensure that the County is providing reasonably-priced, full-family health plan
choices to its employees.
2. Conduct annual Flexible Benefits program open enrollment period and retiree re-enrollment.
3. Continue to review and analyze provisions and impacts of the Affordable Care Act (aka Health Care Reform).
4. Continue plan and program audits, including the quarterly dependent eligibility audit.
5. Continue to conduct the annual Medical Plan Satisfaction Survey, which surveys County employees on their satisfaction of
the County health plan offerings.
6. Work collaboratively with the new Disability Management team to improve the County’s return-to-work process.


Objectives
O
1. Increase the following direct service contacts: 400 new clinical assessments; 1600 follow-up visits; 600 hours of training/
workshops; 150 supervisory consultations, 125 hours of mediation
2. Convert the client diagnostic code statistics to “problem areas” for greater efficiency and analysis.
3. Continue to apply revisions to the EAP website with emphasis on resources and links. Develop an online digital library on
pertinent topics in conjunction with Ventura County Library allowing access to select books and articles for County
employees.
4. Continue to collaborate with County Training on “Nuts and Bolts” Training series as well as Conflict Resolution Training
through the Training Department.
5. Develop a mandatory 30-minute orientation related to new understandings and advances in the field of substance abuse
to be offered to all County Fire personnel.
6. In conjunction with Wellness and Work and Family programs, will provide additional parenting classes and elder care
support groups.
7. Continue to provide and develop additional focus groups and corresponding training modules for departments interested
in improving areas of workplace climate and positive impacts to organizational culture. This includes areas of “Interpersonal
Quality Improvement” as well as characteristics of a motivating environment. Also includes collaboration with Service
Excellence staff and Training Division staff.
8. Assist in the Implementation of an intervention program within HSA to address vicarious trauma of CFS staff.

Objectives
O
1. Complete VC-Well Eat Well Campaign including a large “Taste of Wellness” Farmer’s Market event.
2. Implement new four month VC-Well Live Well Campaign.
3. Continue the VC-Well Trek fitness challenges and Fitbit incentives program.
4. Work with CEO IT to upgrade Wellness Registration application.
5. Continue to collaborate with Public Health to develop policy recommendations for a healthier workplace environment.
6. Continue providing health risk appraisal, biometric screening and follow-up; high risk health coaching; educational class
sessions and the consumer supported agriculture program.
7. Evaluate effectiveness of VC-Well Rewards incentive program and make recommendations for future incentives.
8. Develop and initiate new initiative and marketing campaign for 2017 calendar year.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FPotential costs associated with greater than expected participation resulting from incentives.

Objectives
O
1. Reinstate quarterly newsletters to employees.
2. Design and implement lactation equipment pilot project.
3. Provide comprehensive family care resource and referral services for employees.
4. Enhance web page features.
5. Increase number of Child Care/Preschool Discount Program listings.
6. Market employee benefits available through the Coastal Housing Partnership.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to monitor claims experience and review rate requirements.
2. The County will continue to evaluate this plan and potentially conduct an RFP to find a fully-insured replacement plan that
would be administered by the insurance company.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
If the direction is to replace this current short-term disability plan with a group policy, the rate structure and employee
participation may materially change.

Objectives
O
1. Our goal is to act as a regional service provider, strengthening our County and those around us.
2. Increase upfit capacity - Fleet Operations strengthens the County as a whole. Many cities and agencies lack the financial
ability, infrastructure, or training to perform the complex work required on a modern fleet. A lack of upfit providers in our area
caused cities and agencies to transport vehicles great distances for service. Once there, the vehicles sit, hurting small cities
with limited law enforcement handicapped with inadequate vehicles. Added/trained EVT, ETA, FCC specialists and seek to
increase capacity. As a County, we have a mandate to support cities and agencies operating within our borders. Now,
governments outside the County rely on us for help as well.
3. Upgrade body shop for aluminum repairs - Few facilities provide aluminum repairs that require segregated work areas to
avoid galvanic corrosion. Law enforcement’s transition to SUV’s that are produced with the aluminum body structures has
compounding the situation as these vehicles are frequent fliers at the body shop. We began training and developing a body
shop expansion to meet the demand of our customers.
4. Telematics - phase 2 and 3 implementation to cover entire County fleet.
5. Telematics training - Fleet seeks to improve GHG reductions through telematics by advancing efficient driving practices
involving braking, optimum highway speeds, acceleration, idle time reductions, utilization studies, route mapping, and
consistent on-time PM services. These changes along with a comprehensive anti-idling policy are designed to improve
mileage while reducing GHG emissions, saving money while helping the environment. This system also offers future
expansion to track equipment use hours for additional improvements.
6. Second shift to reduce sprawl and increase fleet uptime without the costs of expansion to accommodate additional staff
and equipment. Planned night shift for light services will result in zero PM downtime for our second largest customer.
7. Continue developing a fuel-efficient and environmentally friendly fleet through the utilization of alternative fuel technology
and lower emission vehicles. Replace older model gas vehicles with low emission technology vehicles.
8. Take advantage of in-source opportunities in the Install Shop and other shops.
9. Update/increase fuel storage capacity for emergency potential.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The County fleet has expanded in recent years. Overall increased vehicle count (85 additional vehicles/equipment in
FY14-15 with a projected FY15-16 vehicle increase of 126 vehicles) will cause increased parts and labor costs.
We are experiencing a dramatic uptick in new vehicle requests. Price per vehicle continues to rise, especially in this
category. With the exception of heavily specialized vehicles of significant value (mobile medical buses, etc.), Fleet will be
focusing on vehicle standardization to reduce costs, potentially offsetting anticipated increases.
Costs will increase as a result of the transition to the new Tahoe patrol vehicle; this is anticipated to continue for the next four
fiscal years. The increased costs of vehicles and parts is a result of purchasing new equipment for upfit versus recycling
parts from old to new vehicles.
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. Our goal is to act as a regional service provider, strengthening our County and those around us.
2. Increase upfit capacity - Fleet Operations strengthens the County as a whole. Many cities and agencies lack the
financial ability, infrastructure, or training to perform the complex work required on a modern fleet. A lack of upfit providers in
our area caused cities and agencies to transport vehicles great distances for service. Once there, the vehicles sit, hurting
small cities with limited law enforcement handicapped with inadequate vehicles. Added/trained EVT, ETA, FCC specialists
and seek to increase capacity. As a County, we have a mandate to support cities and agencies operating within our borders.
Now, governments outside the County rely on us for help as well.
3. Upgrade body shop for aluminum repairs - Few facilities provide aluminum repairs that require segregated work areas to
avoid galvanic corrosion. Law enforcement’s transition to SUV’s that are produced with the aluminum body structures has
compounding the situation as these vehicles are frequent fliers at the body shop. We began training and developing a body
shop expansion to meet the demand of our customers.
4. Telematics - phase 2 and 3 implementation to cover entire County fleet.
5. Telematics training - Fleet seeks to improve GHG reductions through telematics by advancing efficient driving practices
involving braking, optimum highway speeds, acceleration, idle time reductions, utilization studies, route mapping, and
consistent on-time PM services. These changes along with a comprehensive anti-idling policy are designed to improve
mileage while reducing GHG emissions, saving money while helping the environment. This system also offers future
expansion to track equipment use hours for additional improvements.
6. Second shift to reduce sprawl and increase fleet uptime without the costs of expansion to accommodate additional staff
and equipment. Planned night shift for light services will result in zero PM downtime for our second largest customer.
7. Continue developing a fuel-efficient and environmentally friendly fleet through the utilization of alternative fuel
technology and lower emission vehicles. Replace older model gas vehicles with low emission technology vehicles.
8. Take advantage of in-source opportunities in the Install Shop and other shops.
9. Update/increase fuel storage capacity for emergency potential.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The County fleet has expanded in recent years. Overall increased vehicle count (85 additional vehicles/equipment in
FY14-15 with a projected FY15-16 vehicle increase of 126 vehicles) will cause increased parts and labor costs.
We are experiencing a dramatic uptick in new vehicle requests. Price per vehicle continues to rise, especially in this
category. With the exception of heavily specialized vehicles of significant value (mobile medical buses, etc.), Fleet will be
focusing on vehicle standardization to reduce costs, potentially offsetting anticipated increases.
Costs will increase as a result of the transition to the new Tahoe patrol vehicle; this is anticipated to continue for the next four
fiscal years. The increased costs of vehicles and parts is a result of purchasing new equipment for upfit versus recycling
parts from old to new vehicles.
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. Upgrade FM Systems to Version 8.4 from Version 8.3 and continue the implementation of FM Systems eliminating the
need for multiple facilities management applications, providing increased reporting capabilities to operational managers and
other County users, and allowing better and more efficiently manage their operations.
2. Upgrade of AssetWorks to Version 14 from Version 13.
3. Provide enhanced fuel purchase reporting to departments in accordance with Management responses to the fuel audit.
4. Work with PWA to evaluate a possible ISF rate methodology change for Heavy Equipment.
5. Create Fiscal procedural manuals in accordance with the GSA Strategic Plan.
6. Complete fiscal and operational audits of 3 of the County’s lessees.
7. Prepare financial and other analysis to evaluate additional solar projects in support of the Board of Supervisor’s
Sustainability Plan and goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
8. Encourage the other agencies to implement Surveyor 6.
9. Upgrade/Migrate GSA’s Virtual Infrastructure to oVirt (Virtualization platform) and GlusterFS (external clustered storage
platform).
10. Implement an additional large capacity storage server for video surveillance in order to increase availability and capacity
of storage.
11. Virtualize GSA’s main database server in order to prevent unplanned downtime.
12. Continue job analysis and specification revisions.
13. Continue to monitor and ensure compliance with mandated training.
14. Met OSHA’s implementation deadline for the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Hazardous
Chemical (GHS). Ensure workplace is compliant with GHS labeling, Safety Data Sheets obtained for all chemicals, and
mandated employee training is completed for entire staff.
15. Complete desk manuals for HR and Reception Staff.
16. Complete VCFMS Upgrade training offered by the Auditor/Controller’s Office for each fiscal position.
17. Launch the new ISF billing module in partnership with IT Services with a goal of providing greater customer service
through increased reporting features.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. Outsource insurance certificate compliance/tracking.
2. Update internal procedure documentation to reflect business process changes due to VCFMS upgrade.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. AIM – Automated Invoice Processing
Launch agency adoption of Accounts Payable automation. Leveraging staff and digital capture technology, AIM combines
invoice processing with workflow to bring visibility and fiscal accuracy across the Enterprise. Customers will receive invoices
within 24-hours and will reduce invoice cycle times to >30 days. This back-office automation stages daily work for VCFMS
and increases staff productivity.
2. Partner in the development of a VCFMS interface with the Auditor-Controller and IT Service departments to automate
data exchanges of metadata between AIM and VCFMS to stage BDO/IN documents by 9/1/16.
3. DocuShare ECM allows the movement of data and documents through e-form and workflow mapping tools. By leveraging
form data with reporting services, data visualizations can help customers make better decisions with dashboard and KPI
publishing. Deliver and support real-time access for the VCMC Performance Improvement team starting on 07/01/2016.
4. Promote multi-channel marketing campaigns, integrating publishing across email, text, mail, and social media channels.
The investment in the XMPie platform allows response tracking and measurement on the return of marketing dollars. By
outputting messages to the medium of client choice, costs can be reduced. Demo and pilot campaigns for both the CEO and
HCA Public Information Officers.
5. With a newly defined Tech Services Specialist position, extend and redefine Records Center services to include a review
of the document lifecycle. Service will include options for back-file scanning with options to output to ECM systems. Apply
records management policies and retention schedules at the point of capture.
6. Research and recommend replacement hardware and software to upgrade Pitney Bowes mail inserter systems.
Incorporate quality control and data collection best practices.
7. Increase VCPrint online accounts by offering PDF conversions, tier-based pricing, and inventory management options to
meet customer demands. Produce work with high quality production equipment rather than wasting staff time with copier or
MFP output.
8. Review and make recommendations to invest in tools that allow the addition of 2D Barcodes to printed documents so that
they are accessible by widely used free smartphone applications. This can help customers who must comply with legislation
to offer “Accessible Documents” for visually and cognitively impaired individuals.
9. Meeting customer demand, promote and support county communications through Graphic Design creation of marketing
material, including posters, banners, displays, and other non-traditional print.
10. Utilizing document content management expertise and the DocuShare platform, assist VCMC and HCA staff with
regulatory and certification entities during document or form auditing tasks. Document results of review with the MERP,
CMS, and CDPH surveys. Support Cerner downtime policies with improved integrations with document references and links.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the budget unit will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. Expand shared service opportunities to other cities besides City of Ventura to include; surplus processing and inventory
management.
2. Add more inventory management internal customers vs. department use of expensive ad hoc offsite public storage to
create greater efficiency and online access to customer materials.
3. Achieve a more seamless integration with various countywide enterprise systems to our inventory management system,
along with optimizing existing business processes, to provide improved efficiency with enhanced visibility of management
information; e.g. - IT partnered inventory management.
4. Increase surplus bidding audience through increased use of social media to advertise our Public Auction sales via
partnership with CEO Public Information Officer.
5. Define revenue sources to offset need for shared surplus pickup duties among two allocations rather than one Inventory
Management Assistant. Surplus pickup requests have increased by 239% since 2012.
6. Reduce maximum turnaround days to complete surplus pickups from ten work days to five.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Coordinating surplus reuse and disposition is done at no cost to County departments. Cost recovery from recycling and
surplus sales to support surplus administration efforts can vary. Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility
that the budget unit will be impacted by service level reduction requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels
and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to define sharing opportunities so departments can leverage GSA’s daily countywide courier routes.
2. Promote address management services to enable reduced level of returned mail by updating existing address databases
through resources such as National Change of Address postal services, as well as, leveraging in-house Satori postal
software.
3. Implement paperless online postage statement processing for all automated mail presented to the USPS ensuring
continued qualification for maximum postage discounts.
4. Establish a Mail Center user group within Sharepoint/OneDrive to create a greater knowledge base on mail preparation
guidelines and general information on GSA Mail Center’s resources.
5. Promote use of USPS Standard Mail, Non-Profit, and Business Reply applications to help departments reach their
audience in the most cost effective way.
6. Continue to evaluate digital mailbox developments nationwide (i.e. - managing incoming mail and parcels online 24/7) to
assess any service bureau role necessary for County departments.
7. Review and recommend automated sorting system for central mail center hub to ensure timely and efficient routing using
iBOTs (intelligent robotic wireless vehicles) distributing a wide variety of mail into a convenient array of delivery bins in a
single pass.
8. Review and recommend opportunities for the County to qualify mail for further USPS discount incentives/promotions
around the use of mail output innovations ranging from incorporation of Near Field Communication, Augmented Reality
digital overlays, and QR Codes to support enhanced department connections with their audience.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Despite best efforts to project postage costs, growing USPS deficits combined with the ability of the USPS to implement
annual CPI indexed rate increases and specially approved rate changes, if the agency experiences any of these changes, it
may necessitate mid-year budget adjustments.
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
Security:
1. Further centralize and consolidate CCTV monitoring by converting HSA cameras from in-house to SCC monitoring/
system.
2. Work with Security Training Subcommittee to make workplace shooter training available to all employees.
3. Provide additional security measures and education in order to reduce the risk of violent encounters in the workplace.
Special Services:
1. Implement Credit Card Payment Processing into the Retail Sales Program. Purchase/install equipment, program
departments and inventory. Train employees on its use.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.
As a result of increased security concerns following a shooting incident in San Bernardino County, additional programs,
staffing, and services will be brought online. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items
during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to focus GSA resources on water and energy conservation.
2. Develop the next five-year GSA Strategic Plan
3. Continue to support and implement GSA’s assignments within the County’s Strategic Plan.
4. Implement the Executive Security Council’s recommendations.
5. Assist with Nyeland Acres Center planning and improvements.
6. Develop a plan to upgrade the RAIN domestic water meter and pipe system
7. Assist GSA Fleet with facility expansion to accommodate aluminum vehicles.
8. Assist with the County’s Sustainability Committee.
9. Support the County’s sustainability efforts by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, reducing electricity and natural gas
use, recycling and composting waste, conserving water, installing solar PV systems and using alternative fuel vehicles.
10. Encourage team building, expand vertical communication and participation within the Department, continue to emphasize
outstanding customer service, develop staff both horizontally and vertically within the Agency.
11. Improve the Department’s processes using Lean Six Sigma
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to pursue and implement GSA’s strategic plan objectives.
2. Continue the inventory, condition analysis and proactive maintenance for all GSA maintained facilities and associated
services. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3, Strategic Goal 2, Objective 1)
3. Continue installing low flow water fixtures at the Hall of Administration and Hall of Justice. (Strategic Plan, Focus Area 3,
Strategic Goal 3, Objective 1)
4. Submit the 2016 CCFSA Award of Excellence application package for the Maintenance Division.
5. Identify next building and start process to pursue LEED certification process.
6. Train new Facility Operation Specialist I and Facility Operation Specialist II.
7. Review work order process to ensure clients are receiving responsive and efficient services.
8. Update Lock Out, Tag Out procedures for all equipment at GSA managed facilities to ensure safety of staff and
contractors.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year

Objectives
O
1. Complete a study of the future of thermal storage in operating Government Center buildings and implement a new
operating strategy.
2. Complete the installation of a new control system for the Hall of Justice.
3. Complete the installation of Phase II of a new HVAC control system at the Juvenile Justice Center.
4. Complete lighting upgrade of the atrium lighting in the Hall of Administration.
5. Complete the installation of a dry cooler HVAC condenser system for the ITSD Computer Room AC Units, Hall of
Administration.
6. Complete the installation of the new cooling tower, Hall of Administration.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
The drought crisis in California and the re-aligning of the electrical utilities in California away from nuclear generation
capacity may have a significant impact on utility rates in future years, which could make accurate utility budget projections
difficult.

Objectives
O
1. Continuous Improvement – Identify opportunities to improve:
 Labor efficiencies and Quality - reduce wasted motion and minimize variation in quality outcomes by further
standardizing methods and procedures.
 Customer Service – Provide Great Service Always with consistent quality assurance inspections and communication
with service providers and customers.
 Custodian Work Environment Quality - Implement, monitor and modify (as needed) the CTP to continuously improve the
Custodian Work Environment Quality score.
2. Sustainability – Pursue new methods, products and technologies to conserve, preserve resources and reduce pollutants.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Due to Countywide budget constraints, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level reduction
requests. This may entail adjustments to our staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to improve the environment by moving toward greener solutions. Initiatives include the Integrated Pest
Management, LEED, Recycling, Elicit Storm Water Discharge Reduction, and Water Conservation.
2. Complete the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle) Grant project to install for 2015
Tire-Derived Product (TDP) on Government Center campus, and Agromin to provide free recycled tree products.
3. Implement year two of the 5 year water conservation plan and expand remote water management system to include 1911
Williams Drive, Oxnard facility.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Due to Statewide water conservation requirements, there is a possibility that the agency will be impacted by service level
modification requests. This may entail adjustments to staffing levels and/or other budgetary items during the fiscal year.

Objectives
O
1. As an ongoing priority, lead GSA Projects Group initiatives and every-day operations to practice and implement best
practice project management and process improvements which achieve GSA Strategic Plan goals.
2. Manage GSA infrastructure projects and Client-funded Facilities and Interiors projects, on-time and on-budget.
3. Continue to support major remodeling projects funded by HSA, HCA and other Agencies.
4. Implement new VCFMS processes to facilitate contracting & Client fiscal transactions and document completion and
details of Client projects.

Objectives
O
1. Implement Radio Frequency ID (RFID) tagging for improved tracking and reporting of inventory.
2. Work with General Services Agency to transform Service-Now into a common ISF billing platform for both agencies.

Objectives
O
1. Work with the General Services Agency to utilize Service-Now as a common ISF billing platform.
2. Deploy Desktop Central solution for application deployment and 3rd party desktop patching.
3. Implement Windows 10 desktop operating system.
4. Upgrade Microsoft Office to 2016 version.
5. Standardize desktop computer hardware.
6. Standardize on Mobile Device Management solution.
7. Replacement/upgrade of VMWare virtual server farm.
8. Eliminate eDirectory from Identify Management platform for the County.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. Increased consumerization of technology will continue to drive demand for mobile access to government services.
2. Increased adoption of tablet devices and cloud-based solutions will drive new business solutions and the requisite
infrastructure to support management, security, and protection of citizen data.
3. Need to modernize virtualization and storage solution - hyper converged infrastructure

Objectives
O
1. Develop and launch a new website for the Health Care Agency.
2. Develop and launch a new website for the VC Fire Department.
3. Refresh the County’s primary website.
4. Implement High Availability for the County’s primary website.
5. Continue to develop state-of-the-art web and mobile applications that support County agencies.
6. Continue enhancing and supporting the Ventura County Integrated Justice Information System (VCIJIS) including the
implementation of new hardware infrastructure.
7. Continue supporting the County's web application portfolio.
8. Continue supporting and enhancing the County's mobile application portfolio.
9. Assist Sheriff's Office with the replacement of the Automated Field Reporting system.

Objectives
O
1. Continue the support of the Performance Budgeting system for the CEO
2. Continue the support for the county financial system for Auditor-Controller.
3. Continue migration and implementation support for new land tax system and begin project management and development
on July 1, 2016
4. Complete significant PeopleSoft integration efforts with the new employee retirement system, the new financial
management system and performance budgeting system
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Numerous large technology initiatives continue to introduce business and organization changes to several County agencies
and departments. IT Services continues to be required to provide significant training to their workforce in order to support
these new technologies.

Objectives
O
1. Continue improvements to the GIS environment with Project 4 and Data/schema restructuring.
2. Leverage new GIS environment to deploy optimized mobile GIS applications through Geocortex and ArcGIS Online.

Objectives
O
1. Network and IT equipment upgrades are planned for the new North Tower at VCMC.
2. Technology and project management services are continuing in support of the South Tower/Fainer wing remodel project.

Objectives
O
1. Develop integration of Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) trunking for voice services throughout the Ventura County voice
network to vastly increase call capacity while maintaining or decreasing existing voice network costs. Implementing this
technology will also significantly reduce long distance calling costs throughout the voice communications network benefiting
all departments within the Ventura County organization.
2. Finalize phase 1 of the Ventura County Fiber Network to increase network speeds to key areas of the County computing
infrastructure.
3. Increasing network layer security countywide by fostering a segmented network topology which allows for facilitated
network traffic filtering.
4. Implement additional 700 MHz frequency locations in support of the National First Responder radio and data network.
5. Enhance network security through several efforts. These include quarantining unpatched external devices from the
network until remediated, implementing two-factor authentication, expanding end-device management, and upgrading
firewalls to accommodate traffic growth.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. The legislative move to give Public Safety a national wireless license in the 700 MHz range will create an opportunity to
build a dedicated wireless data network with interoperability functionality nationwide. This has now been redefined as
FirstNet and Network Services is beginning to implement allocated 700 MHz frequencies for PSAP’s, Urban Search and
Rescue as well as Office of Emergency Services.
2. The County of Ventura has shown an ever increasing demand for bandwidth and access to the Internet. This will
eventually drive the County to higher speed Microwave and the need for development of a Fiber Network. We anticipate
beginning to build out the Fiber network during the 16/17 fiscal period.

Objectives
O
1. Review functionality of the VCFMS Accounts Receivable Module for use as the Agency's permit billing system.
2. Completion of Appendix C of the County of Ventura Internal Control Guidelines and Control Self-Assessment Program.
3. Develop internal Agency electronic purchase requisition workflow.
4. Pilot test GSA’s Automated Invoice Management system.
5. Develop proof of concept testing for digitizing various Real Estate Services’ documents.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FLegislative and/or policy changes resulting in increased fiscal analysis and monitoring.

Objectives
O
1. Finalize lease for the Saticoy Depot property.
2. Continue to work on succession planning including the hiring of one new staff member to fill budgeted but vacant position
by January 1, 2017.

Objectives
O
1. Redesign and improve the process for receiving and responding to bid questions.
2. Reduce the cost of printing plans and specifications by receiving Board of Supervisor approval for electronic
distribution.
3. Develop an agreement between PWA and RMA on a more efficient payment process for Building & Safety Permits.
4. Implement a Debarment Ordinance for contractors
5. Develop standardization of templates of various Project Management correspondence letters and decisions.

Objectives
O
A. Participate in 'Water Awareness' Month programs; sponsor the annual 'Water Awareness' poster contest; provide water
audits for our large water users, including large landscape, commercial, industrial and institutional customers; provide Water
Wise Gardening workshops.
B. Work towards a paperless environment, promoting electronic billing as an alternative to paper billing.

Objectives
O
1. Work with EMSA to implement PulsePoint, which will allow our CAD system to alert CPR-trained bystanders about a
nearby sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) event through the free PulsePoint mobile app, and let them know the location of the
closest AED.
2. Work with GSA to conduct vendor Request for Information (RFI) and Request for Proposal (RFP) processes to identify
vendors qualified to implement the Fire Human Resource, Personnel and Training Database system.
3. Upgrade the roster station staffing software to a web-based version.
4. Complete redesign of the District’s public-facing websites to add features and be consistent with the County’s public web
pages.
5. Replace mobile computers (CPU’s) in ninety additional first run and reserve apparatus.
6. Replace mobile computer monitors in all apparatus.
7. Complete Standard of Cover study.
8. HR looks forward to purchasing and implementing software to manage data.
9. We will support hiring and promotional process for the coming year.
10. We will expand our Health and Wellness program for all employees and continue an aggressive commitment to safety
and training.

Objectives
O
1. Complete an interface between Accela Automation and the in-house FHRP program for better consistency in the
conditioning of projects.
2. Configure and Implement EDR (Electronic Document Review) in Accela Automation to better serve the public by
reviewing and accepting electronic documents.
3. Improve the administration of the State mandated annual inspections.
4. Publish revised Fireworks standard.
5. Start the development of a new Fire Code Official Desk Manual.

Objectives
O
1. Continue to complete 100 percent of the District’s Fleet Preventative Maintenance Program.
2. Implement in-house Vehicle Smog Testing Program.
3. Accept delivery and put into service 2 new pumpers that were ordered in FY 14 (9/11/13) and delayed in production.
4. Accept delivery and put into service 4 new pumpers that were ordered in FY 15 (4/25/14) and delayed in production.
5. Accept delivery and put into service 3 new pumpers that were ordered in FY 16 (11/19/15).
6. Order 3 additional pumpers for estimated delivery FY 18.
7. Order new PIO trailer.
8. Purchase new 4” hose and new nozzles for distribution department-wide.
9. Purchase new Siamese valves for all fire apparatus.
10. Replace Class B foam department-wide.
11. Purchase new gear bags for all field personnel to carry PPE.
12. Purchase new Gear Keeper microphone holders for all safety personnel.
13. Replace all 10-year old helmets for fire safety personnel to meet NFPA and OSHA requirements.
14. Distribute new body armor department-wide.
15. Replace mobile radios in additional first run and reserve apparatus.
16. Upgrade modems to 4G in 60 additional first run and reserve apparatus to include Wi-Fi hotspot capabilities.
17. Install radio communication towers at four additional fire stations to improve emergency communications to those sites.
18. Distribute twenty additional multiband (UHF/800 MHz) APX 7000 portable radios to improve interoperability with partner
and neighboring agencies.
19. Measure productivity through ESB metrics and the LMS system.
20. Keep all wildland fires at 10 acres or less 95% of the time.
21. Provide training to include new SCBA’s.
22. Enhance Engine Company participation with Community Outreach.
23. Review Annual Operational Area agreements.
24. Implement Ocean Rescue deployment and update response policies and procedures.
25. Regionalize Dispatch Services in the Op Area.
26. Expand ALS service.
27. We will continue delivering quality training and anticipate graduation of our 52nd Academy.
28. CICCS classes and promotional academies will also be delivered.
29. The LMS will be streamlined and additional users added in the next phase of roll-out.
30. We will continue to assure that our first responders are well trained to deliver EMS services to our citizens.
31. We anticipate purchasing epcr’s, safes and cardiac monitors.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
1. Taking over the Oxnard Fire Dispatch Center and anticipating switching to a 12 hour shift instead of a 24 hour shift for
dispatch employees.

Objectives
O
1. Begin construction of Fire Station 20 in Ojai and Fire Station 27 in Fillmore.
2. Complete construction for Fire Station 35 Newbury Park.
3. Complete remodels for Headquarters, Fire Station 22, Fire Station 26, phase-one Fire Station 30 and Fire Station 57.
4. Complete Latigo facility improvement projects.
5. Complete phase one of communication improvement project.
6. Acquire land for the replacement of Fire Station 34.
7. Complete Regional Training Center Master Plan.

Objectives
O
1. ALERT Flood Warning System Operations: Continue Quality Control/Quality Assurance (QA/QC) work and system
enhancements required to ensure accurate, reliable and timely real-time rains and stream gauge data in support of forecast
models and emergency preparedness work. Continue the migration of the District’s network to the ALERT2 protocol using
the new equipment purchased with the FERP Round II grant funds.
2. Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Coordinate the preparation and timely submittal of WPD’s inputs into the VCPWA
FY 17-22 5-Year Capital Improvement Project Plan Document package.
3. Dam Deficiency Study Update and Preliminary Design Project: Update the GEI Dam Deficiency Study with projects
completed since 2004, and identify dams the need additional work along with preliminary project designs and cost estimate.
4. FEMA Community Rating System Program: Complete Year 1 of the Class Six 5-Year Recertification of the Community
Rating System (CRS) program for Unincorporated Ventura County and submit to FEMA in a timely manner.
5. Grants Program Administration: Aggressively pursue available Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization
(NGO) grant opportunities for funding assistance in support of the District’s mission, and to leverage timely completion of
District priority capital projects contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP.
6. Groundwater Programs: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities. Complete 2016 Groundwater Level/Quality
Report. Continue regional implementation of CASEGEM program. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and
provide timely and effective processing of monitoring well and new water well permit submittal requests.
7. Integration of District Core Services and Risk-Based Project Priority Ranking Methodologies: Complete the ongoing
business analytics exercise by which the District’s “Core Services” are clarified, bounded, and resourced, and by which the
District’s integrated, multi-benefit, mission-critical projects and programs are prioritized based on risk-based prioritization
ranking best management practices.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment on and where appropriate,
condition proposed development projects. And provide timely, and effective processing of District red-line channel
encroachment and watercourse permit submittal requests.
9. Strategic Plan Development: Complete an enterprise-wide development of a Strategic Plan (SP) designed to advance the
District’s Integrated Watershed Protection (IWP) Mission holistically, purposefully, and synergistically, thereby aligning and
optimizing the District’s project development work with Board approved policy-decisions, infrastructure investment
opportunities, available structural funding resources, and project stakeholder partners.

Objectives
O
1. Annual Zone 1 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $3.3 Million in preliminary engineering
design, technical studies and CEQA work by June 30, 2017 advancing the following Zone 1 capital improvement projects: (1)
Fresno Canyon Flood Mitigation Diversion Project, (2) Matilija Dam Ecosystem Restoration Project (MDERP), (3) VR-1
Levee Rehabilitation Project west of the City of San Buenaventura, and the (4) VR-2 Levee Rehabilitation Project located in
the unincorporated community of Casitas Springs. Planned capital improvement project work may change based on higher
priority needs (e.g. storm damage), operational factors, and/or the unanticipated availability and/or loss, of offsetting
revenue.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 1 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain regulatory permits for O&M
facility projects, as required.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County and
the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program deployment.
Submit nineteenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura County’s eleven
general purpose governments. Support coordinated efforts to obtain a new, countywide MS-4 Permit from the LARWQCB.
4. Flood Control Maintenance Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District’s MaintStar work order based
tracking system to ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department’s
systems, and achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency’s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades.
Advance the completion of the following sustainable flood protection infrastructure initiatives for Zn 1 facilities: (a) annual
evaluation of the safety of District-owned dams in the zone, as part of the District’s dam-safety program, (b) sediment
management plan for District-owned debris basins, and (c) evaluation of innovative facility maintenance and repair
techniques to better align risk-based infrastructure priority project ranking with available structural revenues.
5. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District’s mission and to leverage timely completion of priority projects in
Zone 1 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
6. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2016 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 1. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 1, as required. Support ongoing cooperative intergovernmental efforts required to establish a
Groundwater Sustainability Agency (GSA) for the Upper Ventura River Basin.
7. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 1 and/or 84 IRWMP Planning and
Implementation Grant projects in and/or impacting Zone 1 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required condition
proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 1, as required.
9. Matilija Dam Ecosytem Restoration Project: Continue Pre-construction Engineering and Design work in accordance with
existing USACE agreements, and discharge the District’s project completion obligations under the terms of the Board
approved Matilija Project Grant Agreements.

Objectives
O
1. Annual Zone 2 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $9 Million in preliminary design
engineering, environmental permitting, rights-of-way, construction and construction monitoring, and/or mitigation work efforts
by June 30, 2017 advancing the following Zone 2 capital improvement projects: (1) Arundell Baranca Hydraulic Deficiency
Improvements, (2) Cavin Debris Basin Retrofits, (3) Rice Road Drain at Terrace Avenue RCB Repairs, (4) Santa Clara River
Levee (SCR-3) D/S of Hwy 101, (5) Santa Clara River Levee (SCR-1) U/S of Hwy 101, (6) Sespe Creek Levee (SC-2), and
(7) tšumaš (Chumash) Creek – Phase II – Hueneme Road to Pleasant Valley Road. Planned capital improvement project
work may change based on higher priority needs (e.g. storm damage), operational factors, and/or the unanticipated
availability and/or loss of offsetting project revenue.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 2 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain regulatory permits for O&M
facility projects, as required.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County and
the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program deployment.
Submit nineteenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura County’s eleven
general purpose governments. Support coordinated efforts to obtain a new, countywide MS-4 Permit from the LARWQCB.
4. Flood Control Maintenance Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District’s MaintStar work order based
tracking system to ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department’s
systems, and achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency’s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades.
Advance the completion of the following sustainable flood protection infrastructure initiatives for Zn 2 facilities: (a) annual
evaluation of the safety of District-owned dams in the zone, as part of the District’s dam-safety program, (b) sediment
management plan for District-owned debris basins, and (c) evaluation of innovative facility maintenance and repair
techniques to better align risk-based infrastructure priority project ranking with available structural revenues.
5. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District’s mission and to leverage timely completion of priority projects in
Zone 2 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
6. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2016 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 2. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 2, as required. Support ongoing cooperative intergovernmental efforts required to establish a
Groundwater Sustainability Agency (GSA) for the Mound Basin.
7. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 1 and/or 84 IRWMP Planning and
Implementation Grant projects in and/or impacting Zone 2 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required condition
proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 2, as required.

Objectives
O
1. Annual Maintenance Work: Continue to perform necessary maintenance and/or repair, construction activities required to
ensure the optimization of the flood-conveyance capacity and flood protection capability of WPD flood protection facilities
located in the Simi Sub-Zone.


Objectives
O
1. Annual Zone 4 Capital Improvement Project Delivery: Complete an estimated $0.250 Million in design engineering, rightsof-
way, and construction engineering work efforts by June 30, 2017 advancing the Oak Park Green Streets Urban Retrofit
Project planned for construction work in FY 18. Planned capital improvement project work may change based on higher
priority needs (e.g. storm damage), operational factors, and/or the unanticipated availability and/or loss of offsetting project
revenue.
2. CEQA and Environmental Regulatory Permitting Work: Initiate CEQA documentation for Zone 4 CIP and O&M
construction projects as required. Complete project mitigation and monitoring reports. And obtain regulatory permits for O&M
facility projects, as required.
3. Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program: Continue regional collaboration with all ten cities, the County and
the District regarding MS-4 Permit implementation activities, including required monitoring events and program deployment.
Submit nineteenth annual report to the LARWQCB as required by the NPDES Permit on behalf of Ventura County’s eleven
general purpose governments. Support coordinated efforts to obtain a new, countywide MS-4 Permit from the LARWQCB.
4. Flood Control Maintenance Strategic Projects: Refine, upgrade and enhance District’s MaintStar work order based
tracking system to ensure full integration of work planning modules and databases with the Transportation Department’s
systems, and achieve functional compatibility with the Public Works Agency’s VCHRP labor-costing system upgrades.
Advance the completion of the following sustainable flood protection infrastructure initiatives for Zn 4 facilities: (a) annual
evaluation of the safety of District-owned dams in the zone, as part of the District’s dam-safety program, (b) sediment
management plan for District-owned debris basins, and (c) evaluation of innovative facility maintenance and repair
techniques to better align risk-based infrastructure priority project ranking with available structural revenues.
5. Grants Program Work: Aggressively pursue applicable Federal, State and Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) grant
opportunities for funding assistance in support the District’s mission and to leverage timely completion of priority projects in
Zone 4 which are contained in the Board-approved 5-Year CIP
6. Groundwater Programs: Complete 2016 Groundwater Level/Quality Report. Coordinate implementation of CASEGEM
program in Zone 4. Oversee the safe destruction of abandoned wells, and process permits for monitoring wells and new
water wells in Zone 4, as required.
7. Integrated Regional Water Management Planning and Implementation Grant Projects: Continue regional planning
collaboration and grant-funded project implementation work regarding any Proposition 1 and/or 84 IRWMP Planning and
Implementation Grant projects in and/or impacting Zone 4 in consultation with the Watersheds Coalition of Ventura County.
8. Land-Development Reviews, Encroachment and Watercourse Permits: Review, comment, and where required condition
proposed development projects, as well as issue encroachment and/or watercourse permits in Zone 4, as required.

Objectives
O
A. Complete the CEQA and Groundwater Sustainability Plan for the Moorpark Desalter Project.
B. Complete Tract 5187 Reservoir Project for WWD #1 Water.
C. Complete the Stockton Reservoir Project for WWD #1 Water.
D. Finalize land purchase for the Moorpark Desalter.
E. Maximize the production of local water to reduce the cost of imported water in the district.
F. Re-coat and Line Reservoirs: Home Acres.
G. Reduce electrical costs at District facilities by revising system operations.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our
water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years.

Objectives
O
A. Complete the MWTP Office/Lab Building for WWD #1 Sewer,
B. Complete Recycled Water Phase IV Pipeline and Booster Pump Station project.
C. Increase the number of customers using recycled water.
D. Complete cleaning and CCTV of 1/3 sewer collection systems.

Objectives
OA. Complete design and start construction of Piru WWTP Tertiary Treatment Facility for WWD #16.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
FAs an enterprise fund, their rates do not include depreciation recovery.

Objectives
O
1. In the WWD No. 17 (Bell Canyon) Water Programs:
A. Complete PDR and design for new 1.74 MG reservoir.
B. Implement new AMI system.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our
water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years.

Objectives
O
A. Complete design and begin construction of pipeline replacement project (Caltrans ROW).
B. Complete design and begin construction of Well 2 Treatment Facility
C. Maximize the production of local water to reduce the cost of imported water in the district.
D. Reduce electrical costs at District facilities by revising system operations.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our
water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years.

Objectives
O
In the LSCSD Water Program:
A. Complete construction of additional development tracts water infrastructure.
B. Implement new AMI system.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Proposed rate increases for imported water and electricity may have a significant impact on the cost of the operations of our
water systems and consequently on the water rates to our customers over the next few years.

Objectives
Continue to monitor the county road and provide maintenance as needed.

Objectives
O
Continue to work with and monitor the landscape maintenance contractor concerning the landscape, irrigation system, tree
maintenance and miscellaneous work within the CSA 4 areas. Where feasible and appropriate, replace irrigation sprinklers
with low water usage system and plant drought tolerant plants. Coordinate the purchase of supplies for the Oak Park CERT.
Manage and process the school crossing guard payments. Continue to monitor street sweeping and payments.

Objectives
O
Continue to monitor street sweeping and street lighting. Continue to monitor legislation regarding LED lighting for conversion
of street lights in CSA 14.

Objectives
O
CSA #34 Sewer Collection System: Refurbish Montgomery sewer lift station (corrosion damage). Add SCADA
communications.

Objectives
O
- Continue negotiations with the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board to obtain their approval of the Local
Agency Management Plan (LAMP) the Environmental Health Division prepared for the County of Ventura.
- Continue interaction with LARWQCB staff to facilitate OWTS application processing and water quality protection.
- Develop proposed AB 885 Policy-conforming amendments to the Ventura County Ordinance Code, as necessary.
- Continue electronic imaging of completed OWTS project files.
- Prepare for implementation of new statewide OWTS regulations.
- Initiate special study for impacts of OWTS on Ventura River Watershed.
Future Program/Financial Impacts
F
Implementation of the County response to the AB 885 Policy may result in increased costs and/or OWTS fee increases
associated with additional oversight responsibilities, such as new or increased OWTS performance monitoring and
recordkeeping.

