Improved access to care by streamlining entry to care, increasing psychiatry hours, clinician productivity and scheduling practices.

 Increase consumer voice by implementation of Wellness Recovery Action Plans, ensuring representation on panels and boards, inclusion in RFP review and selection, and increase in employment opportunities. 
 Increase support through transition (jail, juvenile detention facility, emergency room, hospitalization) through the continuance of Crisis Intervention Training with law enforcement and first responders, implementation of Community-Based Crisis Response Teams, and hiring of two full-time case managers to assist individuals at high risk transitioning from jail/juvenile detention facility and other se?ngs, as well as a full time registered nurse to assist with transitions in care for individuals who are hospitalized.

 Establish clear benchmarks for performance and complete performance reviews on time.
	Develop annual calendar of professional development opportunities and tailor opportunities to position and individual staff, including but not limited to (Mental Health First Aid, Crisis Intervention Training, Law & Ethics, Wellness Recovery Action Planning and others as indicated and available). 

 Develop a Staff Retention/Recruitment plan in collaboration with management team that identifies career pathways within the County and ways for mitigating primary reasons for employees leaving the department.
Ensure department representation on integrated Health/ADMH Employee Recognition Team.

Execute all contracts on time and pay all claims in a timely manner.

	Develop an annual training schedule of trainings available at no charge to community partners and contract providers (Mental Health First Aid, Crisis Intervention Training, Law & Ethics, Wellness Recovery Action Planning). 

	Build outcome measures and evidence-based programming into all contracts for substance use disorder and mental health treatment. 

	Provide excellent customer service to our community-based partners via provision of technical assistance and proactive communication surrounding claims, contracts and quality improvement initiatives. 
 Improve reputation and relationships with community partners that intersect with ADMH (university, jail, juvenile detention facility, hospitals) by increasing transparency, collaboration and communication.

Treatment plans to include health related goals tied to chronic conditions (diabetes, COPD, hypertension, obesity, hepatitis) and unhealthy behaviors (smoking, drug/alcohol use, eating habits, exercise). 

	Assume a leadership role in the county in terms of developing a trauma-informed system through the provision of trainings and convenings around the topic.

	Improve access to care and utilization rates for Hispanic population through increased emphasis on hiring Spanish-speaking staff, collaborating with contract providers who have higher penetration rates proportionally, and outreach activities aimed at reaching the Hispanic population.

	Improve timeliness and accuracy of paperwork (progress notes, assessments, reassessments, client plans) as evidenced by chart reviews and decreased audit findings. Additional quality improvement personnel to assist in oversight and improvement.

	Establish evidence-based practices within ADMH and quantify outcome measures including but not limited to Wellness Recovery Action Planning, Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and hospitalization rates.

	Require evidence-based practices and outcome measures for contact providers including but not limited to Child and Adolescent Needs Survey, Youth Outcome Questionnaire, Milestones of Recovery. Trauma Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Moral Recognition Therapy. 

	Increase clients served and services offered throughout the county. 

	Improve timely access to care as a means for avoiding unnecessary higher levels of care. 
	Provide appropriate level of care in the least restrictive se?ng. 

	Quantify cost per client both internally and at community provider level and ensure cost is in line with acuity. 

Decrease audit exceptions within ADMH and at the contract provider level.
 
Plan for the integration of DESS with the Department of Health Services to form one health and human services agency.

	Develop and implement a strategic plan for employment services.

	Implement family stabilization services for 60 families seeking employment and financial stability. 

	Initiate a results-based accountability framework to measure program performance.

	Open a satellite office in Winters. 

	Co-locate services with other County departments and community partners. 

	In collaboration with community partners, increase CalFresh and Medi-Cal participation rates and expand community education and outreach to seniors. 

	Redesign the Woodland and West Sacramento lobbies, including the installation of a numbering and scheduling system, to improve access and decrease wait times. 
	Continue the use of a call center for intake and ongoing eligibility services.
Update the Department's website to provide information on how to access services. 

Increase public health nursing capacity to serve vulnerable populations. 

 Enhance injury prevention programs and services. 

	Develop a fiscal sustainability plan for core services.

 Implement chronic disease prevention efforts in partnership with other key sectors: transportation, health systems, schools, cities and community-based organizations. 
 Expand health promotion and education efforts including tobacco prevention and cessation, injury prevention, nutrition, active transportation and sexually transmitted disease prevention work. 
Develop Yolo County Community Health Improvement Plans.


 Simplify and streamline comprehensive safety net services through Health and
Human Service Department integration. 

	Improve and enhance perinatal mental health services. 
Expand access to county breast feeding warm line.

	Develop a performance management system.

	Implement department quality improvement plan.

	Apply for national public health accreditation.


Improve project review process/customer satisfaction.

	Update the Climate Action Plan to incorporate new strategies and research in reducing future green house gas emissions. 
 Prepare a Greenway Plan to designate permanent buffers between cities and towns, and revise the agricultural mitigation ordinance to allow greater flexibility. 

 Complete the Dunnigan Specific Plan, pending submittal of a jobs/housing plan. 
 Restore the Code Enforcement Officer position, once funding has been allocated.
 Update Clarksburg Area Plan to ensure consistency with the Delta Protection Plan. 
Complete planning for UC ag/food research park. 

 Develop construction/maintenance programs with reduced funds available.
 Complete construction/rehabilitation for the Access to the Pacific Flyway CR 32B; and construction of CR 99 from Woodland to CR 19A.

	Complete bridge deck seal construction for 13 bridges; and final engineering/Right of Way purchase for Cottonwood Slough CR86A and Zamora CR12.

Shift the balance of limited staff and road funding resources to improve safety and extend the longevity of existing roads with a greater emphasis on maintenance.

	Integrate waste collection, recycling/hazardous materials.

	Secure organic waste agreements and begin construction of a Composting and Construction & Demolition Debris Facility at the Yolo County Central Landfill to reduce disposal and increase recycling. 

 Expand the residential and commercial waste and recycling collection programs. 

	Increase capacity for agricultural liquid and solid waste processing, while continuing to increase waste importation to help reduce local operational costs.

 Increase operational cost efficiencies and address new State fees and regulations. 

	Update/revise methane gas recovery and alternative energy production agreements. 

Assist current and potential manufacturers and processors using recycled materials to utilize the benefits of the new Yolo Recycling Market Development Zone.

 Continue refinement of Fleet services to reduce costs and improve customer services.
 Work with departments and update the County's vehicle policies to identify direct responsibilities; develop future budget allocations that reflect the actual costs of services delivery through a Fleets Services Cost Plan, which is part of the 2014-15 budget. 
Continue to reduce fleet of under utilized vehicles and monitor vehicle purchases. 
	Re-evaluate staffing needs, technology and task prioritization.
	Continue revisiting the organizational structure for potential consolidation or shared services opportunities, address cross-training skill sets to foster succession planning.
Seek new advances in technology to enhance agency coordina??on, public access and
interfacing for greater transparency of departmental processes.
Continue integration of Environmental Health Services toward the goal of creating a centralized customer service center (one-stop-shop) for permiffing, development projects and related regulatory activities. 

	Conduct industry outreach to evaluate customer satisfaction. 

 Restore dedicated staffing for code enforcement complaint response. 

	Seek new advances in technology to enhance agency coordination, public access and interfacing for greater transparency of departmental processes.

	Develop training plans, policies and procedures to assure permit, regulatory and development services staff are committed to ensuring an efficient, cost effective, fair and transparent process for both the applicant and the general public. 

	Complete comprehensive program cost and fee study assuring fair and reasonable fee structure time.

 Seek opportunities for additional consolidation or shared services opportunities. 

	Conduct outreach to stakeholders regarding development of a retail food placarding (grading) program, a drafted onsite sewage ordinance, a drafted well construction ordinance and a drafted septic ordinance that will require well and septic system inspections at time of property sale.
	Maintain regular contact with the County Health Officer to assure continued coordination and public health protection with administration of environmental health and public health programs and mandates.

	County planning, development and environmental health services policies consider community and individual health.

Assist the Auditor-Controller in fourth year procedures associated with the Long-Term Financial Plan.

 Develop and monitor a balanced 2014-15 budget that continues the integration of the Tactical Plan, best practices and performance measurements and outcomes. 

	Implement caps to the County's contribution toward retiree health insurance premiums and develop alternative strategies to further reduce the County's unfunded liability for retiree medical costs. 

 Promote efforts in all departments to secure additional outside funding to augment and support County programs, policies and services.

	Implement new financial management structure and coordinate strategies to improve County fiscal staff skills and abilities. 
 Begin implementation of new fiscal information management system that enhances capabilities in the areas of payroll, forecasting, integrated budgeting and accounting functionality and human resources management. 

	Coordinate implementation of Capital Improvement Plan to ensure that infrastructure is optimally maintained. 

	Develop and begin implementation of a plan to address the County's financial liabilities for Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) and the announced increases in the CalPERS rates which will impact the 2016-17 budget. 

 Continue implementation of the three-year Tactical Plan. 

	Continue progress on performance measures for all departments, including outreach to stakeholders and development of dashboard reporting. 
	Implement countywide change management model and provide training for all employees. 

	Engage staff and stakeholders to develop and promote regional leadership initiatives.

 Establish standard process for staff and external stakeholders to recommend and collaborate in the development of new ideas. 
	Develop annual report to Board on dashboard indicators and trends. 
	Develop guidelines to measure outcomes regularly to ensure they are consistent with Strategic Plan. 

 Promote long-term planning and assist departments in forecasting changes in their operating environment (i.e. major trends, adaptations). 
Amend facility fee to include a park impact fee to fund Parks Master Plan and park maintenance. 

 Continue to pursue shared services opportunities. 

 Continue to achieve Board-approved regional, State and Federal advocacy priorities, including securing funding for key projects and policy changes that result in cost savings. 
	Assist in the consolidation/integration of Health and Human Services departments, Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services, and Clerk -Recorder-Elections-Assessor.
	Continue partnerships with local colleges/universities to utilize students/ coursework to benefit County programs and assist in meeting coursework obligations.

	In coordination with Auditor-Controller, implement JPA oversight program for monitoring management and fiscal responsibility.

	Continue collaborations with agencies and departments on homelessness, MHSA housing, Crisis Nursery, domestic violence, Emergency Services, Yolo County Housing. 
	Implement agreement with the City of Woodland for two jointly operated electric vehicle charging stations. 

	Continue to offer employee training programs to other agencies and counties. 
	Develop and implement comprehensive talent development plan. 

	Strengthen employee recognition programs.

	Implement HR/Payroll information system including time and labor and employee self-service. Develop training plan for department liaisons on implementation

 Foster development of self-service/timekeeping

	Implement competency-based recruitment process (job analysis before recruitment opens, competency-based interview questions, panel training). 

	Support department mergers by providing classification/compensation expertise and recommending appropriate classifications/compensation.

	Continue all-employee training for workplace civility and ethics.

	Continue marketing AVENUES program which is available for employee concerns. 

	Develop competency-based performance evaluation process. 
 Continue to support small community revitalization efforts through active business support, permit fast tracking, downtown revitalization programs and tourism. 

	Support OES to plan for and respond to emergency situations (drought, oil/rail, etc.).
 Support the Countywide Broadband Strategic Plan.
 Provide regional leadership in the advancement of environmental sustainability. 
 Provide regional leadership and support to agricultural prosperity. 

Continue to partner with the California Department of Food & Agriculture and the U.S. Department of Agriculture to secure full funding for High Risk Exclusion, protecting Yolo County from infestations of foreign invasive pests that are shipped through the mail and by common carriers. Coordinate with Sacramento Valley Counties to conduct canine team inspections of incoming shipments at the Postal Facility and UPS for exotic invasive pests. The canine team represents the most efficient and effective means to detect undisclosed shipments of plant material that may harbor these pests.
Maintain an effective consumer protection program by completing all mandated inspections, conducting end-product testing and price verification inspections to assure a fair and equitable marketplace for all consumers and businesses in Yolo County.

 Continue implementation of the Farm to School Program. 
	Continue implementation of the Farmbudsman Program. 

	Work with the Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG) on the completion of the Aggregation Study. 

	Work with County Counsel on the completion of the Ag Mitigation Study. 

	Develop a pilot program to recover department pension and other postemployment benefit (OPEB) obligations. 

	Create an employee development program to prepare for future department retirements. 

	Establish a staffed program to create an agricultural marketing program to:
promote agricultural tourism and direct marketing; and
implement agricultural General Plan action items. 

 Review properties currently on Prop 8 and begin the process of restoring factored base year values as appropriate. 
 Continue to defend appeals to the best of our ability. We are required by law to be present at all appeal hearings and may present evidence to support our values. We rigorously defend our values and will continue to do so as long as we have the time and the funding.

 Continue to keep our webpage updated as a key method of keeping the public informed of important information as well as changes going on in the office. We offer most of our forms online so the public has instant access. We encourage callers to review our webpage and respond with questions/comments. We also encourage our business filers to take advantage of electronic filing of property statements. 
technology, policies and procedures.

 Work with the Recorder's Office to electronically provide PCORs to the Assessor's Office which can automatically be uploaded to Megabyte. 
Electronically link Workpapers and parcel informa??on to Megabyte.
 Work collaboratively with the Clerk-Recorder staff to ensure a smooth transition. 
 Engage in information sharing by providing public access of Megabyte to Recorder's Office . 

Implement continuous auditing plan.

	Conduct countywide risk assessment.

	Participate in control design within new financial system.

	Launch JPA oversight program.

Reinforce County policy on internal control and auditing.

	Redesign business processes according to best practices.

	Build and test the new financial system.

	Train departments to fully integrate the new financial system into daily duties.

	Provide support and guidance to departments during the transition from the current financial system to the new system.

	Create infrastructure for the new Department of Financial Services. 

 Facilitate finance staff participation in support of operational decision-making.

 Implement new staffing plan that ensures qualified and well-trained staff. 

	Adopt standard service level agreements for financial services. 

	Review and update performance measures in the Department of Financial Services. 

	Publish and train County staff in the application and use of countywide cost guidelines and the associated cost calculation templates.

	In conjunction with the County Administrator, evaluate County contracts and projects to ensure maximum potential cost recovery in accordance with adopted County cost recovery principles. 
Publish Comprehensive Annual Financial Report by December 31, 2014.

	Re-establish financial system users group to provide forum for training and communication.

	Train additional staff to prepare annual financial report.

	Implement new financial system for increased efficiencies in external reporting.

Assist County Administrator in creation of long-term plans that involve multiple departments: Capital Improvement Plan, long-range financial forecast, cash flow projections. 

Prepare long-range financial forecast and develop strategies to address financing gaps. 
Create solutions for other long-term structural issues.

	Request proposals for banking services and select new bank.

	Implement new/updated banking relationship.

	Implement changes to daily cash reconciliation process to improve efficiency.

	Collect over 98.7% of property taxes charged in 2014-15.

	Implement document imagining allowing externally created documents to be accessed directly from the property tax administration software.

	Provide staff training to ensure adequate knowledge for succession planning.

	Formalize tracking and reporting of all delinquent revenue due to the County.

	Complete a revenue database to identify the most important revenue sources.

	Develop a revenue forecast model

	Provide analytical support to CAO in revenue sharing and economic development effort. 

 Continue work started with Assessor staff to help develop and implement a new department structure following the merging of the Clerk-Recorder and Assessor Departments. 
Continue partnership with the California Secretary of State office to facilitate and implement the integration of the CalVote Statewide Voter Registration System with existing Voter Registration system, allowing voters of Yolo County to register to vote online. 

	Purchase and implement a new electronic inventory control so as to better control and track the location and status of public and official records in house and at the Records and Archive Center. 

	Conduct the November 4, 2014 General Election in compliance with all Federal and California Election codes to ensure an accurate, timely, transparent and fair election accessible to all voters in Yolo County.

Comprehensive analysis of statutory rules and policies required to adapt or react with agility to implement the Tactical Plan and General Plan.

 Develop governance models supportive of shared services.
			
 Develop all staff to the highest levels of expertise in litigation and performance-based service delivery.

	Maximize use of in-house, non-tort litigation efficiencies.

	Fully support and assist analysis of legal issues pertaining to the fiscal and governance automation projects.

	Achieve highest level of menu-driven department generated legal documents.

	Train the County to achieve the highest level of ethical standards and expertise.

Move systems to the new "Private Cloud" server system.

Ensure that critical hardware is funded for timely replacement. 
Log all system downtime and review monthly performance documents. 
Create training opportunities so that staff is properly trained. 

Maintain a 99.5% uptime for all network and core systems. 

Assist with the implementation of the new Financial and Human Resource Capital Management systems. 

Retain GenLed Financials and Oracle PeopleSoft systems supported and functioning until August 2015.

Upgrade all web-based and COTS (if desired by vendor/customer) to SQL 2008 or SQL 2012. 

Upgrade all ITTD developed web applications to utilize HTLM 5 code (browser independent). 

	Review IT customer satisfaction results monthly and respond to issues as appropriate.

	Finish standard IT requests within 72 hours.

	Maintain customer satisfaction results of "very good" or "excellent". 

	Track completion time for all requests.

Create customer feedback systems for all divisions. 

	Collaborate with other departments in order to facilitate solar and other renewable energy sources at locations throughout the county. 

	Continue to pursue alternative energy solutions that are feasible and practical for the County. 
	Work closely with local utilities to continue to reduce consumption by, and expense to, the County.
	
Keep cri??cal base data layers up to date.
	Build internal GIS viewer for county departments.

	Update GIS test and development environments.

	Implement a learning program and facility with the Office of Education at Grasslands Park. 

	Complete the shade shelter and habitat restoration improvements to Putah Creek park sites with grant funding.

	Complete the Knights Landing Boat Launch improvement project with grant funding.

	Update outdated contract between County and the Yolo County Historical Museum.

	Prepare an existing electrical plan with recommendations for future electrical updates for the Gibson Museum. 

Prepare a concessions ordinance for Yolo County Parks. 

	Develop a deferred maintenance plan with costs for repairing/replacing deteriorating facility systems (i.e. parking lot asphalt, carpeting, interior and exterior paint) for inclusion in the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP). 

 Explore retrofit/upgrades to existing facilities. 

	Develop and implement a maintenance schedule plan that would lower our monthly fuel consumption by eliminating redundant trips through scheduled maintenance days for each facility.
 Explore modernization of irrigations control systems throughout County to reduce water use/consumption.

	Develop a plan to expand and renovate the Monroe Jail. 
Develop a plan to expand the Juvenile Detention Facility. 
  Complete facilities space utilization study. 

Continue to modernize the phone and voicemail systems.


	Continue to upgrade network switches that are capable of utilizing Voice Over IP (VoIP). 

	Upgrade and/or decommission old phone switches. 

	Partner with City of Woodland and YECA to provide better connectivity to the Sheriff and Probation campus. 

Purchase and install a new Telecom billing and work order system.

	Maximize savings by ensuring full participation of online procurement system and use of larger pools of vendors. 

	Bid goods and services contracts and countywide programs to drive down costs.

	Provide outreach to departments for procurement matters ensuring compliancy and best business practices.

	Continue training and development of employees for better skill sets to maximize resources and increase savings. 

	Utilize technology whenever possible to modernize the purchasing process. 

	Revamp current purchasing performance measurements to better reflect priorities and maximize the reporting capabilities of the new financial system. 


	Provide transportation assistance for veterans to Veteran's Administration medical appointments.
	Assist veterans and their families with completing and filing applications. 

	Provide support and outreach to newly returning veterans. 
 Provide appropriate ceremonial support.

Library leaders, working with several staff teams including YoloReads Literacy Services, will identify ways to enhance our customer experience in learning and improving skills in the areas of computer literacy, job hunting, career and occupational employment and development.
 Initiation of the Virtual One-Stop workforce development system, allowing customers to access one-stop services online at local library branches.

 Initiation of mobile one-stop Department of Employment and Social Services (DESS) centers at local library branches.
 Staff will continue to receive training to enhance and learn more about effectively using their strengths based on the strengths assessment taken by all library staff during 2013-14.
 Continue to lead Tactical Plan Collaboration Team. 

 Library leadership will continue to convene organized conversations and trainings with county nonprofits and service providers through the Nonprofit Leaders Alliance to share resources, exchange information and provide integrated solutions to community through a series of 4 collaborative meetings. 

 Collaborate with Positive Youth Justice, Probation and other County agencies and non-profits on youth development through the Yolo Youth Development Coalition. 
	Friends of the Yolo Library at Yolo will complete 501(c)3 paperwork and begin fundraising for a new branch library building.

	Continue work with First 5 Yolo and other community collaborators to enhance family support in underserved rural and urban parts of the county to expand services. 

	Collaborate with others to expand tourism in unincorporated Yolo County by providing hiking and traveler's guides, bike maps prepared by the City of Davis, computer access and online resources, as well as be a destination or travel stop for tourists. 

	Establish centralized circulating laptop lab for mobile trainings and instruction throughout the County.

	Archives Librarian will assist Gibson House Museum staff and volunteers with collection maintenance and preservation issues.

	Expand partnerships with the Health Department (WIC) and DESS (211 Yolo and CalFresh, WIA and Covered California services). 
Prepare children ages 0-5 for school readiness, offer K-12 students a supportive environment for homework completion and supplemental study. 

	Provide adult literacy and 211 Yolo outreach services to adult migrant workers in collaboration with Rural Innovations in Social Economics, Incorporated (RISE). 

	Engage youth ages 14-18 in Makerspace and innovative science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) activities throughout the county. 

	Tuleyome female speaker-focused lecture series to help individuals learn more about the region, plants and animals that make up Yolo County and promote female STEM career exploration. 

	Literacy tutoring at Day Reporting Center for Assembly Bill 109 population— a collaboration with the District Attorney, Sheriff, Probation and Yolo County Office of Education—for seven tutor learner pairs, plus ten presentations on community resources. 

	Provide job readiness workshops and resources including JobScout and other learning materials.

	New eBook reading platform for Children's literature. 

	Yolo County Library staff provide Early Literacy training to community partners. 

	Promote community memory by continuing to collect and preserve content created by Yolo County residents, increasing public access through digitization of photographs, audiovisual materials and finding aids.
Continue to strengthen our collaboration with the Winters Joint Unified School District, library partner, as they provide student interns plus funding for a Library Clerk to cover open library hours each weekday morning and all day on Fridays to maximize our ability to remain open as a full service branch to both the public and the school.
 Working with staff from Human Resources on a staff reorganization plan that will allow more effective, efficient and broader use of staff.
 Increased broadband access at Esparto Regional Branch Library working in partnership with the Friends of the Esparto Regional Library.
Archives will continue to work with local and statewide historical agencies to network, share resources, define collection and programming strengths, and collaborate on promotion and development.

Fully implement and refine the court outreach project in the family law courtrooms. The court outreach project also includes working with the Sexual Assault Domestic Violence Center; now referred to as Empower Yolo. We will provide a hands on approach with these families assisting them to obtain and enforce child support orders. This initiative will result in not only economic stabilization for families, but also a strengthened and positive relationship with our customers.
Develop and participate in community outreach opportunities, including local movie theaters and youth sports programs. Increased public awareness of the Child Support program offers the community education and resources available to families with children in need of medical and child support services. * 
 Develop and implement collection strategies through working targeted reports and queries. By working these targeted reports, Child Support staff will be more strategic in their enforcement efforts.
Improve coordination and referral to the Yolo County One Stop Career Center. The information available to clients at the One Stop Career Center will provide job-readiness and access to local jobs. This will help assist parents who are court -ordered to provide child and/or medical support to their children an opportunity to participate in the program and support their families.

Implement new restorative justice programs, more effective rehabilitative services (AB 109) and closer collaboration among all criminal justice partners. 

	Enhance DA Fraud Unit-Real Estate Fraud, Elder Protection & Identity Theft. 

	Promote Neighborhood Court, an innovative restorative justice program. 
	Expand Mental Health Court. 

	Complete programming necessary to upgrade the DA's paperless system (the HTML5 re-write of LAWSuite DA). 
	Implement e-Discovery and e-Subpoena. 

	Implement integration with the Court and law enforcement through the Court's new access portal. 

	Continue to improve upon digital recovery of all evidence ranging from fraud, to child molestation, to homicides, and prepare to present during trials. 

	Develop additional projects for Multi-Cultural Community Council & Training.

	Further promote District Attorney-sponsored Citizens Academy. 
	Continue to expand Neighborhood Court. 

	Continue to expand Diversity Forums. 

Fully and efficiently integrate risk/needs assessment information into court reports for adults. 

The department will continue to work with the Court and other justice partners to ensure that probation reports provide better information in the most critical cases and decision points, while more efficiently providing only essential information in less complicated matters.

	Develop and fully implement a collaboratively developed system of graduated sanctions and incentives for probationers that maximally supports behavior change. 
The department will continue to work with the Court and other justice partners to develop an agreed upon policy of set responses to violations of probation and/or incentives for positive behavior change in order to ensure a sanction of appropriate severity can be imposed in all violations of probation in a timely manner.

 Enhance collaboration with partner agencies and community stakeholders to provide better and more comprehensive correctional treatment services and cost-effective public safety solutions. 

The department will continue to support deliberate, collaborative and data-driven planning processes to guide program development, resource allocation and enhanced cooperation between agencies to provide the most effective public safety practices possible.

 Develop and enhance technology solutions to increase efficiency and provide more relevant reporting that supports outcome evaluation. 
The Department will Implement a new probation case management system in within this fiscal year to increase efficiency and improve the reporting capabilities.

 Through training, supervision and other management practices, ensure attorneys and staff understand and adhere to their professional and ethical responsibilities to pursue, with knowledge and skill, whatever lawful and ethical measures are required to vindicate a client's cause. 
 Develop and implement holistic defense practices that achieve client-centered advocacy. 
Identify and implement evidence-based practices. 

Continue to expand training beyond professional mandates. 
 Ensure that rehabilitated offenders have access to quality, post-conviction legal services to obtain the relief to which they are legally entitled, thereby supporting their successful re-entry into the community. 
	Utilize multidisciplinary model to leverage expertise of social workers to develop

and implement discharge plans for sentenced inmates who will not otherwise receive support; create proposed disposition plans for pretrial clients to encourage sentences that focus on rehabilitation; and augment advocacy on behalf of high-risk youth in schools and in the community. 
Continue collaboration with Employment & Social Services to identify offenders eligible for benefits, such as Medi-Cal and CalFresh, and streamline the intake and application. 
 Support employee activities to ensure a good work-life balance; recognize high performers; overcome constraints by operating in a dated office building. 
 Focus on leadership skill development that clarifies expectations, aligns tactics and supports professional training opportunities inside and outside the County. 
Digitally archive a portion of client files and continue to enhance technology in the workplace in order to augment, enhance and maximize services.
Educate the community about the purpose and function of the public defense system by developing and maintaining stakeholder relationships and collaborations. 

Support intern programs by hosting law student, social worker, undergraduate, high school and paralegal interns as well as volunteer attorneys. 

Develop a public education campaign to increase awareness of legal rights and related topics. 
 Provide for proper healthcare by arranging for doctor appointments, monitoring
medical treatment, advoca??ng for necessary treatment and voicing the wishes of
the conservatee.

	Arrange for proper nutrition.

	Arrange for appropriate clothing, as needed. 

	Provide for housing that is appropriate and least restrictive. 

Arrange for reasonable safety, comfort, social services, recreation and family contact.

	Locate and marshal assets, assuring they are adequately protected against loss.

	Prepare an inventory of the assets for the Court. 

	Apply for and maintain benefits the Conservatee is entitled.

	Make a budget and pay all legitimate bills for Conservatee.

	Invest the Conservatee's assets and income in safe investments that will meet his/her needs and meet Court requirements. 
Remain accountable to the Court on all expenditures, income, assets and property. 

Prepare a final report and accounting of the estate at the time the Conservatorship terminates. 
 Continue to expand community education and outreach programs on crime prevention and identity theft to bridge law enforcement with community members utilizing town hall meetings and neighborhood watch programs.

 Develop short-term and long-term strategic plans and a vision for the Sheriff's Office.

 Restore positions that were previously lost in prior fiscal years.

	Replace aging safety equipment that previous budgets had not allowed.

 Continue to work with General Services on planning of the Detention Facility Expansion.

	Explore the use of future state funding in order to continue the expansion of the jail can.

 Continue to expand and enhance programs that were initiated with public safety realignment funds to provide the tools necessary for inmates to successfully reenter the community. 

 Continue to reduce the animal population with preventative spays and neuters.
	Coordinate with UC Davis Vet Med Teaching Hospital to develop new animal shelter and veterinarian services.

