 Work collaboratively with Human Resources, the County Administrator’s
Office and other county departments to hire and retain quality staff, provide
quality training and improve employee relations.
 Engage contract providers and community stakeholders to maintain
communication and support the delivery of cost-effective and quality
programs and services.
 Develop and implement an active committee structure to enhance the
effectiveness of the Local Mental Health Board in supporting ADMH
programmatic and budgetary efforts.
 Implement the long-term facilities plan, in accordance with the Mental Health
Services Act (MHSA) Capital Facilities guidelines, with the goal of improving
the service flow and confidentiality of consumers attending Wellness Center
activities.
 Implement the MHSA Information Technology plan as set forth in the MHSA
Plan, designed to support the needs of the organization and improve staff
productivity, coordinated program planning and integrated service delivery.
 Participate and provide leadership in the development of the County and
community treatment continuum for AB 109 individuals related to Public
Safety Realignment.
 Participate with the Health Department, Partnership Health and County
Medical Services Program (CMSP) on the transition to CMSP services in
general and the implementation of the Low Income Health Plan through the
Path2Health program.
 Partner with Employment & Social Services (DESS) in the development and
implementation of services for Foster Children and Youth as required by the
statewide Katie A. Law Suit Court Ruling.
Implement the Milestones of Recovery Scale (MORS) screening and recovery
tool to align services and more effectively deploy resources with client need in
the Adult Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders population.
 Implement the following performance standards in the Children’s Mental Health
population: Child and Adolescent Needs (CANS), Depression Inventory, Anxiety
Inventory.
 Train Children’s staff and implement the evidence-based practice Trauma
Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (TF-CBT).
 Train County and contract providers to develop skill sets and competencies to
serve culturally diverse clients with substance use, mental health and cooccurring
disorders.
 Promote active collaboration with Primary Care and use of evidence-based
practice to improve the overall health of clients with chronic medical conditions
and serious mental illnesses.
Develop a multi-year financial outlook as informed by recent changes to State
funding and operations (Realignment) to help direct the budgetary (revenue,
expenditure and audit) decisions and direction of the department.
 Continue to coordinate program planning and service delivery with budgeting and
financial management.
Establish, implement and provide continuous oversight utilizing standard internal
audit and cost-controls through automated and manual benchmarking of
efficiencies and compliance with billing/cost-reporting requirements and fraud,
waste and abuse regulations.
 Create, develop and implement automated financial reports for submitting
mandated reports including the Annual Mental Health and Alcohol and Drug
Program Cost-Reports.
 Develop and implement automated reporting system to track, monitor and report Drug and alcohol programs, working in partnership with community partners and
treatment providers, include the following:
 Adolescent Treatment: Operated via contract with CommuniCare Health Centers,
provides individual and group therapy to youth through age 18.
 HIV Set Aside: Funding used to provide HIV early intervention services to individuals
undergoing treatment for substance use disorders. This program is operated via
Memorandum of Understanding between ADMH and the Health Department.
 Perinatal Treatment: Operated via contract with CommuniCare Health Centers.
Provides comprehensive substance abuse treatment services to pregnant and
parenting women with young children. The program works in conjunction with Child
Welfare Services to assist family reunification and maintenance. This program
serves approximately 150 women each year, impacting approximately 280 children.
 Inmate Education: Via MOU between the Sheriff and ADMH, provides Alcohol/Drug
Education Program to incarcerated men and women at Yolo detention facilities.
 Felony Drug Court: Places individuals in programs designed to eliminate drug use
dependency, reduce recidivism and improve the overall efficiency of the court
system. Adult drug court is designed for defendants who have been convicted of
felony charges and have a history of significant drug/alcohol abuse and mental
health issues.
 PC1000 Drug Court: This is a deferred entry of judgment program in which
defendants who have committed a qualifying offense have the judgment or
disposition of their case deferred while they participate in a treatment program.
 Chemical Dependency Program: Provides a six-month program with program
activity tapering over time. Treatment groups are two hours long and are a
combination of didactic (education) and group processes.
 Prevention: Programs build partnerships that provide community members with
programs and information that promote positive and healthy living free of alcohol
and other drug abuse, tobacco use and violence, while engaging youth as active
leaders and resources within their own communities.
Continue implementation process for the Service Center.
 Continue conversion of cases in document imaging, focusing on closed
cases.
 Develop a training unit to better equip new hires and to provide ongoing
training for existing staff.Continue implementation process for the Service Center.
 Continue conversion of cases in document imaging, focusing on closed
cases.
 Develop a training unit to better equip new hires and to provide ongoing
training for existing staff.
Strengthen relationship with the local businesses in partnership with
the Workforce Investment Board.
 Implement a web-based APS case management system, pending
adequate funding.
 Explore feasibility of County-operated adoption services.
 Implement CMSP in partnership with the Health Department.
 Provide Family Facilitation Training in Child Welfare Services.
 Participate in a regional partnership for CalFresh outreach.
Continue to redesign department’s website.
 Continue to partner with the Library in development of the 211
system.
 Implement and maintain One-Stop social media network.
 Implement and maintain Foster Care social media network for
transitional foster care youth.
Increase access to high quality local primary and specialty care.
 Expand enrollment to additional eligible county residents.
 Enhance benefit coverage.
Seek funding to plan/develop a community garden next to Health building,
which will support nutrition education and physical activity promotion for
WIC participants and other neighborhood community members.
 Expand access to dental services including oral health screening exams, dental
education and fluoride varnish for WIC participants in West Sacramento
through a partnership with CommuniCare Health Centers.
 Provide expanded tobacco prevention services to community members
through revitalization of the tobacco youth coalition.
 Offer community education and resources in the area of child safety with
focus on child passenger, bicycle and pedestrian safety.
 Enhance communicable disease surveillance and investigation capacity.
Expand community access to high quality home visitation programs by
providing Public Health Nurse home visiting services to high risk women and
children in coordination with other existing home visitation and child
development efforts in the community.
 Enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the California Children’s Services
Medical Therapy Program through enhanced technology and delivery of
support services to address social and emotional needs of handicapped
children and their families.
 Increase food security for low income families through coordination and
collaboration with key partner agencies and by providing leadership in the
development of the County Nutrition Action Plan.
Develop and enhance Quality Enhancement Service Team role.
 Complete Continuous Quality Improvement training for staff.
Improve project review process/customer satisfaction.
 Adopt comprehensive update to the County Zoning Code to bring it into compliance
with the General Plan.
 Update the Housing Element to the General Plan.
 Update the County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance to ensure consistency with
FEMA and DWR requirements.
 Update Clarksburg Area Plan to ensure consistency with the Delta Protection Plan.
Develop construction/maintenance programs with reduced funds available.
 Employ engineering/road design standards ensuring optimal public safety, effective
access and cost effective construction and recycled materials.
 Develop/prioritize a road rehabilitation program to improve road safety and effective
utilization of limited staff and road maintenance funding.
 Refine/expand utilization of the new WinCAMS cost-accounting computer program
for more effective roads budgeting, tracking and electronic payroll system.
Integrate waste collection, recycling/hazardous materials.
 Expand liquid/solid waste and agricultural processing waste systems and franchised
waste and recycling collection programs
 Increase operational cost efficiencies and waste importation, establish compos??ng
services and address new State fees and regulations
 Update/revise methane gas recovery and alternative energy production agreements
Reinvent Fleet service that reduces costs and complaints.
 Implement revised staffing positions, significant revisions to vehicle policies, reduced
operational costs and staffing overhead.
 Implement alternative maintenance services delivery programs and vehicle lease
versus purchase options and research establishment of shared fleet or rental pool.
 Address low use vehicles/intra county reutilization or purchase of vehicles.


Re-evaluate staffing needs, technology and task prioritization.
 Continue revisiting the reorganizational plan for new fiscal/admin support challenges,
address cross-training/update skill sets and foster succession planning.
 Complete implementation of new advances in technology as appropriate for admin/
fiscal support, improved agency coordination and interfacing with the public

Assist the Auditor-Controller in the second year procedures associated with the long-term financial plan.

	Develop and monitor a balanced 2012-13 budget that includes second tier performance measures for all departments and an enhanced revenue development function

	Negotiate updated labor contracts that transition from temporary fiscal solutions to long term sustainable measures.

	Implement caps to the County's contribution toward retiree health insurance premiums in an effort to begin reducing the County's unfunded liability for retiree medical costs.

	Develop and implement a proactive process for CDBG and Housing program grant applications to support County's 2030 General Plan and housing goals.

 Identify other grant sources for eligible housing initiatives, programs and goals.
	Developed tactical plans to progress toward achievement of the Board-approved goals.

	Developed the model for a competency-based HR management system and created a dictionary of competencies necessary for advancing the County's vision and goals.
Secure outside funding for evaluation and staff work related to State and Federal proposals to improve water supply and enhance habitat in the Delta.

 Avoid or minimize impacts of proposals to improve water supply and enhance habitat in Delta and further efforts to achieve Delta sustainability.

	Ensure implementation of the three-year tactical plan

	Adopt a standard change management model
	Successfully convened labor representatives to form the Unfunded Liabilities Workgroup and investigated mechanisms for funding retiree healthcare costs.

	Promoted the successful collaboration between nonprofit developers, the County, YCH, private investors and State agencies to actualize an affordable housing project.

	Successfully completed federal environmental clearance requirements on HOME and CDBG grant awards for the Esparto MultiFamily Housing Project and broke ground on Phase 1 of the project

	Revamped and updated Intranet.
	Establish standard process for staff and external stakeholders to recommend and collaborate in the development of new ideas.

	Encourage participation in professional organizations throughout the County.

	Develop and implement Workplace Civility program and training for all County employees to address bullying and ensure respectful workplaces.


	With shared service partners, identify future Emergency Services structure.

	Investigate and pursue shared service opportunities in the area of Animal Services.

	Work with community colleges to identify workforce development programs that match training with the employers' needs.

	Assist in delivering training and a communication campaign to encourage countywide collaboration.

 Achieve Board-approved regional, State and Federal advocacy priorities, including securing funding for key projects and pursuing policy changes resulting in cost savings

	Develop talent pipeline and begin implementing succession plan to address critical gap in knowledge and expertise for high level fiscal and accounting positions.

	Issue Request for Proposal, recommend a vendor and begin implementation of an upgraded or new HR information management system that provides paperless payroll and benefits administration, time and labor tracking and employee self-service functionality.

	Continue implementation of competency-based Human Resources management system including validating competency dictionary and marketing new approach to departments and employees

	Implement changes to countywide recruitment and selection processes to assist with hiring and promotion of employees based on defined competencies for success

Finalize and implement new flexible and progressive Personnel Rules and Regulations that replace current County Code provisions


	Revitalize small communities by helping investors access financing, fast-tracking relevant permits and completing the $400,000 Brownfields community assessment grant in Esparto.

	Receive and implement $450,000 FAA grants for airport obstruction removal and improvements.

	Promote investment in food processing and agritourism facilities helping with financing, perming and cooperative marketing when possible.

	Maintain and assist with ensuring adequate, quality and affordable housing programs for low-income residents.

	Increase promotion of the County's Housing Rehabilitation and First Time Homebuyer's programs for low income-residents.

Update airport master plan and create airport business and marketing plan.

Continue to partner with the California Department of Food and Agriculture and the U.S. Department of Agriculture to secure full funding for High Risk Exclusion. Coordinate with Sacramento and Contra Costa Counties to conduct a canine team pilot project to inspect incoming shipments at the Postal Facility and UPS for exotic invasive pests. Implement a shared services agreement with other Sacramento Valley counties to offset costs.

High Risk Pest Exclusion is the first line of defense in the ongoing battle to protect Yolo County from being infested with foreign invasive pests that are shipped through the mail and by common carriers. With the consolidation of United States Postal Service Sectional Centers to the West Sacramento location it is imperative that we seek partners to fund this important work. The canine team represents the most efficient and effective means to detect undisclosed shipments of plant material that may harbor exotic pests.
Implement CalAgPermits pesticide permit program. The Department of Pesticide Regulation, under the CEQA act, has developed a new automated permit system; the Yolo County Department of Agriculture converted to the new program in August 2011. The County, along with other County Agriculture Departments, will continue testing and submitting information essential to improving and refining the program.

Partner with the Department of Pesticide Regulation to conduct a program efficiency evaluation.

	Maintain an effective system of device inspection to assure a fair and equitable marketplace for all consumers and businesses in Yolo County by continued analysis of business compliance rates, and maintenance of the compliance-based inspection program begun in 2010-11 for retail motor fuel dispensers; expand the program in 2012-13 to include computing scale inspections.

	Maintain an effective end-product testing and price verification program to assure a fair and equitable marketplace for all consumers and businesses in Yolo County by implementing a price verification program that will issue a consolidated compliance report and invoicing document at the time of inspection.

 Continue the development of a countywide farm-to-school program to bring fresh locally grown/produced food to school meals consistent with General Plan Action Item AG-A24, with the following deliverables:

	Develop a strategic plan and matching budget document,

	Secure funding sources,
	Establish a task force,

	Implement the program as funding becomes available.

 Review properties for declining value (total is greater than 23,000)

Description of Initiative: Review residential properties for changes of ownership back to 2000 for declines in values for the entire county (except Davis); review Davis changes of ownership dating back to 2003.
 Continue to defend appeals to the best of our ability

Description of Initiative: We are required by law to be present at all appeal hearings and may present evidence to support our values. We rigorously defend our values and will continue to do so as long have the time and the funding.

 Continue to keep our webpage updated with the latest information

Description of Initiative: Use the Assessor webpage as a key method of keeping the public informed of important information as well as changes going on in the office. We offer most of our forms online so the public has instant access. We encourage callers to review our webpage and respond with questions/comments. We also encourage our business filers to take advantage of electronic filing of property statements.  

 Streamline the appeals process

Description of Initiative: Continue to work with the Clerk of the Board's office as they convert the manual appeals system to the electronic version created by Megabyte. The appeals module links to the Assessor's system to provide valid, accurate data.



Implement continuous auditing plan.

	Conduct specific reviews/audits of high risk areas.

	Complete countywide risk assessment.

Complete assessment of payroll system request for proposals and recommend to the Board of Supervisors the most cost effective system payroll and human resources information system.

 Evaluate financing options for the system upgrade and recommend financing methods to the Board of Supervisors.


	Increase usage and functionality of Report Writer reports.

	Provide comprehensive training on use of Report Writer to department staff  


	Lead a team of key fiscal and IT staff to identify current and future financial systems needs of the County and issue a request for proposal.

	Evaluate proposals and recommend a course of action to the Board of Supervisors.
	Evaluate and recommend to the Board of Supervisors financing options for the recommended financial system.

Survey all users of the financial system to determine current and future needs.

Increase resources applied to preparation of the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report and publish report by December 14, 2012.


	Implement budget and financial planning, debt, auditing and capital asset policies.

	Develop solutions to address fiscal issues including use of MuniCast to evaluate the impact of proposed County strategies.

	Create solutions for other long-term structural issues.


	Issue a request for proposal for banking services in summer 2012.

	Evaluate proposals for banking services, negotiate and award the contract.

	Implement new/updated banking relationship.


 Maintain staff resources at current levels to ensure that existing systems and collection procedures are continued.
Complete written documentation for all key processes. 

	Obtain staff resources to continue tracking and reporting status of all delinquent revenue due County.

	Obtain commitment to follow up on delinquent amounts by responsible parties and assist as needed to ensure collections of delinquent accounts.

	Monitor commitments to collect past due amounts to ensure collection.

Complete Multi-County Partnership agreement with Yolo, Solano and Sacramento counties and the University of California.

	Participate with teams of industry, UC advisors and specialists in statewide tomato, corn, small grain, safflower, alfalfa, almonds, walnuts, prunes and dry bean variety tests.

	Promote processing and marketing of locally raised horticultural, agronomic and meat products.

Increase number of school sites, participating teachers and students in Nutrition and Youth Development programs.


Provide California Department of Pesticide Regulation Continuing Education hours, training and educational materials to pesticide advisors and applicators in the region.

Provide results of research showing best cultivars to grow and Best Management Practices for those crops.

Provide Master Gardener training and complete Memorandum of Understanding with Woodland Community College.  

	Continue to expand number of children enrolled (from 3,581 in 2011-12) in the nutrition education program, thus improving their health behaviors and reducing the cost of childhood obesity.

Increase number of CalFresh eligible adults in food financial management courses, thus increasing self-reliance and decreasing food insecurity.

	Increase number of children in 4-H. Continue to expand program offerings to include cutting edge research on child/youth development principles.


AB 1228 was passed establishing a pilot program which would allow the Elections Budget Unit to compare election costs and voter turnout of an All Mail election to those of an election not conducted as All Mail.


 Upgrade and replace seven year old desktop workstations in the Clerk-Recorder Budget Unit through the new county PC Replacement Plan. This will establish a four year replacement cycle for computers used by staff with the replacement cost being equally distributed over that time frame.


 Conduct the November 6, 2012 Presidential/General Election in compliance with all Federal and California Election Codes to ensure an accurate, timely, transparent and fair election accessible to all voters in Yolo County.

Prepare for any called local or special district elections.  

 Enter into contract with Government Finance Research to perform an independent third party cost-recovery and fee study of both the Clerk-Recorder and Election Budget Units to ensure that the services provided by the department are financially sustainable.


Implement shared services for operational efficiency.

	Cross train Departmental Hearing Officers.

	Computerize litigation management.

	Minimize outside counsel services.

	Revise personnel policies to provide more clarity and efficiency in labor relations and discipline matters.

	Revise Administrative Policies to allow greater department flexibility for low risk contracts.

 Establish tracking and review of systems development lifecycle for all internally developed applications.
	Ensure that critical hardware is funded for timely replacement.

	Log all system downtime and review monthly performance documents.

	Create training opportunities so that staff is properly trained.

 Maintain a 99.5% uptime for all network and core systems.

	Review customer satisfaction results monthly and respond to issues as appropriate.

	Finish all requests within 72 hours.

	Maintain customer satisfaction results of "very good" or "excellent".

	Track completion time for all requests.

	Finish solar project plan and design.

	Complete interconnect agreements.

	Complete funding mechanisms.


	Analyze use of existing spaces and leases.

	Develop recommendations for consolidation.

Create an electronic requisition for printing requests.

	Increase revenue for print services.

Complete campground showers and store. Complete concession ordinance.

Award campground store contracts.
Develop an automated campground reservation system.

Develop upper and lower Cache Creek sites with grant funding.

Complete improvements to Knights Landing boat launch with grant funding. Complete improvements to the Clarksburg boat launch with grant funding. Complete improvements to the Putah Creek park with grant funding.

	Develop a maintenance plan and timeline.

	Complete solar and Juvenile Hall projects.
	Reduce PG&E usage countywide.

Utilize prenegotiated discount pricing for new voicemail and piggy-back on Alameda County's contract to save time and money.

	Upgrade county phone system to current version for VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) capability and better supportability.
 Implement countywide contract module
Procure the necessary quality and quantity of goods and services in a cost efficient and timely matter.

Maximize savings by ensuring full participation of online procurement system and use of larger pools of vendors.

Bid goods and services contracts and countywide programs.

Perform trend analyses to take advantage of opportunities.

Provide outreach to departments for procurement matters ensuring compliancy and best business practices.

Create resources for departments to streamline the learning curve on procurement.

Continue training and development of employees for better skill sets to maximize resources and increase savings.


 Provide transportation assistance for veterans to V.A. medical appointments.
	Assist veterans and their families with completing and filing applications.

	Provide support and outreach to newly returning veterans.
Provide appropriate ceremonial support.

The Library will provide integrated career and job support and advancement tools, workshops and resources to Yolo County residents. This integrated effort will include materials, virtual resources, expert advice and practical applications, with a collaborative method of delivery.
 Support development and infrastructure at designated General Plan locales (Dunnigan) by initiating community conversations and resulting plans to address service needs in Dunnigan beginning September 2012.
 Support tourism in unincorporated Yolo County (the Library provides hiking and traveler's guides, computer access and online resources, and is often a destination or travel stop for tourists).
For the Farm-to-School effort, the Library will provide meeting room use, gallery space for FarmArt, promotion and marketing, and existing partnerships with schools and community agencies.

	Library leadership will work with the Board to establish a coordinated "Chamber of Services" model convening organized conversations with county non-profits and service providers to share resources, exchange information and provide integrated solutions to community needs, beginning August 2012, with a goal of a series of four conversations through 2013.

	Library will work with First 5 Yolo and other community collaborators to enhance family support in underserved rural and urban parts of the county where there is no established family resource center. Planning can begin July 2012.
Library will expand information technology architecture by bringing fiber to Knights Landing and West Sacramento libraries.

 Library will work collaboratively with County Probation to provide GED and job readiness skills training and supportive literacy services to incarcerated juvenile clients.
	Promote life readiness skills and supportive services to adults to meet a minimum of 50% of their personal goals.

	211 Yolo will explore operations of integrating call center with existing YECA dispatch infrastructure beginning July 2012.

 Expand services, hours and resources at Knights Landing and Yolo branch libraries effective August 2012 with additional staffing.
 Library leadership and community stakeholders will explore establishment of a Yolo Friends organization. Coalition development will include board leadership training and will focus on restoration of Yolo Branch.
 As part of the Library's strategic planning efforts, leadership will work with staff and the community to draft service priorities and a work plan that reflects County goals and Board direction with an overarching goal toward sustainability and customer satisfaction.


	The Archives plays a pivotal role in Yolo County history. A preservation assessment was conducted by noted Preservationist Barclay Ogden in 2010 which provided the framework for a larger analysis of the collection and existing resources and a plan to increase access through digitization and enhanced public hours, community tours and promotion. Planning implementation will begin immediately following the budget process for 2012-13.

	Archives will champion the development of a historical agency alliance to network, share resources, define collection and programming strengths and collaborate on promotion and development.

	Image all closed case file documents into the California Child Support Automated System (CCSAS). Dedicated staff will focus on imaging all necessary documents on over 5,000 closed case files. This initiative will result in improving access to closed case file documents, minimizing paper storage, eliminating case tracking systems, increasing information security and reducing costly off site storage.

	Minimize paper storage, eliminate tracking system, increase information security and reduce costly off-site storage. Imaging will free up storage space and eliminate costly storage fees. By law, documents must be stored for various periods. Security of information is also improved because the physical files are no longer available. Accessing information is available only to authorized personnel via the computer and disaster recovery will be possible once the data is converted to digital format.
 Implement an Office Standards Policy to provide more specific guidance to staff regarding work expectations relative to casework. The office standards will be given to each production staff and will set workload expectations and provide supervisors and managers with tools to review and hold staff accountable for performance .
Conduct an intensive case review of case files to clean up erroneous data to improve automated outcomes. Cleaning up erroneous data in CCSAS will speed up the process of locating people who owe child support. This will ultimately increase the Department's collections and payments to families .

Maintain sufficient staffing necessary to investigate and prosecute crimes committed in Yolo County.

 Provide legally mandated services to victims of crime.

 The effective implementation of AB 109 will depend upon adequate staffing and resources in the District Attorney's Office. Local responsibility for public safety has increased dramatically.

Fully and efficiently integrate risk/needs assessment information into court reports for adults.

Description of Initiative: The department will continue to work with the Court and other justice partners to ensure that probation reports provide better information in the most critical cases and decision points, while more efficiently providing only essential information in less complicated matters.

	Develop and fully implement a collaboratively developed system of graduated sanctions and incentives for probationers that maximally supports behavior change.

Description of Initiative: The department will continue to work with the Court and other justice partners to develop an agreed upon policy of set responses to violations of probation and/or incentives for positive behavior change in order to ensure a sanction of appropriate severity can be imposed in all violations of probation in a timely manner.

	Enhance collaboration with partner agencies and community stakeholders to provide better and more comprehensive correctional treatment services and cost-effective public safety solutions.

Description of Initiative: The department will continue to support deliberate, collaborative and data-driven planning processes to guide program development, resource allocation and enhanced cooperation between agencies to provide the most effective public safety practices possible. 

 Develop and enhance technology solutions to increase efficiency and provide more relevant reporting that supports outcome evaluation.

Description of Initiative: The department will work with Information Technology to modify the Probation Law Suite application to efficiently track case processing indicators, integrate the system with risk/needs assessment software, maximize efficiencies and automate reporting features wherever possible.

Through training, supervision and other management practices, ensure attorneys and staff understand and adhere to their professional and ethical responsibilities to pursue with knowledge and skill whatever lawful and ethical measures are required to vindicate a client's cause.

 Continue to actively participate in activities such as the AB 109 Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) executive committee, AB 109 related workgroups, California Risk Assessment Pilot Project, Criminal Justice Cabinet, Blue Ribbon Commission, Disproportionate Minority Contact grant, Quality Assurance Committee, Bench Bar Media Committee, Pretrial Services Committee and the Mental Health Court steering committee.  

	Educate community about the purpose and function of the defense system. Develop and maintain relationships with community organizations to assist in improving defense services.
	Continue to develop and support intern programs by hosting law student, social worker, undergraduate, high school and paralegal interns as well as volunteer attorneys.

 Provide for proper healthcare by arranging for doctor appointments, monitoring medical treatment, advocating for necessary treatment and voicing the wishes of the conservatee.
	Arrange for proper nutrition.

	Arrange for appropriate clothing, as needed.

	Provide for housing that is appropriate and least restrictive.

	Arrange for reasonable safety, comfort, social services, recreation and family contact.

	Locate and marshal assets, assuring they are adequately protected against loss.

	Prepare an inventory of the assets for the Court.

	Apply for and maintain benefits that the Conservatee is entitled.

	Make a budget and pay all legitimate bills for the Conservatee.

	Invest the Conservatee's assets and income in safe investments that will meet his/her needs and meet Court requirements.

	Remain accountable to the Court on all expenditures, income, assets and property. 
	Prepare a final report and accounting of the estate at the time the Conservatorship terminates.

Continue to expand community education and outreach programs through town hall meetings, neighborhood watch, crime prevention and identity theft to bridge law enforcement with community members.

 Develop short-term and long-term strategic plans and a vision for the Sheriff's Office.

 Restore positions that were previously lost in prior fiscal years.

Replace aging safety equipment that previous budgets had not allowed.

Continue to work with General Services on planning of the Detention Facility Expansion in order to mitigate the impacts of AB 109 state prison realignment.

Explore the use of future AB 900 funds to see if the expansion of the jail can continue.

Continue to expand and enhance programs that were initiated with AB109 funds to provide the tools necessary for inmates to satisfactorily re-enter the community.


	Continue to reduce the animal population with preventative spays and neuters.

	Work with Operations Pet Snip out of Gainesville Florida to transfer the Big Fix Rig to Yolo County so that mobile spay and neuter services can be provided.

	Work with Cities regarding shared services to ensure all costs are captured.

Coordinate with UC Davis Vet Med Teaching Hospital to develop new animal shelter and veterinarian services.

