The aim of the administrative unit is to continue
excellent administrative infrastructure support
to all customers. Our goals are to provide an
enterprise level IT infrastructure and
environment that enables innovation and
efficiency, provides a well maintained vehicle
fleet, assures a safe and clean working
environment and well cared for facilities, and to
continue to enhance our administrative
practices.
Identify new revenues to maintain selfsufficiency
 Identify areas on the airport for solar farm
activities as a new revenue source and
potential energy savings for the airport and
its operators
 Continue developing a series of visual
enhancement projects to clean up the
airport properties
 Maintain hangar occupancy at 100 percent
 Research new grant programs to continue
the Airport Capital Improvement Programs
 Continue to implement security procedures
to prepare for federal requirements
applying to general aviation airports
 Create a new airport logo, new marketing
brochure, and continue design ideas as
revenues allow
 Continue to review and determine revenue
for the implementation of airport
surveillance camera systems and gate
access control systems
In preparing the budget for FY 2011-2012,
the additional budget reductions resulted in
the General Fund participation being
eliminated in Industrial Development Fund
101-1400, with which the Administrative
Technician position was previously split 35%
Industrial and 65% Airport. This resulted in
reducing the position to 50 percent. The
position is being brought back to full time in
FY 2012-2013 with the additional 50
percent being funded from the Enterprise
Zone State Tax Credit Program. The 50
percent from the Enterprise Zone State Tax
Credit Program application fees revenue
will continue in FY 2013-2014.
 The Airport Maintenance Coordinator
position was transitioned to Administrative
Services - Buildings & Grounds (B&G) in FY
2011-2012. Costs continue to be shared for
this position between B&G and the Airport
at 50 percent each. This action benefits the
Airport with both budget and labor
allocations. It will also result in greater
backup maintenance assistance when
needed across all locations.
 The FY 2011-2012 budget package included
an A-87 charge of $41,983 as opposed to
the FY 2010-11 budget with an A-87 charge
of $113,911. The airport received some
assistance from the Administrative Services
budget for FY 2010-2011 in the amount of
$50,000 to bring the Airport’s portion down
to $63,911. In this 2012-2013 budget
proposal, the airport had a significant
credit. Bouncing up and down in this
expense category makes it difficult for the
airport to budget each year. FY 2013-2014
budget instructions did not have an A-87
estimate for the Airport and could impact
the submitted budget once those estimates
are known.
 The Airport leases property to the County
Public Works Road Department, the
Sheriff’s Shooting Range, and County
Animal Control at rates that are significantly
lower than the market rate. According to
the Revenue Use Policy, rental of land to, or
use of land by, the County for nonaeronautical
purposes at less than fair
market value rent is considered a subsidy of
local government and is a prohibited use of
airport revenue. The current rental rates
paid by the County for these facilities are
less than .02 cents per square foot. The Airport’s current lease rate for similar
ground property is .065 cents per square
foot.
o In fiscal year 2011-12, a new agreement
was drafted between the Airport and
the Sheriff to compensate for land
taken and utilized by the Airport as a
result of the recent taxiway and apron
construction projects. This agreement
also resulted in a 40% reduction of the
Sheriff’s rent.
 For FY 2010-2011, Reclamation District
assessments were billed to the airport at a
total of $33,746 which reflects fees similar
to FY 2008-2009 on which the airport still
owes a balance of approximately $25,000. A
payment plan has been created to pay
these fees. During FY 2008-2009,
Reclamation District 784 assessments were
initially determined to be $52,836 and was
later reduced to $33,639, still a substantial
amount for the Airport to absorb and the
end balance of the Enterprise Fund 130 at
June 30, 2010, reflected that. The new
levee fees of approximately $9,000 going
forward will significantly assist the airport in
meeting those fees annually. It should be
noted, the Airport can only recover a small
portion of the fees charged from our
Lessees as the fees relate to the entire
property of the airport. There are a total of
three acres of buildings with 75 acres of
airfield developed with 10 acres of road; for
a total of 13.39 percent or 88 of the 657.2
acres of the airport developed. The
remaining properties are open space or
airport safety areas and thus RD costs must
be borne by the Airport.
 The Olivehurst Public Utility District fire
assessment fees for FY 2011-2012 were
$4,594 and a similar fee is expected for FY
2012-2013. Unlike the RD 784 and the
levee fees that are based on the entire
airport developed areas, including runways
and taxiways, the majority of the OPUD and
light district fees are recovered from the
lease tenants utilizing the property.
 The security requirements for general
aviation airports as a result of the 9-11
incident continue to be discussed by the
Federal Aviation Administration. The
airport has completed 90 percent of the
fencing requirement. A new grant will be
requested to continue the security projects.
Remaining plans include fence completion
and installation of surveillance cameras at
key points. Funding for additional gate
systems and cameras will be pursued during
this fiscal year, pending the priorities set for
the Airport Improvement Program.
 During the construction of the new airport
pollution control facility at the main hangar
entry area, considerable soil contamination
was discovered both during a tank removal
process and preparation of the pad for the
control facility. A total of 410 tons of soil
are currently scheduled to be removed due
to a contamination of the pesticide
toxephene. The airport continues to work
closely with the County hazmat team in
proper control of the contaminated soil
area and removal plans. The current
estimated cost to remove the soil is
$142,000. The soil is currently being
managed on site and a plan will be
determined on how to phase out the
removal of the entire contaminated
material.
 Completion of the updated Airport Master
Plan was accomplished in October 2008.
With the plan finalized, the airport will
continue to work on the next phase of
projects. A permit will be filed with the
Corps of Engineers during FY 2013-2014 to
get started with the realignment of the
drainage channel that is currently
obstructing any further development
opportunities. It is expected to take a
minimum of 12 months for the permit
process to be completed.
 The Airport has a pending grant application
submitted to the Federal Aviation
Administration that would allow the Airport
to purchase 45 acres of a 90-acre parcel
adjoining the airport property to the south.
This acquisition would provide ‘encroachment protection’ to the airport
resulting from residential development and
will provide the ability to extend the
runway at a future date. New FAA
legislation has increased the potential
federal share to 95 percent. With the
state’s match, the Airport’s share of this
project is reduced to 2.5 percent. The
remaining 45 acres will be available to the
owner to market to new business. A
navigation easement will be developed for
this area to limit height and the types of
projects that can be developed in
compliance with the Airport’s land use plan.
The lot split has already been completed.
 The Master Plan preparation has
determined the need to consider
purchasing two additional 45-acre parcels
just east of the 90-acre parcel (above) that
will be in the path of the proposed 1,000 ft
main runway extension approach. These
funds are being reserved from the prior
year land sales to accomplish any grant
match requirement for this purchase. This
project has been added to the Airport’s
Capital Improvement Plan for grant
consideration after the initial 90 acres are
purchased.
 The Airport will continue to maintain a close
review of the airport’s cash flow and make
every effort to develop new airport revenue
streams to maintain self-sufficiency.
Maintain field lighting, vegetation control,
and paved surfaces in order to assure a safe
operational environment for the flying
public
 Update the administration’s computer
systems to current standards
 Conduct regular T-hangar inspections and
conduct an annual review of all tenant files
to include implementation of a new hangar
rental agreement.
 All other goals listed under the airport’s
main budget unit also apply
State budget has not placed any hold on
State Division of Aeronautics annual funding
to airports; however, these funds will not
be used until there is the assurance of
receipt. These funds are used for normal
maintenance and repair of airport
pavement and lighting systems to include
the runway and taxiway lights, apron field
lighting, and the airport main beacon.
 The Special Aviation budget unit is provided
through an annual grant from the California
Aid to Airport Program. The same federal
requirements apply and therefore the same
Maintenance of Effort Statement used for
the airport’s main budget unit has been
repeated on the next page.
Maintain and update the Yuba-Sutter
Enterprise Zone website at
www.yubasutterez.com.
 Promote the available incentives and
benefits associated with the Enterprise
Zone.
 Encourage retail, office, commercial, and
industrial development within the
boundaries of the Yuba-Sutter Enterprise
Zone
 Participate in local business workshops,
meetings, and conferences to provide
information about the Zone benefits
 Continue to develop and improve the Yuba-
Sutter Enterprise Zone Hiring Tax Credit
Program and promote and encourage the
use of its services by Enterprise Zone
businesses
 Work in partnership with the economic
development coordinator to promote the
county and its benefits and incentives
 Process a minimum of 1,800 Tax Credit
Vouchers during the fiscal year in order to
meet the revenue projections to fund the
administration of the program
 Develop an online tax credit vouchering
system
 Coordinate the approval of a number of
Enterprise Zone actions between the state
of California and the Boards of Supervisors
of the Counties of Yuba and Sutter and the
City Councils of Marysville, Yuba City,
Wheatland, and Live Oak
For FY 2013-2014 this budget is supported
entirely through revenues from the State
Enterprise Zone Hiring Tax Credit Program. The
General Fund allocation was eliminated in FY
2011-2012 due to budget constraints. The
General Fund previously provided an additional
$24,665.
This budget has been prepared utilizing a 70/30
percent split for the Airport Manager’s salary
and benefit that covers the administration and
management requirements of the 6-jurisdiction
Yuba-Sutter Enterprise Zone. The
Administrative Technician position that has assisted with the Enterprise Zone program and
in particular the State Tax Hiring Credit has
been returned to a full time position with 50
percent allocated for this budget and the
additional 50 percent level in Fund 130, Airport
Enterprise Fund for assistance with airport
office requirements.
The Yuba-Sutter Enterprise Zone ended its 20-
year designation on October 14, 2006.
Legislation for a 5-year extension was never
approved and therefore a new application was
pursued and submitted during FY 2006-2007. A
new designation was successful and the Yuba-
Sutter Enterprise Zone received conditional
designation approval as of October 15, 2006, for
a new 15-year program. Yuba County was
named the Lead Agency by the partner
jurisdiction of the Counties of Yuba and Sutter
and the Cities of Marysville, Yuba City, and now
Live Oak and Wheatland, making the program a
6-jurisdiction enterprise zone program. A new
funding participation for the six jurisdictions has
been implemented through the State Tax Hiring
Credit Program, increasing the revenue to the
County for services to the partners as agreed in
the zone application.
It is always our goal and objective to assist in
providing a safe and comfortable work
environment for Yuba County employees,
helping them to provide service for the
residents of Yuba County. We plan to continue
to provide preventive maintenance for County
owned buildings and equipment as well as
providing building maintenance service and
support to all County Departments.
More specific goals for this year include:
 Repair damaged boiler-courthouse
 Demolish decommissioned boilercourthouse
 Install customer bench in front of new
Veterans facility
 Repair damaged fiberglass in Camp Singer
Gym
 Add IT office to emergency power,
government center
 Add additional security cameras to
government center exterior parking lot area
 Develop comprehensive tree maintenance
plan
 Replace sections of carpeting in Packard
facility
 Electrical upgrade at Packard facility
 Repaint sections of Packard facility
 Install new ceramic tile in employee break
area, Packard facility
 Replace carpeting, government center
 Replace Animal Care vinyl flooring
 Continue to focus on employee safety
 Continue successful asbestos and lead paint
management plans
 Continue to prioritize and manage work
order load to ensure safe facilities and
optimize customer satisfaction.
Custodial Services biggest challenge is to
continue to provide services with a reduced
staffing level. We are down four positions from
previous years, but support more office space
than ever before. It will continue to be the
objective of the custodial staff to provide the
best possible housekeeping services to the
county with the staffing levels we are given.
Our main objective is to keep all county
facilities looking new, presentable, sanitary and
safe, and to preserve our structures from wear
and tear the best we can.
We plan to complete our new security policy
and implementation of processes in support of
that policy, finish work on migrating our 70+
servers to the new active directory
environment, and retire the old domain
completely. Updated document management
software is planned, network equipment is
planned to be replaced, and about 500 PC
moves are expected to occur as we work to
stretch the life of the equipment we have.
Additionally we plan to support expanded
automation of human resources systems, and
continue to train staff through cross training, as
well as on new technologies we are being asked
to support. Narrow banding will be occurring
on our public safety radios, and we will support
the design and implementation of that effort.
Continue pursuing revenue sources that
would benefit the Department and the
County, while focusing on maintaining
expenditures at a minimum.
 Continue to incorporate the new statewide
permit system (Cal Ag Permits). This will
require working with the development
company, Department of Pesticide
Regulation, industry, growers, Yuba County
I.T. as well as other counties. Provide
training resources to staff as we continue
implementation of the Cal Ag Permits
program to encourage “on-line reporting”
with the regulated industry and growers.
 Work with Yuba Sutter Farm Bureau, Farm
Services Agency, and Resource
Conservation District on agricultural related
issues that have the potential to affect Yuba
County.
 Make all necessary adjustments to the
department workload to assure as many
Agricultural Phyto sanitary exports take
place, to help keep Yuba County exporters
competitive world wide.
 Create the mandatory Pesticide Work Plan
and submit it to the California Department
of Pesticide Regulations (CDPR) for
approval.
 Assure our Licensed Biologists maintain
through federal exam their qualifications as
a United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) ACO exporter accreditation.
 Update the Department safety program to
address current standards.
 Serve as necessary on the Yuba County
“Strike Team”, the West Nile Virus Task
Force and other groups intended to prepare
for and provide for the safety of the citizens
of Yuba County during countywide
emergencies.
 Continue working through CACASA to
negotiate increased funding through the
unclaimed gas tax distribution and the
Pesticide Mill Assessment as well as federal
funding for priority pest detection
programs.
 Administer the remaining Federal Forestry
Reserve Payment (HR 2389) Title III funds to
implement programs approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
 Continue working with area growers to
address agriculturally related water quality
issues and to represent Yuba County on the
Sacramento River Water Quality and the
Butte-Sutter-Yuba Sub-watershed
Coalitions.
 Serve as a resource to Board of Supervisors
and the Planning Department during the
updating of the County’s policies as per the
General Plan and participate in various
committees as requested by the Board or
County Administrator.
 Secure additional funding through the Yuba
Sutter WMA and private sources for Hydrilla
eradication project as well as compete for
statewide supplemental funding for same.
 Incorporate Yuba County/UPS delivery
center inspection program to include
trained canine inspection to detect illegal
plant shipments.
Continue to examine and adjust the
assessed values of properties currently
assessed under Proposition 8.
 Fairly and accurately assess all taxable
properties in the county.
 Produce a quality assessment roll at the
most economical cost.
 Provide information and access to the
public.
 Discover other efficiencies as we progress
throughout the upcoming year.
The current budget environment of the County
has changed the focus of the department to a
degree. For the fiscal year 2013-14 the
department will focus on measures that will
improve county operations at a minimal capital
outlay. The department is working to have the
standardized chart of accounts including
departmental revenues and expenditures ready
for implementation for 2014-15 budget
preparation. Additionally the department will
increase staff training opportunities to identify
areas for improvement on internal operations.
In conjunction with departmental staff training,
the department will create training
opportunities for fiscal managers in other
county departments to ensure consistency of
operations, common understanding of fiscal
matters, and standardization of policies and
procedures. The department will continue to
improve upon the accuracy and reliability of the
Cost Allocation plan to increase utility to the
county as a whole.
During FY 2013-14, the Bi-County Farm
Advisor’s office goal is to continue assisting
local clientele by developing and delivering
appropriate information to help them achieve
their goals and needs. This will be
accomplished through applied research and
educational activities. In addition, we intend to
foster continued growth of the UC CalFresh
Nutrition Education Program and further
develop the 4-H Science, Engineering and
Technology Program to address local critical
challenges facing our young people.
Despite the elimination of 33% of the county
clerical support for the department over the
last two years, the University of California is
demonstrating its commitment to local partners
and clientele in FY 2013-14. The County Director
of the Bi-County Farm Advisor Department was
successful in securing two new UC academic
positions that will address critical local
programmatic issues. An Area Agronomy
Advisor position to be housed in Colusa is
expected to be filled by July 1, 2013 and will
address field and vegetable crop issues in
Colusa, Sutter, and Yuba Counties. In addition,
an Area 4-H/Youth Development Advisor
position is expected to be released in February,
2014 and will address youth development
issues in Colusa, Sutter, and Yuba Counties.
Sutter County is the designated lead agency for
the Bi-County Farm Advisor Department, which
is located in Yuba City. Sutter County bills Yuba
County for its portion of the budget.Apportionment of costs, as agreed by the two
funding counties, is 63% from Sutter and 37%
from Yuba. This formula is based historically on
a comprehensive evaluation of the workloads
and an approximation of the time spent
delivering UCCE programs in the respective
counties.
As we look ahead to FY 2013-14, the
department will continue to focus on increasing
our performance numbers on the Federal
Performance Measures. In addition to the
Federal Performance Measures, YCDCSS will
also continue to concentrate on the State
Compliance Guidelines in order to maintain the
minimum compliance requirements.
Provide training for departments on agenda
and committee submittal requirements
 Assist in facilitating a Brown Act training for
Boards, Commissions, and Committees
 Provide training opportunities for staff
development and leadership as budget
allows
 Continue looking for ways to streamline
operations for costs and time savings
 Meet mandates as established by
Government Codes, ordinances, and Board
of Supervisors
Develop map retrieval process to provide
public and other county departments
access to all digitized map images.
 Develop an archival collection of images of
recorded maps for sale to the public.
 Refurbish, repair and preserve volumes of
recorded documents and indices with use
of trust funding as provided by law.
 Replace by re-filming/scanning older
inferior quality images in order to provide
clear reproducible document images for our
electronic record systems and to insure
quality archival images.
 Amend county’s documentary transfer tax
ordinance as recommended by the County
Recorder Association of California to reflect
the expanded definition of “realty sold” to
achieve equitable treatment of all changes
of ownership of real property.
 Potential purchase and implementation of
new system to provide a high level of
service and efficiency for the functions of
the recorder and county clerk.
Streamline election specific processes and
procedures.
Implement the updated service fees,
evaluate through the fiscal year and report
back to the Board of any needed changes in
preparation for FY 2014/15.
 Continue with implementation of the 2030
General Plan by updating of the County’s
Development Code and preparation of
Resource Efficiency Plan through outside
consultants due to deletion of the Planning
Director position.
 Complete an update to the Housing
Element (2013-2021 planning cycle)
through an outside consultant due to
deletion of the Planning Director position.
 Complete an update of the County’s impact
fee program based on the updated General
Plan and Development Code. Look for ways
to provide incentives through the fee
programs to further the County’s goals of
economic independence and improved
quality of life.
 Complete the construction of numerous
Public Works projects.
 Complete the Neighborhood Stabilization
Program.
Continue to administer and apply for grants
that assist the low-income residents of Yuba
County including:
 Apply for available grants through HUD,
HCD and CSD to continue and expand
existing programs
 Apply for additional housing vouchers
 Housing Element Task—Identify Affordable
Housing projects
Take part and assist with coordination of
Public Safety realignment legislation and
closely monitor impacts to counties.
 Take part and assist with coordination of
the Affordable Care Act and Covered
California programs and legislation and
closely monitor and advocate for counties.
 Support regional Public Safety initiatives
and continued cooperation between fire
and law enforcement services.
 Work to support construction of the new
Sheriff’s Department Operations Facility.
 Organizational Excellence
 Continue ongoing communications with
employees and department heads through
monthly department head meetings and
“brown bag” lunch meetings with all
employees.
 Work with internal service departments to
streamline operations and improve
effectiveness for all departments.
 Continue the ongoing effort of the County’s
Workforce Excellence Committee.
 Provide additional opportunitie
Working to complete a Master Tax Sharing
Agreement with the City of Wheatland.
 Provide support to complete the County’s
Zoning Ordinance update.
 Continue to support “public-public” and
“public-private” efforts with Beale Air Force
Base to assist them in maintaining and
enhancing their operations.
 Coordinate and assist the cities of
Marysville and Wheatland in their growth
management and general plans, particularly
sphere of influence adjustments through
the LAFCO process.
Continue to support local businesses
through networking opportunities such as
the County’s Perspectives event and the
Yuba County Economic Development
Advisory Committee.
 Work with commercial interests to
encourage economic opportunities for
business and residents.
Enhance and continue the working
relationship with the Yuba-Sutter Economic
Development Cooperation.
 Continue support for the County’s
enhanced web presence through media
avenues such as the E-Note, YouTube and
Facebook.
 Continue to work with the Yuba County
Water Agency leadership team on the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
relicensing project.
Evaluation of impacts associated with the
ongoing state budget crisis.
 Monitoring of workloads due to reduced
staff, management and financial resources.
 Development and implementation of
further County budget actions to reduce the
General Fund structural deficit.
Complete revision of the Countywide
Emergency Operations Plan to meet CPG
101 v.2 guidance and seek final approval by
the BOS.
 Work with municipalities to further
coordinate emergency management
planning.
 Work with EOC Management team
members to complete advanced EOC
training and work towards credentialing in
their assigned position per the NIMS
Training Plan.
 Work with stakeholders and consultant to
update the Multi-Jurisdictional Multi-
Hazard Mitigation Plan as required by PDM
2000.
 Update the Operational Area
Interoperability Communications Plan.
 As a member of the YSHMRT Administrative
Group, work with the Members to help
insure the team’s long term success.
 Hold countywide slow rise flood exercise.
 Form committee and identify new
emergency notification system to replace
WARN. WARN is not compatible with new
federal standards.
Improve and continue focused business
attraction, retention and expansion
programs and activities that increase
employment levels and sales tax revenues,
and decrease unemployment numbers
 Strengthen strategic partnerships with key
stakeholder organizations including the
Yuba-Sutter EDC, UpState California EDC,
SACTO, Small Business Development Center
(SBDC), Chamber of Commerce, 1-Stop
Centers, Yuba College, etc.
 Leverage committee activities and
workshops to maximize business feedback
to the Board of Supervisors, including the
Economic Development Advisory
Committee and the Yuba County Alliance
for Development (YuCAD)
 Coordinate Business Perspectives 2014
luncheon and promote the selection of the
business “Champion of Yuba County”
 Update and publish collateral material
including the 2014 Economic Profile and
tourism guides to encourage business
development and visitors
 Coordinate effective methods to “tell the
story,” including the creation of a 2014
“Champion of Yuba County” business video
documentary and highway billboard, and
create complementary advertising material
to promote Yuba County year-round
Utilize media relations, social media, and
direct contact to promote an understanding
of Yuba County’s strengths and relative
business advantages
 Provide the community and Board of
Supervisors with regular economic
development announcements and updates
including public presentations, the Yuba
County E-Note, Economic Profile, reports
and memos
 Take coursework as required to maintain
professional accreditation with the
International Economic Development
Council (IEDC’s CEcd certification)
 Maintain positive relationships and strong
partnerships with County departments,
businesses, developers, residents, and
community organizations
 Identify grants, partnerships and methods
to decrease marketing and program costs
and to increase efficiency
 Promote the business benefits and retain
the Yuba-Sutter Enterprise Zone
 Maintain and improve the economic
development website located at
www.chooseyuba.com
 Continue to report and present economic
development metrics that are measurable,
sustainable, and accountable
 Adhere to and actively promote the
County’s Strategic Plan
Every member of the County Counsel’s
Office will strive to continue providing
superior legal services to the Yuba County
Board of Supervisors, Commissions, County
Boards, County Departments and Special
Districts of Yuba County.
 The establishment of a Yuba Resolution
Book which will contain all adopted
Resolutions of Yuba County from 2013
forward.
 The ongoing maintenance and amendment
of the ordinance code in both a hard copy
format and in an electronic form.
 The establishment of an internship program
with area law schools thereby providing
public law office experience to law students
while receiving in turn the services of a
second or third year law students free of
charge.
 Partner with the District Attorney’s Office
to provide assistance to the District
Attorney and to allow County Counsel’s
attorneys to gain jury trial experience.
The Health and Human Services Department’s
strategic plan goals are aligned with the
Strategic Plan adopted in 2009 by the Yuba
County Board of Supervisors. In keeping with
the Board’s Strategic Plan, the Department’s
goals also fall into four key priority areas; public
health and safety, economic development,responsible growth and organizational
excellence. As noted in the section above, each
Division successfully accomplished a significant
number of established goals during the past
fiscal year. Major goals and objectives for FY
2013/2014 include: Increase participant enrollment in
employment and training activities which
will lead to self-sufficiency.
 Improve appraisal and assessment tools
used for evaluating participant’s aptitude,
skills and obstacles.
 Continue collaborating with community
partners to coordinate services provided to
mutual participants.
 Continue encouraging employee
participation in activities which promote
local economic development and
employment opportunities.
 Implement new regulatory requirements
mandating previously exempt clients to
engage in required employment and
training activities.
 Improve customer service by streamlining
procedures for processing new applications
by leveraging technology.
 Implement regulatory changes associated
with Semi-Annual Reporting.Complete the transition of Adoption
Services from the California Department of
Social Services (CDSS) to the county.
 Begin implementation of the Quality
Parenting Initiative.
Complete the Child and Family Service
Review (CFSR) and submit a new Systems
Improvement Plan.
 Begin implementation of the Katie A. Core
Practice Model. Major goals for next year include:
o Enroll citizens in all available health
care coverage
 Implement a “no wrong door”
approach
 Coordinate services
 Provide high quality customer
service
 Hire and train staff to keep up with the
increase in client contacts and applications.
 Train staff to offer horizontal integration
opportunities to families seeking health
care coverage who appear to be eligible for
CalFresh and/or other public assistance
programs.
 Implement changes in front reception
procedures to reduce lobby traffic.Implement Health Care Reform.
 Implement major changes in the CalWORKs
and CalFresh programs within the
timeframes set by the state and federal
government.
 Implement a Call Center phone system to
meet the requirements of Health Care
Reform.
 Continue to send staff to the outreach sites
within the community.
 Continue to partner with local hospital and
clinics in processing referrals for Medi-Cal.Partner with community groups and
farmers to establish CalFresh acceptance at
all Yuba County Farmer’s Markets.
 Initiate intensive data collection, including
community member surveys, to complete
Maternal Child and Adolescent Health fiveyear
needs assessment.
 Prepare the birth certificate processing
program at Vital Statistics for Rideout
Memorial Hospital opening its new
maternity ward which will transfer nearly all
Yuba and Sutter births from Sutter County
to Yuba County.
 Aggressively acquire the knowledge,
relationships, and lay the groundwork to
develop evidence- based programs that will
potentially be funded through the
Affordable Healthcare Act.
 Start the long, arduous process of Health
Department Accreditation since it is widely
expected that Accreditation status will be a
strong indicator of receiving Federal grant
funding in the future.In the past two years, there have been
significant funding changes to Health and
Human Services programs. Most notably, the
2011 Realignment realigned programs between
the state and counties, including public safety
programs, in addition to Child Welfare Services
(CWS), Foster Care, Aid to Adoptive Parents
(AAP), Adult Protective Services (APS), mental
health services, and substance abuse
treatment, and significantly changed the way
those programs are funded. Funding for the
CalWORKs program was also realigned from
1991 Mental Health Realignment resources and changed the county’s sharing ratio for
CalWORKs grants. In 2012, the legislature
enacted a trailer bill (Senate Bill 1020) which
included the ongoing funding structure for
realignment beginning in FY 2012/2013 and
beyond.
The final FY 2012/2013 budget included
significant reductions to many social services
programs, most notably CalWORKs, with major
policy changes to achieve budget savings in the
program; most significantly a 24-month time
welfare-to-work time limit determined
prospectively from January 1, 2013. Other
policy changes included annual reporting for
child-only cases; alignment of participation
hours with Federal requirements;
reinstatement of the Cal Learn program, which
supports teen parents to complete high school;
the option to redirect funding between mental
health and substance abuse services and the
Single Allocation; and, elimination of the
differentiation between core and non-core
activities. The Single Allocation was reduced by
$205.7 million in FY 2012/2013 as compared to
the previous fiscal year.
The FY 2012/2013 budget also included
programmatic changes which impacted child
welfare services (CWS) and the In-Home
Supportive Services (IHSS) programs. Most
notably in CWS, foster family agency and
Intensive Treatment Foster Care programs
received basic rate increases; the California
Child and Family Services Review Process was
changed from a three-year to a five-year
process and counties are required to report
progress on achieving improved outcomes
annually to the California Department of Social
Services; numerous changes were made to the
Assembly Bill (AB) 12 extended foster care
cases, including extending eligibility to age 21
effective January 1, 2014; and, changes were
made to to the Transitional Housing Placement-
Plus (THPP-Plus) and THP-Plus Foster Care
programs. In the IHSS program, the across-the-board 3.6
percent reduction was retained for one more
year; the Community First Choice Option was
implemented, which increases the federal
sharing ratio in IHSS by six percent, effective
December 1, 2011; funding for local fraudprevention
and intervention activities was
eliminated; a Coordinated Care Initiative (CCI),
to integrate care for individuals who are eligible
for both Medi-Cal and Medicare, was included
as a managed care benefit beginning March 1,
2013, for a small number of pilot counties, with
a phased-in expansion of CCI to other counties
over three years. A State Public Authority was
created as a public joint-powers authority to
assume collective bargaining for wages,
benefits, and other terms for employment for
the eight CCI demonstration counties. After a
transition phase, the State Public Authority will
become the collective bargaining agent for all
county IHSS programs. County IHSS programs
will continue to administer the IHSS program,
including intakes, assessments, provider
enrollment, quality assurance, and other
activities. A significant funding change in the FY
2012/2013 budget was the establishment of a
Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for IHSS
expenditures. The MOE is based on individual
county expenditures in the IHSS program for
IHSS services, county administration and Public
Authority administrative costs during FY
2011/2012.
The FY 2012/2013 budget enacted by the
Legislature also provided for the phase-in of the
Healthy Families program into Medi-Cal in four
phases beginning on January 1, 2013. Yuba
County is scheduled to begin the transfer of
1727 Healthy Families cases to Medi-Cal on
September 1, 2013. In the interim, the Health
and Human Services Department (HHSD) is
required to make Medi-Cal eligibility
determinations for any children currently living
in Yuba County who were discontinued from
Healthy Families by other counties after January
1, 2013.
Successful approval of the Governor’s ballot
initiative in November 2012 ensured the
generation of increased revenues through a mix
of taxes from personal income taxes on the
wealthiest taxpayers and increases in the state
sales tax. The Governor’s ballot initiative
included constitutional protection for the
revenue dedicated to 2011 Realignment in
addition to fiscal and mandate protections for
the counties.
For the first time in years, the Governor’s
Budget for FY 2013/2014, which was released in
January, projected a balanced budget absent
significant program cuts and was less bleak than
in many recent fiscal years. It also included
various proposals to create a $1 billion reserve.
For the most part, the FY 2013/2014 Budget
maintained status quo in most health and
human services programs without significant
changes and/or budget reductions. Specifically,
after years of disinvestment, this budget did not
propose any reductions or programmatic
changes to the CalWORKs program and overall
funding for the Single Allocation was expected
to increase by $130 to $140 million in FY
2013/2014. An additional $138.5 million is
included for Employment Services to fund the
costs associated with the programmatic
changes to the CalWORKs program enacted last
year by Senate Bill 1041. Realignment
revenues—both in base and growth—were
estimated to be stronger in FY 2013/2014.
Based on these positive revenue projections,
HHSD anticipates having sufficient funding for
the upcoming fiscal year for its realigned
programs; specifically, child welfare services,
which has faced funding shortages and fiscal
uncertainties in past budget years.
The Governor’s FY 2013/2014 Budget made few
changes to public health programs and/or
funding. 1991 Realignment funds, in addition to
federal and state grants, support many of the
public health programs and services that are
delivered locally by HHSD’s public health division. These programs address public health
issues, such as communicable disease control,
smoking cessation programs, childhood
exposure to lead, and family planning services.
However, as noted below, the May Revision
included withholding realignment funding from
counties based on projected “savings” in
indigent health spending. Counties are
concerned that any changes to 1991
Realignment have the potential of jeopardizing
funding for public health programs and hamper
the ability to deliver required services to local
communities.
Governor Brown released the May Revision to
his proposed FY 2013/2014 Budget on May 14,
2013, which overall reflects continuing recovery
of the California economy, although changes at
the Federal level since January slowed earlier
projections of state economic growth. In the
May Revision, General Fund revenues are
projected to be $2.8 billion higher in the current
fiscal year (2012/2013) than January estimates,
but lower in the budget year (2013/2014). A
$1.1 billion reserve is still maintained.
Currently, counties receive about $1.5 billion
annually in the 1991 Health Realignment
Account, which is used for indigent health care
and public health services. The Administration
proposes using federal funding available
through the Affordable Care Act to expand
Medi-Cal eligibility for childless (medically
indigent) adults and redirect Health
Realignment revenues from the counties to the
state by withholding $300 million in FY
2013/2014 to recover the savings they believe
will result from the transfer. The amounts to be
withheld are proposed to increase over a
number of years; $900 million in 2014/2015;
and, $1.3 billion in 2015/2016. The California
State Association of Counties is “gravely
concerned” about the proposal and has
expressed a desire to find a more phased-in
approach. Another problematic element of the
proposal for counties continues to be that after
the first year the state would capture the
projected county savings through additional
social services realignment. The Administration
proposes that over time counties would assume
greater fiscal responsibility for CalWORKs,
CalWORKs-related child care, and CalFresh
Administration.
Overall, other than the changes mentioned
above, the proposals in the May Revision
continue to maintain the status quo for most
social services programs. There were some
adjustments to earlier caseload projections and
anticipated revenues but nothing that will alter
the ability of counties to administer mandated
programs and/or provide services. The good
news was that all of the automation projects
are adequately funded. Proposed funding for
the SAWS systems includes resources for the
SAWS/CalHEERS interface, development of the
customer service networks and other system
specific improvements.
Of note, the May Revise implements the IHSS
Settlement Agreement which will replace the
3.6 percent across-the-board reduction with an
eight percent across-the-board reduction in
services effective July 1, 2013. The
Administration had originally proposed a 20
percent across-the-board reduction which was
legally challenged to arrive at the settlement
agreement. The budget also proposes an
increase in state General Fund of $47.5 million
for non-federal expenditures in IHSS services
and administration that exceed the counties’
MOE contributions. The May Revise also made a
number of adjustments to the Coordinated Care
Initiative and delayed the start date to no later
than January 1, 2014, for all of the eight
demonstration counties.
Currently, the most far-reaching organizational
and procedural issues facing local health and
human services departments are related to
implementation of the Affordable Care Act
(ACA). The ACA, signed into law by President Obama on March 10, 2010, brings a new era of
health care to our nation, intended to provide
quality and affordable health care for all citizens
and most legal immigrants. To facilitate the
implementation of the ACA, also known as
Health Care Reform (HCR), county human
services agencies are required to serve a larger
segment of California’s population in an
expeditious and coordinated manner. Counties
must be ready to serve new and existing clients
under the new requirements by October 1,
2013. HHSD is in the process of preparing for
ACA implementation by adding staff to operate
a Customer Service Call Center to respond to
higher caseloads, increased public contact and
demands from new business requirements.
Health Care Reform brings dramatic changes to
the way counties conduct business, both in the
culture and delivery of services. Currently,
HHSD’s eligibility technicians (ETs) are
responsible for determining whether clients are
eligible for Medi-Cal and approving or denying
their applications. Under ACA’s requirements
of “no wrong door”, and because nearly
everyone will be entitled to health care
coverage, ETs will be required to assist clients to
find the right type of health care coverage and
offer them other services, such as CalFresh, if
they are apparently eligible. All this activity will
increase customer contact and result in
significantly higher caseloads. Requests for
general information are expected to increase
and, along with more applications, there will be
greater movement between public assistance
programs and low-income private health
insurance programs as families’ circumstances
change.
The ACA requires all individuals to obtain health
insurance. Covered California was established
as California’s health care exchange to help
consumers compare and enroll in insurance
plans beginning October 1, 2013, with an
effective coverage date of January 1, 2013.
Covered California is responsible for a number
of policy issues, including the structure for
establishing Customer Service Centers to
receive enrollment calls related to health care
coverage. In coordination with counties, the
exchange is expected to help consumers
determine whether they qualify for Medi-Cal or
a federally subsidized private insurance plan
and assist them with their choices. While roles
are still being developed, Covered California will
act as a clearing house and transfer consumers
who are not eligible for tax-credit-subsidized
and unsubsidized insurance coverage to local
county human service departments for
processing. Statewide, an estimated two
million additional individuals are expected to be
newly eligible for Medi-Cal and another two
million for subsidized private health insurance.
Yuba County anticipates a proportionate share
of the caseload increases.
A special session of the California Legislature
was convened in early February 2013 to address
the operational and programmatic aspects of
fully implementing Health Care Reform in
California and to codify the processes necessary
to ensure the State and counties fully comply
with the ACA. Concurrently, to meet short
ACA’s timelines, California counties have been
working closely with the County Welfare
Directors’ Association (CWDA) to proactively
prepare for ACA implementation. Yuba County
also requested the C-IV Consortium, its state
automated eligibility system provider, for
assistance with establishing a Customer Service
Center to meet ACA requirements and interface
with Covered California’s automated California
Healthcare Eligibility, Enrollment and Retention
System (CalHEERS), currently under
development and expected to become
operational on October 1, 2013. To meet ACA
and Covered California requirements, the
county will operate with extended hours and
staff will be available from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday during the open
enrollment period which extends from October
1, 2013, through March 31, 2014, and 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. during non-enrollment
periods.
With a short time to plan, build infrastructure,
develop policies and procedures, hire and train
staff, initiate a department-wide cultural
change, create a Customer Services Call Center
and be fully ready to implement the
requirements of the ACA on January 1, 2014,
HHSD has a lot of work to do in a very short
time. In addition to implementing federal
health care reform, the department is working
on a number of other significant initiatives and
projects, including: assuming responsibility for
adoptions from CDSS on July 1, 2013; completing a self-improvement plan in Child
Welfare Services; utilizing CMIPS II full
functionality after going-live on April 30, 2013;
developing processes to comply with the Katie
A. Lawsuit in Child Welfare Services; and,
preparing for Public Health Accreditation. Fiscal
Year 2013/2014 is shaping up to be one of the
most challenging times the department has
ever experienced. Success in accomplishing all
our goals will depend on steady leadership,
coordinated teamwork, reliable funding, an
ability to hire and retain dedicated employees,
assistance and support from other county
departments and the Board of Supervisors, and,
last but not least, a tremendous amount of hard
work.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
was signed into law in March of 2010 and goes
into effect on January 1, 2014. As with pension
reform, we have been reading and researching
what effects this new law will have on Yuba
County
All current contracts are scheduled to expire on
6-30-14. We have 10 bargaining units in Yuba
County and we will be in full open negotiations
with all of them in the fall of 2013.
Performance: We have created on on-line
performance evaluation form that is fill-able
with drop down menus to assist supervisors in
timely, thorough, and appropriate employee
performance evaluations. We will continue to
work with all other departments to develop
coaching plans and materials to help our
workforce attain excellent performance and
customer service.
Training: We continue training in Supervisory
Development, Harassment Prevention, Ethics,
HIPAA, Heat Illness Prevention, other Safety
training and performance evaluation writing.
We have assisted with the development of the
first Employee Development Academy which
reaches out to the entire workforce. This
Academy allows Yuba County employees to
take control of their own career paths.
Medical/Dental/Vision: The Health Care
Committee will reconvene if and when it is
necessary to look at benefits again. The County
and YCEA agreed through the Master Labor
Agreement to continue to meet regarding this
issue. With the implementation of Health Care
Reform, this Committee will take a lead role in
understanding the impacts of the legislation on
the County.
Retirement benefits: We will continue to
investigate the most cost-effective benefits
available for County retirees.
Safety: We will continue to identify, evaluate
and update safety policies and programs across
the County. HROS has been and will continue
to be pro-active in identifying safety needs
throughout the County.
Even in oppressive financial climates, it is
important for the County to ensure that all
employees know how important they are to the
organization. It is this Department’s goal to
keep the right people into the right jobs for the
right amount of compensation. Employees
need to be given the training and tools they
need to succeed and the opportunity to grow
with and within the organization.
We will continue to evaluate and improve both
the Annual Employee Recognition ceremonies
and the Employee Appreciation BBQ.
Expand services at the Day Reporting
Center to address more criminogenic needs
of our offenders to include mental health
services.
 Obtain data collection software and hire
specialized personnel to gather empirical
data required to measure success rates,
outcomes, and to aid in the decision making
process. Future State funding will depend
on data collected and processed.
 Create and implement Case Plans for adult
probationers.
Maintain extremely high quality of Court
reports generated by the Adult Court unit.
Continue to have an experienced probation
officer present in Court for all major
sentencing and providing added assistance
to the Court as needed.
 Educate the Court on the advantages of
utilizing the programs at the Day Reporting
Center.
 Implement what was learned in
Motivational Interviewing Training to
improve the quality of offender interviews
at the pre-sentence level.
Continue to intensely supervise the
Proposition 36 clients to better provide
them with guidance and referrals to
programs that will assist with their success.
 Implement motivational interviewing
techniques in our meetings with the
Proposition 36 clients to successfully
motivate them to follow through with
positive choices with their lifestyle.
 Seek funding for residential treatment and
clean and sober living programs.
 Seek funding so that the Proposition 36
team attends the 2013 National Association
of Drug Court Professional training
conference.
 Continue weekly meetings with Yuba
County Probation Department drug
counselors and the Yuba County
Proposition 36 team.
Continue to secure extra funding from
Comprehensive Drug Court Implementation
grant funding for the existing Adult Drug
Court program.
 Expand the Friends of Drug Court program
through acquisition of greater resources so
to better assist Drug Court clients.
 Our goal is to continue to work closely with
drug court clients and provide services and
motivation to focus on their continued
recovery.
 The Drug Court team would like to see a
Dependency Court developed to serve
participants in the Drug Court program with
children that could be involved with Child
Protective Services.
Implement updates in AB12/AB212-
Extended Foster Care.
 Implement updates in Child Welfare
Systems/Case Management System.
 Continue to ensure all minors are enrolled
in a seat time program at school.
 Implement updates of Title 4E program
offered by Justice Benefits.
 Implement Functional Family Therapy.
 Enhance our collaboration with Health and
Human Services and Mental Health to
ensure the youth of this community are
receiving the appropriate services.
Continue to improve the evidence based
model of programming for minors.
 Place renewed emphasis on motivational
interviewing techniques with staff.
 Implement the Positive Behavioral
Interventions and Supports program (PBIS)
in the Juvenile Hall School.
 Further implement policy and procedures to
address the Prison Rape Elimination Ace
(PREA) standards.
 Institute state revisions of Title 15 and 24 of
the California Code of Regulations.
 Seek funding sources and develop a fiscal
plan to move forward with modernization
projects to bring the Juvenile Hall into
compliance with Titles 15, 19 and 24 of the
California Code of regulations.
Continue to improve the evidence based
model of programming for minors.
 Place renewed emphasis on motivational
interviewing techniques with staff.
 Implement the Positive Behavioral
Interventions and Supports program (PBIS)
in the Juvenile Hall School.
 Further implement policy and procedures to
address the Prison Rape Elimination Ace
(PREA) standards.
 Institute state revisions of Title 15 and 24 of
the California Code of Regulations.
 Seek funding sources and develop a fiscal
plan to move forward with modernization
projects to bring the Juvenile Hall into
compliance with Titles 15, 19 and 24 of the
California Code of regulations.
Continue to Improve the ADA compliance of
the Dan Avenue property in which the
Victim and Program Services unit is housed,
specifically, identify funding to bring into
compliance the entry doors and bathrooms.
 Continue to explore grant funding
opportunities to help with program
expansion and possible general fund
savings.
 Conduct quarterly briefings with all local
law enforcement to further ensure victims’
rights and identify gaps/problems
surrounding Victimization in Yuba County.
 Provide 24 community presentations
throughout Yuba County addressing cultural
issues unique to Yuba County and services
offered at Victim Services.
 Continue the development of a three year
strategic plan for the Victim and Program
Services Unit with a focus on sustainable
funding through grants and a minimum of
45% general fund dollars over the next
three fiscal years.
 Update the Victim Services webpage and
add resources for victims to access online.
 Begin application and feasibility study for
the establishment of a Child Advocacy
Center in Yuba County to have a “one stop
shop” for all child advocacy and treatment
needs.
This legislative mandated program for adult
offenders is not historically offered through
county probation departments, or by staff
working concurrently in a victim witness sitting.
However, as domestic violence perpetrators are
among the highest recidivists, offering this
program affords the Probation Department to
provide education that can be an agent of
change, and supervision of the perpetrator in a
controlled group setting. Services to victims of
domestic violence, and children witnessing the
violence are served by the Victim Witness
Program.
Program Goals:
 To continue to develop a curriculum that is
Evidence Base that serves the needs of the
perpetrator in breaking the cycle of
violence.
 To protect the victim from further harm
 To identify child witnesses of domestic
violence and provide early intervention
 Identify additional probation staff to be
trained to become 52 Week Batterer’s
Program facilitators. This will help alleviate
stress placed on the program due to high
client demand.
Continue working with Multi-Disciplinary
Team for community efforts and resources
 Attend fall training to meet PA/PG/PC
requirements
 Explore new funding options through
federal/state/local resources
 Secure ongoing funding through
federal/state/local resources
 Continue efforts to enhance data reporting
procedures
 Utilize affordable training options to further
enhance staff skill level
 Maintain strong partnerships with
community organizations
 Increase number of face-to-face encounters
with conservatees
 Increase number of care conferences for
conservatees
 Work to eliminate barriers to lower level
care for conservatees
 Explore more extensive methods of
efficiency for the department
 Adhere to the County’s Strategic Plan
 Continue the safe, humane, secure and
efficient operation of the county jail.
 Continue to maximize revenues through the
rental of excess bed space.
 Prepare Prisoners, mentally and physically for
successful reintegration into the community.
 Zero Escapes and in-custody deaths.
 Continue reporting of all foreign-born county
prisoners to ICE for criminal alien screening
and deportation.
 Maintain Facility and various systems to
insure reliability, security and efficiency.
 Continue high standard of training for the
division via roll call training, monthly training
and off site training. Consider individual
officer’s training recommendation when
developing training plans.
 Assess facility systems such as graphic panels,
heating and air conditioning and camera
system and consider development of a longrange
plan that addresses system upgrades.
 Continue the development of the Correctional
Reserve program through recruiting hiring
and training.
 Assess the jail division computer inventory
and develop a plan to replace computers that
are outdated and underpowered.
 Develop a space plan for the office space in
the courthouse that will be vacated by the
pending sheriff’s office move.
 Complete the development of a
television/video system that allows the jail to
play instructional videos for the inmates.
 Assess the vehicle fleet of the transportation
unit and, if necessary, develop a plan for
transitioning to the replacement vehicles.
 Attempt to find an alternative to the metal
feeding trays currently used in the jail.
Portions of the metal trays have been used to
produce sharp edged weapons.
Yuba County continues to face economic
struggles, like most counties in California. It will
be imperative for the department to continue
development of its alternative sentencing and
rehabilitative programs to relieve jail
overcrowding. Revenue from the ICE contract
will continue to play a vital role in the
department’s fiscal well-being.
Additionally, the County Health Officer will be
retiring in June 2013, and there will be a need
to contract with a general practice physician to
handle the medical needs of the inmates.
The civil unit will strive to maintain excellent
service to the public while minimizing the
turnaround service time for civil actions.
Host the third annual SWAT Challenge
 Host our second annual Northern California
Canine Competition.
 Conduct Active Shooter training with other
local law enforcement agencies.
 Implement a tactical dispatcher program.
 Develop new strategies for the use of crime
analysis.
 Continue to work on plans for the new
Sheriff’s Department facility.
 Continue to work on strategies to enhance
our radio communication system.
 Work in partnership with local fire
departments and the District Attorney’s
Office to train new arson investigators.
Make in-house training POST compliant
wherever possible.
 Ensure in-house and CA POST training for all
peace officers is up-to-date.
 Continue to develop and improve the crime
analysis unit to provide even more timely
and pertinent information on crime trends
and patterns.
 Upgrade all Department computer related
equipment for the move from Windows XP
to Windows 7.
 Detailed examination of the new Patrol
Dodge Chargers performance with input
from the Patrol Deputies as we continue to
replace aging Crown Victoria’s during the
year.
 Expand SWAP and AOWP programs to
encompass additional public agency and
non-profit participation so that additional
court ordered work hours and inmates can
be involved in the program.
 Continue training ACS staff on animal
disaster rescue procedures.
 Continue expansion of animal adoption
program at Animal Shelter.
 Continue to hold periodic rabies clinics in
various areas of the County.
 Continue training program for two
additional Forensic Recovery Evidence
Device (FRED) deputies as well as providing
training for cell phone evidence recovery.
 Select and train an additional radio
programming deputy.
 Continue planning for the new Sheriff’s
Office facility.
 For the Crime Analysis Unit to continue
working closely with the Administration and
Operations Staff to develop as much
information and statistical data as possible
which will help identify the criminal
element and possible methods of
operation.
Updating and rewriting policies and
procedures for general office procedures,
along with financial and property tax
systems due to recent and or upcoming
upgrades.
 Investigate the opportunity to implement epayments
and or credit card and or debit
card services for all County departments in
light of the new law authorizing
convenience fees to be paid by user.
 Issue and reinvest up to $9,000,000 for
Wheatland Union High School District
General Obligation debt following the
passage of Measure U.
 Assist in the transition of Yuba
Environmental Science Charter Academy
(YES) from Marysville Joint Unified School
District to Yuba County Office of Education.
 Conduct Tax Defaulted Property Tax
auction.
 Issue and reinvest multiple TRANs for the
County, Yuba Community College District,
Marysville Joint Unified School District, and
Wheatland Union High School District.
 Continue to utilize new methodologies like
ACH transfers to reduce banking expenses.
 Continue to expand the MySchoolBucks
program to help ease the constituents and
school districts for Marysville Joint Unified
and Wheatland Union High School Districts.
 Continue to monitor, safe keep, and invest
the total Treasury for all participants in an
amount of approximately $400,000,000.00.
 Update and make the Treasurer & Tax
Collector’s website more effective for
communicating important information
about this office and the County.
