The Proposed FY 2016-2017 Budget recommends a balanced $2.8 billion spending plan for
County programs and services, including an increase of $117.9 million for the General Fund, and
supports a workforce of over 9,600 employees. The Proposed Budget closes a $72.2 million
funding gap through a deliberate and public process, and reflects the invaluable input provided
by your Board, agency and department heads, the Budget Workgroup and other County
stakeholders.
Alameda County’s financial status has benefitted from the robust growth in the national and
local economies. The County’s March 2016 unemployment rate of 4.3% is less than half of
what it was in early 2012. Most major industries have added jobs over the past year including
private education, health services, as well as the trade, transportation and utility-related
industries.
While there is some slight evidence of wage growth for working-class individuals, income
growth for most people beyond the very wealthy, has remained flat or declined for decades.
Recognizing that economic development relies on wage growth, policy makers have begun to
address income stagnation through modest increases to the minimum wage, changes in overtime
rules and extending an earned income tax credit for wage earners in California.
The rise in real estate values led to a 7.1% increase in the FY 2015-2016 assessment roll,
resulting in much-needed general purpose revenues for the County. However, higher home
values and rents reduce the stock of affordable housing, placing additional strain on those who
are paying a larger share of their lower incomes for housing costs.
The County continues its efforts to document those most affected by economic disparities and
cumulative State budget reductions. These “human impacts” are again included in a special
section of the Proposed Budget.
COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR

STATE BUDGET
As stated by the Legislative Analyst’s Office, the State of California’s budget is better prepared
for an economic downturn than it has been at any time in decades. The May Revision of
Governor Brown’s FY 2016-2017 budget proposes total discretionary reserves of $8.5 billion
and $6.7 billion in the “Rainy Day” fund. These reserves together represent the equivalent of 45
days of working capital.
However, caution is warranted based on a recent Moody’s fiscal “stress-test,” that rated
California the least prepared of the four most populous states to weather a potential recession in
the next two years. The financial ratings firm noted California has much higher revenue
volatility, less financial flexibility and lower reserve levels than does Texas, New York or
Florida. Further, the seventh year of recovery has begun to show some signs of economic
weakness, which may cause those same General Fund revenues to experience slow or even
negative growth in the next three to five-year period. State General Fund revenues particularly
personal income tax collections are now projected to be $1.9 billion less than the Governor had
estimated in January. It is important to recognize that personal income taxes comprise 70.2% of
the three largest revenue sources to the State’s General Fund.
Given the Governor’s commitment to budgetary prudence and restraint, very few proposals for
new spending are found in the FY 2016-2017 budget submitted in January or in his May
Revision. However, there are a few proposed appropriation increases and several examples of
repurposing existing revenues for new statewide policy priorities, including:
? An additional $169 million for Medi-Cal administration costs associated with
implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA);
? Lump sum payments to counties of $177 million for truing up health care realignment
revenue after implementation of the ACA as directed by Assembly Bill 85;
? The first cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) in a decade for SSI/SSP recipients;
? A State Senate proposal to issue bonds for affordable housing using a portion of future
Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) revenues;
? $100 million of carbon “cap and trade” revenues for local climate action proposals; and
? Increased funding of $55 million for the Continuum of Care reform efforts.
COUNTY BUDGET OVERVIEW
The FY 2016-2017 Proposed Budget for all funds totals $2.83 billion, an increase of $88.8
million or 3.24% from the FY 2015-2016 Final Budget. The General Fund, which supports most
County operations, totals almost $2.55 billion, an increase of $117.9 million, or 4.86%.

The Proposed Budget includes funding to provide mandated and essential services, meet debt
service obligations, maintain a status quo level of infrastructure and capital funding, and adhere
to the Board’s financial management policies. Funding is recommended to support a workforce
of over 9,634 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions and reflects a net increase of only 34 FTE, all
of which were approved by your Board mid-year and are fully offset with new revenue.
The Proposed Budget funds cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) for most of our employees
based on negotiated labor agreements, and for many of our community-based organizations
(CBOs). The Proposed Budget includes $500.8 million for services provided by 243 CBOs, an
increase of $24.0 million from FY 2015-2016. This includes $80.1 million for services provided
by the Alameda Health System (AHS). Other CBOs funded in the Proposed Budget include
non-profit service providers, cities, school districts, and local hospitals. A list of all CBO
contracts with funding recommendations is included in the Appendix of the Proposed Budget
document.
Measure A, the voter-approved half-cent sales tax for essential health care services, which was
reauthorized through 2034 by over 75% of voters on June 3, 2014 as Measure AA, continues to
provide over $125 million a year in crucial funding for health services. AHS receives 75% of
the revenue directly and the remaining 25% is allocated by the Board of Supervisors to support
other essential health services. The Proposed Budget includes only $31.5 million in Measure A
funds for non-AHS essential health services as per the three-year Measure A spending plan
adopted by your Board in December 2015. While this represents an increase of approximately
$2.0 million, or 7.0%, compared to the FY 2015-2016 Final Budget, it is $2.5 million less than
the current year projected receipts of $34.0 million.
Consistent with your Board’s financial management policies, the Proposed Budget recommends
designating $6.3 million—the equivalent of 1% of discretionary revenue—for both capital
projects and the general reserve. Contingencies for pending labor negotiations, benefit cost
increases, and other contractual obligations are also included in the Proposed Budget.

CLOSING THE GAP
The Proposed Budget closes a funding gap of approximately $72.2 million that was projected
based on the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) funding requirement. The funding gap was
determined by identifying the difference between the cost of maintaining existing programs and
projected revenues. The MOE Budget for the General Fund was just over $2.55 billion, an
increase of $123.4 million or 5.1%. Available revenues to finance the projected MOE costs
totaled about $2.48 billion, an increase of just $50.4 million, or 2.1%.
Your Board’s Values-Based Budgeting (VBB) priorities and Strategic Vision initiatives were
considered in developing balancing strategies within each program area. The table below
summarizes the total proposed net cost reductions by program area:
PROPOSED BUDGET BALANCING

Proposed solutions to close the $72.2 million funding gap included a combination of spending
reductions, revenue increases, and one-time strategies. The $12.0 million in countywide
strategies includes updated projections of property, sales, and aircraft taxes; one-time property
tax penalties; and a reduction in risk management charges to departments.
The Proposed Budget recommends the use of $30.8 million or 43% in ongoing strategies and
$41.4 million or 57% in one-time strategies, with most of the one-time savings coming from the
Fiscal Management Reward Program (FMR). The FMR net savings have been generated
through the efforts of County agencies/departments to operate their programs well within budget,
mitigate future funding cuts and maintain the continuity of services. FMR is considered a onetime
funding source as these savings may not be available to assist with balancing budgets in
future years. A structural imbalance between ongoing revenues and expenditures remains,
largely due to the State’s ongoing shift of property taxes from local governments.
Honorable Board of Supervisors -5- June 9, 2016

PROGRAM AREA NET COST REDUCTIONS AND FUNDING CONCERNS
General Government – The General Government program area contributed net cost savings of
$16.9 million through $0.2 million in spending reductions, $0.8 million in increased revenue,
and $15.9 million in FMR savings.
In July 2014, your Board’s policy to allocate $90.0 million of former redevelopment agency
(RDA) tax increment funds over five years to fund “Tier 1” capital projects in the unincorporated
areas was amended to align expenditures with slower-than-anticipated receipt of former RDA
property tax revenues. However, the completion of “Tier 1” projects could be further delayed if
tax receipts do not keep pace with project plans, project cost increases and timelines.
Additionally, there will be $5.0 million less available per year for “Tier 1” capital projects based
on your Board’s December 2015 decision to allocate the first $5.0 - $7.5 million of property tax
revenues based on prior year receipts, toward affordable housing programs starting in FY 2016-
2017.
Housing has emerged as a key area of concern for County residents. Reductions in federal
housing funding such as the HOME Investment Partnerships Program and the Community
Development Block Grant result in less funding available for the County to meet community
needs and to cover the administrative costs of compliance monitoring. Your Board has continued
to respond to these challenges by investing over $100 million annually in housing programs
across various agencies and departments. In addition, your Board has also committed the
aforementioned $5.0 - $7.5 million per year of limited discretionary funding towards affordable
housing programs across the County.
Another significant funding concern is the State Board of Equalization’s decision to lower the
excise tax rate for gasoline for the third year in a row. Effective July 1, 2016, the excise tax rate
will be $0.022 lower, following reductions of $0.06 and $0.035 in FY 2014-2015 and FY 2015-
2016, respectively. Lower excise tax revenues may jeopardize the Public Works Agency’s

ability to complete a variety of traffic and pedestrian safety projects in the unincorporated areas.
The Public Works Agency estimates that reduced excise taxes may result in a $6.0 - $10.0
million loss of critical transportation infrastructure funding.
Health Care – The Health Care Services Agency contributed net cost savings of $17.6 million
through $0.7 million in appropriation reductions, $4.8 million in increased revenue, and $12.2
million in FMR savings. The spending reductions included savings of $0.3 million from the
elimination of 1.92 vacant, funded positions and a $0.5 million reduction in medical expenses
and discretionary services all in the Public Health department. Revenue increases include the
use of $1.7 million in one-time Tobacco Master Settlement funds, $0.5 million in Medi-Cal
revenue, $1.0 million from growth in 1991 realignment, $0.1 million in Household Hazardous
Waste revenue, and the allocation of an additional $1.5 million in Mental Health Services Act
(MHSA) funding.
The County continues to have concerns about Medi-Cal reimbursement rates not covering the
cost of care for our safety net health providers. This adversely affects the entire health care
network and constrains the ability of providers to invest in their systems. The Public Health
department continues to experience a decline in federal funding for Nutrition and the Women,
Infants and Children (WIC) programs. County general funds of $1.2 million have been included
in the Proposed Budget to maintain these programs at the current service levels.
In Behavioral Health, the potential diversion of future MHSA funds to finance a statewide
housing bond may impact funding available to support services to the severely mentally ill.
While statewide associations are pushing for counties to remain whole (i.e. receive a
proportional share of bond proceeds to the MHSA revenue they may lose), this is not guaranteed.
In Environmental Health, a statewide shortage of qualified inspectors has slowed hiring,
resulting in lower fee revenue collections.
Public Assistance – The Public Assistance program area achieved net cost savings of $7.3
million through revenue increases including a $4.0 million adjustment from the CalWORKs
Single Allocation redistribution, $1.2 million in CalFresh Match Waiver close-out, and $2.1
million from prior years’ close-out of multiple social service programs.
Given that the Medi-Cal caseload in Alameda County has increased nearly 90% since January
2014, additional Medi-Cal administrative funding is needed to meet increased workloads and
maintain case management standards. In addition to the underfunding of Medi-Cal, federal and
State base funding for older adults programming has remained relatively flat in the past decade
despite the rapid growth in the senior population.
Though the May Revision includes the first cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) to the State
Supplementary Payment (SSP) in a decade, the COLA falls substantially short of reversing the
impact of deep cuts to SSI/SSP made to help close budget shortfalls during the Great Recession.
These cuts have compromised the ability of low-income California seniors and people with
disabilities to afford basic needs such as housing and food, and are exacerbated by ineligibility
for food programs.

Public Protection – The Public Protection program area achieved net cost savings of $18.4
million through $3.2 million in appropriation reductions, $14.6 million in revenue increases, and
$0.6 million of FMR savings. Appropriation reductions include decreased discretionary
operating expenses in the Sheriff’s Office of $2.7 million and $0.6 million in indigent defense
contract costs. Public Protection revenue adjustments totaled $14.6 million including increases in
the Sheriff’s negotiated contracts and Utility User’s Tax receipts ($5.5 million overall); District
Attorney’s revenue from fines and forfeitures ($3.0 million); additional juvenile justice funding
for Probation programs ($3.4 million); and the Public Defender’s case management revenue
($0.2 million).
FMR savings contributed by the Public Defender and Probation department further reduced the
net cost of this program area.
If Governor Brown’s Public Safety and Rehabilitation Act of 2016 appears on the November
2016 ballot and is enacted by voters, State inmates convicted of non-violent felony offenses who
have completed the full sentence of their primary offense will be eligible for parole. Parolees
would then be released to Post Release Community Supervision (PRCS), which would be
administered by the counties. Although the goal is to reduce the prison population and spending
at the State level, it is unknown if additional funding will be made available for counties to
support this new Probation population.
While the State formula for the distribution of AB 109 Public Safety Realignment funding has
been established, it is still unknown whether the County’s FY 2016-2017 base allocation will be
sufficient to fund the cost of Public Safety program responsibilities realigned by the State.
Furthermore, the allocation of future growth will be dependent on the development of statewide
performance metrics.
Trial Court Funding revenue continues to decline due to the State’s revised methodology that
reallocates fines and forfeiture revenues to other jurisdictions. This revenue reduction results in
a significant increase in County General Fund support to meet our mandated Trial Court Funding
commitments. The County may also incur increased security-related costs for the new East
County Courthouse in Dublin unless additional funding is guaranteed from the State.
FISCAL MANAGEMENT REWARD (FMR) SAVINGS
Your Board’s FMR Program allows General Fund departments to carry over net savings each
fiscal year to be used in subsequent years for budget balancing, one-time expenditures and/or
program enhancements. Through ongoing cost-saving and revenue generation efforts, County
agencies/departments contributed $28.7 million in prior-year FMR savings to help balance the
FY 2016-2017 budget.

Ongoing efforts by agencies and departments to reduce spending and conserve resources have
enabled the County to mitigate major program reductions and maintain vital services. However,
departments must continue to balance these efforts with the need to fund increased costs and
meet the growing demand for essential services in all program areas.
UNFUNDED OBLIGATIONS
While your Board has adhered to your long-standing financial management policies, which
include strategies and guidelines to build and maintain prudent reserves, the County has
unfunded obligations that must be considered. At the close of FY 2014-2015, the County
estimated its long-term unfunded obligations were approximately $2.79 billion or about $100.1
million more than the close of the prior year. Pension costs for current and future retirees
account for $1.4 billion of the total unfunded liabilities. In addition, to date the County has
issued debt of $607.0 million related to construction of the Acute Care Tower Replacement
project for the Alameda Health System (AHS) and has remaining pension obligation bond debt
of approximately $300.0 million. Other outstanding debt includes the County’s shared
ownership of the Coliseum/Arena and other prior capital commitments for essential facilities like
the Juvenile Justice Facility and Santa Rita Jail. The updated five-year Capital Improvement
Plan identifies over $200 million of unfunded capital projects and deferred major maintenance
on County-owned properties that, if not addressed, will increase dramatically as buildings and
infrastructure continue to age.
The debt incurred by the County for capital improvements was based on responsible financial
plans that identified revenue sources to retire the debt over time and ensure that the County was
also able to maintain its core services and other mandated commitments. The Proposed Budget
includes funds for annual debt service payments and the County’s annual required contributions
to the pension fund through the Alameda County Employees’ Retirement Association (ACERA).
In addition, in response to your Board’s directive that the County Administrator and Auditor-
Controller consider options to reduce the County’s unfunded pension liability using existing
designations and reserves, your Board has authorized transfers totaling $400.0 million into a new
designation to help reduce the County’s portion of the unfunded pension liability. Further, your
Board has committed to designate up to $100 million more in each of the next four years.
Paying down future liabilities will reduce annual principal payments and interest, and will
ultimately improve the County’s ability to plan for and invest in future projects and initiatives
while maintaining strong credit ratings.

PENDING FACTORS
Although the economy continues to improve, ensuring adequate and stable long-term funding for
County programs and services remains a challenge. Given the length of the current economic
recovery, there are concerns that sales tax and vehicle license fee-based revenues may not be
sufficient in the short to intermediate-term to fund fully the cost of program responsibilities
transferred by the State to counties in health care, public assistance and now public safety. Our
growing reliance on federal and State funding bears careful monitoring given the specter of
election-driven policy changes and fiscal challenges that could result in funding cuts or further
shifts of program responsibilities to counties without adequate financial resources.
Alameda County residents rely on many important County-provided health, public safety and
economic assistance services to, in the words of the County’s mission statement, “enrich their
lives.” Long-term financial issues such as the increased costs of health care, employee salary and
benefit costs, and economically-sensitive revenue sources will continue to challenge our limited
discretionary resources. Careful assessment of existing services, diligent review of proposed
services and strategic decisions about the use of available financial resources will be vitally
important over the next few years to focus on effective and efficient service delivery and longterm
financial stability.
A healthy economy, in the seventh year of a recovery, has reduced unemployment, spurred
automobile sales and increased home values. Even now, Alameda County continues to
experience a structural deficit where ongoing expenses are greater than ongoing revenues.
Moreover, while we have been able to contribute regularly to reserve funds, a dip in the
economy that reduces property values and taxes and sales tax revenue will quickly increase the
size of future budget gaps. Unfortunately, that decline in the economy and vital discretionary
revenue is now closer than ever. Attention will be required to identify solutions to the structural
deficit and address the increasing amount of unfunded capital projects and deferred major
maintenance needs. These and other key issues may require policy decisions by your Board to
guide departments on effectively managing future operating cost increases in coordination with
development of sustainable revenue sources.
RECOMMENDATIONS
County stakeholders have balanced the FY 2016-2017 Proposed Budget through a collective
effort to develop a sustainable approach to providing services in the coming year. In addition,
balancing the FY 2016-2017 Proposed Budget using a significant amount of one-time funds will
necessitate careful monitoring throughout the year to ensure that expenditures remain within
budget and estimated revenue is fully realized.
As you conduct public hearings and deliberate on the FY 2016-2017 Proposed Budget, your
Board’s leadership and strong fiscal management will assist the County in maintaining that
critical balance between service demands and limited financial resources.