SUBJECT: FISCAL YEAR 2012-2013 PROPOSED BUDGET
Dear Board Members:
The Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Proposed Budget is balanced and provides more than $2.6 billion in
spending for County programs and services. The Budget reflects input from your Board, agency
and department heads, and other County stakeholders to close an $88.1 million deficit. While
the FY 2012-13 funding gap is the first shortfall under $100 million in four years, closing a
deficit this size does not come without sacrifice. Service recipients and providers, County
departments and agencies, and the County’s more than 9,000 employees have all contributed in
order to maintain essential services and keep the County on solid financial footing.
We are cautiously optimistic that recent economic reports point to an economy in sustained
recovery. In the first quarter of 2012, U.S. Gross Domestic Product grew by 2.2% and
employers added more than 600,000 jobs. Initial claims for unemployment have dropped and
businesses appear poised to increase spending. While housing prices remain far off their peaks,
some indications point to slowly rising values beginning next year. Greater lending activity in
real estate and consumer loans indicate increased consumer confidence and improved fiscal
health, at least for some Americans. Unfortunately, in Alameda County, as in many other
places, income and wealth disparities remain. Hispanic and African-American residents in
Alameda County have, on average, significantly lower household incomes and higher rates of
unemployment than non-Hispanic white or Asian residents. In addition, the rates of
unemployment for young people are significantly higher than for other age groups.
A healthier economy would improve the County’s fiscal condition by decreasing demand for
County services and increasing County revenues, thereby reducing deficits and program cuts.
However, economic growth could stall or even reverse due to outside factors, such as the
economic crisis in Europe, which could hurt U.S. exports and domestic tourism. In addition,
lower housing prices limit property tax revenues, the County’s principal discretionary revenue.
Fortunately, after two years of declines, the assessment roll grew in FY 2011-12, albeit by less
than half a percent. Even with the positive growth, the past three years have been the three worst
in assessment roll growth on record in Alameda County. By comparison, since the 1950s the
average annual gain in assessed valuation was 8%, providing much needed revenue to pay for
the increased cost of providing services.
Moreover, irrespective of economic conditions, County services will remain vulnerable as long
as the State and federal governments, which provide about half of the County’s funding,
continue to grapple with budget problems. Governor Brown’s May Revision of his proposed
budget estimates a State funding deficit through FY 2012-13 of $15.7 billion, or $6.5 billion
higher than the $9.2 billion gap for which he proposed solutions in January. Dramatically lower
revenue estimates and proposed cuts that have been blocked by the courts, federal government
and the State legislature account for most of the increased shortfall.
Half of the Governor’s proposals to close the State’s funding gap involve spending cuts,
primarily to health and human services programs, the judiciary, use of former redevelopment
agencies’ assets, and a 5% reduction in State worker compensation. Some of the cuts would be
subject to negotiation, while others have previously been blocked or are unlikely to receive the
political support of the State Legislature. The Governor also assumes $5.6 billion in budget
savings from his proposed temporary tax measure to raise income tax rates on the wealthy and
increase the sales tax rate by 0.25%. The proposal would need majority vote approval in
November. The Governor’s plan includes severe “trigger” cuts to schools, higher education, and
the courts if voters reject the measure. While most of the trigger cuts would not directly affect
County services, the Legislature might find severe cuts to education unpalatable and instead
reduce other programs and funding for County services.
Effective October 1, 2011, the State transferred fiscal and programmatic responsibility for many
public safety and health and human services programs to counties. Known as “Realignment,”
the shift transferred from State parole to County probation departments the responsibility for
supervising felons leaving State prison after completing sentences for non-violent, non-serious,
non-sex crimes. In addition, Realignment transferred responsibility for housing newly convicted
non-violent, non-serious, non-sex offenders from State prisons to County jails. On November
22, 2011, your Board adopted the County’s Realignment Implementation Plan, as submitted by
the Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee (CCPEC). The CCPEC, which
provides fiscal and programmatic oversight of the County’s public safety realignment efforts,
has been meeting regularly to monitor the progress of plan implementation and to identify
mechanisms for promoting the rehabilitation of the realigned population, while protecting public
safety. In addition, your Board and County staff have been actively seeking a more equitable
funding formula for FY 2012-13 and beyond. The Governor has not yet proposed a major
realignment of health and human services programs in FY 2012-13, but discussions will ensue in
the coming year with the goal of transferring programs in the future.
annual deficits and the national debt. Congress will likely wait until a lame duck session in
November and December to tackle many of the big looming budget issues. The Budget Control
Act that was signed into law last August, as a compromise for raising the debt ceiling, calls for
trigger cuts to occur beginning in January 2013. Short of Congress passing legislation to amend
or repeal trigger cuts, the federal government is facing $984 billion in spending cuts over nine
years – equal to $109 billion per year through Federal Fiscal Year 2021. These annual cuts of
$109 billion will begin in January 2013. Non-defense discretionary spending would be reduced
by about 8%, impacting all discretionary spending including aid to state and local governments
for transportation, education, housing, social services, justice and discretionary grant
programs. Congress also must address whether to extend the Bush-era tax rates, which expire at
the end of December.
The combination of increased demand for County services, lower revenues to pay for those
services, and cuts in State and federal funding, continues to create an extremely challenging
fiscal environment as we head into Fiscal Year 2012-2013 and beyond.
The Proposed Budget includes funding to provide mandated and essential services, meet debt
service obligations, maintain a minimum level of infrastructure and capital funding, and adhere
to the Board’s Financial Management policies. The Proposed Budget supports a workforce of
9,060 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions and reflects a net staffing decrease of 26 FTE,
including mid-year Board-approved staffing increases of 11 FTE, offset by a reduction of 37
FTE as part of budget balancing.
Most employee labor organizations have agreed to forego annual cost-of-living adjustments
(COLAs) for four years, and partnerships with labor will reduce employee health care and
pension costs as well. Despite these concessions, investment losses incurred by the Alameda
County Employees’ Retirement Association (ACERA) have not yet been recognized, which will
contribute to a rise in both the employer and employee contribution rates over the next few
years.
For the fourth year in a row, the Proposed Budget does not recommend COLAs for communitybased
organizations (CBOs). Nevertheless, the Proposed Budget provides $520 million for
services provided by 251 CBOs, many with multiple contracts with the County. This amount
includes $127 million in health care services provided by the Alameda County Medical Center
(ACMC). Other CBOs funded in the Proposed Budget include non-profit service providers,
cities, school districts, and local hospitals. A list of all CBO contracts with funding
recommendations is contained in the Proposed Budget Book. Though there have been no
COLAs and some State funding formulas have become more restrictive, impacting many CBO
service levels, federal health care reform has provided at least $30 million in additional funding
for indigent health services provided through ACMC and the Health Program of Alameda
County (HealthPAC, formerly primary care) network.
Measure A, the voter-approved half-cent sales tax, provides funding for essential health care
services. Seventy-five percent of the revenue is earmarked for ACMC, while the remaining 25%
is allocated by the Board of Supervisors to support essential health services. The Proposed
Budget includes $27 million in Measure A funds for non-ACMC essential health services, an
increase of approximately $0.5 million – or 2% – compared to 2011-12.
As part of its FY 2011-12 Budget, the State dissolved redevelopment agencies effective
February 1, 2012. At your Board’s direction, the Proposed Budget includes one-time funding of
$3.2 million in property tax increment returned from the County’s redevelopment agency in
order to support former staff of the agency and other related activities through FY 2012-13.
Consistent with your Board’s Financial Management policies, contingencies for pending labor
negotiations and benefit cost increases, higher unemployment insurance costs, contractual
obligations, and a $5 million general reserve contribution are included in the Proposed Budget.

CLOSING THE GAP—The Proposed Budget closes an $88.1 million funding gap that was
projected based on the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) funding requirement. The funding gap was
determined by identifying the difference between the cost of maintaining existing programs and
available financing. The MOE Budget for General/Grant/Measure A Funds totaled $2.19 billion,
an increase of $113.9 million, or 5.5%. Available revenues to finance the projected MOE costs
totaled $2.10 billion, an increase of $32.9 million, or 1.6%.
To the extent possible, your Board’s Values-Based Budgeting priorities and Strategic Vision
initiatives have been considered in developing balancing strategies within each program area.
The table below summarizes the total proposed net cost reductions by program area:
Proposed solutions to close the $88.1 million funding gap include a combination of permanent
ongoing program reductions, revenue increases, and one-time strategies. The Proposed Budget
recommends the use of $24.9 million or 28% in ongoing strategies and $63.2 million or 72% in
one-time strategies. Fiscal Management Reward Program (FMR) savings total $48.4 million for
the 2012-2013 Proposed Budget and have been generated through the ongoing efforts of
Departments/Agencies through the years to operate their programs efficiently and effectively
within budget, to avoid further program and staffing reductions. While a structural imbalance
between ongoing revenues and expenditures remains, FMR savings allow for the preservation of
vital services.
PROGRAM AREA NET COST REDUCTIONS
General Government (including Internal Service Funds) – The General Government program
area contributed net cost savings of $18.8 million through appropriation reductions of $378,510,
increased fee revenue of $692,269 and the use of Fiscal Management Reward program savings
of $17.8 million. Appropriation reductions include the elimination of a vacant position in the
Treasurer’s Office, reduced use of supplies and contracted services, and increased
interdepartmental credits for personnel services and other internal cost savings measures.
Service impacts from these reduced appropriations include the loss of funds for future one-time
needs and the delay in implementation of programs to increase departmental efficiencies. Fee
revenue was increased to recognize cost recovery by the Local Agency Formation Commission.
Health Care – The Health Services program area contributed net cost savings of $20.4 million
through $4.9 million in appropriation reductions, $1.6 million in increased revenue, and $13.9
million in Fiscal Management Reward Program savings. The appropriation reductions include
the elimination of 15.6 vacant positions. Revenue increases include HealthPAC Low-Income
Health Program federal funds, increased 2011 realignment revenue in FY 2011-12 to be applied
to FY 2012-13, and additional revenue from improved Measure A sales tax receipts.
Public Assistance – The Public Assistance program area achieved net cost savings of $25.8
million. State-imposed changes to CalWORKs and In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS)
requirements reduced appropriations by $8.2 million and also reduced revenues by $4.0 million,
resulting in a net cost savings of $4.2 million for the Social Services Agency. These reductions
reflect the CalWORKs caseload decrease of approximately 1,300 cases, which is linked to the
48-month eligibility limit and the 8% cut to cash aid payments implemented this fiscal year.
This caseload decline has reduced childcare usage, impacting families who have become
ineligible for services as well as the childcare providers on whom they rely. The IHSS
reductions are the result of implemented service hour reductions to the existing 18,000
recipients. The coming shift of Medi-Cal eligible IHSS cases to the federal Community First
Choice Option provides more federal funding to stabilize the program.
Other adjustments reduce expenditures by $961,000 and revenue by $887,000 almost entirely
from reductions in cell phone, printing and messenger services that create efficiencies with
minimal impact on service delivery. These adjustments also include updated caseload estimates.
Other revenue increases totaling $10.1 million prevent other cuts and stabilize some programs.
These revenues include payment by the State of prior year 1991 Realignment “growth” revenues
($5.7 million), prior year fraud prevention incentive funds ($1.2 million), CalFresh (Food Stamp)
revenue and reinvestment of Title IV-E Waiver savings ($2.0 million) to child welfare programs.
Additionally, $6.8 million in Fiscal Management Reward program savings contributes to the
Public Assistance program area cost savings. The Social Services Agency also used $5.3 million
in prior year Title IV-E waiver savings in developing its MOE budget, thereby reducing the
County funding gap.
Public Protection – The Public Protection program area achieved net cost savings of $17.7
million. These savings include $4.1 million in appropriation reductions, including the
elimination of 21 vacant positions in the Sheriff’s Department. Increased revenue of $3.6
million was realized through revision of Proposition 172 public safety sales tax estimates,
increased State funding in support of juvenile probation and camps, increased contract funding
for Sheriff’s crime lab services, and federal reimbursement strategies. Additionally, $10.0
million in Fiscal Management Reward program savings contributed to Public Protection program
area cost savings.
FISCAL MANAGEMENT REWARD (FMR) PROGRAM SAVINGS
Your Board’s Fiscal Management Reward Program allows General Fund departments to carry
over net savings each fiscal year to be used in subsequent years for budget balancing, one-time
expenditures and program enhancements. Through ongoing cost-saving and revenue generation
efforts, County agencies/departments contributed $48.4 million in prior-year FMR savings to
help balance the FY 2012-13 budget.
While efforts by County departments to reduce costs are commendable, the continued reliance
on prior-year savings for budget balancing poses certain risks for the County. As budgets are
reduced and more positions are left vacant or eliminated, it may become more difficult for
departments to carry out their mission of providing quality, essential services and continue to
achieve commensurate savings in subsequent years.
COUNTYWIDE STRATEGIES
The following countywide strategies contribute $5.3 million towards balancing the FY 2012-13
Proposed Budget:
• $5.0 million reduction in appropriations by suspending the Board’s policy to allocate one
percent of discretionary revenue to Capital Projects; and
• $0.3 million from revised property tax estimates.
Prior-year FMR savings, reduced program appropriations, additional program revenues, and
countywide strategies are sufficient to close the current $88.1 million funding gap for Fiscal
Year 2012-2013. However, we must continue to identify additional strategies in anticipation of
significant program cuts and additional County costs related to pending federal and State budget
actions.
PENDING FACTORS: FEDERAL AND STATE BUDGETS
Fiscal problems in Sacramento and Washington have a significant impact on local government
finances. Many Democratic members have voiced strong opposition to Governor Brown’s
proposed reductions to health and human services programs, including cuts to CalWORKs, In-
Home Supportive Services, and State support for childcare. Democrats also object to the
Governor’s $292 million cut to Cal Grants, which provide financial aid to low-income college
students. While the budget need only be adopted by a majority vote, Republicans have voiced
strong opposition to the Governor’s tax measure, and we anticipate an active campaign against
the proposal. Further complicating matters is the fact that the outcome of the election will not be
known until November, more than four months after the beginning of the fiscal year. Schools,
community colleges, higher education and other programs would face daunting trigger cuts
should the voters reject the tax measure.
The Governor’s ballot measure would also provide constitutional protections guaranteeing
counties will receive ongoing funding for 2011 Realignment. Without constitutional protection,
counties have no assurance that the State will continue to fund realigned programs.
Even absent further cuts from the State, Alameda County’s discretionary revenue continues to be
impacted by the Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) shift, which is the State’s
ongoing transfer of property tax revenues from local governments to meet its obligation to fund
schools. Since ERAF began in 1992-93, Alameda County has shifted $4.3 billion in local
discretionary funds to the State. Discretionary revenues now represent only 25% of the County’s
General Fund budget. With 90% of the County’s limited discretionary revenue now property
tax-based, the weakness in property values impacts our ability to fund core services.
The economy, State and federal budget problems, and other factors pose significant challenges to
our finances and operations. However, your Board has made difficult decisions and adopted
responsible, pragmatic budgets that address rather than delay and compound problems, which
puts Alameda County in a relatively strong fiscal position. We expect Alameda County’s
economy to begin growing faster soon; however, given the severity of the downturn and the
prolonged recovery, the impact to residents and County services will be felt for several more
years.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The FY 2012-2013 Proposed Budget is balanced and reflects the County’s commitment to
providing vital services to County residents in spite of the difficult economic times. The
Proposed Budget may require substantial adjustments following revisions to the State and
federal budgets. In addition, balancing the budget using a significant amount of one-time funds
will necessitate careful monitoring throughout the year to ensure that expenditures remain within
budget and revenue estimates are fully realized.
As you conduct public hearings and deliberate on the Proposed Budget, your Board will be faced
with very difficult choices. Your ongoing leadership and strong fiscal management will assist
the County in once again maintaining that critical balance between service demands and limited
financial resources.
Therefore, it is recommended that your Board:
1. Accept the Proposed Budget for FY 2012-2013 for review pending public hearings;
2. Set public hearings on the Proposed Budget to commence on June 18, 2012 at 1:30
p.m. as outlined in the Attachment; and
3. Schedule public hearings and/or public meetings to consider charges for Emergency
Medical Services District, Vector Control Services District, Fire Department
Emergency Medical Services, Flood Control District, Clean Water Protection, Public
Works Agency-administered County Service Areas, and Lead Abatement as detailed
in the attached budget hearing schedule.