Pursuant to statute, the Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2013-2014 (July 1, 2013 – June 30, 2014) is
presented for consideration on June 11, 2013. The Recommended Budget provides Butte County with a
prudent spending plan that is balanced with the resources available to the County and provides the
foundation to conduct hearings as required by California law. It is requested that the Board of
Supervisors accept this Recommended Budget as the basis for budget hearings scheduled to begin on
Tuesday, June 25, 2013. As specified under statute, budget hearings can last no longer than 10 days.
Subsequent to those hearings, the Board of Supervisors may adopt a budget that is smaller, but no larger,
than the accountings made at the conclusion of the hearings. The Board of Supervisors will consider
adoption of the budget on July 30, 2013.
Attached to this memo you will find the Recommended Budget Summary (Exhibit A), Position
Allocation Changes (Exhibit B), and Multi-Year Budget Trend Analysis (Exhibit C).
INTRODUCTION
Under the leadership of the Board of Supervisors, the Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2013-2014
demonstrates that Butte County has survived the economic crisis, achieved stability, and is now headed
for recovery. These three simple words, “Survival, Stability, and Recovery” represent Butte County’s
journey through the economic crisis, and encompass the vision and leadership of the Board as well as the
dedication and sacrifice by our department heads and all our employees.
To fully appreciate our current position, we need to see it in context of where we have been. From 2008
to 2011, we focused on surviving extremely difficult fiscal times. Budget cuts, position eliminations, and
service reductions defined this time as the County suffered through the worst financial crisis since the
Great Depression. The Board took bold steps and made difficult decisions that guided the organization
through the recession. In making these difficult decisions early on, the Board planted the seed for future
stability and recovery.
The Board’s actions began to bear fruit in fiscal year 2011-2012 when the organization transitioned out
of survival mode into one of relative stability. Our regional economy, as well as the state’s economy,
began showing signs of improvement, which enabled us to shift from cutbacks and begin to strategize

on obtaining long-term stability. The strategy included employees making sacrifices such as paying an
increased share of retirement costs as well as increased health insurance premiums, implementing
innovative efficiencies, and creating new revenue sources such as the temporary lease of the unused
portion of the County’s Table A water allocations. All these efforts combined to steer us toward a more
sustainable future. The organization is now poised for the next phase, recovery.
As fiscal year 2013-2014 begins, I am pleased to report that Butte County is entering the recovery phase.
Our fiscal house is in order; the Board’s long term strategy is working. For the first time since the
recession, our ongoing revenues and our ongoing expenditures are in balance. This year several
indicators suggest that the scene is set for a modest recovery, with a more comprehensive recovery still
being several years out. During this recovery phase, we will continue to address long term fiscal
challenges such as retiree health care costs, unfunded pension liabilities, deferred maintenance of our
facilities, our pension obligations bonds, and compensation for our employees.
While each of these challenges poses a unique and complex set of issues, for the first time in several
years a plan is in place – or will be in place shortly – to address each of these areas. Paying down
unfunded liabilities, investing in our buildings and infrastructure, and remaining competitive in the
marketplace are all achievable with patience, staying the course of fiscal discipline, and with modest
reinvestment as the opportunities present themselves. It will not be easy and there are many potential
pitfalls that could set us back, but given the dedication and talent of our workforce and the continuing
steady leadership of the Board, I am confident that we will succeed in our recovery.
A LOOK BACK
Even in these difficult times, Butte County has continued to provide its citizens with excellent customer
service and innovative new ideas. Butte County residents can be proud of the many accomplishments
that have taken place this past year. A few of these highlights are provided below:
 Approved the Zoning Ordinance and streamlined the development review process.
 Initiated several new, popular programs in the Library, including a drop-in user group for help
with e-readers and table computers; a free afterschool homework assistance program that
matches retired teachers with kids in grades 1-8; and a one-month program where children read
to trained service dogs, thereby allowing the children to build their reading skills in a safe and
fun environment.
 Secured agreements to lease portions of the County’s State Water Project Table A water
allocation not currently needed within the County. The lease agreements eliminate an annual $1.4
million General Fund liability and generated $1.2 million annual revenue for two years.
 Began commercial operations at the landfill gas-to-energy facility at Neal Road Recycling and
Waste Facility and received the first royalty check from the contractor operating the facility.
 Adopted a Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Program to provide non-residential
property owners the opportunity to use contractual assessments to finance installation of energy
efficiency improvements and renewable energy generation improvements. The PACE Program
provides commercial and industrial businesses with an opportunity to reduce energy costs.
 Approved Debt Management Guidelines and Procedures (DMGP) to serve as a foundation for
prudent debt issuance and management. The DMGP formalizes debt issuance processes, assists
with affordability determinations, assigns issuance responsibilities, and promotes transparency.
 Completed design of the Hall of Records with the plans going out to bid this summer.

 Continued Department Head Work Team efforts, including publication of a Sustainability
Report, redesign of the County’s website, and customer service training as part of the
development streamlining process.
 Adopted a nut theft prevention ordinance that tightens the requirements related to ownership of
nut crops. The ordinance provides additional tools for law enforcement to combat theft of
agricultural commodities including walnut crops.
 Introduced Version 5.0 of SunGard Finance Plus, an upgrade to the County financial system that
will allow for more efficient reporting and analysis of financial and related data, including
elimination of duplicate entry and shadow systems.
 Strengthened the relationship between the career and volunteer firefighting components of the
Butte County Fire Department by adjusting hiring practices, updating training standards, revising
duty statements, and clarifying discipline policies.
 Secured Federal Emergency Management Agency accreditation of the Sycamore-Mud Creek
urban levees.
 Expanded the Regional Child Support Services Call Center by taking calls for Contra Costa
County, the eighth county to contract to use the Call Center. This expansion resulted in an
increase of more than 6,000 calls into the Call Center.
 Completed over 25 major facility projects, including plans for the first phase of refurbishing 900
Esplanade, Chico, which will house the Museum of Northern California Art.
 Reviewed over 40,000 properties for value decline and completed enrollment of approximately
30,000 declined assessments which resulted in a 25% reduction in assessment appeal filings from
2011 to 2012.
 Approved the Restriction on Cultivation of Medical Marijuana Ordinance, which placed
limitations on how many plants could be grown on any given property, defined minimum
setback requirements. and implemented other measures to help protect the public.
 Automated the posting of tax payments, leading to time and cost savings for the Treasurer-Tax
Collector through reduced manual entry, higher levels of accuracy and security, and same day tax
deposits.
 Implemented the Positive Pay system, an automated warrant file upload program that prevents
fraudulent cashing of counterfeit checks drawn on the bank accounts of the County, schools,
and special districts.
 Completed the communication tower project at Bloomer Mountain, expanding radio coverage
for public safety and general government users. The project was awarded the Geotechnical
Project of the Year 2012 from the American Association of Civil Engineers for the micro-pile
foundations used on the project.
RECOMMENDED BUDGET HIGHLIGHTS
The Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2013-2014 is essentially status quo with similar service levels as
the last two years. It includes General Reserves recommended at $5.5 million, which is a $500,000
increase from the fiscal year 2012-2013 budget. The recommendation includes a target of $4.5 million for
General Fund Appropriations for Contingencies, which is a $1 million increase from the target included
in the fiscal year 2012-2013 Recommended Budget. The Recommended Budget also proposes an
investment of approximately $1.2 million for ongoing and deferred maintenance. In all cases, these
additional expenditures will utilize one time funds, mainly from the previous year’s water lease funding
and an unanticipated increase in tobacco settlement revenue.

Highlights within this Recommended Budget include:
 Growth for the Department of Employment and Social Services (DESS) as it continues to deal
with increased Medi-Cal and CalFresh caseloads resulting in the recommendation of 11 new
positions. These positions will be funded with State and federal funds and do not impact the
General Fund. Additionally, DESS will request adding more positions sometime during fiscal
year 2013-2014 to address the increased responsibilities for determining eligibility for the new
statewide exchanges being set up as part of the Affordable Care Act.
 Additional resources to the Sheriff’s Office, the Probation Department, Behavioral Health
Department, and the District Attorney’s Office as a result of the continued implementation of
AB 109, which shifted a number of state prisoners to county control. This new approach in
criminal incarceration continues to unfold with increased funding and increased responsibility
for inmates staying in county jails instead of state prisons.
 Increase in the General Reserve of $500,000, which would improve it from $5 million to $5.5
million. The Board of Supervisors General Fund Balance Reserve Policy, established in 2010,
states that the Board shall consider, during the public hearing on the Recommended Budget,
increasing the General Reserve “when one-time, unanticipated discretionary revenue exceeding
$500,000 with no offsetting expenditure were received over the current (closing) fiscal year…”
The County did receive unbudgeted water lease revenue and higher-than-expected tobacco
lawsuit settlement revenue this fiscal year meeting this requirement. Therefore, the
recommended increase in General Reserve is made consistent with Board policy.
 Increase of $1 million to General Fund Appropriation for Contingencies (for a total of $4.5
million) as compared to the previous fiscal year’s Recommended Budget. This is prudent to help
offset the increased uncertainty of many elements outside County control. The world and state
economies, along with new and large realignment of programs, reflect an uncertain time.
Caution dictates an increase in reserves and contingencies, especially when the revenues are one
time in nature. The recommendation helps the County toward achieving the goal of setting aside
at least 5% of the General Fund budget in contingencies.
 Increasing commitment to address the backlog of deferred maintenance. Over the last couple of
years, the County has slowly begun to address this maintenance backlog. This year, the
Recommended Budget includes the additional funds needed for projects such as replacing the
Paradise library roof, replacing the chiller in the building at 25 County Center Drive, Oroville,
replacing carpeting in a variety of buildings, replacing windows at 900 Esplanade, Chico, and a
variety of other needed improvements.
 Transfer of $378,950 in realignment funding from Behavioral Health and $628,586 from Public
Health to the Welfare Fund. This results in a reduction of General Fund transfers to the
Welfare Fund by an equal amount. The recommended transfers are less than previous years.
The overall Recommended Budget is approximately $504 million dollars (a 4.87% increase from last
year). Most of this increase is the result of the ongoing implementation of 2011 realignment. More
precise details of the changes are contained in Exhibit A. The recommendation includes an overall
increase of seven positions, almost all associated with the increased responsibilities at DESS. With a
workforce of almost 2,263 this is a moderate increase, given the growth of program responsibility.

THE FUTURE
As has been noted, I believe the County has weathered the worst of the recession, has stabilized, and is
heading for recovery. This belief is based upon a number of factors, but mostly upon the fact that the
decisions we have made over the last few years including labor concessions, new revenue from the
temporary lease of the County’s unused Table A allocations, and a variety of other changes and
efficiencies have decreased or slowed our expenditures and increased our revenues to a point where they
are in balance. Further, many economic indicators at the national, state, and local levels point toward a
modest economic recovery. Revenue growth is mostly occurring through healthier statewide sales tax,
and there are projections for increased property tax revenue based upon rising property values and
property sales. While cities within our county are not recovering as quickly as the County in general,
increased home sales, especially in Chico, are a strong indicator for growth in property tax revenues.
While revenue growth is projected to rise modestly over the next few years, several large fiscal impacts,
many outside our control, are also expected to occur. These include:
 Increases in pensions costs. In April 2013, the CalPERS Board voted to substantially increase
the costs it charges to employers over a five year period beginning in 2015 to offset its increasing
unfunded liability. This move, coupled with last year’s decrease in its discount rate and an
increasingly vibrant investment return should help CalPERS address the system’s long term
liabilities and put it in a better financial position. Likewise, this move will also help ensure Butte
County will address its own portion of that unfunded liability (approximately $70 million). These
anticipated cost increases have been entered into our Multi-Year Budget Trend Analysis.
 Loss of revenue to the General Fund from winding down the federal jail contract. As a result of
the increased number of inmates associated with the implementation of AB 109, the County is
now experiencing a serious shortage of jail beds. Before prison realignment, the County entered
into a contract with the federal government and leased beds for housing federal prisoners. This
lease generated revenue that was critical for the County during the survival phase. However, as
the demands for jail space increase due to AB 109, the County can no longer house these federal
inmates. The cancellation of this contract will result in almost $3 million in annual revenue loss.
 Long term concerns that costs associated with AB 109 realignment programs will not be
completely funded by State and federal resources.
 Long range plans to address costs associated with paying down the debt on our pension
obligations bonds, as well as beginning to put into effect a strategy to fund our long term liability
on retiree health care costs.
 Impact of world, national, and/or state events on our local recovery. In this increasingly
interconnected and unstable world economy, political or economic upheavals in one part of the
world can have major impacts on our part of the world.
Even with these uncertainties our Multi-Year Budget Trend Analysis, which includes addressing the
CalPERS increase, the elimination of the federal jail contract, and other known expenditure increases,
indicates that we should stay about even with revenue growth.
Unfortunately, two important areas still remain unaddressed in long term budget planning. These issues
involve restoring and/or growing service delivery to levels that are more responsive to the community’s
needs, and employee compensation issues that need to be addressed if we are to remain competitive as
an employer. We have started labor negotiations with all nine bargaining units to address compensation
and other issues. Hopefully, more robust economic development efforts and a faster local economic
recovery will help us address these issues.

CONCLUSION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The long road to fiscal recovery is starting. While we continue to address our budgetary and fiscal needs,
it is important to remember that our departments address the concerns and needs of our citizens daily
and provide top-notch services. Some of the innovative and far reaching initiatives we will address this
coming year include:
 Bringing to the Board a policy for pre-funding our retiree health care liability costs to ensure we
get in front of this issue and smooth the anticipated cost increases out over a number of years.
 Implementing Microsoft Lync, a major technology upgrade that will integrate and manage all of
our voice, text, e-mail and telecommunications needs, and also move us in the direction of a
licensing model to assure we always have the latest upgrades of software available.
 Breaking ground on the new Hall of Records building. This will consolidate all employees of the
Clerk-Recorder’s Office into one building, which increases efficiency, and will also free up
much-needed space in the building at 25 County Center Drive for those departments that
remain. In addition, it will consolidate and protect all county historical records in one
centralized and accessible place. This will happen with no increased expenditure from the
General Fund.
 Taking responsibility for enrolling over 12,000 Butte County residents in health insurance as part
of the new Affordable Care Act. Department of Employment and Social Services staff will be
responsible for determining eligibility for a whole new host of people who will receive expanded
or new health care benefits.
Finally, I want to recognize all the hard work of the employees who put this budget together. This is the
25th county budget in my career and third in Butte County. I can say without hesitation that the quality
and level of professionalism of this team is second to none. Hundreds of people are involved in the
preparation, assembly, and data collection for this document. It begins with Administration staff in the
Fall analyzing data to put together an allocated cost package and budget instructions that will meet the
high accounting standards set by the federal and State audits. Next, staff from 23 County departments
work long days and weekends from January through March to prepare budget requests. Department
heads and senior department staff then review and refine every detail before submitting their requests to
my office. Once submitted, a talented and experienced budget team from my office reviews, analyzes,
asks questions, edits, and makes sense of all the pieces and puts them into coherent documents that tell a
bigger story. I spend hours with the budget team considering and debating the recommendations, and
ultimately arrive at this budget document.
Most of this the public never sees, but the results show in some of the best credit ratings of any county
in the state and clean financial audits. Most importantly, the effort culminates into a financial document
that is accurate, realistic, and responsible.
Butte County is fortunate to have the dedicated and talented employees that make this process go
smoothly year after year.
