On behalf of dedicated Butte County staff, I am pleased to deliver the fiscal year 2014-2015 Recommended
Budget for the Board’s consideration. Over the last several years, the Board and County employees have both
demonstrated a strong commitment toward sound and prudent financial management. As a result of this
discipline and the willingness to work together, we have been able to weather the worst of the “Great
Recession” and are now on the path toward fiscal stability.
In last year’s budget message, I began by stating that “Butte County has survived the economic crisis,
achieved stability, and now is headed for recovery.” This year, I am pleased to report that we are continuing
along this road to recovery, and will continue to have a balanced budget. While I am pleased to state that the
County’s fiscal picture has improved over the past few years, I am also cautious about the future because for
every positive development there is also a potential challenge to our growth. For example:
 Unemployment figures continue to improve in the County to less than 10% (the lowest since 2007), but
thousands of Butte County residents are either still looking for work or underemployed;
 Property values and property tax revenues continue to grow but at a very slow rate, which is not keeping
up with expenditure growth;
 Our regional economy is showing some growth but not nearly as fast as other areas of the state;
 The County’s fiscal situation is challenging but stable. However, at least two of our cities are facing
severe budget cutbacks, which can affect our organization and certainly our citizens who live in these
cities;
 Our agriculture sector continues to produce record yields, but we face a serious drought that could alter
or dramatically slow the growth of this sector; and,
 We have made great strides in solving our long-term unfunded obligations for County employees, but
statewide CalPERS pension costs continues to escalate.
So, what does all this mean? It is a very mixed message of positive news coupled with very real challenges.
My hope for this coming fiscal year is to continue the progress we have made while making sure we do not
slip backward. While this goal may not sound very bold or inspiring, it is realistic as we continue to live in a
very tenuous time in the world, nation, and State. Issues such as the implementation of the Affordable Care
Act, the continued implementation of public safety realignment, a growing but volatile State budget, and a
drought all offer both opportunities as well as risks.

As we begin fiscal year 2014-2015, I believe the message that I would like to send is that while I am proud of
the way this County has performed through some of the most difficult economic times in our history, we are
not out of the woods yet and must maintain restraint. In stating this, I recognize that our residents and our
staff are weary of hearing fiscal prudence and discipline as a mantra, but it is the reality we face. We must
continue to look forward but must also recognize that we are in no position to loosen the purse strings and
spend money that we do not have. We must maintain the fiscal discipline that has helped us weather this
economic downturn.
At present, our long term budget trend analysis indicates a growing gap between costs and available
resources. I will be working proactively with department heads and staff over the next year to recommend
strategies to increase revenues and/or reduce costs over the next several years. At this point, the situation is
manageable, but it shows once again just how vulnerable we are to even the most subtle change in either
revenues and/or expenditures. The only true long-term solution to our fiscal dilemma is greater economic
and job growth. We need to continue to stress economic development as the only sure way to grow the
economy and, therefore, our revenues to meet current and future service needs.
Yet even with these uncertain times, we continue to rise to the challenge. Whether it is being a leader in
addressing public safety realignment, or taking on the challenge of signing up thousands of new Butte
County residents for health care, or starting a new program to make restaurant inspections more safe and
transparent, our employees continue to make us proud while providing exemplary service to our citizens.
With that in mind, I want to close with a message of thanks to all the people who make this budget possible.
It starts with the talented department heads and their staff who have spent months scrutinizing program
needs and reviewing available resources to ensure that we stay in budget and use the public’s money wisely
on a day-to-day basis. In addition, kudos go out to the dedicated staff in Administration who review, analyze,
double check, and produce the budget all the while making sure that the budget is balanced and consistent
with Board priorities. Most importantly, I want to thank the 2,300+ employees of Butte County who bring life
to this budget by doing the work of the County every day of the year. Without them, this budget has no
significance. Finally, the work of the County could not be achieved without the support of the Board of
Supervisors. The Board’s leadership, vision, and commitment is critical to everything we do each day.

Additional resources to the District Attorney and Public
Defender. Due to the increased workload experienced since the
passage of AB 109, the Superior Court opened a new criminal
court, which required additional staffing for the District Attorney
and Public Defender. The recommended budget includes
$517,000 for these positions.
 Addition of two Deputy Sheriff
positions for enhanced marijuana
enforcement.
 Reduction of federal funding for
the Probation Department. Under
Title IVe, the department receives
reimbursement for certain tasks. The
federal government reduced the number
of activities that can be claimed under
Title IVe, resulting in a funding reduction
of nearly $600,000.
On-going commitment to address
the backlog of deferred maintenance. Over the last couple of
years, the County has slowly begun to address this maintenance
backlog. This year, the Recommended Budget includes funds
needed for projects such as improving fall protection at 25
County Center Drive, path-of-travel improvements at the
Paradise Library, installation of an ADA compliant ramp at the
Oroville Veterans Memorial Hall, replacement of a boiler at 25
County Center Drive, accessibility improvements at 25 County
Center Drive, and various climate control improvements.
 Continued work on existing and new modules at the Neal Road
Recycling and Waste Facility including the excavation of Module
5, which is the next waste cell.
 Anticipated completion of the North County Public Works
Corporation Yard and construction of the Hall of Records.
 Expansion of public hours at the Development Services
Department. Instead of closing at 3:00 p.m., the department
will be open until 4:00 pm., which is the same as the Public
Works Department. This will be more
convenient for customers who need
to see both departments after 3:00
p.m. Growth for the Department of
Employment and Social Services (DESS)
as it continues to deal with caseload
increases in various entitlement
programs and the continued
implementation of the Affordable Care
Act at the County level.
Transfer of $715,201 in realignment
funding from Public Health to the
Welfare Fund. This results in a reduction
of General Fund transfers to the Welfare
Fund by an equal amount. To improve the cash position in the
Behavioral Health Fund, no realignment transfer is recommended
for fiscal year 2014-2015.
 Shift of staffing and financial resources in the Administration
Department to provide additional support for Economic and
Community Development activities.
One-time purchases of equipment needed by the Information
System Department to fully implement unified messaging,
including Voice over Internet Protocol functionality.
 Net increase of 13.35 positions in the County workforce, with
most of them associated with the increased responsibilities at
DESS.

Loss of significant federal revenue for the
Sheriff’s Office. Prior to the passage of
AB 109, the Sheriff was able to lease jail
beds to the U.S. Marshals Service, which
at its peak brought $3.2 million in revenue
to the County. Subsequent to AB 109,
jail beds became increasingly necessary
for the growing local jail population,
necessitating the end of the partnership
with the U.S. Marshals Service. Fiscal year
2014-2015 is the first full year without
revenue from this contract.

The overall Recommended Budget for fi scal year 2014-2015 is approximately $467 million and contains funding for similar service
levels as the last two years. This is a decrease of 8.7% from fi scal year 2013-2014, not due to reduction in County services but because
of two financial reporting changes at the State level:
• The federal and State shares of In-Home Support Services (IHSS) program costs are no longer included in the County’s budget because they are
paid and recognized by the State. In the fi scal year 2014-2015 Recommended Budget, only the County’s share of costs for the IHSS program, the
required Maintenance of Eff ort, is included.
• The County’s share of realignment funds for indigent health care is no longer included in the budget. In the past, the County was responsible for
all indigent adult healthcare and paid its share of Public Health realignment revenues to County Medical Services Program (CMSP), a consortium
of 35 rural counties that operated a health plan for indigents. With the implementation of the Aff ordable Care Act, most of those indigent adults are
now eligible under expanded Medi-Cal through the State, and the County no longer accounts for that portion of public health realignment funding.
The Recommended Budget for the General Fund is approximately $141 million, which is a decrease of 0.65% from fi scal year 2013-
2014. This includes a target of $4 million for General Fund Appropriations for Contingencies, which is a reduction of $500,000 from
the target included in the fi scal year 2013-2014 Recommended Budget. The recommendation includes General Reserves of $5.5
million, which is the same as the fi scal year 2013-2014 Adopted Budget.

The fiscal year 2014-2015 Recommended Budget is $467,039,345 for all funds, which is a decrease of
$44.5 million or 8.70% compared to the fiscal year 2013-2014 Adopted Budget. This is a reflection of all
County funds including governmental funds (primarily the County’s operating funds), internal service
funds (insurance and utilities), enterprise funds (the Neal Road Recycling and Waste Facility), and special
districts and County Service Areas.
For the 16 governmental funds, the Recommended Budget is $445,845,016, which is a decrease of $45.4
million or 9.24%, compared to the fiscal year 2013-2014 Adopted Budget. Of this total, $43.7 million is
from recommended operating transfers between funds. The majority of these transfers, $39.8 million, are
from the Public Safety and Health and Human Services Realignment Fund to the operating department
budgets. An additional $2.0 million in transfers from the General Fund to support expenditures in
Special Revenue, Capital Project and Debt Service Funds is included in this total. The remaining $1.9
million in transfers is made up of other transfers between various funds.
