On behalf of the dedicated Butte County staff, I am pleased to submit the fiscal year 2015-2016
Recommended Budget for the Board’s consideration. This year, we continue to see the slow economic
recovery that began in 2011. While we have implemented several significant and structural reforms
over the last several years and have made progress to improve our fiscal health, we still face slow
growth in our discretionary revenues. Every step forward in revenue growth is matched almost equally
with increases in the cost of providing services, much of which is out of our control. The Recommended
Budget reflects this reality and presents a responsible spending plan for fiscal year 2015-2016 as well
as laying the groundwork for stability in the future.
With this Recommended Budget I can report several positive developments.
 Property tax revenue continues to grow at approximately 3.0% to 3.5%;
 Statewide sales tax growth is up, which helps the County with increased realignment and
criminal justice funding;
 Local sales tax revenue is also increasing, although this helps our cities much more directly
than it does the County;
 Agriculture continues to be the economic engine of the County. Butte County had a record crop
last year, with almonds, walnuts and rice production leading the way;
 The new Hall of Records is almost finished, which will enable us to better serve our residents
with a number of important services;
 Available one-time funding allows modest increases in Appropriation for Contingencies in the
General Fund;
 Prudent levels of pre-funding our pension liabilities and retiree health care programs are
included;
 The upgrade of our financial management system will become effective July 1, 2015, with
continued work throughout the fiscal year to make the system more efficient and effective; and
 Progress is being made as we vigorously enforce the marijuana cultivation ordinance approved
by the voters (Measure A).
Along with the positive developments, though, many challenges still remain. Some of these include:
 The cost of providing fire services is escalating faster than the growth of local revenues, which
will require restructuring our agreement with CAL FIRE. We continue to develop
recommendations, which will include reduction in services;
 A drought of historic magnitude is negatively impacting agriculture, forcing residents to reduce
water usage, and creating high fire dangers throughout the County;
 Funding for road maintenance and repair continues to decline at the national, state, and local
level adding to the problems of our deteriorating infrastructure;
 Recruiting and retaining employees is becoming increasingly difficult as the economic recovery
strengthens, and the County’s compensation levels become less competitive;
 The challenge to implement criminal justice realignment remains as well as other federal and
State mandates such as the Affordable Care Act
This brings me back to a familiar theme: our budget as recommended is responsible and responsive
but not nearly as robust as we would like. It generally provides baseline services but provides little in
new or enhanced services. It is a responsible budget for serious times, balancing the needs of
providing services to our residents today with the need to prepare for future fiscal challenges. The
challenge lies in being responsible stewards of public monies with a need to be responsive to the many
needs and desires from our residents. With this budget, I believe we have successfully managed this
balancing act, but it is a precarious balance that will require on-going monitoring to be successful.
Further, we still need to address long-term challenges in order to remain responsible and responsive
into the future.
That said, Butte County employees continue to provide excellent service. They continue to innovate,
and they continue to serve our citizens with distinction. They should be proud of what they accomplish
for the residents of Butte County, and I want to thank each and every one of them for their service and
dedication.
I especially want to thank the budget staff of County departments; the department heads who continue
to be team players looking out for the overall good of the organization, even if it means sacrifices to
their particular departments; and the staff in County Administration who provided hours of detailed
analysis to formulate these recommendations. In addition, administrative staff who put together what is
essentially a “book” in a very short amount of time should be recognized. All are to be commended for
their hard work.

Sufficient funding to aggressively enforce the County’s
medical marijuana cultivation ordinance.
 Restructure of County Fire service to provide services
within available resources.
 Several large facility maintenance projects including new
roofs at the Chico Library, Gridley Library (partial) and 25
County Center Drive in Oroville are part of the County’s
on-going effort to address a backlog
of deferred maintenance.
 Construction of a new module at
the Neal Road Recycling and Waste
Facility and the development of
a septage receiving facility as an
alternative to the existing ponds,
which will be removed as the new
waste Module 5 is developed
starting fiscal year 2015-2016.
 Site improvements at the Chico
Sheriff Sub-station communications
tower to allow equipment on the
tower to be accessed and maintained.
 Completion of the Hall of Records in Oroville which
will house the office of the Clerk-Recorder and Registrar
of Voters and will better protect the County’s historical
documents.
 Completion of a three-year water inventory and
analysis report. The report will allow Butte County and its
surrounding jurisdictions to make sound policy decisions
on the long-term sustainability of local groundwater.
 Completion of a major overhaul of the County’s financial
and human resources system and business processes. This
will allow the County to more fully utilize technological
tools and increase efficiencies.
 Capital improvements at Fire Station 25 in Butte Valley, to
make the station able to house staff as needed.
 Target of $6 million General Fund contingency, which is
an increase of $1.4 million from the fiscal year 2014-2015
adopted budget. This moves the County closer to the goal
of a 5% General Fund contingency (about $7 million) and
provides added security in the event of an emergency such
as fire or drought.
Net increase of 17.5 positions
in the County workforce. Most of
the positions are in the Behavioral
Health and Employment and Social
Services Departments to meet State
and federal requirements. Only
one new position is funded by the
General Fund.
 Acquisition of property and initial
design work for a replacement fire
station in South Chico (Station #44).
 Energy efficiency lighting project to reduce the County’s
energy usage. The project is funded in part by a PG&E
rebate and is expected to pay for itself within three years.
 Transfer of $800,000 in realignment funding from
Public Health to the Social Services Fund. This reduces
in a reduction to the General Fund transfer to the Social
Services Fund by an equal amount. No realignment transfer
is recommended for fiscal year 2015-2016 from Behavioral
Health to continue to improve the cash position in the
Behavioral Health Fund.

The Recommended Budget is a
responsible spending plan that
is responsive to the needs of
the residents of Butte County. It
contains the spending authority
for all County departments.
While most services and
programs are ongoing, this list
provides some highlights of the
Recommended Budget.

The fiscal year 2015-2016 Recommended Budget is $475,897,957 for all funds, which is an
increase of $1.8 million or 0.4% compared to the fiscal year 2014-2015 Adopted Budget. This is
a reflection of all County funds including governmental funds (including the County’s operating
funds and non-operating funds), internal service funds (insurance and utilities), enterprise funds
(the Neal Road Recycling and Waste Facility), and special districts and County Service Areas.
For the governmental funds, the Recommended Budget is $450,567,141, which is a decrease of
0.4% or $1.8 million compared to the fiscal year 2014-2015 Adopted Budget. Of this total, $48.7
million is from recommended operating transfers between funds. The majority of these transfers,
$40.2 million, are from the non-operating funds to the operating funds. An additional $3.7 million
in transfers from the General Fund to support expenditures in Special Revenue, Capital Project
and Debt Service Funds is included in this total. The remaining $4.8 million in transfers is made
up of other Departmental transfers between funds including transfers to equipment replacement
funds and the Capital Projects Fund.
