Fiscal Year 2014-15 continued to see the County moving in the right direction. After weathering
the “Great Recession” we continue to see improvement in our financial status. Contra Costa
County has managed the economic downturn through cooperation between the County Board,
Department Heads, and Employees. We have made prudent fiscal choices, lived within our
means, and continue to plan ahead. None of this has been easy nor has it been painless.
However, it is through this combined effort that we have been able to achieve a budget that is
structurally balanced for the fourth year in a row.
Cautious and thoughtful fiscal management has placed us on solid economic footing. Our goal
will be to continue that approach and avoid future fiscal ups and downs. The Board,
Department Heads, and the entire County workforce will continue to work together to retain the
balance in this $3.1 billion ($1.4 billion General Fund) budget for FY 2015-16 and beyond.
In addition to a structurally balanced budget for the fourth consecutive year, there have been a
number of key accomplishments this past year.
?? Perhaps the most significant achievement over the past four years has been our ability to
maintain critical services to the public in spite of the economic turmoil, budget cuts and
staff reductions.
Additional achievements over the past 12 months have included:
?? The Board of Supervisors formed a Hiring Outreach Oversight Committee to move
forward with ensuring our commitment to diversity after the vacation of the Consent
Decree. As part of that process, and with the support of the Chair of the Equal
Opportunity Committee, we moved the Equal Employment Opportunity Officer and the
newly hired clerical staff person into the Risk Management unit to provide more structure
and to increase access time in the communities doing outreach and recruitment. The
ultimate goal continues to be to have our Employees reflect the diversity of the
communities we serve.
? Increased our Fund Balances while allocating additional funding for infrastructure.
? Achieved the fourth GFOA Distinguished Budget Presentation Award for Contra Costa
County.
? Recruitment and selection by the Board of Supervisors of new department heads for
Agriculture Commissioner and County Librarian.
? Successful agreements with most of our unions including SEIU 1021, Local 1, Local 21,
AFSCME 2700, AFSCME 512, and Local 1230. These agreements provided wage
increases for 2014 and 2015 and included adoption of the PEPRA COLA which is 2%
instead of the 3% COLA we had before and which will save significant dollars over the
next several years.
? Completed the Fitch Studies of the Contra Costa County Fire Protection District and
EMS operations.
? Worked with the Realignment Allocation Committee to keep the reduction in funding to
the Community Corrections Partnership to the smallest amount possible. The new
formula, while resulting in a reduction in funding for fiscal year 2014-15, will provide a
one-time increase in 2015-16 before the base is set in 2016-17 and beyond. If the
Community Corrections Partnership holds budgets constant with only reasonable COLA
increases, we will be able to maintain current programing for several years.
? Moved responsibility for Labor Negotiations into the organizational structure of the
County Administrators Office, including reassignment of staff to improve and expedite
the negotiations, resulting in more timely response to Unions and the Board of
Supervisors.
? Improved Technology in the Board Chambers by replacing podium and monitors with
newer state-of-art equipment .
? Worked with the PeopleSoft Committee to develop proposals to improve the electronic
time keeping and payroll system and have begun a process to address our aging People
Soft System.
Key Budget Issues
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget continues to provide for essential community services
to our residents and minimizes adverse impacts to the community. However, as per the norm,
once the State budget is adopted, we likely will need to consider budget adjustments and will
provide the Board with options at that time. We are in contract with the majority of our labor
unions; however a healthcare reopener with six of the County’s unions will provide a significant
challenge to County resources. In the last few contract periods, with their help we have
implemented a long-term rebalancing plan to reduce our expenditures and restructure our
service delivery to provide the most effective services within annual available resources. This
collaboration has meant that we can propose additional resources to augment departmental
staff resources in the upcoming budget and has virtually eliminated the need for lay-offs. We
are hopeful that positive collaboration during the healthcare reopener will result in benefits to
our employees that are more affordable.

The County Board, Department Heads, and employees have come together and have worked
collaboratively to address our fiscal challenges. I particularly want to thank Department Heads
and all of our employees for their dedication and sacrifice, as well as their valuable and
thoughtful input throughout the process. Our goal has been to ensure a fair and transparent
budget process and to produce a user-friendly budget document. A great deal of effort has
been put into developing and producing this budget.
The Recommended Budget represents a work plan to achieve our mission and priorities in the
coming year. Below are a number of key issues that have informed or impacted the
development of our budget for next year.
? Property Tax Recovery: Low growth in the housing market in the recent past has
significantly impacted the County budget as 83.2% of General Purpose revenues and 22.5%
of total General Fund revenues come from property taxes. As a result, the slowdown in the
housing market continues to have a greater impact on our County than most other Bay Area
Counties. After three straight years of negative growth of assessed valuation, the County
experienced positive growth of 0.86% in FY 2012-13; however, the majority of cities were
still negative. Growth was 3.45% in FY 2013-14. In the current year, assessed value
increased by 9.09%. We are hopeful that we will continue to see property tax recovery to
counterbalance the cumulative negative assessed valuation since FY 2008-09. The County
is projecting very high growth of 6% for FY 2015-16. In years prior to FY 2008-09, growth
had been atypically high and, unfortunately, our expenditures counted on that growth. A
more modest annual growth of 3% is projected for FY 2016-17 and beyond.
Over the three year period between 2009-10 and 2011-12 property taxes declined by
11.08%. Over the last three years 2012-13 to 2014-15 the increase was 13.4%. This means
that the total net increase in property taxes over the past six years only grew by a net of
2.32%.This fact is a significant reason for the slow economic recovery in Contra Costa
County.
? Employee Benefits and Retiree Health Care/Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB):
Another key issue is the continued financial pressure related to the cost of benefits,
including health care, for employees and retirees. Over the last few years, the County
reached agreement with the majority of our employee groups to reduce the County’s cost for
current employees and to eliminate retiree health care costs for future employees. This
action substantially reduced our long-term liability relating to the provision of retiree health
care. This action, in combination with pre-funding, virtually eliminated growth in the
County’s OPEB liability. The budget continues the $20 million annual set-aside, which
began in FY 2008-09, to reduce our unfunded liability for retiree health care. While we would
prefer a greater level of pre-funding, the absence of any new resources makes this
impossible without further service cuts. Nevertheless, $20 million in annual contributions will
continue to have a positive impact on the County’s OPEB liability. Our most recent OPEB
valuation indicated that over the last seven years, the County has significantly reduced its
OPEB liability and annual required contribution. The current Other Post-Employment
Benefits liability fell from $ 2.6 billion in 2006 to $793 million and the annual required
contribution fell from $216.3 million in 2006 to $87 million. None of these reductions could
have been achieved without the support and cooperation of our employees. Continued
negotiations towards Countywide health care cost containment strategies and the
redirection of designated future resources remain key to resolving the OPEB dilemma for the
County. The challenge of offering health care options to our employees that are
affordable and competitive will be an important focus in future negotiations. The Board of
Supervisors continues to make significant progress towards a solution for one of the biggest
fiscal challenges the County has faced to date.
? Pension Benefits: A major issue for FY 2015-16 and beyond continues to be the impact of
the County’s unfunded liability on pension rates and thus employee costs. In 2000, the
Contra Costa County Employees Retirement Association reported an unfunded liability of
$288.4 million and a funded ratio of 89.1%, at the end of 2013 those figures were $1.8
billion and 76.4% (the County of Contra Costa accounts for approximately 84% of those
figures). And, those figures do not include $258.5 million in outstanding pension obligations
bonds. Although we paid off a significant pension obligation bond in FY 2013-14, the
projected relief was eliminated by the pension board’s reduction of the assumed investment
rate from 7.75% to 7.25% (see the Retirement/Pension Costs – Future Year Projection/
Budgets section of this letter for more information on pension). On a positive note, the
County has begun to benefit from new lower cost PEPRA pension plans and has negotiated
a 2% cost of living adjustment to the PEPRA plans with the majority of its bargaining units.
? Long-Term Rebalancing: One of the most important challenges we faced over the last few
years was to rebalance and restructure the County's budget. A long-term solution including
a targeted negotiation strategy was developed and implemented. Our office will continue to
work with the Board and Departments to review our historical trends, identify service
priorities, and to develop strategies to address any budget imbalance that exists between
our annual expenditure needs and our annual revenues. Our goal will be to provide the most
effective and efficient community services within our available resources.
? State Budget: The state’s continuing economic recovery, prior budget cuts, and the
additional, temporary taxes provided by Proposition 30 have combined to bring the State
Budget to a much improved financial condition. California’s budget outlook for FY 2015-16
continues to show the promise begun in FY 2014-15 though there are substantial cost
pressures and budget risks in health and human services programs. Our economy is
expected to see continued improvement over the next several years and revenue growth is
exceeding last year’s projections. General Fund revenues are projected to be $109.7 billion
in FY 2014-15 and $114.6 billion in FY 2015-16. The administration projects that the
General Fund’s three major taxes collectively will increase by over $5.6 billion in FY 2015-
16—to a level that is more than $1 billion above administration estimates from last June for
the 2015-16 fiscal year. However, about half of these additional revenues are required to
satisfy Proposition 98, the K-14 funding guarantee. The other half would be placed in the
Rainy Day Fund and used to pay down debt per the terms of Proposition 2, the ballot
measure passed in November 2014 that strengthens the reserve requirements and pays
down debt in years of strong capital gains tax revenue growth.
Whether tax revenues grow further, stagnate, or, in the worst case, decline in FY 2015-16
will depend in large part on trends in volatile capital gains and business income. History
tells us that the current strength of state revenues, bolstered by a soaring stock market last
year, may not continue for long. As the Governor argues, the budget remains vulnerable to
downturns that may re-emerge with little warning. Thus building budget reserves and paying
down state debts remain important goals.
? Capital Improvement Plan: Despite having accrued substantial deferred maintenance and
capital renewal needs, the County continues to make great strides in planning the recovery/
rebuilding of our infrastructure in order to provide high quality and accessible services to our
residents. Significant fiscal constraints in FY 2008-09 through 2011-12 prevented any
appropriations for facilities maintenance or capital renewal from the general fund. A
comprehensive building condition analysis report completed in FY 2007-08 revealed the
level of deferred maintenance and improvements that would be required to extend the
useful life of County facilities and promote the health and safety of employees and the public
who utilize our facilities. Based on the information in that report, beginning in FY 2012-13
funding was allocated from the Tax Losses Reserve Fund for deferred maintenance
projects: $5 million in FY 2012-13, $10 million in FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15 and a
proposed $10 million in the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget.
Currently an updated evaluation is being finalized that will provide much needed information
in developing a formal Real Estate Master Plan of County facilities. The plan will prioritize
deferred maintenance projects, establish a preventative maintenance program, consider
under-utilized real estate assets for surplus and prioritize future needs for capital projects.
Such a plan will be used to assist the County with its strategic plan for the use of County
owned and leased facilities and will be a key tool for the Board of Supervisors’ future
allocation of capital investments. The amount of funds needed for facilities will, by default,
affect the County’s current and future operating budget and services that are provided. The
Board and administration will work diligently to balance the service needs of residents and
facility needs to provide the services. For detailed information on the County’s capital
program and progress, see Capital Improvement Plan, Page 432.
? Bonded Debt Limitation and Assessed Valuation Growth: The statutory debt limitation
for counties is 5% of assessed valuation (Government Code Section 29909), but it is
actually 1.25% of assessed valuation pursuant to the California Constitution which requires
taxable property to be assessed at full cash value rather than ? of that value. The California
Constitution limit applies to all County-controlled agencies, including the County General
and Enterprise Funds, Successor Redevelopment Agencies, Housing Authority and Special
Districts. For technical auditing purposes, only pension obligation bonds and tax allocation
bonds are counted as “general obligation bonded debt” even though neither form of debt
requires voter approval; lease revenue bonded debt and assessment district debt are not
required to be included. As of June 30, 2014 the County’s outstanding bonded debt was
$350.9 million leaving a statutory margin of $7.2 billion and a Constitutional margin of $1.5
billion. (See Current Debt Position, Page 435 for details.)
? State Realignment: In October 2011, the Governor began implementing massive changes
to the relationship between State funding and management of County operated programs.
The realignment of public safety programs has transferred to counties the fiscal and
programmatic responsibility for many criminal justice and health and human service
programs previously administered by the State. Public Safety Realignment transferred
oversight of certain nonviolent, non-serious and non-sex crimes felony offenders from the
State to counties as a means of reducing overcrowding that has long plagued the state
prison system.
In November 2012, voters approved Proposition 30, which, among other things, secured a
constitutional guarantee that local community corrections funding would continue to
-vicounties.
Although the funding has been guaranteed it is important to understand that (1)
funding comes from a portion of the Auto Vehicle License Fees and the sales tax, both of
which are subject to the ups and downs of the economy, and (2) that the funding guarantee
does not extend to local jurisdictions. In 2012, a two-year funding formula (fiscal years 2012-
13 & 2013-14) was adopted by the Department of Finance, with the advice of the California
State Association of Counties (CSAC) and the Realignment Allocation Committee (RAC), a
committee of nine representatives from the County Administrative Officers Association of
California (CAOAC), to guide the allocation of funding by the State to counties. The two year
funding formula increased funding to Contra Costa County. In October 2014, the RAC
recommended a new three-year funding formula that significantly impacted the County,
resulting in a proposed reduction to our base allocation of $5.3 million between fiscal years
2013-14 to 2015-16. This is partially mitigated by a one-time “Transition Payment” of $5.6
million that is designed to ease the transition to the new formula for those counties receiving
a funding reduction. The prudent use of funds by the Board of Supervisors and the
Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) will allow us to weather this storm in the short
term; however, continued restraint will be necessary in FY 2015-16 and beyond to maintain
critical programs that we have implemented over the last four years.
On February 9, 2015, the Public Protection Committee approved a $21.5 million budget
package, as recommended by the CCP-Executive Committee, for FY 2015-16. The budget
includes funding for only ongoing expenses in recognition of the significant reduction in the
County’s base allocation scheduled for FY 2015-16 as discussed above. In addition, the
Committee approved encumbering up to $754,000 should state or federal legislation
eliminate the ability of prisons and jails to collect fee revenue from inmate
telecommunications to fund inmate welfare programming. Should the Sheriff’s Office be
negatively impacted by such legislation, the CCP would evaluate the impact to inmate
programming and make a recommendation whether or not to fund the loss with AB 109
funding to the Public Protection Committee.
Historical Perspective
Between FY 2004-05 and FY 2007-08, total expenditures for the General Fund grew by an
average of 4.0%. Expenditures then declined by 2.6% in FY 2008-09 and another 6.1% in FY
2009-10. Although they were budgeted to grow by approximately 4.3% in FY 2010-11, actual
growth was within 2% and was funded with one-time resources. The one-time resources were
not available in FY 2011-12 and expenditures dropped by 2.6% to below FY 2009-10
expenditures. Growth has been slow, but steady since FY 2011-12. The current year budget
shown in the graph below displays more growth in expenditures than expenditure projections
indicate. This is due to a high number of vacant positions.

As depicted in the following chart, total revenues began a two year decline in FY 2008-09 and
were relatively flat until FY 2012-13 when they began to steadily increase. Growth of 4.8% is
included in the Recommended Budget; the majority of this growth is from other local revenue.
These revenues are projected based on historical trends, which have been impacted by
property tax and general economic recovery (as described above).

General Purpose Revenue Other Local Revenue Federal Assistance State Assistance
As shown below, the County has struggled with maintaining a structurally balanced budget over
the years; however, all Recommended Budgets since FY 2012-13 have been structurally
balanced. State impacts on FY 2015-16 are currently unknown but expected to be positive.
Appropriations for Contingency have been budgeted to address mid-year unanticipated issues.

Prior to the housing market collapse, the County had reversed the declining reserves trend
experienced in the last decade and achieved a balanced General Fund budget for fiscal years
2005-06 and 2006-07. However, as is their purpose, reserves were spent in FY 2007-08 and
FY 2008-09 to alleviate two fiscally difficult years. In FY 2009-10 and FY 2010-11, due to
Federal Stimulus funding and negotiated compensation concessions, the budgets were
balanced. The FY 2012-13, 2013-14, and 2014-15 Recommended Budgets did not anticipate
reserve spending for on-going program expenses and in fact projected a $3 million repayment
of reserves from reallocation of property tax revenues to the West Contra Costa Healthcare
District (Doctor’s Hospital). The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget does not include this
source of revenue due to uncertainty regarding the hospital’s status.
Fiscal year-end 2010-11 marked a change in the calculation of the County’s General Fund
Reserve to comply with terminology revisions required by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB) Statement No. 54-Fund Balance Reporting and Governmental Fund
Type Definitions. GASB issued Statement No. 54 in an effort to improve consistency in
reporting fund balance components, enhance fund balance presentation, and improve the
usefulness of fund balance information reported annually. The Statement required a revision to
the County’s 2005 Reserve Policy – unreserved was changed to unassigned. The impact was
that $32.5 million of previously categorized unreserved balance is now considered either
assigned or committed. In the following chart, the ten year history of unreserved balance has
been over-laid with year-end 2009-10 figures calculated using both definitions and the following
years calculated pursuant to the revised policy. There was no change in the total fund balance.
The County is exceeding the minimum 5% target (Unassigned Fund Balance was 11.0% of total
General Fund Revenues June 30, 2014).

Although the graph below depicts a drop in fund balance for the current and budget year, it
should be noted that actuals will likely be higher than shown due to a high number of vacant
positions. Fund balance is shown as a percentage of total General Fund revenues, which are
projected to reach budgeted figures in the current year (reduced revenue would decrease the
ratio between the two). As noted, actual expenditures are expected to be less than budget,
which will increase reserves and therefore the reserve ratio.

General Fund Revenue and Appropriations
The County Summary Information available beginning on page 381 of the Recommended
Budget depicts history and recommendations for all revenue sources and uses for all County
funds. The recommended General Fund budget of $1.423 billion is supported by local, federal,
and State resources. Almost half of the revenue, $586.9 million, or 41.3%, is dependent upon
State and federal allocations (very close to the 42.1% of last year). General Purpose revenue
available from sources such as property tax and interest income is $384.9 million. The
remaining ‘Other Local’ revenue is generated primarily by fees, fines, and licenses. In the two
fiscal years prior to 2007-08, the assessed valuations of the County’s tax rolls had increased by
double digits due to the strong housing market. The economic downturn slowed growth in
assessed valuation and had reduced most revenue sources. This trend has turned around and
the County is experiencing modest, yet consistent, revenue growth.

These revenue sources are used to fund programs throughout the County. All categories below
are self-explanatory, except ‘Other Charges’, which includes contributions to other funds such
as the Enterprise Funds and interest expense on bonds and other debt. The pie chart is used
to show the size of the expenditures in relation to each other (ideally, pie charts are not used
with negative numbers). The following chart breaks out recommended expenditures between
the major expense areas.

Our General Fund resources fund three functional areas: General Government, Health &
Human Services, and Law & Justice. The following chart shows the distribution of resources in
these three areas in the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget. Distribution of resources has
tracked very closely to these ratios for many years.
Each department of the County, within the General Fund, is included in one of these functional
areas and is described in detail in the Recommended Budget. The General Government
Functional Group includes Agriculture, Assessor, Auditor-Controller, Board of Supervisors,
Capital Improvements, Central Support Services, Clerk-Recorder, Conservation and
Development, Contingency Reserve, County Administrator, County Counsel, Crockett/Rodeo
Revenues, Debt Service, Department of Information Technology, Employee/Retiree Benefits,
Human Resources, Public Works, and Treasurer-Tax Collector. The Health and Human
Services Functional Group includes Employment and Human Services, Health Services
Department, and Veterans Services. The Law and Justice Functional Group includes Animal
Services, Conflict Defense, District Attorney, Justice Systems Development/Planning,
Probation, Public Defender, Sheriff-Coroner, and Superior Court Related Functions.
Each department was asked to submit a budget that balanced its requirements to provide
services with the County’s goals of adopting a FY 2015-16 General Fund budget that balances
annual expenses and revenues, addresses revenue restraints, pension cost increases, and
includes an appropriation for partially pre-funding the County’s OPEB liability and capital
replacement.
The budget is balanced and reflects sound financial practices. For example, ongoing revenues
are used for ongoing expenditures while one-time revenues support one-time spending. As
was mentioned above, a portion of General Fund sources is obligated to support debt service
payments.

American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) Tax Credit Bonds and Sequestration
Contra Costa County was awarded over $77 million in ARRA (Federal Stimulus) grant funds
following passage of the legislation in 2009. To date, those grant funds have been spent and
the County has no further reporting obligations to the federal government. The County also took
advantage of special ARRA bond structures known as Build America Bonds and Recovery
Zone Economic Development Bonds in 2010 to finance the construction of the new West
County Clinic. The County’s interest cost expense on these $33.8 million in bonds were to be
reduced by about $8.9 million over the term of the bonds when compared to traditional taxexempt
bonds through tax credits paid by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in advance of
each bond payment date. The expectation when the bonds were issued was that the those
federal subsidies would be fully funded in each annual federal budget over the life of the
bonds. However, the impacts of sequestration as a means of resolving the recent federal
“Fiscal Cliff” crisis resulted in across the board cuts in the federal budget for non-entitlement
programs. This includes “tax-credit” bond programs such as the Build America Bond and
Recovery Zone Economic Development Bond programs. For this reason, the County will
continue to receive about $41,000 less than it would have otherwise received if the full debt
service interest subsidies were paid by the federal government. Sequestration occurs one fiscal
year at a time and it is not yet known whether a sequestration will occur for FY 2015-16. Any
subsidies not received from the federal government must be covered by the County’s General
Fund so that the entire amount of debt service on the bonds is timely paid.
Fleet/Internal Services Fund
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes a fully funded vehicle budget, including full
vehicle depreciation expense. Requiring the annual budgeting of full vehicle depreciation will
continue to facilitate regularly scheduled replacement of County vehicles, which began in FY
2008-09.
Venture Capital Resources
The Board of Supervisors adopted a Budget Policy in 2006, which included a resource intended
to improve departmental operations and in FY 2012-13 approximately $1 million in reserve
funding was available for technology projects to be used to increase efficiencies and economies
in departments that do not have resources available within their normal operating budgets for
such expense. In FY 2012-13, approximately $600,000 was allocated for projects that ranged
from electronic appointment scheduling software to procurement system hardware and
licenses. In FY 2013-14 and 2014-15 $995,000 and $1,003,000 was allocated for projects that
ranged from auto-dialers to programming tools to develop workflow processes to automate
repetitive tasks. In FY 2015-16, departments requested over $1.6 million and the County
Administrator is recommending the full $1 million for projects. Projects include electronic poll
books, alternative key pads for electronic signatures and cloud based VoIP phones.

Retirement/Pension Costs - Future Year Projections/Budgets
As was discussed above, the rising costs of pension benefits are a key issue in Contra Costa.
In the 2009 Budget Message, a graph was included that projected the impact of the 2008
Contra Costa County Employees’ Retirement Association (CCCERA) market losses (26.5%) in
combination with an unachieved earning assumption (then 7.8%) to be a negative impact of
over 34%. Even using a five-year smoothing model, County costs were expected to begin to
rise in FY 2010-11 and virtually double by FY 2015-16. Since that time:
? Positive market experience for calendar year 2009 of 21.9% drastically changed the original
projection; however, pension costs were still expected to increase significantly over the next
five years;
? Positive market experience for calendar year 2010 of 14% again reduced projected
increases; however, pension costs were still expected to increase significantly over the next
five years;
? Market experience for calendar year 2011 was disappointing at 2.7%. Although it was a
positive number, it has a negative impact on costs because it was below the earning
assumption of 7.75%;
? Positive market experience for calendar year 2012 of 14.1% improved the 2012-13
projection;
? The CCCERA Board adopted changes in Economic Assumptions, which decreased the
Assumed Investment Rate from 7.75% to 7.25%; and
? Positive market experience for calendar years 2013 and 2014 of 16.5% and 8.4%
respectively again improved the projection stabilizing retirement cost over the next five
years.
In a letter dated February 23, 2015, CCCERA’s actuary issued a report which projected
employer contribution rate changes based on an estimated 8.4% gross market value
investment return for 2014 and other changes in economic and demographic assumptions. The
projection is derived from the December 31, 2013 actuarial valuation results, which are the
most current available. A new five year projection will be available in the Fall using December
31, 2014 valuation figures. The projections do not reflect any changes in the employer
contribution rates that could result due to future changes in the demographics of active
members or decreases in the employer contribution rates that might result from new hires going
into the PEPRA tiers. These modeled projections are intended to serve as illustrations of future
financial outcomes that are based on the information available to us at this time. Emerging
results may differ significantly if the actual experience proves to be different from these
assumptions. The four most significant variables are demographic experience, the economy,
stock market performance, and the regulatory environment.
As can be seen in the chart, the cumulative impact of smoothing gains and losses for the
aggregate plan is projected to be -7.57% (as of December 31, 2018). These projected rate
changes are implemented 18 months after the actuarial date. Therefore, the projected
decrease of 2.28% in the chart below for 2014 will be implemented on July 1, 2016.
Note that because the actuary estimated the allocation of the rate changes across the cost
groups, the actual rate changes by group will differ from those shown in the exhibit, even if the
plan-wide rate changes are close to those shown below. For instance, the cost of a General
Tier III employee is projected to decrease by 1.72% for 2014 (rate decrease date of July 1,
2016), a County Safety employee by 3.09%, and a Contra Costa County Fire District Safety
employee by 5.87%. The total impact to the County, all things considered, is expected to be
very close to these figures.

The chart below, which County Administration staff and the Auditor prepared together, uses all
of the latest information available for a new five year projection of total County pension costs,
including Fire. The cumulative effect of the market rate improvements is dramatic. Presented
in the chart are four years’ of actual data, a projection of the current year (straight-lining eight
months of actual data), the Recommended Budget for FY 2015-16, and a projection based on
the Recommended Budget for FY 2016-17 and beyond (no increases in FTE or wages). A
significant drop in projected expenses in FY 2014-15 was due to the retirement of one of the
County’s pension obligation bonds that was netted against increased in FY 2014-15. Note that
the Board changed its OPEB funding policy and redirected all the savings achieved ($33 million
annually) towards funding the additional retirement expense due primarily from the reduction in
the assumed rate.



Summary of Impacts
The following impact statements from several of our major departments depict the tone of the
Recommended Budget, which is optimistic. The goal of the FY 2011-12 budget was to make
cuts that would balance the budget in a way to promote future sustainability into FY 2012-13
and beyond. The goal was reached and the majority of our immediate problems were solved.
Due to mandates on service levels, budget reform was enacted primarily in the area of
employee compensation. The majority of our County employees were impacted by reduced
wages and increased pension costs. Taken together, these impacts allowed the County to
achieve a structurally balanced County budget, which allowed for the continuation of essential
public service. The vast majority of our labor contracts expired June 30, 2013. Contract
negotiations were completed for 85% of the County workforce. A 3% increase was built into the
FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for negotiated increases, the majority of which was
absorbed by departments through increased revenues. The Recommended Budget for FY
2015-16 includes growth in appropriations and increased general fund subsidies for many
County departments. There was insufficient growth, however, to fund all FY 2015-16 baseline
requests. The budget includes a net increase of 35 full-time equivalent positions countywide.
Of this number, 27 are in the General fund, one is in the Library, and seven are in the CCC Fire
Protection District.
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Animal Services:
The Animal Services Department services all of Contra Costa County in various ways. We are
pleased that the department is operating with a high degree of success on many levels, which
recently resulted in the online publication “Bay Woof” naming our shelter as the “Best Municipal
Shelter” in the area over runners-up in Berkeley, San Francisco and Alameda. However, our
challenges remain similar to other municipal shelters that by law cannot screen which animals
to accept. The Department hopes to build upon and improve adoption numbers, while at the
same time increasing public education and outreach to educate animal owners to care for and
not abandon animals. We believe that the FY 2015-16 budget provides the funding to begin to
accomplish these goals. More detailed information is included in the departmental narrative
section of the budget beginning on page 299.
Human Resources:
The Human Resources Department services all County departments and is funded primarily
from charges to departments. Approximately 30% of the funding is through a direct general
purpose revenue allocation. The FY 2015-16 recommendations include funding for new
support staff added during the current fiscal year to develop a team better equipped to provide
improved service delivery to County departments and individuals seeking County employment.
The County has undertaken a nationwide search for a new Director to move the department
into the 21st century. In the meantime, the County has contracted with a consulting firm that
has made significant process in migrating aged County systems onto new more efficient
platforms. One such project is the future implementation of an automated employee
recruitment and onboarding process to replace the current paper-based workflow system. More
detailed information is included in the departmental narrative section of the budget beginning on
Page 107.

The County Library is not part of the General Fund. In excess of 86.9% of the County Library
budget is dependent upon property tax revenue, which has been impacted by reductions in
assessed valuations. In years prior to the economic downturn, annual revenues exceeded ongoing
expenditure needs and the Library was able to not only fund one-time projects and
enhance materials, but was also able to build a reserve. The Library is cautiously optimistic
about the modest increase in property tax revenue but continues to exercise diligence in
strategically filling staff vacancies based on workload, classification, and community library
needs. The Library budget is balanced and structurally sound. The Library continues to be a
vital asset and support to the community through innovative programming advancements in
technology, and use of media. More detailed information is included in the departmental
narrative section of the budget beginning on Page 111.
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Employment and Human Services:
The Employment and Human Services Department (EHSD) General Fund allocation has been
increased by approximately $950,000 over the 2014-15 fiscal year. Increases in salary and
benefits are being offset by increases in County General Fund and current estimates of state
and federal revenue. The FY 2015-16 budget recommendations do not take into account any
unknown impacts to funding due to the State budget. EHSD is continuing a redesign of how
social services are provided in Contra Costa County to better utilize strategic partnerships and
the innovative use of technology to assist clients and provide more efficient and effective
services. In addition, the Department continues to rebuild its infrastructure and resources,
carefully adding capacity to respond to a significant increase in Medi-Cal cases as a result of
the Affordable Care Act. More detailed information is included in the departmental narrative
section of the budget beginning on Page 161.
Health Services:
The Recommended Budget for the Health Services Department for FY 2015-16 includes an
increase of approximately $161,000 from the FY 2014-15 budget. The Health Department
successfully transitioned the delivery system to meet the challenges and requirements of the
Affordable Care Act (ACA). The Health Plan has added more than 65,000 Medi-Cal expansion
members since the implementation of the ACA, and now provides comprehensive, quality
health coverage to more than 170,000 people in Contra Costa County. To meet this increased
demand for services, the Regional Medical Center added additional clinic capacity, expanded
the features of the Electronic Medical Record and begun a roll out of a new medical home
design. More detailed information is included in the departmental narrative section of the
budget beginning on Page 209.
LAW AND JUSTICE
District Attorney:
The FY 2015-16 budget continues to fund new initiatives in the District Attorney’s Office and
those established in prior years, specifically targeting the Richmond Ceasefire program, gang
prosecution, domestic violence prosecution, the West and Central County Family Justice

Centers, and prosecution of sexual assault, human trafficking and firearm cases. In FY 2015-
16, new funding is recommended for four additional Deputy District Attorney-Basic positions
and one additional Victim/Witness Program Specialist to enhance current programs. In addition,
the budget includes funding for one Crime Scene Specialist position to assist with the newly
established Forensics Division and one grant writer position to assist the Office in securing new
grant revenues and manage existing grants. The District Attorney’s budget does include a
minor vacancy factor, which has been reduced to $432,391 from the FY 2014-15 level of
$685,087, to balance. Funding initiated in prior budgets related to AB 109 is continued in the FY
2015-16 budget for the District Attorney.
Although the stability of the District Attorney’s budget has improved considerably, we remain
cautiously optimistic for the future taking into account the continued impacts related to AB 109
and Proposition 47 implementation and general increases in baseline costs. More detailed
information is included in the departmental narrative section of the budget beginning on page
307.
Probation:
The FY 2015-16 budget for the Probation Department contemplates a $2 million reduction in
Title IV-E reimbursements to the County for housing juveniles in imminent risk of foster care
placement. Additionally, the Department is anticipating increased operating costs attributable to
detention medical expenses as well as court-ordered custodial care placement trends. The
recommended budget funds the baseline services, including negotiated and anticipated salary
and benefit increases as well as nine new positions at Juvenile Hall added in December 2014.
There is no impact to the department’s continued vacancy factor of $1.37 million. More detailed
information is included in the departmental narrative section of the budget beginning on Page
329.
Public Defender:
The FY 2015-16 budget reflects an increase of 6.0 FTEs in the Public Defender’s Office. The
staffing augmentation acknowledges increased caseloads in the Department and will facilitate
compliance requirements related to the immigration consequences of non-citizen clients. In
addition, new staff will implement support and services for the new client population under
Laura’s Law. The budget is balanced with no vacancy factor and the County Administrator
believes that current staffing is appropriate to meet the needs of the department. More detailed
information is included in the departmental narrative section of the budget beginning on Page
341.
Sheriff-Coroner:
The FY 2015-16 budget continues to fund services previously restored following several years
of serious expenditure reductions in the Sheriff’s Office. The budget funds negotiated
compensation increases with the Deputy Sheriff’s Association and recommends funding for ten
additional Deputy Sheriff positions to enhance County Patrol. Continued increases to baseline
expenditures remain an issue, but much of those operational increases are offset by a
significant reduction in projected retirement expenses in FY 2015-16. Similar to other
departments, the departmental budget condition has improved considerably; however, we
remain cautiously optimistic for the future taking into account the continued impacts related to
AB 109 and Proposition 47 implementation. Although the initial impact of Proposition 47 was a reduction
in the adult inmate population, specifically at the West County Detention Facility, the
Sheriff’s Office reports that inmate counts are beginning to increase again as those inmates
begin to reoffend. There also remains a considerable strain on the Martinez Detention Facility,
which for years has battled issues of separating maximum security inmates with different
classifications within the facility. More detailed information is included in the departmental
narrative section of the budget beginning on Page 345.
FIRE DISTRICT
Contra Costa County Fire Protection District:
The Contra Costa County Fire Protection District, a special district within the County, continues
to face significant fiscal difficulties. The District has had the challenge of balancing those
difficulties with maintaining a system that ensures the health and welfare of residents within the
District. In FY 2015-16, the District is recommending staffing for 24 engine companies and three
Emergency Medical Service (EMS) squads. Engine companies are staffed with three personnel
and squads are staffed with two personnel, all of which are trained firefighters and emergency
medical technicians (or paramedics). Although the FY 2015-16 budget still contemplates an
annual shortfall of $4.1 million, the District has been working responsibly to manage vacancies
within the department throughout the year to minimize the impact to reserves and continues to
work with the County Administrator’s Office to evaluate District operations to ensure the safety
and security of District residents. More detailed information is included in the departmental
narrative section of the budget beginning on Page 373.
Conclusion
This budget continues to reflect years of careful, comprehensive and continuing review of
County operations to cope with economic challenges. In our assessment of County operations
– and at every opportunity – we continue to make changes in delivering services that are more
efficient and less costly. These changes, which could not have been accomplished without
financial sacrifices from our employees, have allowed us to protect the services that residents
need and expect from County government.
The County has and will continue to adapt to changing circumstances. Our strategy over the
last several years has been to harness our organizational discipline and innovation to reduce
our spending and continue our Mission: “to provide public services that improve the quality of
life of our residents and the economic viability of our businesses”. Our success depends upon
a continuation of that strategy.