Fiscal Year 2015-16 continued to see the County moving in the right direction. After weathering
the “Great Recession,” we continue to see improvement in our financial status. Contra Costa
County has managed the economic downturn through cooperation between the County Board,
Department Heads, and Employees. We have made prudent fiscal choices, lived within our
means, and continue to plan ahead. None of this has been easy nor has it been painless.
However, it is through this combined effort that we have been able to continue to achieve a
budget that is structurally balanced.
Cautious and thoughtful fiscal management has placed us on solid economic footing. Our goal is
to continue that approach and avoid future fiscal ups and downs. The Board, Department Heads,
and the entire County workforce will continue to work together to retain the balance in this $3.3
billion ($1.5 billion General Fund) budget for FY 2016-17 and beyond.
In addition to a structurally balanced budget for the fifth consecutive year, there were a number of
key accomplishments this past year.
? Recruitment of a new Animal Services Director who will continue the Department’s effort to
match adoptable animals with homes, while delivering high quality services to the
community.
? Successful local Medi-Cal expansion effort under the Affordable Care Act, whereby nearly
one-fifth of County residents are now enrolled in our Contra Costa Health Plan with a
majority of them being cared for in our own hospital and clinics.
? Agreement with a majority of our employee Unions on healthcare provisions that resulted
in the County picking up 100% of the cost increase for 2016 and allowed our employees
to move to a three-tier plan that provides greater flexibility in coverage and membership.
? Implementation of Laura’s Law to provide assisted outpatient mental health treatment to
those with serious mental illnesses and further integrate our mental health, substance
abuse and homeless services.
? Improved public safety with an innovative public-private partnership between Consolidated
Fire and AMR to provide high quality emergency ambulance services to the majority of
County residents. This new arrangement will speed ambulance response time, reduce
service duplication and enable us to access new federal funding.
? Opened two Family Justice Centers, one in the City of Concord and one in the City of
Richmond. These one-stop centers provide vital help to victims of domestic violence,
sexual assault, child abuse, and elder abuse.
? Opened a new Reentry Success Center in the City of Richmond to provide services to
formerly incarcerated individuals to help them get housing, jobs and reduce the likelihood
of criminal recidivism.
? Created the position of County Sustainability Coordinator to help lead our sustainability
efforts and pursue new funding to expand those efforts.
? Maintained our AAA credit rating by exercising strong financial management that enabled
us to restructure debt, saving $4.6 million in net present value and an average annual
savings of $417,000 over the 13 remaining years to maturity.
The County’s long-term, strategic goal continues to be to the provision of public services which
improve the quality of life of our residents and the economic viability of our businesses. This goal
provides the context for decisions regarding the recommendations in this Recommended budget.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget continues to provide for essential community services to
our residents and minimizes adverse impacts to the community. However, as per the norm, once
the State budget is adopted, we likely will need to consider budget adjustments and will provide
the Board with options at that time.
The County Board, Department Heads, and employees all worked together to address our fiscal
challenges during the “Great Recession.” I particularly want to thank Department Heads and all of
our employees for their dedication, as well as their valuable and thoughtful input throughout the
process. Our goal has been to ensure a fair and transparent budget process and to produce a
user-friendly budget document. A great deal of effort has been put into developing and producing
this budget.
The Recommended Budget represents a work plan to achieve our mission, priorities and goals in
the coming year. Beginning on page 21 is a discussion of a number of Key Issues affecting the
County. Below are the three principal issues facing the County that have particularly informed or
impacted the development of our budget for the next year.
Labor
For the first time in over 10 years, we have contracts in place with all of our labor unions. With
their help, we have implemented a long-term rebalancing plan to reduce our expenditures and
restructure our service delivery to provide the most effective services within annual available
resources. This collaboration has meant that we can propose additional resources to augment
departmental staff resources in the upcoming budget.
However, over half of our labor contracts will come open during the 2016-17 Fiscal Year. Eight
different bargaining units representing over 5,000 employees will have their contracts open for
discussion. These bargaining units represent employees in every department in the County and
special districts. The County will be challenged to meet all of the likely requests for increased
wages and benefits from these groups. Successful contract negotiation is key to maintaining
fiscal stability. Built into our projection is a three percent wage increase for these open contracts.

Capital Projects
The County Administrator's Office has added a Chief Deputy County Administrator designated
specifically for the purpose of updating the County Capital Improvement Plan (CIP). In March of
2015, the County Board of Supervisors received an updated Comprehensive Building Condition
Assessment which identified $272.2 million in deferred facilities maintenance needs and capital
renewal requirements touching every department in the County. An earlier needs assessment
from 2007 identified $270.2 million. The new position will help the County Board identify and set
priorities for the elimination of structurally deficient or no longer needed structures, and look to
replace structures while reducing the backlog of deferred maintenance. More information of this
subject can be found in the Capital Improvement Plan section of this document on page 475.

Economic Projection
The economy in Contra Costa County and the Bay Area continues to recover from the 'Great
Recession.' However, it would be inaccurate to say that we have fully recovered, and we will
need to be cautious to insure that we do not return to a period during which we failed to balance
our needs with our limited resources. As Governor Jerry Brown said in his 2016 State of the State
Address, "The challenge is to solve today's problems without making those of tomorrow even
worse."
Each department was asked to submit a budget that balanced its requirements to provide
services with the County's goals of adopting a FY 2016-17 budget that balances annual expenses
and revenues, addresses revenue restraints, pension cost increases, and includes an
appropriation for partially pre-funding the County's OPEB liability, capital replacement, and debt
service payments. Thus, the budget is balanced and reflects sound financial practices.
This budget continues to reflect years of careful, comprehensive and continuing review of County
operations to cope with economic challenges. In our assessment of County operations- and at
every opportunity- we continue to make changes in delivering services that are more efficient
and less costly. These changes, which could not have been accomplished without financial
sacrifices from our employees, have allowed us to protect the services that residents need and
expect from County government.
The County has and will continue to adapt to changing circumstances. Our strategy over the last
several years has been to harness our organizational discipline and innovation to reduce our
spending and continue our Mission: "to provide public services that improve the quality of life of
our residents and the economic viability of our businesses". Our success depends upon a
continuation of that strategy.