As the current fiscal year draws to a close, and we look forward to fiscal year 2014-15, it is clear
that the County is moving in the right direction. After years of significant challenge we are
seeing improvement in our financial status. Contra Costa County has managed the economic
downturn of the past several years through cooperation between the County Board,
Department Heads, and Employees by making prudent fiscal choices, living within our means,
and continuing to plan ahead. None of this has been easy nor has it been painless. However, it
is through this combined effort that we have been able to achieve a budget that is structurally
balanced.
Cautious and thoughtful fiscal management has placed us on solid economic footing.
Continuing that approach will keep us there, and avoid future fiscal ups and downs. The Board,
Department Heads, and the entire County workforce will continue to work together to retain the
balance in this $2.7 billion ($1.4 billion General Fund) budget for FY 2014-15 and beyond.
In addition to a structurally balanced budget for the third consecutive year, there have been a
number of key accomplishments this past year.
• Standard & Poor’s (S&P) has raised Contra Costa County’s credit rating to “AAA” from
“AA”, a reflection on the County’s prudent management of finances as the Bay Area
eases out of the recession. S&P credited the strong management of the County and the
capacity to meet ongoing financial commitments. S&P forecasts a stable outlook for the
County, expecting it to maintain strong reserves and a balanced budget over the critical
next few years. The ratings agency also raised its long term ratings to “AA+” from “AA-“
on Contra Costa’s existing lease revenue bonds and pension obligation bonds. Only a
handful of other California counties have the “AAA” designation, which is the highest
rating that S&P gives.
• The Federal Court vacated a long standing consent decree. In doing so, the Court found
that, in addition to having made great strides in diversity, the County has also developed
and implemented policies and laws that promote diversity and prevent discrimination in
a broader range than was encompassed by the consent decree. Contra Costa adopted
a Merit System Ordinance broadly prohibiting discrimination in county employment,
iihired
an affirmative action officer, developed an affirmative action plan and established
a hiring outreach oversight committee that reviews the statistical data of female and
minority hiring and then makes recommendations regarding recruitment. Based on all of
these circumstances, the court found that the County has substantially complied with the
consent decree, and that the ongoing day to day supervision of county activities under
the consent decree was no longer necessary.
• The County Library system was awarded the National Medal for Museum and Library
Service by the Institute of Museum and Library Services. The National Medal is the
nation’s highest honor conferred on libraries for service to the community and celebrates
institutions that make a difference for individuals, families, and communities. Specifically
cited in the award were Library-a-Go-Go, Snap & Go, and Discover & Go, programs
which demonstrate and fulfill the Library’s mission to bring library service to the users,
whenever and wherever it is needed.
• The County partnered with Covered CA to conduct multiple news conferences
highlighting the availability of health care under the Affordable Care Act; generated
dozens of print and electronic news stories encouraging residents to sign up for
insurance or Medi-Cal. Bay Area enrollment numbers have been very strong in
comparison to other parts of the state, in large part due to outreach by the County.
• We continue the configuration of an electronic timekeeping system with a projected golive
date later this year. It is important to note that implementation of this system will
include electronic capture of supervision thereby allowing the County to begin to report
supervision levels. This feature will provide key information required to support the
County’s goal of flattening the organization.
• The realignment of public safety programs (described in more detail later) has
transferred to counties the fiscal and programmatic responsibility for many Criminal
Justice and Health and Human Service programs previously administered by the State.
The Public Protection Committee has approved ongoing and one-time funding for
County departments and community programming deigned to prevent recidivism and
protect the public.
Key Budget Issues
The Recommended Budget continues to provide for essential community services to our
residents and minimizes adverse impacts to the community. However, as per the norm, once
the State budget is adopted, we likely will need to consider budget adjustments and will provide
the Board with options at that time. By the end of the current fiscal year, we expect to be in
contract with the majority of our labor unions. In the last few contract periods, with their help we
have implemented a long-term rebalancing plan to reduce our expenditures and restructure our
service delivery to provide the most effective services within annual available resources. This
collaboration has meant that we can propose additional resources to augment departmental
staff resources in the upcoming budget and has virtually eliminated the need for lay-offs.
-iii-
The County Board, Department Heads, and employees have come together and have worked
collaboratively to address our fiscal challenges. I particularly want to thank Department Heads
and all of our employees for their dedication and sacrifice, as well as their valuable and
thoughtful input throughout the process. Our goal has been to ensure a fair and transparent
budget process and to produce a user-friendly budget document. A great deal of effort has
been put into developing and producing this budget.
The Recommended Budget represents a work plan to achieve our mission and priorities in the
coming year. Below are a number of key issues that have informed or impacted the
development of our budget for next year.
• Property Tax Recovery: Low growth in the housing market in the recent past has
significantly impacted the County budget as 82.7% of General Purpose revenues and 25.9%
of total General Fund revenues come from property taxes. As a result, the slowdown in the
housing market continues to have a greater impact on our County than most other Bay Area
Counties. After three straight years of negative growth of assessed valuation, the County
experienced positive growth of 0.86% in FY 2012-13; however, the majority of cities were
still negative. In the current year, assessed value increased by 3.45%. We are hopeful that
we will continue to see property tax recovery to counterbalance the cumulative negative
assessed valuation since FY 2008-09. The County is projecting very high growth of 5% for
FY 2014-15. In years prior to FY 2008-09, growth had been atypically high and,
unfortunately, our expenditures counted on that growth. A more modest annual growth of
3% is projected for FY 2015-16 and beyond.
• Employee Benefits and Retiree Health Care/Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB):
Another key issue is the continued financial pressure related to the cost of benefits,
including health care, for employees and retirees. Over the last few years, the County
reached agreement with the majority of our employee groups to reduce the County’s cost for
current employees and to eliminate retiree health care costs for future employees. This
action substantially reduced our long-term liability relating to the provision of retiree health
care. This action, in combination with pre-funding, virtually eliminated growth in the
County’s OPEB liability. The budget continues the $20 million annual set-aside, which
began in FY 2008-09, to reduce our unfunded liability for retiree health care. While we would
prefer a greater level of pre-funding, the absence of any new resources makes this
impossible without further service cuts. Nevertheless, $20 million in annual contributions will
continue to have a positive impact on the County’s OPEB liability. Our most recent OPEB
valuation indicated that over the last six years, the County has significantly reduced its
OPEB liability and annually required contribution. The annually required contribution fell
from $216.3 million in 2006 to $99.7 million. None of these reductions could have been
achieved without the support and cooperation of our employees. Continued negotiations
towards Countywide health care cost containment strategies and the redirection of
designated future resources remain key to resolving the OPEB dilemma for the County. The
challenge of offering health care options to our employees that are affordable and
competitive will be an important focus in future negotiations. The Board of Supervisors
continues to make significant progress towards a solution for one of the biggest fiscal
challenges the County has faced to date. The 2014 OPEB valuation will be released in the
next few weeks.

Pension Benefits: A major issue for FY 2014-15 and beyond continues to be the impact of
the 2008 equity market losses in our pension fund. While the five year smoothing period will
end in FY 2014-15, the County will continue to pay for these losses over the remaining
thirteen year amortization period. We paid off a significant pension obligation bond in FY
2013-14. Projected relief was eliminated, however, by the pension board’s recent reduction
of the assumed investment rate from 7.75% to 7.25% (see the Retirement/Pension Costs –
Future Year Projection/Budgets section of this letter for more information on pension). The
County has begun to benefit from new lower cost PEPRA pension plans. Additionally the
County has negotiated a 2% cost of living adjustment to the PEPRA plans with the majority
of its bargaining units.
• Long-Term Rebalancing: One of the most important challenges we faced over the last few
years was to rebalance and restructure the County's budget. A long-term solution including
a targeted negotiation strategy was developed and implemented. Our office will continue to
work with the Board and departments to review our historical trends, identify service
priorities, and to develop strategies to address any budget imbalance that exists between
our annual expenditure needs and our annual revenues. Our goal will be to provide the most
effective and efficient community services within our available resources.
• State Budget: The state’s continuing economic recovery, prior budget cuts, and the
additional, temporary taxes provided by Proposition 30 have combined to bring the state
budget to a much improved financial condition. The Legislative Analyst’s Office (LAO) is
indicating that with continued growth in the economy and restraint in new program
commitments, the state budget could see multibillion-dollar operating surpluses within a few
years. The state’s FY 2013-14 budget plan assumed a year-end reserve of $1.1 billion. The
LAO’s revenue forecast in November 2013 anticipated $6.4 billion in higher revenues for
2012-13 and 2013-14 combined, though revenues are trending higher than anticipated.
These higher revenues are offset by $5 billion in increased expenditures, almost entirely due
to greater required spending for schools and community colleges. Combined with a
projected $3.2 billion operating surplus for the state in 2014-15, these factors lead the LAO
to project in November that, absent any changes to current laws and policies, the state
would end 2014-15 with a $5.6 billion reserve. The administration’s multiyear budget
projection, however, which reflects both its updated revenue and expenditure projections, as
well as projections of various proposals made by the Governor in his 2014–15 budget plan,
shows more modest surplus projections. The administration projects that General Fund
revenues will annually exceed expenditures after 2014–15, resulting in an operating surplus
of $1.7 billion in 2015–16, growing to $2.3 billion in 2017–18. This disparity results in large
part from a few billion dollars in each year for wall of debt payments that are not included in
the LAO forecast.
However, the LAO notes that continued caution is needed since the state's fiscal recovery is
dependent on a number of assumptions that may not come to pass. The forecast assumes
continuing economic growth and slow but steady growth in stock prices. A significant
portion of the recent revenue surge probably results from capital gains–related Personal
Income Tax, caused by large increases in stock prices throughout 2013. “As we know from
past experience, this revenue surge may prove short–lived. The Legislature should prioritize
increasing the size of the Governor’s proposed reserves and setting aside additional funds
in anticipation of making bigger payments on the state’s key retirement liabilities (including
payments to address California State Teachers’ Retirement System unfunded obligations).
-v-
In order to keep the state on a sound fiscal footing, the state would be wise to make only
limited and targeted ongoing program commitments from additional revenues that may be
identified this Spring”.
• Capital Improvement Plan: Despite having accrued substantial deferred maintenance and
capital renewal needs, the County continues to make great strides in planning the
recovery/rebuilding of our infrastructure in order to provide high quality and accessible
services to our residents. Significant fiscal constraints in FY 2008-09 through 2011-12
prevented any appropriations for facilities maintenance or capital renewal from the general
fund. A comprehensive building condition analysis report completed in FY 2007-08 revealed
the level of deferred maintenance and improvements that would be required to extend the
useful life of County facilities and promote the health and safety of employees and the public
who utilize our facilities. Based on the information in that report, beginning in FY 2011-12
funding was allocated from the Tax Losses Reserve Fund, including $10 million in the FY
2014-15 Recommended Budget.
Currently an updated evaluation is underway. The assessment, which is targeted for June
2014, will provide much needed information in developing a formal Real Estate Master Plan
of County facilities. Such a plan will be used to assist the County with its strategic plan for
the use of County owned and leased facilities. The Master Plan will also be a key tool for
the Board of Supervisors’ future allocation of capital investments. The amount of funds
required to be allocated for facilities will, by default, affect the County’s current and future
operating budget and services that are provided. The Board and administration will work
diligently to balance the service needs of residents and facility needs to provide the
services. For detailed information on the County’s capital program and progress, see
Capital Improvement Plan, Page 420.
• Bonded Debt Limitation and Assessed Valuation Growth: The statutory debt limitation
for counties is 5% of assessed valuation (Government Code Section 29909), but it is
actually 1.25% of assessed valuation pursuant to the California Constitution which requires
taxable property to be assessed at full cash value rather than ? of that value. The California
Constitution limit applies to all County-controlled agencies, including the County General
and Enterprise Funds, Successor Redevelopment Agencies, Housing Authority and Special
Districts. For technical auditing purposes, only pension obligation bonds and tax allocation
bonds are counted as “general obligation bonded debt” even though neither form of debt
requires voter approval; lease revenue bonded debt and assessment district debt are not
required to be included. As of June 30, 2013 the County’s outstanding bonded debt was
$404.5 million leaving a statutory margin of $6.8 billion and a Constitutional margin of $1.8
billion. (See Current Debt Position, Page 423 for details.)
• State Realignment: In October 2011, the Governor began implementing massive changes
to the relationship between State funding and management of County operated programs.
The realignment of public safety programs has transferred to counties the fiscal and
programmatic responsibility for many Criminal Justice and Health and Human Service
programs previously administered by the State. Public Safety Realignment transferred
oversight of felons exiting State prison for nonviolent, non-serious and non-sex crimes from
the State to County probation departments and custody of newly convicted "non, non, non"
felons to county Sheriffs instead of State prison as part of an effort to reduce bulging
populations in the prisons.

County public safety departments began implementing Public Safety Realignment with the
Board’s October 4, 2011 adoption of the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) Plan.
Since that time, the CCP Executive Committee has met monthly to monitor the progress of
plan implementation and to discuss the need for modifications, if needed. On February 24,
2014, the Public Protection Committee approved a $22.4 million budget package, as
recommended by the CCP-Executive Committee, for fiscal year 2014-15. This includes
$21.3 million in ongoing and $1.1 million in one-time costs, by County departments and
through community programming. In addition, the Committee provided direction to staff to
encumber up to $1.2 million of fiscal year 2013-14 funding as one-time, start-up funding for
implementation of regional reentry plans in West and Central/East county. In addition, it
should be noted that the Sheriff’s Office will continue to work on an upgrade to the West
County Detention Facility (WCDF) cell locking mechanisms, funded at $1.6 million in the
fiscal year 2013-14 budget, during fiscal year 2014-15 as well.
In November 2012, voters approved Proposition 30, which, among other things, secured a
constitutional guarantee that local community corrections funding would continue to
counties. Although the funding has been guaranteed it is important to understand that (1)
funding comes from a portion of the Auto Vehicle License Fees and the sales tax, both of
which are subject to the ups and downs of the economy, and (2) AB 109 granted discretion
for the allocation of those funds, including any growth, to the California Department of
Finance (DOF) through fiscal year 2013-14. In 2012, a two-year funding formula (fiscal
years 2012-13 & 2013-14) was adopted by DOF, with the advice of the California State
Association of Counties (CSAC) and the County Administrative Officers Association of
California (CAOAC), to guide the allocation of funding by the State to counties. There has
been no decision regarding funding allocation methodology for fiscal year 2014-15 and
beyond, except that the Governor’s January Proposed Budget recognizes that the formula
should be flexible for the next several years. The Governor’s Proposed Budget
contemplates $934.1 million available to counties for implementation of realignment in 2014-
15, which is approximately a 6.5% decrease over the statewide allocation in 2013-14
(excluding growth). County departments impacted by the realignment have been working
diligently to implement programming for the new population; however, with the absence of a
funding methodology going forward and a reduction in statewide funding, it is important to
continue to exercise fiscal prudence in the expansion of programming countywide.
Historical Perspective
Between FY 2003-04 and FY 2007-08, total expenditures for the General Fund grew by an
average of 4.0%. Then declined by 2.6% in FY 2008-09 and another 6.1% in FY 2009-10.
Although they were budgeted to grow by approximately 4.3% in FY 2010-11, actual growth was
within 2% and was funded with one-time resources. The one-time resources were not available
in FY 2011-12 and expenditures dropped by 2.6% to below FY 2009-10 expenditures. The
current year budget shown in the graph below displays more growth in expenditures than
expenditure projections indicate. This is due to a high number of vacant positions.

As depicted in the following chart, total revenues began a two year decline in FY 2008-09 and
have been relatively flat since then. Growth of 3.1% is included in the Recommended Budget;
the majority of this growth is from state sources. These revenues are projected based on
historical trends, which have been impacted by the property tax and general economic
slowdown (as described above).
General Purpose Revenue Other Local Revenue Federal Assistance State Assistance
As shown below, the County has struggled with maintaining a structurally balanced budget over
the years; however, all Recommended Budgets since FY 2012-13 have been structurally
balanced. State impacts on FY 2014-15 are currently unknown. Appropriations for Contingency
have been budgeted to address mid-year unanticipated issues.

Prior to the housing market collapse, the County had reversed the declining reserves trend
experienced in the last decade and achieved a balanced General Fund budget for fiscal years
2005-06 and 2006-07. However, as is their purpose, reserves were spent in FY 2007-08 and
FY 2008-09 to alleviate two fiscally difficult years. In FY 2009-10 and FY 2010-11, due to
Federal Stimulus funding and negotiated compensation concessions, the budgets were
balanced. The FY 2012-13 and 2013-14 Recommended Budgets did not anticipate reserve
spending for on-going program expenses and in fact projected a $3 million repayment of
reserves from the FY 2010-11 loan to Doctor’s Hospital. The FY 2014-15 Recommended
Budget does the same.
Fiscal year-end 2010-11 marked a change in the calculation of the County’s General Fund
Reserve to comply with terminology revisions required by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB) Statement No. 54-Fund Balance Reporting and Governmental Fund
Type Definitions. GASB issued Statement No. 54 in an effort to improve consistency in
reporting fund balance components, enhance fund balance presentation, and improve the
usefulness of fund balance information reported annually. The Statement required a revision to
the County’s 2005 Reserve Policy – unreserved was changed to unassigned. The impact was
that $32.5 million of previously categorized unreserved balance is now considered either
assigned or committed. In the following chart, the ten year history of unreserved balance has
been over-laid with year-end 2009-10 figures calculated using both definitions and the following
years calculated pursuant to the revised policy. There was no change in the total fund balance.
The County is still meeting the minimum 5% target (Unassigned Fund Balance was 9.4% of
total General Fund Revenues). Although the graph below depicts a drop in fund balance for the
current and budget year, it should be noted that actuals will likely be higher than shown. Fund
balance is shown as a percentage of total General Fund revenues, which are projected to reach
budgeted figures in the current year (reduced revenue will decrease the ratio between the two).
As noted, actual expenditures are expected to be less than budget.

General Fund Revenue and Appropriations
The County Summary Information available beginning on page 369 of the Recommended
Budget depicts history and recommendations for all revenue sources and uses for all County
funds. The recommended General Fund budget of $1.353 billion is supported by local, federal,
and State resources. Almost half of the revenue, $571.6 million, or 42.1%, is dependent upon
State and federal allocations (down slightly from 44.7% last year). General Purpose revenue
available from sources such as property tax and interest income is $351.9 million. The
remaining ‘Other Local’ revenue is generated primarily by fees, fines, and licenses. Note that
the difference between revenues and expenditures is due to the “repayment” of reserves from
the West Contra Costa Healthcare District (see page 89 for more information). In the two fiscal
years prior to 2007-08, the assessed valuations of the County’s tax rolls had increased by
double digits due to the strong housing market. The continued economic downturn has slowed
growth in assessed valuation and has reduced most revenue sources.

Our General Fund resources fund three functional areas: General Government, Health &
Human Services, and Law & Justice. The following chart shows the distribution of resources in
these three areas in the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget. Distribution of resources has
tracked very closely to these ratios for many years.
Each department of the County, within the General Fund, is included in one of these functional
areas and is described in detail in the Recommended Budget. The General Government
Functional Group includes Agriculture, Assessor, Auditor-Controller, Board of Supervisors,
Central Support Services, Clerk-Recorder, Conservation and Development, Contingency
Reserve, County Administrator, County Counsel, Crockett/Rodeo Revenues, Debt Service,
Department of Information Technology, Employee/Retiree Benefits, Human Resources, Public
Works, and Treasurer-Tax Collector. The Law and Justice Functional Group includes Animal
Services, Conflict Defense, District Attorney, Justice Systems Development/Planning,
Probation, Public Defender, Sheriff-Coroner, and Superior Court Related Functions. The
Health and Human Services Functional Group includes Employment and Human Services,
Health Services Department, and Veterans Services.
Each department was asked to submit a budget that balanced its requirements to provide
services with the County’s goals of adopting a FY 2014-15 General Fund budget that balances
annual expenses and revenues, addresses revenue restraints, pension cost increases, and
includes an appropriation for partially pre-funding the County’s OPEB liability and capital
replacement.
The budget is balanced and reflects sound financial practices. For example, ongoing revenues
are used for ongoing expenditures while one-time revenues support one-time spending. As
was mentioned above, a portion of General Fund sources is obligated to support debt service
payments.

American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009
Department and County Administration staff continue to be involved in tracking and pursuing
opportunities available through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Federal
Stimulus). Contra Costa County has been awarded over $77 million in ARRA funds. In an
effort to keep residents informed about ARRA and our efforts in Contra Costa County, the
County Administrator’s Office has posted a report that tracks the County’s efforts in securing
stimulus funding for various projects and programs that will improve the lives of our residents
and stimulate the economy. The report, which is updated regularly, is available for review at
www.cccounty.us.
The County took advantage of special ARRA bond structures known as Build America Bonds
and Recovery Zone Facility Bonds in 2010 to finance the West County Clinic. The County’s
interest cost expense on these $33.8 million in bonds will be reduced by about $8.9 million over
the term of the bonds when compared to traditional tax-exempt bonds. The expectation when
the bonds were issued was that the federal subsidies of a portion of the debt service interest
cost would be fully funded in each annual federal budget. However, the lack of a permanent
resolution of the recent federal “Fiscal Cliff” crisis resulted in a sequestration whereby across
the board cuts in the federal budget for non-entitlement items were implemented. The
sequestration includes a reduction of the federal subsidies. In the case of the Build America
Bonds and Recovery Zone Facility Bonds, the County will receive about $41,000 less than it
would have otherwise received if the full debt service interest subsidies were paid by the federal
government. Sequestration occurs one fiscal year at a time and it is not yet known whether a
sequestration will occur of Fiscal Year 2014-15. Any subsidies not received from the federal
government must be covered by the County’s General Fund so that the entire amount of debt
service on the bonds is timely paid.
Fleet/Internal Services Fund
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes a fully funded vehicle budget, including full
vehicle depreciation expense. Requiring the annual budgeting of full vehicle depreciation will
continue to facilitate regularly scheduled replacement of County vehicles, which began in FY
2008-09.
Venture Capital Resources
The Board of Supervisors adopted a Budget Policy in 2006, which included a resource intended
to improve departmental operations and in FY 2012-13 approximately $1 million in reserve
funding was available for technology projects to be used to increase efficiencies and economies
in departments that do not have resources available within their normal operating budgets for
such expense. In FY 2012-13, approximately $600,000 was allocated for projects that ranged
from electronic appointment scheduling software to procurement system hardware and
licenses. In FY 2013-14, approximately $995,000 was allocated for projects that ranged from
auto-dialers to programming tools to develop workflow processes to automate repetitive tasks.
In FY 2014-15, departments requested over $1.4 million and the County Administrator is
recommending the full $1 million for projects. Projects include servers, automation of
countywide forms and specialized software.
-xiii-
Retirement/Pension Costs - Future Year Projections/Budgets
As was discussed above, the rising costs of pension benefits are a key issue in Contra Costa.
In the 2009 Budget Message, a graph was included that projected the impact of the 2008
Contra Costa County Employees’ Retirement Association (CCCERA) market losses (26.5%) in
combination with an unachieved earning assumption (then 7.8%) to be a negative impact of
over 34%. Even using a five-year smoothing model, County costs were expected to begin to
rise in FY 2010-11 and virtually double by FY 2015-16. Since that time:
• Positive market experience for calendar year 2009 of 21.9% drastically changed the original
projection; however, pension costs were still expected to increase significantly over the next
five years;
• Positive market experience for calendar year 2010 of 14% again reduced projected
increases; however, pension costs were still expected to increase significantly over the next
five years;
• Market experience for calendar year 2011 was disappointing at 2.7%. Although it was a
positive number, it has a negative impact on costs because it was below the earning
assumption of 7.75%;
• Positive market experience for calendar year 2012 of 14.1% improved the 2012-13
projection;
• The CCCERA Board adopted changes in Economic Assumptions, which decreased the
Assumed Investment Rate from 7.75% to 7.25%; and
• Positive market experience for calendar year 2013 of 16.5% again improved the last
projection stabilizing retirement cost over the next five years.
In a letter dated January 31, 2014, CCCERA’s actuary issued a report which projected
employer contribution rate changes based on an estimated 16.5% gross market value
investment return for 2013 and other changes in economic and demographic assumptions. The
projection is derived from the December 31, 2012 actuarial valuation results, which are the
most current available. A new five year projection will be available in the Fall using December
31, 2013 valuation figures. The projections do not reflect any changes in the employer
contribution rates that could result due to future changes in the demographics of active
members or decreases in the employer contribution rates that might result from new hires going
into the PEPRA tiers. These modeled projections are intended to serve as illustrations of future
financial outcomes that are based on the information available to us at this time. Emerging
results may differ significantly if the actual experience proves to be different from these
assumptions. The four most significant variables are demographic experience, the economy,
stock market performance, and the regulatory environment.
As can be seen in the chart, the cumulative impact of smoothing gains and losses for the
aggregate plan is projected to be -6.21% (as of December 31, 2017). These projected rate
changes are implemented 18 months after the actuarial date. Therefore, the projected
decrease of 0.21% in in the chart below for 2013 will be implemented on July 1, 2015.
Note that because the actuary estimated the allocation of the rate changes across the cost
groups, the actual rate changes by group will differ from those shown in the exhibit, even if the
plan-wide rate changes are close to those shown below. For instance, the cost of a General
Tier III employee is projected to increase by 0.16% for 2013 (rate increase date of July 1,

2015), a County Safety employee by 0.35%, and a Contra Costa County Fire District Safety
employee by 0.51%. The total impact to the County, all things considered, is expected to be
very close to these figures.
Rate Change Component Valuation Date (12/31)
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Deferred (Gains)/Losses -0.76% -1.94% -1.40% -1.06% -1.05%
Loss of Investment Income on
(Gain)/Loss of Investment Income on
Difference Between AVA and MVA
-0.12% -0.43% -0.28% -0.17% -0.09%
18 Month Rate Delay 1.09% 0.50% -0.13% -0.20% -0.17%
Incremental Rate Change 0.21% -1.87% -1.81% -1.43% -1.31%
Cumulative Rate Change 0.21% -1.66% -3.47% -4.90% -6.21%
The chart below, which County Administration staff and the Auditor prepared together, uses all
of the latest information available for a new five year projection of total County pension costs,
including Fire. The cumulative effect of the market rate improvements is dramatic. Presented
in the chart are four years’ of actual data, a projection of the current year (straight-lining eight
months of actual data), the Recommended Budget for FY 2014-15, and a projection based on
the Recommended Budget for FY 2015-16 and beyond (no increases in FTE or wages). A
significant drop in projected expenses in FY 2014-15 due to the retirement of one of the
County’s pension obligation bonds is netted against increased in FY 2014-15. Note that the
Board changed its OPEB funding policy and redirected all the savings achieved ($33 million
annually) towards funding the additional retirement expense due primarily from the reduction in
the assumed rate.

Summary of Impacts
The following impact statements from several of our major departments depict the tone of the
Recommended Budget, which is optimistic. The goal of the FY 2011-12 budget was to make
cuts that would balance the budget in a way to promote future sustainability into FY 2012-13
and beyond. The goal was reached and the majority of our immediate problems were solved.
Due to mandates on service levels, budget reform was enacted primarily in the area of
employee compensation. The majority of our County employees were impacted by reduced
wages and increased pension costs. Taken together, these impacts allowed the County to
achieve a structurally balanced County budget. The vast majority of our labor contracts
expired June 30, 2013. Contract negotiations are on-going. A 4% increase was built into the
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget, the majority of which was absorbed by departments. The
Recommended Budget for FY 2014-15 includes growth in appropriations and increased general
fund subsidies for many County departments. There was insufficient growth however to fund all
FY 2014-15 baseline requests. The budget includes a net increase of seven positions in the
General fund.
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Human Resources:
The Human Resources Department services all County departments and is funded primarily
from charges to departments. Approximately 27.4% of the funding is through a direct general
purpose revenue allocation. The FY 2014-15 recommendations include increased
departmental salary and benefit costs of $245,000 and an additional $359,000 to pay for a
Labor Relations Attorney and increased support from Information Technology. The County is
currently undertaking a nationwide search for a new Director to move the department into the
21st century.
Library:
The County Library is not part of the General Fund. In excess of 84.9% of the County Library
budget is dependent upon property tax revenue, therefore it has been impacted by reductions
in assessed valuations. In years prior to the economic downturn, annual revenues exceeded
on-going expenditure needs and the Library was able to not only fund one-time projects and
enhance materials, but was also able to build a reserve. Due to sound financial planning, and
continued diligence in strategically filling vacancies based on workload, classification, and
community library needs, the Library budget is balanced and structurally sound. Additionally,
the County has hired a new County Librarian to continue the Library’s advancements in
technology and use of media.
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Employment and Human Services:
The Employment and Human Services Department (EHSD) General Fund allocation has been
increased by approximately $790,000 over the 2013-14 fiscal year. Increases in salary and
benefits are being offset by increases in County General Fund and current estimates of state
and federal revenue. The Department has undertaken significant organizational changes that
are reflected in the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget. EHSD transferred responsibility for
determining CalFresh (aka Food Stamps) eligibility and Medi-Cal eligibility from the Adult and

Aging Services (AAS) Bureau to the Workforce Services (WFS) Bureau. EHSD successfully
staffed and opened one of three Covered California Call Centers. EHSD has completed a
conversion to a predominantly paperless operation. The project, referred to as the “Office of the
Future”, allows clients to access department services electronically. The FY 2014-15 budget
recommendations do not take into account any unknown impacts to funding due to the State
budget. EHSD is continuing a redesign of how social services are provided in Contra Costa
County to better utilize strategic partnerships and the innovative use of technology to assist
clients and provide more efficient and effective services.
Health Services:
The Recommended Budget for the Health Services Department for the 2014-15 fiscal year
includes a reduction of approximately $675,000 from the 2013-14 current year budget. This is a
$20.1 million reduction from the baseline budget. This budget is predicated on the assumption
that (1) the enrollment in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) programs will remain constant with the
existing Low Income Health Plan (LIHP) levels; (2) the payment rates coupled with the increase
in the Federal Matching Percentage (FMAP) will be sufficient to cover the cost of this
population; and (3) the State take-back of Indigent Realignment Funding is consistent with
revenue growth in this program.
Additionally, under the Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool (DSRIP) funding is available for
work in four areas:
1. Infrastructure Development,
2. Innovation and Design,
3. Population-Focused Improvement, and
4. Urgent Improvement in Care.
Funding is contingent on meeting specified performance milestones. This budget anticipates
receipt of $32.55 million for meeting those milestones.
LAW AND JUSTICE
District Attorney:
The FY 2014-15 budget continues to fund new initiatives established in the 2012-13 budget and
continued in the 2013-14 budget, specifically targeting the Richmond Ceasefire program, gang
prosecution, domestic violence prosecution, the Family Justice Center, and prosecution of
sexual assault, human trafficking and firearm cases. The District Attorney’s budget does include
a minor vacancy factor of $685,087 to balance. Funding initiated in prior budgets related to AB
109 is continued in the 2014-15 budget for the District Attorney.
Although the stability of the District Attorney’s budget has improved considerably, we remain
cautiously optimistic for the future taking into account the continued impacts related to AB109
implementation and general increases in baseline costs. More detailed information is included
in the departmental narrative section of the budget beginning on Page 297.
Probation:
The FY 2014-15 budget will result in service reductions in the Probation Department. This is
due to an anticipated cut in Title IV-E reimbursements to the County for housing juveniles in
imminent danger of being removed from their homes. The Probation Department continues to
work with the California State Association of Counties (CSAC) and the Chief Probation Officer’s
Association of California (CPOC) to restore Title IV-E funding in the State of California. The
department continues to project, under a best case scenario, the restoration of $2.5 million of
Federal revenue to the County which is a $1.7 million reduction from the 2013-14 budget. Due
to the current uncertainty of this situation, the County Administrator is recommending a
departmental vacancy factor of $1.37 million to balance the 2014-15 budget. Should funding be
restored at a level below $2.5 million, or not at all, the department will return to the Board of
Supervisors for additional action. More detailed information is included in the departmental
narrative section of the budget beginning on Page 319.
Public Defender:
The FY 2014-15 budget reflects an increase of 4.0 FTEs in the Public Defender’s Office. These
positions will provide managerial oversight and support to staff recently added to the felony
defense and AB 109 programs. In addition, the budget funds all departmental initiatives funded
previously by AB 109 Public Safety realignment, including the Arraignment Court Early
Representation (ACER) program, which provides legal representation to defendants during
arraignment hearings. The budget is balanced with no vacancy factor. More detailed
information is included in the departmental narrative section of the budget beginning on Page
331.
Sheriff-Coroner:
The FY 2014-15 budget continues to fund services previously restored following several years
of serious expenditure reductions in the Sheriff’s Office. The budget funds negotiated
compensation increases with the Deputy Sheriff’s Association, however, this also results in an
increase to the departmental vacancy factory to $4.2 million. Similar to other departments, the
departmental budget condition has improved considerably; however, we remain cautiously
optimistic for the future taking into account the continued impacts related to AB109
implementation, increased average daily populations associated with housing those individuals
and the potential for long-term sentencing of inmates in County facilities. Continued increases
to baseline expenditures remain an issue as well.
The budget also maintains the services established in previous budgets related to AB 109 and
funds $1.1 million in new capital expenditures in county adult detention facilities. The
department will also continue a substantial, $1.6 million project to upgrade cell locking
mechanisms at the West County Detention Facility (WCDF), funded in the 2013-14 AB 109
budget, during 2014-15. More detailed information is included in the departmental narrative
section of the budget beginning on Page 335.
FIRE DISTRICT
Contra Costa County Fire Protection District:
The Contra Costa County Fire Protection District (CCCFPD), a special district within the
County, continues to face significant fiscal difficulties. In July 2013, one additional fire station
was closed in Pittsburg to partially mitigate a continued structural deficit in the District resulting
in a total reduction of seven (7) engine companies since January 2011. In February 2014, the

xviiimuch
anticipated operational study of the District by Fitch & Associates, LLC, was delivered to
the Board. With the study complete, the District continues to work with the County
Administrator’s Office to evaluate District operations to ensure the safety and security of District
residents.
The District’s recommended budget balances by drawing operating reserves in the amount of
$9.8 million. This is primarily due to an increase in retirement expenses of $8.1 million from the
reduction from 7.75% to 7.25% in assumed rates for investment returns by the Contra Costa
County Employee’s Retirement Association (CCCERA). No additional service level reductions
are being recommended in the 2014-15 budget. The County Administrator will continue to
update the Board with multi-year financial projections for the District throughout FY 2014/15.
More detailed information is included in the departmental narrative section of the budget
beginning on Page 361.
Conclusion
This budget continues to reflect years of careful, comprehensive and continuing review of
County operations to cope with economic challenges. In our assessment of County operations
– and at every opportunity – we continue to make changes in delivering services that are more
efficient and less costly. These changes, which could not have been accomplished without
financial sacrifices from our employees, have allowed us to protect the services that residents
need and expect from County government.
The County has and will continue to adapt to changing circumstances. Our strategy over the
last several years has been to harness our organizational discipline and innovation to reduce
our spending and continue our Mission: “to provide public services that improve the quality of
life of our residents and the economic viability of our businesses”. Our success depends upon
a continuation of that strategy.