Honorable Board Members:
Submitted for your review and consideration is the Chief Administrator’s Recommended
Budget for FY 2012-13. Departments have done an excellent job of maintaining their
FY 2011-12 Net County Cost, the assigned target for FY 2012-13. This budget is
balanced with a slight surplus of $677,642. The Chief Administrative Office is
recommending that this surplus be added to the designation for Capital Projects and reevaluated
after the books close in August. This budget was our first budget based on
the Board adopted Investment Plan with long term strategies geared towards limiting
government and enhancing services. These strategies include moving forward with
replacement of costly, inefficient systems that require more and more resources to
maintain, allowing employees to become more efficient and turning these savings into
enhanced services. This budget is based on the core principals of spending
conservatively, investing wisely and being flexible and ready to act. The strategy is to
minimize future shortfalls by holding down spending until efficiencies can be gained
through system and process improvements. Any “surplus” or unanticipated fund
balance should be invested wisely based on the investment plan. One time funds
strategically invested result in future on-going operational savings to help close our
structural deficit and enhance services.
The County continues to have a structural deficit (see Attachment A) resulting in a
projected shortfall of $8.2 million in FY 2013-14. Many of the projects in the Board
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

adopted Strategic Investment Plan are already underway and as efficiencies are
recognized this projected shortfall will decrease.
This budget is submitted during the ongoing negotiation of the State’s FY 2012-13
budget and does not make any assumption about the impact of the State’s Budget. The
State is facing a $15.7 billion deficit for FY 2012-13. In their overview of the Governor’s
May Revision the LAO agrees that the Administration’s estimates are based on
reasonable assumptions. It is important to note that the Governor’s proposed budget
relies on voters approving his November statewide ballot initiative. If the ballot initiative
fails, additional cuts will go into effect that could impact the County.
Each department summary provides a detailed list of program areas with corresponding
budgetary information, number of staff, extra help costs, and net county cost and/or
general fund contribution. Ten year information is shown in a staffing allocation trend
chart and a ten year fiscal history by line item class. Organizational charts show the
department’s staff by allocation and distribution by program. Detailed financial
information is shown by department, by fund type. Additionally the Budget Basics has
been updated to include current data and is incorporated into the Recommended
Budget document. Also included with the Budget Basics is the presentation given to the
Board in September, 2011 outlining the Strategic Investment Plan. CAO staff and
departments will be available to discuss this information with the Board in functional
group meetings and during the Budget Special Meetings.
The Budget Special Meetings will begin on June 5, 2012 and continue on June 6, 2012
if necessary. CAO staff will provide an overview of the Recommended Budget as well
as present a new Personnel Resolution for adoption. We would like to return to the
Board during the month of August with updates from the Investment teams and
recommendations for changes to the Recommended Budget. Budget Hearings are
scheduled to begin on September 17th with approval of the Adopted FY 2012-13 Budget
on September 25th.
OVERALL BUDGET OUTLOOK
The total Recommended Budget for FY 2012-13 is $382M, which is $20M (5%) less
than the Adopted FY 2011-12 budget of $402M. The County’s proposed General Fund
budget, which includes discretionary funds for County services, is $194M, which is
$15M (7%) less than the Adopted FY 2011-12 budget of $209M. The chart below
provides a five-year trend of County budget changes:
The Recommended Budget includes no growth in the General Fund discretionary
revenue sources. The $15M decrease is primarily related to a decrease in fund balance
of approximately $12M. Departmental revenues have also decreased slightly by $1.6M
or 2%. Non-General Fund revenues are restricted in their use for programs delivered
by the Department of Transportation, Public Health, Mental Health, Community Services
and Erosion Control. The decrease of $5M within Non-General Fund revenues are
primarily related to changes within Public Health (decrease of $5M), Mental Health
(decrease of $5M), and Community Services (decrease of $2.2), offset with increases in
the Road Fund of $4M and Road District Tax Fund $3M.
The Recommended FY 2012-13 Budget includes funding for 1747.73 full-time
equivalent positions (FTEs). This represents a 9.1 FTE increase from the current FY
2011-12 allocation. This chart includes only departments with personnel allocation
changes.

The chart below reflects the increases and decreases in General Fund appropriations
by expenditure class for the Recommended Budget. Salaries have remained relatively
flat. Expenses have decreased due to reductions in workers compensation and general
liability. Fixed assets and Operating Transfers have also decreased. In FY 2011-12 the
Board set aside one time funds ($6M) into a Designation for Capital Projects to increase
this fund based on the investment strategy as well as a designation for the Meyers
Landfill ($4M). The FY 2012-13 budget includes an additional $677,642 increase to the
Reserve for Capital Projects bringing the total Designation for Capital Projects to
$8,793,456.

The chart below reflects the distribution of increases and decreases in General Fund
appropriations by functional group. The largest change is between General Government
and Land Use/ Development Services due to the transfer of the Facilities unit out of
Land Use and into General. Law and Justice and Health and Human Services include
minor decreases of approximately $1M or 2% each.

The chart below reflects the distribution of increases and decreases in the amount of
discretionary Net County Cost (NCC)/General Fund support by functional group. The
increase in General Government is due to the transfer of the Facilities function from
Land Use/Development Services and is offset with a corresponding decrease in Land
Use. Law and Justice and Health and Human Services also decreased.
$3.2M in roll-over contingency and approximately $5.4 in departmental savings and
$1.6M in additional non-departmental revenues. This estimate is subject to change with
the close of the FY 2011-12 financial records in August.
Contingency / Reserves Budgeted at 8%: The Recommended FY 2012-13 Budget
sets aside 8% for “rainy-day” reserves. The contingency fund is proposed to be $5.3M
or 3% of adjusted General Fund appropriations. It should be noted that beginning in FY
2012-13 the Sheriff has requested a contingency budget specifically for unanticipated
costs within the Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff anticipates returning over $1M in
savings to the General Fund. A contingency budget of $300,000 has been established
in the Sheriff’s budget. This amount combined with a $5M contingency in Department
15 makes up the 3% contingency based on adjusted General Fund appropriations. The
reserve fund is proposed to be $8.8M or 5% of adjusted General Fund appropriations.
The reserve has decreased $139,296 from FY 2011-12 due to a decrease in general
fund appropriations. With the high degree of uncertainty we are facing it is critical to
have resources to address those unknown but highly likely future fiscal challenges.
Designations: The Recommended FY 2012-13 Budget includes an additional
$677,642 set aside as a Designation for Capital Projects. Currently the County has
$8.1 set aside. The addition of the $677,642 brings the total Designation for Capital
Projects to $8.8M.
THE OUT YEARS
Attachment A is the five-year projection for the General Fund. While we have made
much progress in the past year, this projection indicates on going potential deficits if
current fiscal conditions continue. Appropriations are still growing at a higher rate than
revenues resulting in a structural deficit. Discretionary revenues continue to remain flat;
there are potential increases in the range of 2-4% in our PERS rates, and there is still
much uncertainty in regards to State actions. The Board has adopted the Investment
Plan which relies on a long term strategy of limiting government and enhancing services
by spending conservatively, investing wisely, and being flexible and ready to act.
Through strategic investments the County will reduce operating costs and allow
employees to become more efficient moving towards closing the structural deficit.
OTHER SCHEDULES
Provided in a separate section of the budget document, “Other Schedules,” is a list of
proposed fixed assets and memberships included in the Recommended Budget.
BUDGET AND BEYOND
The closure of the Recommended Budget special meeting will not conclude the FY
2012-13 Budget process. There are still many issues at play including the State budget,
the final closing of the County books, and investment strategies. The Chief
Administrative Office will be returning to the Board in August with updates on the
Investment Teams and will incorporate State actions and final fund balance figures into
the Adopted Budget to be discussed during the September budget hearings.
CONCLUSION / ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This year’s budget document is the culmination of continuous budget review and
dialogue with department heads, their staffs and the Board over the past several
months. This budget could not have been balanced without their assistance.
I wish to acknowledge my staff for their perseverance and dedication in preparing this
document and the Auditor-Controller’s Office for providing the budget summary
schedules. I also want to thank the Board of Supervisors for their support of this office.