The budget transmittal letter for FY 2012-13 acknowledged that your Board has been taking the
actions necessary to prepare this County for the fiscal challenges ahead. Fiscal Year 2012-13
presented numerous opportunities to exhibit that your Board, working with administration,
department heads, line staff and our community partners, was indeed prepared.
• Implementation of AB 109 Public Safety Realignment continued in FY 2012-13 with approval
of updates to the 2011 Implementation Plan by the Community Corrections Partnership
(CCP) on March 15, 2013 and the Board of Supervisors on April 23, 2013. With the
continuation of AB 109 funding for jail beds (including medical services) and Post-Release
Community Supervision (PRCS) functions along with other services for the realigned
population, the update included an expansion in evidence-based programs and services to
reduce crime and recidivism while promoting a reduction in criminal victimization and
increased public safety. These include the addition of:
o A jail transition pod with programs and services (education, substance abuse, and
community services) to help the offender transition from custody to the community;
o Counseling and case management services designed to reduce recidivism for both incustody
and out-of-custody offenders, as well as those individuals in the pre-trial stage;
o Homeless offender services for those on PRCS, and completing the jail transition pod
and pre-trial programs (these services will be designed to divert offenders from the cycle
of incarceration and homelessness), and
o A shift in funding to provide employment services to offenders.
Working with our Sacramento lobbyists, in conjunction with other San Joaquin Valley counties, we
continue to stress at the local and State level the need for growth and ongoing AB 109 funding to be
based on per offender allocations to address the disparities under the current allocation formula. In
this manner counties with high volume caseloads, as with Fresno County, can gain a measure of
equity thereby providing all counties the ability to adequately address the AB 109 realigned
population. As a member of the Realignment Allocation Committee, I will continue to carry the
Board's message for equity and work with our lobbyists towards that effort.

Animal Control transition of services began March 28, 2012, when the Central California
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals notified the County that they would be
terminating their contract to provide services effective September 30, 2012. Numerous
meetings, negotiations, and a request for proposal to contract, resulted in services via
the new contractor, Liberty Animal Services, becoming operative October 1, 2012,
temporarily located at the re-purposed former Coroner facility. This is a success story
with reduced costs and improved services based on community input and interaction,
Board action and the Public Health Department's responsiveness.
• The Department of Social Services (DSS) implemented a Service Center model for the
Medi-Cal and CaiFresh programs which has created efficiencies and streamlined
business processes that will help with the implementation of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (ACA).
o In July 2012, DSS launched the Service Center design and build stage with a goal of
improving customer service; leveraging new or improved technology; increasing
quality assurance; improving business efficiencies; and keeping staff and the
community informed and prepared for future changes.
o In February 2013, six lobbies were redesigned to help clients better navigate the
application process, standardize business practice and improve timeliness of
services. The new redesigned lobbies include self check-in kiosks with a lobby traffic
system; upfront imaging; Benefits CaiWIN Stations (for online applications and
services); phone stations; and appointment management system technology.
o In April 2013, DSS launched an ongoing Medi-Cal and CaiFresh Service Center
which included expansion of the call center; implementation of the task management
tool for workload distribution; online case files; phone interviews, and centralized mail
imagining.
o In May 2013, DSS expanded the Service Center for the Medi-Cal and CaiFresh
Intake services.
• September 12, 2012, the Public Employee Pension Reform Act (PEPRA) was signed
into law (AB 340 and AB 197). Personnel acted in early January to ensure the County
was in compliance bringing an item authorizing the continued use of retirees who were in
the workforce prior to PEPRA. The Board approved and confirmed rates for the new
PEPRA retirement tier. Two department head positions have been recommended by the
CAO and approved by resolution of your Board to return under the new PEPRA
guidelines as extra-help.
• Early in the current fiscal year, your financial management team recognized an
opportunity in the current financial marketplace to use our excellent credit rating, based
on sound fiscal management practices, to refinance existing lease revenue bonds to
reduce the County's debt burden in the future. Your debt advisory committee and Board
supported those recommendations and bonds were successfully sold in September,
2012.

While the planning process began in 2010 when the Federal government enacted the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, since February 2013 local county agency
engagement has intensified in preparation for the upcoming ACA responsibilities in our
multiple capacities: as a social service eligibility agency, a healthcare provider agency,
as well as an employer. Personnel and the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer-Tax Collector
have taken preliminary steps to prepare the County of Fresno to respond as an
employer subject to the ACA.
• Service and facility assessments are currently underway with recommendations for
corrective actions being developed to address the needed improvements for access to
healthcare for those adults and juveniles in custody, including infrastructure concerns
and current regulations such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
privacy rule. The recommended budget includes a designation for budget mitigation
which may be used to address this matter.
Throughout the current year your Board has continued to manage in a fiscally responsible
manner, ensuring maintenance of your excellent credit rating by processing year-end and
quarterly budget variance reviews as regularly scheduled Board items; and taking decisive
action in real time to ensure that the County budget remained in balance when revenues or
expenditures varied from the budgeted projections. Your Board continued the practice of not
backfilling loss of State, Federal or grant funds with discretionary revenues ensuring that service
levels would be sustainable in the upcoming budget year. Your Board also directed the addition
of $1 ,52M to the General Reserve in the FY 2012-13 Adopted Budget bringing the current total
to $12.9M.
The economy is showing signs of recovery with Proposition 172: Local Public Safety Sales Tax
revenues being budgeted in FY 2013-14 at a 9.5% increase over the amounts budgeted for the
current year. Your Board updated fees through the Master Schedule of Fee process, balancing
the need for off-setting revenues with the desire to not hamper local economic recovery by
overburdening the public with fee increases.
The County workforce is being rebuilt with positions being added in Social Services related to
implementation of the ACA, and in public safety to continue to address jail needs and public
safety realignment workloads. The recommended budget for FY 2013-14 includes funding for
6922 positions, an increase of 236 positions over the current year adopted budget.
The changes that have been implemented focused on expanding channels through which
services are provided from streamlining lobbies to expansion of use of phones, internet and mail
for provision of services. In addition, the new model of doing business provides flexibility of
sharing work across offices which will help address caseload increases and significant program
changes such as ACA.
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to the appointed and elected department heads and their staff for their
cooperation in developing this recommended budget. The Auditor-Controller/Treasurer-Tax
Collector and Internal Services Departments are essential to the production and distribution of
this budget material to the Board and the public. Analysts and support staff of the County

Administrative Office have done a remarkable job of preparing and assembling the requested
documents to provide transparency to the Board and the public as the County of Fresno does
the business of adopting a balanced budget.