Welcome to Humboldt County’s budget for Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15. I would like to thank
the community for their participation in the budget process, particularly the community
budget meeting held in March. I would also like to thank our County department heads who
generated ideas and proposed solutions on the County’s FY 2014-15 budget and continue to
be engaged in the budget development process.
The County’s adopted budget totals $305,541,663. The proposed budget for the General
Fund, the fund that contains the County’s discretionary dollars, is $109,298,533 in
expenditures and only $106,544,182 in revenue. This means there is a General Fund total
deficit for FY 2014-15 of $2.7 million. Of this $2.7 million, $1.2 million is a structural
deficit, and $1.5 million is budgeted for contingencies. This is a slight improvement over FY
2013-14 which had an adopted total deficit of $2.9 million. Again, the community and
County departments engaged in discussions on how to remedy this structural deficit. These
discussions need to continue. We cannot wait until the next budget year to address this longterm
structural problem.
The County began to engage in systems review the last half of FY 2013-14 to help address
the deficit. Systems review needs to continue in FY 2014-15. The proposed budget contains
some one-time technology improvements that will lead to future cost savings. These are the
kinds of things we need to continue to invest in and research and actively seek out in order to
provide a more effective and efficient form of local government. County departments
submitted over $5.1 million in funding requests. Due to our limited financial resources, only
$624,291 of the requests are recommended to be funded– a sign that the need in our County
departments is far greater than our ability to fund.
Our financial situation has changed. Expenses continue to grow at a rate greater than our
discretionary revenue. We have seen significant increases in the costs of retirement and
health insurance with no relief in sight. Difficult decisions lie before us, as the County needs
to ask and determine what level of service we want to provide and at the same time, ask what
can we afford to provide. These are difficult questions and even more difficult to answer.
In addition, the County has a number of facility issues such as a significant amount of
deferred maintenance that continue to plague the County’s coffers and buildings. It is time to
find a more proactive and a less reactive solution to the management and care of our County
facilities. A Facilities Taskforce, comprised of County staff, is beginning to meet and
address these issues.
You will notice some changes in this year’s budget document. The budget in brief is
hopefully a bit more visually appealing and makes it easier to understand the nuts and bolts
of the County’s budget and the numbers associated with it. In addition, the proposed budget
document is now designed for online viewing and you will notice some format changes. I
encourage you to give us feedback on these changes and what you would like to see in the
proposed budget document in future years.