Welcome to Humboldt County’s budget for Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17. I would like
to thank the community for their participation in the live interactive community
budget meeting held on March 3rd. I would also like to thank our county department
heads and staff for their participation in the budget process. And I would like to
thank your Board for your leadership as the county creates a path to sustainability.
As you know, the budget that was adopted by the Board of Supervisors in June is
more than a host of tables and graphs, and references to revenues and expenditures.
This budget is the plan that we, as a community, will take this year to address the
unique needs of our community. Last year we saw the budget begin to address the
community’s need for more public safety services, especially in the outlying parts of
the county. This was a substantial shift in the way we operate, as the citizens of
Humboldt County took it upon themselves to make our area safer by passing
Measure Z, a half-cent sales tax, in 2014.
At this point two years ago, the Sheriff’s Office did not patrol in the far reaches of
the county, local fire agencies had old and failing breathing apparatuses and
equipment, the District Attorney lacked personnel to prosecute and the Probation
Department struggled to monitor offenders because they did not have enough staff.
Due to your guidance and dedication to fulfilling the promise made to local citizens,
the Sheriff’s Office can now staff and patrol in areas like Willow Creek and
McKinleyville in the north, and Garberville in the south. Volunteer firefighters have
received new equipment, in some cases for the first time in over a decade. In
addition, that equipment meets industry standards and no longer presents an obstacle
in the field when one fire company teams up with another. The District Attorney’s
Office has hired more attorneys and support staff to prosecute criminals. We now
have more probation officers, which allows them to have smaller caseloads and
more face-to-face time with clients to work with them intensively. More than $1
million was used for local road repair, and those funds were used to leverage even
more funds to get multi-jurisdictional projects off the ground. In all, more than 30
miles of roads are now being repaired, with more on the way.
These are just a few of the projects you helped make happen through the budget
process. This year, the nine-member Citizens’ Advisory Committee recommended
more than $6 million in additional projects to fund in Year 2 of Measure Z, and a list
of proposed projects is contained later in this book. While our community still has
significant public safety needs, there is no question that we are safer now than we
were prior to the passage of Measure Z.
It is inspiring to see the transformation brought to our community by efforts like
Measure Z. During a time where we are so dependent on state and federal revenue to
fund local services, this is truly a case where we have created our own path.
However, it is important to remember that Measure Z is a temporary path. Looking
forward, we must determine how to meet our community’s public safety needs and
our other long-term obligations if this path ends.

The adopted budget totals $353,377,402. This is an increase of $34.3 million, or 11
percent, over last year. This is due principally to $11.5 million for capital projects,
$10 million for North Coast Integrated Regional Management grants, $2.9 million
for Measure Z expenditures, and the remainder is attributable to federally reimbursable
activities in Health & Human Services, as well as salary and benefit increases.
In the General Fund, revenues are projected at $118,017,810, which is $5,811,169 or
4.5 percent higher than last year. Revenues are slowly growing. This revenue increase
is primarily due to Measure Z ($1.3 million), property taxes ($1.2 million),
tax loss reserve fund transfer ($1 million), cost-allocation charges ($667,000), teeter
revenue ($500,000), insurance refund ($358,000) and Public Safety’s Proposition
172 ($462,000). However, these revenue increases are not keeping pace with expenditures.
This budget states that your Board will appropriate $122,932,981 in General
Fund Expenditures, which is an increase of $7,645,977, or 6.5 percent from last
year. This means fund balance in the amount of $4.9 million will be used for financing
FY 2016-17 activities. This will allow the county to make expenditures that were
not made last year, as well as one-time expenses and to cover the structural deficit.
This will result in an estimated ending balance of $1.8 million in the General Fund.
This budget includes a contribution of $750,000 to General Reserve. It is a sound
financial practice to contribute to our reserves, however, the balances of these funds
are well below policy levels. Per Board-adopted policy, the General Reserve should
total approximately $9.38 million (between 8 and 10 percent of total General Fund
revenue), and Contingencies should total 6 percent of General Fund revenue.
One thing Measure Z did not address was the long-term structural imbalance of the
General Fund. By increasing funding for public safety departments, this has had a
trickle-down effect, increasing the workload for already-understaffed departments
that provide internal support service. In addition, we have looming expenses and unfunded
mandates like ADA facility improvements, SB 678 jail expansion/community
correction center and unfunded PERS liability, to name a few.
These challenges, while daunting, are not insurmountable. Over the years, your
Board has been successful in shrinking the structural deficit and taking steps to improve
efficiency and service delivery in several areas. As we look forward, we can
take solace knowing that Humboldt County citizens are incredibly prideful, and willing
partners when it comes making our community better. This is a powerful partnership,
and because of that I am confident that we will find our way to long-term fiscal
sustainability, creating our own path if necessary.