Introduction
There are, I suppose, many ways to approach discussing the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget. And, there are several verses in Rambling, Gambling Willie that seem to lend themselves well to reasonable viewpoints about the County’s fiscal outlook and proposed program of services against a backdrop of local and national reminiscences. But the song is just so darn good, I decided to include it in its entirety, minus the refrains - of which this Budget Message will probably have plenty - and let you read into it whatever you want. Hopefully, that will be with a discerning mind and an easy laugh. Or, you might just question the wisdom of beginning the Budget Message for the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget with a gambling song.
In many respects, however, budgets are always a gamble; subject to rolls of the dice passing through many hands. The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget, presented here, seeks to minimize reliance on chance. The budgets requested by County departments are being trimmed, but not drastically when compared to last year’s Board Approved Budget amounts. The Recommended Budget supports some growth in many departmental budget requests, just not to the extent sought by the departments.
The Recommended Budget also minimizes reliance on salary savings; there are just not many vacant General Fund positions from which to cut costs to help balance the budget. And, it’s anticipated that salary savings accrued last year will be a smaller component of the General Fund Balance relied on to balance this year’s Budget. Looking ahead, the need to pre-fund some PERS retirement costs for miscellaneous employees beginning next July, in a range of $2,713,962 to $4,390,599, will further curtail the historic use of salary savings to balance future years’ budgets. The Recommended Budget does support some, but not all enhancements to Authorized Staffing levels sought by departments, and proposes a few changes in staffing levels with an eye toward building departmental capacities and future efficiencies.
The Recommended Budget only supports one of the two new positions requested to be funded with Criminal Justice Realignment funds. The requested draw on these funds this year has approached an amount that almost exceeds the County’s base allocation amount. The Board of Supervisors’ Criminal Justice Realignment Policy was adopted as part of the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget and has been reaffirmed every year since. The policy emphasizes the judicious use of the State allocation - which is notoriously underfunded given the task at hand - to keep the County from losingallitsmoney. As discussed in detail later in this Budget Message, Criminal Justice Realignment Policy stresses the need to live within the funding constraints of AB 109 and reallocate existing resources whenever possible (as opposed to funding new layers of programs).
Similarly, the Recommended Budget reiterates the need to track outcomes and ensure the positions that have been, or that are being recommended for funding with Criminal Justice Realignment funds or Health and Human Services Realignment funds, are indeed off-setting costs by maximizing billing opportunities. To stretch the use of limited Criminal Justice and HHS realignment monies, it is critical to leverage opportunities for submitting billings for Medi-Cal and other HHS reimbursements. Make your money while you can, before you have to stop . . .
The County’s traditionally lethargic discretionary revenues still preclude making any significant increases to the County’s ongoing operating expenses. For example, as reported by the County Assessor to your Board during department reports in July, the secured property tax roll is projected to increase by only 4.08%, or $438,374, compared to the statewide average of 11%. However, almost all of this increase is due to the statutorily-prescribed increase in value for property owned by the City of Los Angeles, which accounts for 48% of the value of the secured property tax roll. The increase in the assessed value of land not owned by the City of Los Angeles (52% of the secured roll) is only 1.27%. This growth in the assessed value of private property is 0.26% less than the 2016 CPI growth factor, and almost 90% lower than the statewide average; not the sort of revenue growth to bet on when considering any increases to the Budget that will translate into ongoing future costs.
Nevertheless, the Budget continues to recognize sizable grants and fund capital projects and equipment that contribute to the overall size of this year’s Recommended Budget. In addition to recognizing grant-related revenue and expense, the Recommended Budget also proposes using one-time revenue (including a sizeable portion of the projected Fund Balance and other increases in revenue that cannot be reasonably forecast to be available in the future) to fund one-time projects and initiatives, such as putting $80,000 toward the cost of replacing the County’s election equipment, and capital projects like airport improvements and upgrades to County facilities.
The County Budget is still “spread far and wide” to help people. Public Safety costs are increasing by $726,749, or 3.9%. This includes almost $805,000 in the Public Defender budget to provide criminal defense legal services to the indigent, and actually adding $184,691 in funding to juvenile probation costs (in addition to a $508,788 increase to Health and Human Services department budgets) to support the provision of expanded juvenile services. Health and Human Services costs account for $20,804,778, or 22% of the Recommended Budget.
Inyo County does not have 900 miners to lay their money down, or drive a growing economy on which to build a robust budget. The land tenure pattern that results in less than 2% of the County’s 10,000 square miles being privately-owned, creates the feeling that our towns - or at least opportunities for economic growth in them - are owned by someone else. This Recommended Budget continues to provide funding, to the extent possible and in a manner intended to achieve the maximum effect, to change this dynamic. It continues to identify and provide funding to promote tourism, and it recognizes the need to aggressively pursue grants for large-scale public infrastructure projects that can sustain and diversify the County’s economy. This includes supplementing Federal Aviation Administration funding with General Fund dollars and other discretionary revenue to expand and diversify regional air service and improve reliability; providing staff and consulting resources to pursue the County’s fiber-to-the-curb broadband initiative; and, supporting efforts to quantify and support the region’s agricultural industry.
While it is far from a royal flush, the County has again been dealt budget cards that allow it, after 150 years, to not only stay in the game, but move ahead. The Budget is far from being a dead man’s hand, and the Recommended Budget does not call for drastic reductions in staff or services. It does, however, shuffle the deck (a bit). And, it actually adds money to the pot (without anticipating or relying on passage of the proposed Cannabis Business Tax ballot measure), and provides funding to enhance programs and initiatives that meet future County needs, improve services, and create new opportunities.
SUMMARY
As presented, the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Recommended Budget is balanced, as required by law. The Recommended Budget totals $95,978,087 in expenditures and $87,935,124 in revenues. The General Fund portion of the CAO Recommended Budget is $56,726,177 in expenditures and $53,072,054 in revenues, and is based on having $3,654,123 in General Fund Balance available from Fiscal Year 20152016.
The amount of General Fund Balance being used to close the gap between revenues and expenses in this year’s Recommended Budget is the same amount of General Fund Balance ultimately used to balance last year’s Board Approved Budget, but $124,334 more than what was needed to balance last year’s CAO Recommended Budget.
The Auditor-Controller will certify Fiscal Year 2015-2016 General Fund Balance at the commencement of Budget Hearings. If the certified Fund Balance turns out to be higher than the $3,654,123 relied upon to balance the Budget, your Board of Supervisors will have an opportunity to consider uses for the additional money in this year’s Budget. If the certified Fund Balance is less than $3,654,123, reductions will need to be made to the CAO Recommended Budget.
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Department Requested Budget, which is also presented here, and based on budget requests submitted by departments, seeks $94,543,534 in expenditures against $85,920,950 in projected revenues. The General Fund component of this year’s Department Requested Budget seeks $56,119,338 in expenditures, and projects $52,180,170 in revenues. The Department Requested Budget results in a $3,939,168 General Fund deficit; $285,045 more than the $3,654,123 General Fund Balance relied upon to close the gap between revenue and expenses in the CAO Recommended Budget. (Table 1.)
This year, the CAO Recommended Budget is distinguished by actually proposing higher General Fund expenditures than the Department Requested Budget. This is due to the net effect of:
	Taking just $215,748 in General Fund salary savings (less than half the amount applied to last year’s budget);
	Making approximately $222,017 in non-personnel cuts to department funding requests;
	Adding relatively large new expenses to the Department Requested Budget including: $140,000 to allow your Board to consider funding after-school programs; $130,000 for contract building inspection and plan-check services; $184,691 to support the transition plan for enhanced juvenile services compounded, in part, by funding shortfalls - compared to last year - in the Juvenile Institutions budget; $47,000 for an economic study in the Agriculture department; $25,000 in the County Library to complete the automation process; and, other costs requested by departments late in the budget process.
	Recognizing $624,867 in Operating Transfers In to the General Fund; and,
	Recommending $603,751 in Operating Transfers Out of the General Fund to support senior services, deferred maintenance projects, funding for elections equipment, and landfill operations.
However, while the CAO Recommended General Fund Budget increases expenses compared to the Department Requested General Fund Budget, it also increases revenues and, overall, results in closing the gap between General Fund revenues and expenditures by $285,045; to $3,654,123, which is the amount of estimated Fund Balance.
AT A GLANCE
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Recommended General Fund Budget is balanced by:
 Projecting an overall increase of $935,688 in revenues in the General Revenues & Expenditures budget.
	Utilizing $624,867 in Operating Transfers In to the General Fund, compared to the $728,499 in Operating Transfer revenue needed to balance last year’s Budget.
	Making $603,751 in Operating Transfers Out of the General Fund for senior services, deferred maintenance projects, elections equipment, and landfill operations.
	Assuming General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2016, will be certified at or above $3,654,123.
As noted above, this is the same amount used to balance the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Board Approved Budget. However, the $124,334 increase between the amount of Fund Balance relied on to balance last year’s CAO Recommended Budget and last year’s Board Approved Budget was appropriated, by your Board during Budget Hearings, to “one-time” expenses like OPEB Trust contributions and General Fund Contingencies. These appropriations are not included in this year’s Recommended Budget. Therefore, the amount of Fund Balance relied on in this year’s CAO Recommended Budget could be a cause for concern because (a) the amount of Fund Balance needed to balance the Recommended Budget is increasing and (b) the money is, in some respects, being budgeted towards ongoing cost obligations instead of discretionary, one-time expenses.
	Relying on $215,748 in General Fund Salary Savings, compared to the $476,202 in Salary Savings used in the Fiscal Year 20152016 Board Approved Budget.
	Making $222,017 in non-personnel related reductions to the Department Requested General Fund Budget, compared to the $126,852 in non-personnel cuts made in last year’s CAO Recommended Budget. This is exclusive of the money the CAO Recommended Budget adds to the Department Requested Budget, including: $184,691 for juvenile services; $140,000 for possible after-school programming agreements; and, $130,000 for contract building inspection services; and, other costs requested by departments late in the budget process.
As presented, this year’s Budget:
 Provides $12,000 in General Fund Contingencies.
 Makes changes to the Authorized Staffing by: adding 17 new positions and eliminating 11 positions, 9 of which are vacant and unfunded, and two that are expected to become vacant.
 Allocates $611,081 from the General Fund to support senior citizen programs in Inyo and Mono counties.
This includes $556,081 for Inyo County’s IC-GOLD Program, which is funded exclusively from the General Fund to supplement senior services provided through the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging. Additionally, the General Fund is providing the $55,000 in required matching funds to access State and Federal Funding for the ESAAA Program in Inyo and Mono counties, as well as another $54,008 Operating Transfer from the General Fund to the ESAAA budget, through the IC- GOLD budget, to cover the actual costs of providing this regional service.
 Adds approximately $883,479, including five (5) new positions to fund enhanced services for County’s youth ($184,691 to Probation department budgets, and $648,788 to Health and Human Services department budgets) in accordance with the recently approved Juvenile Services Transition Plan.
 Dedicates $80,000 to add to the Elections Innovations Trust in anticipation of needing to replace the County’s aging elections equipment (estimated at up to $650,000) before the 2018 General Election.
 Funds the fifth year of debt-service on the County’s Property Tax Management System project.
 Identifies $300,000 in funding to continue making upgrades to the County’s financial system software (IF AS).
 Provides $134,428 in matching funds to support Federal Aviation Administration grants for improvements to the Bishop and Lone Pine-Death Valley airports.
 Includes $370,351 in funding for Deferred Maintenance projects, with $268,751 coming from the General Fund and the balance being funded through a combination of grants, and the use of designated or categorical monies. The Budget also includes $221,605 in encumbrances to fund ongoing projects approved in prior years’ budgets.
 Makes a $200,000 General Fund Operating Transfer to help maintain Recycling and Waste Management service levels, including: paying $149,930 in ongoing debt-service for CARB- compliant landfill equipment acquired in the last two years; providing for over $635,000 in one-time expenses; and, anticipating a possible payback to the State Board of Equalization for a Transaction and Use Tax allocation error.
 Recommends purchasing a new/used CARB-compliant off-road dump truck for landfill operations with “one-time” Fund Balance.
 Supports a $47,000 regional agriculture economic analysis.
 Purchases 10 new patrol vehicles for the Sheriff’s Office from the Motor Pool budget.
 Creates a new Emergency Services Manager position to revitalize emergency services preparedness and response capabilities through a $128,853 Emergency Management Performance Grant and $128,853 in required matching funds.
 Reserves $35,000 for matching funds in support of a State grant award to build a disabled-access dock at Diaz Lake, and adds two seasonal positions to the Parks budget to facilitate park and campground improvements and deferred maintenance activities.
 Sets aside $200,000 to fund a possible passenger terminal for commercial air service at the Bishop Airport.
 Maintains last year’s funding levels for ongoing programs in the Advertising County Resources budget, including the revamped Community Project Sponsorship Program.
 Increases funding in the Grants-In-Support budget by $140,000 to allow your Board to consider a contract or contracts for afterschool programs with the Inyo County Superintendent of Schools and local school districts.
While this Budget has some highlights, as always, it is important to also recognize that this Budget does not fulfill all of the department budget requests. And, although the Recommended Budget maintains the County’s core programs and services, and provides funding for some recently identified needs and some new initiatives, it still leaves many County needs unmet, and others only partially met. For example, the Recommended Budget designates no money for a contribution to the Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust the County established eight years ago to begin addressing unfunded retiree healthcare liabilities. Similarly, there is no money designated for General Reserves or the Economic Stabilization Fund.
In addition, there are trends associated with this year’s Budget - some reported last year, some newly emerging - that warrant noting:
	As alluded to above and discussed in greater detail on page 92, Department Requested funding from Criminal Justice Realignment is within $19,469 of exceeding the County’s Fiscal Year 2015-2016 base allocation amount, and needs to be curtailed and ongoing costs re-evaluated for adherence to the County’s Criminal Justice Realignment Policy. Reallocating existing resources and keeping Criminal Justice Realignment expenditures below State allocation levels is critical to grow funds with which the County can develop an Area Resource Center and/or similar facilities for adult offenders.
	The Budget Team has worked closely with the Health and Human Services department to ensure that the department’s realignment budgets - most notably Social Services (there will be a slight draw on Fund Balance in the Public Health budget pending the department looking at structural adjustments later this year) - live within their base realignment allocations and not use up Fund Balance. To the extent that this has been accomplished, while supporting requests for 12 new positions funded primarily by these realignment funds, it will be critical to monitor and ensure these positions approach reimbursed billing estimates to help offset costs and free up realignment funds for other purposes. (See page 98.)
	Employee pension benefit costs increased by $276,732. This includes the increase to the lump-sum payment (now $486,120) CalPERS is continuing to charge the County to pay for unfunded liabilities in the County’s safety pension plan.
	Additionally, next year, CalPERS has notified the County that it intends to begin, separately (and similar to the pension plan for safety employees) charging the County lump-sum payments for unfunded liabilities in the County’s miscellaneous (non-safety) employee pension plan (see page 102). At a minimum, this will result in an estimated additional cost to the County of $693,408 in the first year. However, if your Board opts to take advantage of substantial savings associated with a 20-year or 10-year buydown (instead of amortizing payments over 30 years) it would result in the County incurring additional costs of $1,595,850 or $2,370,045, respectively.
	Retiree healthcare costs continue to grow. The County’s “pay-as- you-go” costs have increased from $1,979,074 in last year’s Board Approved Budget to $2,546,478 this year. The Budget is sufficient to fund the pay-as-you-go amount without dipping into the County’s OPEB Trust established in Fiscal Year 2009-2010. The balance in the OPEB Trust is $5,475,437 as of June 30, 2016.
	Non-General Fund budgets appear to be continuing to increase the use of their fund balances, and need to be carefully monitored. For example, the Road department has had to increase its reliance on Road Fund Balance due to the reduction in Highway Users Tax Account (HUTA) funding; using $352,844 from its fund balance in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 to needing to use $1,023,321 this year. While this is not an immediate problem - since there will be $4,118,268 remaining in Road Fund Balance - it still warrants careful monitoring, especially if the State does not resolve the gas tax dilemma. It has been the policy of the Board of Supervisors to maintain a $1,000,000 Fund Balance for this budget.
	After a brief respite last year, when some law enforcement costs, such as Probation, showed signs of decreasing, this year’s budget indicates the law enforcement costs are increasing faster than most other general fund budgets with the exception of Health and Human Services budgets.
	Although the amount of Operating Transfers In to the General Fund is about $103,000 less than last year, the General Fund Budget is continuing to budget more revenue from key trusts than those trusts receive each year.
 With the exception of City of Los Angeles land valuation prescribed by the Constitutionally-mandated “Phillips Formula,” secured and unsecured property taxes are not showing signs of significant increases, especially compared to statewide trends.
Arriving at the Recommended Budget
As presented, this Budget document presents, and identifies the differences between the Department Requested Budget and CAO Recommended Budget for the Fiscal Year 2016-2017. It also describes the steps taken to ultimately submit a balanced Budget for consideration by your Board of Supervisors.
In any County Budget, the wants and needs of departments usually exceed what the County can afford, or the Budget Officer is comfortable recommending. This year is no different. The expenses in this year’s Department Requested General Fund Budget exceed projected revenues in the Department Requested Budget by $3,939,168. This is $285,045 more than the amount of General Fund Balance the CAO Recommended Budget anticipates will be available and, as noted above, the Department Requested General Fund Budget does not include all of the costs the County needed to consider funding this year.
This year, the CAO Recommended General Fund Budget is actually $606,839 more than the Department Requested Budget. This is because, in addition to adding to and decreasing some departmental funding requests, the CAO Recommended Budget also had to add some significant expenses not included in the Department Requested General Fund Budget, such as: $140,000 for possibly funding an afterschool program; $130,000 for contract building inspection and plan check services; and, $184,691 to Probation budgets for enhanced juvenile services. While overall expenses increased in the Probation department’s budgets, decreases in some revenues in the Juvenile Institutions budget resulted in further increasing the department’s Net County Cost. Adding additional expense to the Department Requested Budget is not unusual, but this year the net effect of increasing some departmental costs more than other departmental costs were reduced, coupled with the impact of Operating Transfers going in and out of the General Fund, resulted in making the CAO Recommended General Fund Budget more than the Department Requested Budget.
As a result of the changes made by the CAO Recommended Budget, the overall gap between revenues and expenses in the General Fund Budget has been reduced from $3,939,168 to $3,654,123. Again, this is the result of multiple actions involving adding revenues, and adding and removing expenses (including the limited use of salary savings). This could not have been accomplished without the use of $624,687 in Operating Transfers In to the General Fund (which results in using more money from some of these trusts than the trust receives each year).
It is not unusual to have a difference in the amount of the deficit between Department Requested and CAO Recommended budgets and, in fact, this year’s difference was relatively small. Last year, the difference between revenues and expenses in the Department Requested General Fund Budget was $4,834,127 compared to $3,529,789 in the CAO Recommended Budget.
Similar to last year, the gap between this year’s Department Requested Budget and the CAO Recommended Budget could easily have been much greater if departments did not continue to strive to maintain the cost savings achieved in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 and Fiscal Year 2015-2016 budgets. And, keep in mind, the savings achieved in the last two years’ budgets came on top of many successive years of budget belt-tightening by many County departments. This year’s CAO Recommended Budget seeks to recognize those efforts by supporting limited increases to Authorized Staffing, including trading out lower-level positions for higher-level positions capable of performing a wider range of more complex work, and adding funds to budgets where things are getting done.
In every budget process, there is a certain amount of inherent give-and-take. This year, the CAO Recommended Budget again seeks to spread available funding around. The Recommended Budget cautiously adds some staff capacity, which represents increases in ongoing costs, and it provides funding for one-time costs such as infrastructure investment, adding money to the Elections Innovations Trust to fund replacement of aging elections equipment, and supporting certain economic development initiatives like Phase II of a commercial air service passenger study and an economic assessment of regional agriculture. Again, this task was made easier by most departments making an effort to maintain expenditures around last year’s levels. Departments that sought larger increases in expenditures often had their budgets trimmed back by the Recommended Budget, but this was the exception rather than the rule.
The CAO Recommended Budget reduces non-personnel costs in General Fund budgets by a total of $222,017 (gross not net), not including salary savings or another round of one-time reductions in dental and vision insurance costs. This stands in contrast to last year when the CAO Recommended Budget reduced non-personnel costs in General Fund budgets by $126,852, but is not as big a cut as Fiscal Year 2014-2015 when the CAO Recommended Budget reduced nonpersonnel costs in General Fund budgets by $429,642.
While adjustments to department budget requests are an integral part of the steps taken to arrive at a balanced Recommended Budget, the resulting savings are usually relatively modest and, on their own, do not result in achieving a balanced budget. Each year, the CAO Recommended Budget must rely on a combination of multiple actions - not just cutting department budget requests - that reduce or defer costs and, in some instances, identify alternative sources of revenue. Similar to past Budget Messages, this section will provide an overview of those actions for readers not familiar with the County’s budget process.
Components of the CAO Recommended Budget which, with the exception of the use of salary savings, are not typically part of the Department Requested Budget include:
Fund Balance. Fund Balance is the amount of money remaining in a fund at the end of the fiscal year. Typically, Fund Balance refers to the Fund Balance in the County’s General Fund, and the County relies on this money to bridge the gap between projected revenues and expenses in the Department Requested and, ultimately, the CAO Recommended Budget. However, Non-General Fund budgets, which by definition sit in their own fund, can also have fund balances and these, too, are often used to bridge budget shortfalls in respective budgets.
Operating Transfers from Key Funds & Trusts. The Recommended Budget continues to benefit from the strategic use of Operating Transfers from key trusts to the General Fund and, sometimes, to NonGeneral Fund budgets. These key trusts include: the Geothermal Royalties Fund; the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust; the AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) Trust; and, the COPS Trust. The use of these NonGeneral Fund monies continues to be a critical means of increasing revenue in the General Fund to pay for specific projects and services - which meet the respective criteria to be eligible for funding from these trusts - that would otherwise have to be funded from General Fund revenues or deleted from the Budget. These funding sources are also sometimes used to fund specific activities in Non-General Fund budgets that would otherwise require an Operating Transfer from the General Fund.
Salary Savings. Positions in the Authorized Staffing which are vacant after the beginning of the fiscal year, sometimes have salary and benefits expense removed, in monthly increments, in the CAO Recommended Budget (or by the department in the Department Requested Budget) as a means of temporarily reducing budget expense for the current fiscal year. Usually, this is done judiciously, taking only as much salary savings as might accrue until the position is filled. Attachment B shows the salary savings being used from vacant positions in the CAO Recommended Budget. This is different from salary savings accrued during the year through attrition, which contributes to end-of-year Fund Balance as discussed below.
This section goes on to describe these components of the budget balancing process in greater detail. The discussion of salary savings being applied to balance this year’s CAO Recommended Budget occurs in the subsequent Personnel Actions section. And, in addition to these standard maneuvers, this year’s Recommended Budget continues to benefit from increases in some General Revenues. These increases in certain revenue streams, and decreases in others, are discussed farther below in the Fiscal Overview section. However, it is important to remember that, to the extent these increases in certain revenue streams emerged over the course of last fiscal year, they also greatly benefit the projected General Fund Balance for the year ending June 30, 2016, which was relied upon to balance this year’s Budget.
Fund Balance
The Auditor-Controller will certify the actual Fiscal Year 20152016 General Fund Balance in September at the start of Budget Hearings. Pending the Auditor-Controller’s certification of Fund Balance, the CAO Recommended Budget has relied on a placeholder figure; assuming the available General Fund Balance will be $3,654,123. This is the same amount of Fund Balance available and used to balance last year’s Board Approved Budget, but $124,334 more than used to balance last year’s CAO Recommended Budget, which means that this year it is necessary to rely on a higher amount of Fund Balance than last year to present a balanced budget.
As part of your Board of Supervisors’ adoption of the Final County Budget for Fiscal Year 2016-2017, it is anticipated that the Auditor-Controller will certify the General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2016, as being at least $3,654,123. This is the amount of Fund Balance needed to fill the shortfall between projected income and projected expenses in the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended General Fund Budget, including providing $12,000 for General Fund Contingencies.
If the Auditor-Controller certifies Fund Balance in excess of $3,654,123, the additional money could be used to address some of the under-funded or unfunded needs identified in this Budget, such as making a contribution to the OPEB Trust, General Reserves, or the Economic Stabilization Fund, or increasing the contributions to General Fund Contingencies, the Elections Innovations Trust, or Accumulated Capital Outlay fund. But, if last year’s Fund Balance is certified lower than $3,654,123, it will be necessary to make cuts to the CAO Recommended Budget.
As frequent readers of Inyo County budgets already know, it is not unusual for the County to rely on using the prior year’s General Fund Balance to help balance the current year’s Budget. And, the existence of a prior year’s General Fund Balance, and using it to balance the Budget, is not necessarily a cause for concern.
The existence of General Fund Balance is an indicator that, overall, the County is living within the limits of its spending plan for that year (e.g., under-spending appropriations and/or overachieving revenues). If General Fund Balance did not exist at the end of a fiscal year, it would mean that departments matched their budget projections exactly (which is very unlikely). And, if a negative General Fund Balance exists, it indicates that, as a whole, departments either over-spent appropriations, under-achieved revenues, or both - so, on its own, the existence of Fund Balance is a good thing.
It is typical for the County to rely on its prior year’s General Fund Balance to balance the Budget, and the Board Approved General Fund Budget in any given year is usually balanced to the amount of the available Fund Balance. Table 2. shows the amount of General Fund Balance used to balance the Budget the last six (6) years. As indicated, during this time, the year-ending General Fund Balance has fluctuated between $3,529,789 and $3,976,086.
To the extent that the actual, certified Fund Balance exceeds what was used to balance the CAO Recommended Budget, it is recommended, and your Board usually directs that the amount of this un-budgeted Fund Balance be budgeted to reserve accounts or onetime expenses, as opposed to being used to increase funding for ongoing costs.
As discussed in last year’s Budget, and emphasized again here, the County cannot rely on General Fund Balance increasing every year to cover increased costs, which often grow faster than revenues.
While many components, including accounts receivable, prior years’ encumbrances, and claims on cash, factor into the Fund Balance calculation, a simplified analysis shows the County’s General Fund Balance can usually be primarily attributed to three things: (l) salary savings that accrue after the Budget is approved; (2) lower-than- anticipated expenditures in non-personnel expenses; and, (3) achieving or exceeding budgeted revenues, particularly in the General Revenues and Expenditures budget (as opposed to individual department budgets).
Although these elements have been described in previous years’ budget messages, for the benefit of readers not familiar with the County budget process, this year’s Arriving at the Recommended Budget section of the Recommended Budget again describes the primary elements of Fund Balance in detail. (While this year’s discussion has been updated to incorporate new trends affecting Fund Balance and the Budget, long-time readers, and those familiar with prior years’ Budget Messages might prefer to read ahead to the Geothermal Royalties discussion beginning on page 25.)
Salary Savings as a component ofFundBalance
As noted above and discussed in more detail in the Personnel section below, use of anticipated (or, budgeted) savings in Salaries and Benefits costs, associated with currently vacant staff positions, is routinely employed as part of the budget process to reduce the size of the shortfall that exists between the Department Requested and CAO Recommended budgets.
However, because of the conservative approach usually taken when budgeting salary savings, there will almost always be additional salary savings in the Budget after it is adopted - for two reasons. First, positions usually take longer to fill than the amount of time used to calculate salary savings. For example, a position budgeted as providing three months of salary savings may actually take four or five, or even seven months to fill, thereby generating additional savings. Unless this savings is re-appropriated elsewhere in the department’s budget during the fiscal year - a practice discouraged by the County Administrator and Auditor-Controller (since salary savings is associated with ongoing expense) - it will show up as part of the Fund Balance calculation at the end of the year.
The second reason is that, in addition, there will also always be vacancies that arise later in the year; some degree of employee turnover is a workforce reality in almost any organization. These vacancies, and the salary savings that come with each one, simply cannot be anticipated at the time the Budget is prepared. While it is reasonable to anticipate that there will always be additional “unanticipated” or, perhaps more accurately, “unbudgeted” salary savings that accrue due to employee turnover throughout the year, it is not easy to anticipate what the amount of that savings might be, or in which department it might be realized. It is, therefore, neither practical nor prudent to, as pundits have suggested in the past, guess which departments might experience vacancies after the Budget is adopted, and then try to adjust their budgets accordingly in advance.
Again, because of these phenomena, there will always be some unbudgeted salary savings in the County Budget at the end of the year that will contribute to Fund Balance - unless the savings is allowed to be spent elsewhere in a department’s budget, or is negated by the department not fully achieving revenue projections in its budget.
While the practices and realities described above explain how we arrive with salary savings at the end of a budget year, they do not necessarily explain why the dollar amount is so high. Not counting salary savings from Health & Human Services positions, unanticipated General Fund salary savings typically account for slightly more than $1,000,000 in year-end Fund Balance. In general, when contemplating the amount of money associated with salary savings, and all the variables at work, it is perhaps most useful to consider that the amount of money generated by salary savings is a direct reflection of the fact that personnel costs currently account for 68% (or, $38,485,728) of the County’s Recommended General Fund Budget.
It is important to stress that your Board’s continuation of the Authorized Position Review Process during the year continued to slow the County hiring process significantly. Without the Authorized Position Review Process, it is likely that the amount of additional salary savings contributing to Fund Balance could have been less.
Also, as discussed on pages 102 to 106, if your Board begins prepaying (as is recommended) the lump-sum payments that CalPERS will begin charging the County in Fiscal Year 2017-2018 for unfunded liabilities in the miscellaneous (non-safety) employee pension plan, the savings associated with retirement benefit costs for vacant positions will not be available to contribute to salary savings since they will have been spent based on actuarial projections instead of actual employee costs.
Under-Exnenditures as a component ofFundBalance
In addition to savings from position vacancies that arise during the year, under-expenditures in non-personnel categories of expenses also contribute to Fund Balance.
Based on past analyses, there is rarely a single budget, or a group of budgets that routinely budget far more than they actually spend (which would be to the detriment of tighter, “more realistic” budgets). Rather, under-expenditures can generally be segregated into two categories. The first category is singular, high-priced expenditures - such as a capital improvement project, a consulting contract, or a large, one-time purchase - that, for any number of reasons, do not materialize in the year in which they are budgeted. Underexpenditures in this first category are likely to show up again as expenses in the following year’s budget.
The second category of under-expenditures is comprised of budgets with small savings in budgeted expenses spread across many object codes that, when taken together, add up to significant savings. It is this second category of under-expenditure (small savings adding up to big dollars) that is usually more prevalent, and usually accounts for greater savings.
With very few exceptions, year in and year out, most departments manage their budgets effectively, and save money. The savings may not be a lot - a couple hundred dollars here, and a thousand dollars someplace else - but, considering that the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget included 138 budget units, even a savings of a thousand, or couple thousand dollars (in a budget of a few hundred thousand or even a million dollars) can quickly add up to a large amount of money when the County Budget is considered as a whole. These “small but mighty” efforts always need to be encouraged, acknowledged, and appreciated.
Unlike salary savings, in most years it is far less certain that the County can count on a lot of little savings adding up to big savings at the end of the year. And, when it is necessary to reduce or at least freeze the amount being spent for services and supplies, budgettightening compounds the likelihood there will be less underexpenditures at the end of the year for Fund Balance. This is simply because freezing or reducing appropriations when costs continue to increase results in less “wiggle room” for departments to save money. As noted above, this year the Recommended Budget makes $222,017 in non-personnel cuts to the Department Requested General Fund budget ($95,165 more than last year). This could foretell that there will be even less for departments to save, and therefore there will be less under-expenditures in this year’s Budget to contribute to year-end Fund Balance on June 30, 2017.
Revenue Realization as a component ofFundBalance
Realizing budgeted revenues is a critical factor in determining year-end Fund Balance that cannot be overemphasized. For every dollar of revenue that is budgeted, but not achieved, year-end Fund Balance is decreased by a dollar regardless of any other factors affecting Fund Balance. Although the accrual period will not close until August 31, 2016, it appears that in Fiscal Year 2015-2016, actual General Fund revenues - excluding Health & Human Services revenues - were approximately $1.5 Million more than the Board Approved Budget, and approximately $1.2 Million more than the Working Budget. While this is a sign the departments are doing a good job achieving budgeted revenues, it is more indicative that some General Revenues - like the hotel bed tax and sales tax - continue to exceed intentionally-conservative projections in the General Revenues & Expenditures budget.
While departments continue, by and large, to do a commendable job in achieving budgeted revenue, remember that the overall figures benefit from the fact that underrealized revenues in some budgets are offset, or masked by higher than anticipated revenues in other budgets. For example, for last fiscal year, the General Revenues & Expenditures budget realized over $2 Million more than the Working Budget Projections. This makes up a significant portion of this year’s Fund Balance and includes:
	Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax (HTOT, or TOT) revenue appears to be about $687,415 higher than projected in the Board Approved Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-2016. (Most of this increase is attributed to increased visitation to witness the Death Valley Super Bloom occurring in the third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year. Through the second quarter of last fiscal year, TOT revenues were actually lagging behind the prior year’s actuals);
	Sales tax revenue is $420,644 higher than projected in the Board Approved Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-2016; and,
	Secured property tax roll revenue is $808,399 higher than projected in the Board Approved Budget for Fiscal Year 20152016.
Without this “extra” unbudgeted revenue in the General Revenues & Expenditures budget, the revenue budgeted by departments (excluding HHS revenue) in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Board Approved Budget would be underachieved by $409,789; and, by $639,689 in the Working Budget.
In other words, the General Fund Balance available to use in this year’s budget could have been higher if all revenue projections in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Working Budget had been fully achieved, and much higher if revenue projections were met in addition to the receipt of additional, unbudgeted General Fund revenue.
This analysis, which is similar to analyses in previous years’ budgets, continues to raise an important issue. A primary purpose of the County’s Mid-Year and Third Quarter Financial Review processes is to revise budget projections as necessary. When a department reports that it will not, or it becomes apparent that a department might not achieve budgeted revenues, the Working Budget should be amended to reflect the decrease in revenues AND, pursuant to the
County’s Budget Control & Responsibility Policy, expenditures need to be decreased accordingly. Failure to do both has the effect of doubling the impact the loss of revenue has on the bottom line.
Therefore, as always, a key factor to maintaining the integrity of the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Budget, and not eroding the year-end Fund Balance available for the Fiscal Year 2017-2018 Budget, is that departments must meet their budgeted revenue projections, and decrease their expenditures by a corresponding amount when they cannot meet revenue projections.
Revenue projections have typically been budgeted conservatively to guard against blue sky spending, and often provide “extra” revenue at the end of the year that masks underachieved revenues elsewhere in the Budget. However, beginning with the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Budget, and continuing through last year, some projected revenues were bumped up to reflect recent trends; thereby leaving much less room for error, or opportunity for Fund Balance to benefit from unanticipated revenue. The above analysis indicates it is still prudent to budget conservatively. Had this year’s increases in General Revenues been forecast and fully budgeted, the overall General Fund would have still underachieved budgeted revenues by $639,689, but Fund Balance would be $1,916,458 less.
Operating Transfersfrom KeyFunds & Trusts.
In addition to Fund Balance, the CAO Recommended Budget always relies on the use of Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund, Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, AB 443 Trust and some minor trusts to offset General Fund expenses.
This year’s reliance on Operating Transfers to the General Fund is similar to last year. Operating Transfers In to the General Fund have decreased by $103,632; from $728,499 in last year’s Budget to $624,867 this year. As reported last year, there is cause for concern that, in some cases, the transfers from these trusts continue to exceed the prior year’s receipts. This results in diminishing fund balances for the trusts, making current levels of Operating Transfers from the trusts unsustainable. For example:
 Geothermal Royalties Trust. The CAO Recommended Budget relies on $542,958 in geothermal royalties funds ($208,530 benefits the General Fund, and $334,428 benefits Non-General
Fund budgets). However, last year, the County only received $248,490 in royalty payments.
	AB 443 Trust. A total of $732,862 in AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) money is being used to balance the Recommended Budget. However, in Fiscal Year 2015-2016, the County only received $509,888 in AB 443 funds.
	Criminal Justice Facilities Trust. In Fiscal Year 2015-2016, the County received $56,907 in Criminal Justice Facilities payments associated with Court fines. Similar to recent years’ budgets, the Recommended Budget is relying on $80,984 in Criminal Justice Facilities monies, and of this $68,894 is for ongoing maintenance expenses.
While these trends should be a cause for concern, the concern is somewhat tempered by the realization that sometimes not all of the budgeted operating transfers occur in a year. This is usually because the projects for which the money is designated are delayed, or do not materialize.
Geothermal Royalties Fund
The use of Geothermal Royalties Fund money to offset certain eligible expenses in General Fund budgets (and in Non-General Fund budgets that would otherwise require General Fund Operating Transfers) replaces funding that would otherwise need to be paid from the General Fund.
Pursuant to County policy, Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers are only made from revenue already received in the Geothermal Royalties Fund, and do not rely on geothermal royalty revenue that is expected, but has yet to be received this Fiscal Year. In Fiscal Year 2015-2016, the Geothermal Royalties Fund received $248,490 in new royalty payments, all of which (and then some) are being appropriated in this year’s Budget. Table 3. shows the use of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers for the past six (6) years.
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget includes a total of $542,958 in Geothermal Royalties Fund Operating Transfers. These are used to offset $208,530 of eligible projects in the General Fund Budget, and $334,428 in the Non-General Fund Budget.
Geothermal Operating Transfer History
In past years, the Budget used geothermal royalties monies to offset costs linked to the Coso Geothermal Plant. Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers were made every year to the Assessor budget to fund a portion of the annual mining and geothermal assessment contract with Harold Bertholf and Associates and, in years when the Coso Geothermal Plant appealed its property tax assessment, Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers were made to the Assessor and CAO budgets for consultants to respond to any assessment appeals.
Last year, the Assessor terminated his contract with Harold Bertholf and Associates for annual mining and geothermal assessment work, choosing to perform this work in-house. Typically, the portion of the Bertholf contract associated with geothermal assessment work was valued at almost $70,000, which could be funded from the Geothermal Royalties Trust. This year, the Assessor estimates that office staff will spend about 44 hours on the Coso Geothermal Plant assessment, and the value of this staff time - about $3,900 - is being funded with an Operating Transfer from the Geothermal Royalties Trust. And, since at this time, we are not aware of any active property tax assessment appeals involving the Coso Geothermal Plant, it is not necessary to budget, or fund consulting contracts to respond to the appeals with geothermal royalties funds.
The projects and other costs being funded with Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund are identified in Table 4. This includes $134,428 in County matching funds for two FAA airport improvement grants, as well as setting money aside for the possible renovation of an existing hangar at the Bishop Airport to serve as a new passenger terminal for commercial airline service.
Table 4.
If not for the availability of the Geothermal Royalties money, the General Fund might have been required to fund all of these costs; something that might not be possible without reductions to other areas recommended for funding in this Budget.
The amount of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers used to balance this year’s Budget leaves $226,430 in the Geothermal Royalties Fund without anticipating the receipt of additional royalty payments this year. However, the remaining Fund Balance would be lower except that not all of the Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers included in last year’s Budget materialized, thereby bolstering the amount of Geothermal Royalties Fund Balance available for this year’s Budget.
Geothermal Royalties Received
The wisdom of budgeting only geothermal royalty funds accrued in the Geothermal Royalties Fund - and not budgeting projected geothermal royalty revenues expected to be received in the current year - has served the County very well. In recent years geothermal royalty payments to the County have become less stable. Table 5. shows the amount of geothermal royalty payments the County has received in each of the last six (6) fiscal years.
As indicated in Table 5. last year the County received nearly $100,000 less in geothermal royalties payments than the amount of annual payments the past three years. This is most likely due to lower production by the Coso Geothermal Plant which, in turn, affects the plant’s payment of royalties to the Bureau of Land Management. However, in addition to being directly affected by the amount of production at the Coso Geothermal Power Plant, this critical revenue source has been subject to a host of political machinations at the federal and state level. For example, there have been several attempts in recent years to completely eliminate Federal geothermal royalty payments to counties.
Criminal Justice Facilities Trust
The Inyo County Board of Supervisors created the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, by resolution, in 1982 for the purpose of acquiring, rehabilitating, constructing, financing, and leasing suitable criminal justice facilities, including all facilities necessary or incidental to the operation of such criminal justice facilities. The Criminal Justice Facilities Trust should not be confused with the Courthouse Construction Trust that existed to provide funding for the acquisition, rehabilitation, construction, and financing of court facilities and, as part of the implementation of the Trial Court Facilities Act of 2002, was transferred to the State and now falls under the control of the Judicial Council of California.
The Criminal Justice Facilities Trust currently holds approximately $712,329, including $56,907 in new revenue received in Fiscal Year 2015-2016. Table 6. shows the revenue history for this trust.
Table 6.
Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Funds Received
In recent budgets, this trust provided the primary means of funding the new Sheriff’s Substation in Lone Pine. And, if the proposed Consolidated Office Building Project moves forward, Criminal Justice F acilities monies are identified as one of the sources of funding to help pay for a portion of the cost of the Sheriff, District Attorney, and Probation offices in the facility.
This year’s Budget relies on using $80,984 in Operating Transfers from the County’s Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to the General Fund to balance the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 County Budget. This is $925 less than the $81,909 in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers necessary to balance the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 County Budget. Last year’s Budget used Criminal Justice Facilities Trust money to fund one eligible deferred maintenance project. Table 7. shows the uses of this year’s recommended Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers.
Table 7.
While the Recommended Budget proposes using $925 less in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers compared to last year’s Budget, there is still more money leaving the trust than coming in. While the Fund Balance remains relatively robust, as noted above, in Fiscal Year 2015-2016, the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust only received $56,907 in new revenue. This contrasts with the $80,984 in Operating Transfer being budgeted from the trust, of which $68,984 is for ongoing expenses.
AB 443 Trust
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget includes the use of $732,862 from the AB 443 Trust. The Sheriff again supports the recommendation for a $300,000 Operating Transfer from the AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) Trust to offset departmental costs. This Operating Transfer will only be made to the extent it is needed to ensure the Net County Cost for the Sheriff’s budgets does not increase during the fiscal year.
Also, as originally agreed upon in the Fiscal Year 2007-2008 Budget, both the Requested and Recommended budgets provide for continuing the use of AB 443 Funds to fund the five (5) additional Correctional Officer positions added to the Sheriff’s Authorized Staffing in 2007, which provided greater operational flexibility, and placed more deputies on the street. The Sheriff has elected to leave two (2) of these positions vacant, so AB 443 funds are only being used to pay for the cost of three (3) Correctional Officer positions at $271,490.
In total, the Recommended Budget recognizes $732,862 in AB 443 funds. However, in contrast, last year the County only collected $509,888 in AB 443 funds.
In past years, the County has been conservative in its use of AB 443 funding because, like other State public safety subventions, the reliability of this funding was very volatile and subject to political whimsy in Sacramento. However, now that this critical funding is part of 2011 Criminal Justice Realignment funding, it is much more stable.
Fortunately, the Sheriff and Board of Supervisors have worked in concert to conserve and not become overly reliant on these funds, and the Recommended Budget still leaves a balance of $2,158,102 in the County’s AB 443 Trust. And, another $500,000 is expected to be received in the trust this year. While the fund balance in the AB 443 Trust does not lessen concerns about ongoing and escalating costs, this money could become an essential bridge in maintaining appropriate levels of law enforcement services if the need to significantly reduce future County budgets materializes. Furthermore, these funds are available to fund other public safety related initiatives, such as costs from the Consolidated Office Building project, if it moves forward, that could be assigned to the Sheriff’s Office.
COPS Trust
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Budget recognizes $146,618 in COPS funding for equipment and supplies in the Sheriff’s requested budgets. Similar to last year, the entire Citizens Option for Public Safety allocation is being budgeted, whereas, in the past the Sheriff’s budgets only recognized a portion of the available funding, and appropriated the rest during the year. There is currently $206,631 in the COPS Trust, and the trust will receive monthly allocations throughout the year. This change in budgeting results in only COPS funding that has
been received to-date being appropriated, similar to how geothermal royalty monies are budgeted.
PERSONNEL ACTIONS
Position Adjustments
As a result of changes negotiated in collective bargaining agreements three years ago, most position adjustments that used to be regulated and approved through the budget process are now, instead, performance-based. As a result, this Budget does not contemplate position adjustments such as career ladders (e.g., movements going from a I to a II, or from a II to III), equity adjustments, or reclassifications. Career ladder movements are now based on merit, and departments are responsible for budgeting for career ladders for those employees who may be eligible, based on performance, during the coming fiscal year. The CAO Recommended Budget does not reduce increased costs associated with anticipated career ladder movements. And, changing the classification and/or compensation of positions now requires separate action by the Board of Supervisors outside of the budget process. Examining classification and compensation issues for positions, and making adjustments as warranted, is addressed primarily through a review of the Classification Plan every five to seven years; although a process and criteria are in place to allow reclassification and associated compensation issues to be considered on a case-by-case basis outside of the budget process.
Although reclassification and compensation matters are not required or expected to be addressed through the budget process, several departments have incorporated the reclassification of some positions, and the associated cost, in their Department Requested budgets. Most classification and compensation adjustments are expected to be made in conjunction with the Classification Plan review process every five to seven years. The next Classification Plan review will most likely begin next fiscal year. To reclassify a position, including changing its level of compensation, outside of the Classification Plan review process, the County Personnel Rules require:
In order for a position to be considered for reclassification
outside of the classification review period described in
section 4.1, the department head must demonstrate in
writing and, if provided, on a form prescribed by the Personnel Director '
	The need for the reclassification is urgent, and cannot wait for the next countywide classification plan review,' and,
	The need for the reclassification is the result of a change in County Code, policy or program, approved by the Board of Supervisors, and the department head clearly informed the County Administrator and Board of Supervisors that the proposed change in County Code, policy or program, if adopted, would result in the need for the reclassification andthe associated costs; OR, the need for the reclassification is the result of changes in State or Federal law or regulation, AND additional and commensurate State orFederal fundingnecessary to fund the reclassification is available and secure ', and,
	To implement the changes in the County Code, policies, or programs, or State or Federal laws and regulations will require higher levels of skills or higher levels of responsibility clearly distinguishable from those associated with the position for which reclassification is sought; and,
	The incumbent in the position has the capacity to successfully perform the newly required skills and responsibilities.
The CAO Recommended Budget does not support department requests to reclassify positions that do not meet each of the four criteria. This affects the Child Support Services department’s request to reclassify all of its Child Support Officers positions, and the Public Works department’s request to reclassify an Administrative Analyst position established as part of a Service Redesign initiative and associated promotions. Neither of these reclassification requests meet the criteria cited above for reclassifications outside of the Classification Plan review process, and no analysis or recommendation is forthcoming regarding the proposed level of compensation for these positions; particularly as it pertains to the reclassification of Child Support Officers, which initially seems higher than warranted if equity is to be maintained with other positions in the County’s Classification Plan. Since reclassification requests are not tied to the budget process, both departments can bring forward their reclassification requests at a later time, following the Personnel Rules and independent of the budget process, if circumstances change, and the department head can demonstrate the reclassification criteria have been met.
Changes in Authorized Stalling
The County of Inyo Manpower Report (Attachment C) identifies, by department, Authorized Staffing levels (full-time and B-PAR employees) as of July 1, 2016. (Note: The Manpower Report identifies Authorized Staffing at the department level, but not yet at the budget unit level.) Because the Health and Human Services department has numerous employees spread across multiple budgets, a table showing the department’s authorized full-time and B-PAR staff, and how they are allocated among various programs, is also provided (Attachment D) to guide your Board of Supervisors in its review of the Health and Human Services budgets.
This Budget recommends changes to the Authorized Staffing for several departments and offices; including deleting positions and supporting some new position requests. These are summarized on Table 8., and discussed below. 
Table 8.
Agricultural Commissioner - Mosquito Abatement. The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to reduce the Authorized Staffing for this budget by deleting two vacant Mosquito Technician positions (Range 52). The Recommended Budget also supports the department request to provide funding for two additional seasonal Mosquito Technician positions, which increases the number of seasonal positions funded in the budget from one (l) to three (3) and provides the department with greater operational and budget flexibility.
Assessor. The Recommended Budget does not support the department’s request to delete a B-Par Office Technician I position from the departments Authorized Staffing and add a full-time Office Technician I.
However, the CAO Recommended Budget does increase the department’s Authorized Staffing by adding a new full-time Auditor Appraiser position (Range 78), and deleting one Appraiser position (Range 70) effective December 31, 2016, at an annual cost increase of $17,064. The need for the Auditor Appraiser position was identified as part of an organizational assessment of the department performed in late 2014 and early 2015, and shared with your Board of Supervisors on August 18, 2015.
CAO - Disaster Services. The Recommended Budget supports creating a new Emergency Services Manager position (Range 78) to revitalize emergency services training and response capabilities. Half of the funding for the position comes from an Emergency Management Performance Grant.
District Attorney - Victim Witness Assistance Council. The CAO Recommended budget supports the department’s request to change its Authorized Staffing by deleting the Victim Witness Assistant position (Range 54), and reinstating the Victim Witness Coordinator (Range 60). The Victim Witness Coordinator position was deleted in Fiscal Year 2015-2016, and the department head has submitted justification for this reclassification request in accordance with the Personnel Rules section cited above. The difference in Salaries and Benefits is $5,345 and there are sufficient funds in this grant to support this request.
Environmental Health. The CAO Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to add a B-Par Lab Tech I position (Range 60) to the department’s Authorized Staffing at a cost of $25,815. The cost of this position is funded with proceeds from the department’s agreement to provide Certified Unified Program Agency services to Mono County. The department’s previous full-time Lab Technician II position was eliminated from the department’s Authorized Staffing in September 2014 as part of the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program and, since that time, remaining department staff have been assigned to perform Water Lab services, albeit at a reduced level (as the department disclosed to the Board of
Supervisor’s when proposing the VSIP action). Reinstating the Lab Technician position, part-time, still maintains the cost savings associated with the Service Redesign initiative while expanding Water Lab services and helping to address recent findings from the annual drinking water program evaluation report recently issued by the State of California Water Board’s Division of Drinking Water.
F arm Advisor. The Recommended Budget changes the Authorized Staffing by deleting the vacant Program Coordinator position (Range 66) and adding an Office Clerk III position (Range 52), effective October 8, 2016, for a savings of $20,397. The Office Clerk III position is consistent with the County’s obligations to provide clerical support to the Farm Advisor Program pursuant to the current MOU between the County and U.C. Extension. The Program Coordinator position being recommended for deletion was the result of the former, budget-based reclassification process (that has been replaced by the periodic classification review process in the County Personnel Rules) and recognized that employee’s long-standing tenure and commitment to the Program.
Health & Human Services - Community Mental Health. The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to add an Administrative Analyst II for Quality Assurance (Range 70) to the Authorized Strength at a cost of $105,185. The position will be funded from Mental Health Realignment and Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) funds and used to gather data for juvenile cases associated with the Continuum of Care Reform and Juvenile Services Redesign.
The Recommended Budget also supports the department’s request to add a Social Worker IV / Psychotherapist position (Range 73) to its Authorized Staffing to perform work related to Continuum of Care Reform and the new Area Resource Center services being provided as part of Juvenile Services Redesign. The budget cost of $111,482, is funded from Mental Health Realignment and MHSA funds.
The Recommended Budget also supports the department’s request, recommended by the Community Corrections Partnership, to add a Psychotherapist position (Range 81) to the department’s Authorized Staffing to provide adult services in the Jail. This position will be funded with $130,895 in Criminal Justice Realignment funds. Despite adding to the increased use of the County’s Criminal Justice Realignment base allocation, funding the position with Criminal
Justice Realignment monies is warranted, at least initially. The services the Psychotherapist will be providing to incarcerated adults in the County Jail is intended to reduce recidivism, and is consistent with, and supports the tenets of efforts to “redesign” the criminal justice system at the State level through Criminal Justice Realignment (AB 109). However, because the services the Psychotherapist provides will occur in the Jail, they are not eligible for Medi-Cal Reimbursement (and without reimbursement may not be possible to be funded entirely through Mental Health Realignment and MHSA funds at this time without exceeding base allocation or eliminating other Mental Health positions or programming). Therefore, it is appropriate to consider funding this position with Criminal Justice Realignment monies. However, it is also appropriate and important to continue to support efforts at the Federal level, to make these types of services, provided to the incarcerated population, eligible for Medi-Cal reimbursement so that other funding sources can be used to fund these needed and, hopefully, effective services. Furthermore, Medi-Cal eligibility status notwithstanding, this funding conundrum also speaks to the desirability of providing these services to the AB 109 population outside the Jail, at an adult Area Resource Center and/or similar facilities, where the services can be billed for reimbursement. As such, this, along with similar Criminal Justice Realignment initiatives, need to be carefully monitored and evaluated for outcomes as well as the ability to draw on more reliable and available funding sources - not iust remain a fixture on a limited Criminal Justice Realignment, budget. As a means of freeing up Criminal Justice Realignment funds, looking at funding this position through Mental Health Realignment and MHSA funds in next year’s budget may be warranted.
The Recommended Budget also supports the department’s request to add two (2) Rehabilitation Specialist positions (Range 60) to the department’s Authorized Staffing to support HHS programs and services at the new Area Resource Center being developed for juveniles as a result of Juvenile Services Redesign. These positions will be funded from Mental Health Realignment and MHSA funds at a cost of $173,756, but these costs can be offset by submitting Medi-Cal billings for eligible services. Again, the billing reimbursement trends for these two positions needs to be carefully monitored and strongly encouraged. It is expected that one of the two positions will be filled by transferring a Senior Rehabilitation Specialist (formerly Group Counselor) from the Authorized Staffing for the Juvenile Institutions budget as discussed below.
The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to add an additional Residential Caregiver position (Range 53) for Progress House to the department’s Authorized Staffing at a cost of $73,203 funded from Mental Health Realignment and MHSA funds.
And, the Recommended Budget supports the department’s suggestion to add a Progress House Manager Trainee position (Range 70) to the authorized strength. The Progress House Manager Trainee position will only be filled when the currently authorized (and currently vacant) Progress House Manager position (Range 78) is vacant, and vice versa. The department has been struggling to recruit the Progress House Manager position for a very, very long time - the licensing requirements include a year of experience in a residential care facility - and the department is in the midst of its second out-ofclass assignment (limited to six months per person per assignment by the Personnel Rules); a situation which is not sustainable. As allowed by the State licensing process, the Progress House Manager Trainee can work under the certification of another staff member to attain the year of experience in a residential care facility prerequisite, and be required to obtain their own license/certification to be the Progress House Manager within 15 months of being in the job (12 months experience plus another three months for taking the licensing test wherever it is being given in California).
Finally, the Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to add a B-Par PSA II position (Range 42) to the Authorized Staffing to staff the Friendly Visitor Program in the Lone Pine area. The $25,416 cost to the budget is funded through Mental Health Realignment and MHSA funds.
Health & Human Services - FIRST Program. The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to add an additional HHS Specialist IV position (Range 60) to the department’s Authorized Staffing to provide additional help for the FIRST Program as part of Juvenile Services Redesign. The budget cost of $86,878 is funded through a multiplicity of funding sources supporting the FIRST Program and, as such, carefully monitoring outcomes and billing reimbursements is important.
Health & Human Services - First Five Commission. The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to delete a vacant HHS Specialist position (Range 60) and add a Prevention Specialist position (Range 60). There is no change in cost to the budget.
Health & Human Services - Social Services. The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to add a B-Par Prevention Specialist (Range 60) to the Authorized Staffing for the Foster Care and Mentoring Program in support of expanded juvenile services. The $35,854 cost of this position will be funded through three different sources:	Substance Use Disorders ($9,860); Social Services
Realignment ($16,134); and Tobacco ($9,860).
The Recommended Budget also supports the department’s request to add a Social Worker Supervisor I (Range 76) to its Authorized Staffing to oversee Resource Family recruitment and support and coordinate Continuum of Care Reform efforts, including possibly becoming a Foster Family Agency. As discussed throughout the Juvenile Services Redesign process the past year, developing a robust and expanded Resource Family Program is paramount for improving juvenile services in the County. The cost of the position is $118,365, and there is an additional allocation from the State to fund at least part of this position, but the amount of this year’s allocation is not known. For budget purposes, and based on last year’s partial allocation of $50,000, the Budget assumes $100,000 of new State revenue will be received to pay for the position and, there is a potential for additional billing reimbursement revenue - that could be enhanced by becoming a local Foster Family Agency - depending on the number of placements. Again, this is a position where outcomes and funding- including billable reimbursements, must be carefully monitored.
The Recommended Budget also cautiously supports the department’s request to change its Authorized Staffing by deleting a vacant Integrated Casework Worker II position (Range 64) and adding a Human Services Supervisor position (Range 70) at an additional cost of $11,661. The position will continue to be based in Lone Pine. However, to the extent there is already a Human Services Supervisor position based in Lone Pine, and the department indicates there is a need for an additional Supervisor to support services in the northern part of the County, it would be preferable to leave the Lone Pine ICW position in the Authorized Strength and identify a different vacant position from which this requested change in Authorized Staffing could be effected.
Health & Human Services - Substance Use Disorders. The department requests to add two Addictions Counselor II positions (Range 57) to its Authorized Staffing; one of the positions would be funded from the department’s Substance Use Disorders allocation and the other is proposed for funding with Criminal Justice Realignment funds for a total cost of $164,352.
The Recommended Budget only supports adding one (l) Addictions Counselor II to the department’s Authorized Staffing. The Recommended Budget does not support adding the Addictions Counselor II position proposed to be funded with Criminal Justice Realignment funds because, while this is an essential service to provide to the Jail population, the Criminal Justice Realignment funding requests are getting close to exceeding the County’s annual base funding allocation and these funds need to be preserved. The addictions counseling services that the Community Corrections Partnership endorses for the Jail can be provided by the additional Addictions Counselor II position being funded with the Substance Use Disorder allocation which is not dependent on being eligible for billing reimbursement.
Information Services. In keeping with the Information Services restructuring and organizational mapping strategy presented in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget to attempt to address emergency staffing shortfalls and improve recruitment and retention for this essential function, the Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to change its Authorized Staffing by deleting a vacant (due to retirement) Network Operations Analyst position (Range 79) and adding a Senior Network Analyst position (Range 84). The new position will be filled through an open recruitment.
Juvenile Institutions. The Recommended Budget deletes all vacant Group Counselor and Supervising Group Counselor positions in the Authorized Staffing for this budget. The funds previously budgeted to pay Salaries and Benefits costs for these vacant positions are now being appropriated in the new Out of County Juvenile Hall budget (See page 80.).
Also, the current Group Counselor and Supervising Group Counselor job classifications are being deleted and replaced with the Rehabilitation Specialist/Senior Rehabilitation Specialist I/II job classification. All current Group Counselor and Supervising Group
Counselor positions that are filled are being transferred to this new job classification at their current salary. The Recommended Budget changes the department’s Authorized Staffing by deleting all Group Counselor and Supervising Group Counselor positions, and adding two (2) Senior Group Counselor I positions and six (6) Senior Group Counselor II positions to the department’s Authorized Staffing. This equates to one less position than currently comprises the filled positions in the Juvenile Institutions budget (providing eight (8) instead of nine (9) Senior Rehabilitation Counselor I/II positions). Another Senior Rehabilitation Counselor position will be moved to the Health and Human Services department’s Authorized Staffing for the Mental Health budget to fill one of two new Rehabilitation Specialist positions being added to the Mental Health budget’s Authorized Staffing.
Library. The Recommended Budget does not support a request from the Library Director to add a full-time Librarian I position (Range 54) to the Library’s Authorized Staffing. Rather than add another Librarian to the Authorized Staffing, the Library can better deploy existing staff by rotating personnel among library branches instead of solely assigning the majority of staff to just one specific branch.
However, the Recommended Budget does add two temporary Librarian I positions (Range 54), budgeted for six months at 20 hours per week each, for completion of the Library Automation Project. The total cost of these two positions is $19,802.
Probation. The Department Requested Budget includes a request to change its Authorized Staffing by deleting a vacant Legal Secretary III (Range 64) in the Juvenile Institutions budget and adding an Office Clerk III positon (Range 52) funded between the Probation and Juvenile Institutions budgets. The Recommended Budget supports this request which results in a savings of $26,538.
Public Works - Building & Maintenance. The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to change the Authorized Staffing by adding a Lead Building & Maintenance Worker (Range 66), and deleting the Custodian Supervisor position (Range 58), when vacant, for an additional cost of $14,245. The Lead Building & Maintenance Worker will perform a lead worker role and is justified, in
part, by the deletion of the Facilities Maintenance Manager as part of an earlier Service Redesign initiative.
Public Works - Building & Safety. The Recommended Budget includes funding to increase Authorized Staffing by adding a Building Inspector position (Range 68). This position, and the Associate Building Official position added in last year’s Budget will perform building inspection and plan-check services for both Inyo County and the City of Bishop, and the cost of the new position will be partially offset through an agreement with the City of Bishop. As part of the Volunteer Separation Incentive Plan implemented as part of the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget, one of the department’s two Senior Building Inspector positions was deleted. The department has since determined that, while it does not typically require the services of two Building Inspectors, it has work for more than one Building Inspector. The addition of this position and anticipated contract with the City of Bishop will allow the department to increase services while still saving money compared with the pre-Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Authorized Staffing level.
Salary Savings
The use of salary savings to balance the CAO Recommended Budget continues to decline. Table 9. provides the trend of General Fund salary savings used to balance the Budget over the past six (6) years.
Table 9.
Budgeted Salary Savings History
There are fewer vacant positions from which to draw salary savings. This speaks to the recent success the County has had in filling vacant positions with qualified individuals, many of which were internal County recruitments. However, it also highlights that as the County has reduced the size of its workforce in recent years - through attrition, the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program, and a modest increased reliance on shared positions - there will be less salary
savings available to balance the Budget at the beginning of the year, and contribute to Fund Balance at the end of the year.
Additionally, and as reported last year, departments are increasingly preemptively using salary savings in their Department Requested budgets as a means of moderating their budget requests. This is fine, but overall department costs are not going down, and it means that salary savings associated with these vacant positions are not available to close the gap between the expense in the Department Requested Budget and projected revenues in the CAO Recommended Budget.
This year’s CAO Recommended Budget is able to identify $215,748 in additional General Fund salary savings compared to $476,202 last year. The Position Vacancy/Salary Savings Table (Attachment B) identifies salary savings by department and staff position, and includes the earliest date that the position can be filled to realize the anticipated salary savings.
All of the salary savings being recommended by the CAO occurs in the General Fund, and most is realized in the County Administrator’s department budgets.
As mentioned above, in the Fund Balance discussion on page 17, the calculation of CAO Recommended salary savings is usually intentionally conservative. The fact that this year’s recommended General Fund salary savings is $260,454 less than the amount used to balance last year’s Budget (which was $55,260 less than the amount of salary savings used to balance the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget) signals that - due to fewer positions, and departments being more aggressive in filling their vacant positions - salary savings could continue to be less of a tool for balancing budgets in future years.
The use of salary savings to help balance the Budget is assumed to be preferred to eliminating filled positions. However, over the long term, taking salary savings from whichever positions happen to be vacant, forgoes performing any strategic analysis of which positions are the most critical to meeting the service priorities established by your Board of Supervisors.
The Budget does delete 11 positions shown in Attachment E. All but two of these positions are currently vacant, and the filled positions are expected to become vacant due to retirement.
FISCAL OVERVIEW
General Fund
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Recommended General Fund Budget projects revenue increasing by $2,737,685 or 5.4%; from $50,334,369 in last year’s Board Approved General Fund Budget to $53,072,054 in this year’s CAO Recommended General Fund Budget. This increase includes $624,867 in Operating Transfers into the General Fund. In total, the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget projects revenue increasing by $1,078,065 or 1.24%; from $86,857,059 in last year’s Board Approved Budget to $87,935,124 this Fiscal Year.
Overall, and similar to last year, the increase in revenue in this year’s County Budget is being driven by General Fund budgets rather than the Non-General Fund budgets. This remains unusual. This year, about half of the revenue growth in the General Fund is attributable to the net increase in General Revenues ($935,688); a good thing considering the cost increases affecting the General Fund. However, the other half of the increase in revenue can be attributed to growth in Health and Human Services, which is categorical funding that does not benefit the General Fund’s bottom line.
When Operating Transfers into the General Fund are subtracted from both this and last years’ revenue projections, projected revenue has increased from last year’s Board Approved General Fund Budget by $1,384,319. (There were $728,499 in Operating Transfers In to the General Fund in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Board Approved Budget and there are $624,867 in Operating Transfers to the General Fund in this year’s Recommended Budget.) In contrast, last year’s analysis showed a $2,172,913 increase in General Fund revenues (after Operating Transfers In to the General Fund were backed out) which indicates the County’s General Fund revenue is not growing as much as it was a year ago (but at least it is still growing). Also, this comparison may be influenced by last year’s budget making less conservative projections of key General Revenues compared to the previous year.
Property tax revenues received by the County from the City of Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP) are a key source of revenue for the General Fund. The Los Angeles property tax payment is calculated using the Constitutionally-prescribed Phillips Formula, and accounts for about 48% of the County’s secured property tax roll. Based on State calculations, this year the LADWP tax
payment is increasing by 5.23%. This is down from last year’s 5.8% increase.
Excluding the increase in the value of LADWP property from the secured property tax roll shows the rest of the secured roll is only growing by 1.27% — slightly less than the allowable CPI increase of 1.53% provided for by Proposition 13. This is almost 90% lower than the statewide average increase in private property values, which the Assessor reports as approaching 11% throughout California.
Overall, the County’s share of this year’s secured tax property revenue is projected to increase by 4.08% or $438,374. The increase in the amount of the secured property tax roll is $59,339 less than last year’s increase. One factor, albeit a relatively minor one, contributing to the deceleration of growth in the secured property tax roll is a 6% decrease to the unitary tax roll prepared by the State. The unitary tax roll accounts for 4.76% of the secured property tax roll.
Also, unfortunately, this year’s unsecured property tax revenue is continuing to decline. The unsecured property tax roll is showing a decrease of 5.93%, or $65,230 less than Fiscal Year 2015-2016. As mentioned in previous budget messages, the Coso Geothermal Plant continues to represent a significant portion of the unsecured property tax roll, accounting for 89% of the total unsecured tax roll. The continued decline in the assessed value of the Coso Geothermal Plant accounts for 40%, or $25,822 of the decline in the County’s share of unsecured property tax revenue this year.
In addition to the decline in Coso’s assessed value, the assessed value of the CR Briggs mine was reduced by 45%, leaving the County with a $22,605 loss in revenue for Fiscal Year 2016-2017. Large industrial properties, like a geothermal plant or a gold mine, can experience swings in value due to the complexity of their assessments. However, in counties with more diversified unsecured property tax rolls, growth in other unsecured properties usually offsets some or most of these changes. In Inyo County, the unsecured property tax roll is not diverse (Coso accounts for 89% of the roll) and the properties comprising the remaining 11% of the unsecured tax roll are not showing increases in assessed value.
On a positive note, this year’s Federal Payment In Lieu of Taxes funding increased by $171,141. However, Federal PILT funding is only appropriated by Congress a year at a time, and the County’s continued receipt of this critical funding is always uncertain. For this reason, the
County only budgets the PILT revenue actually received in the prior year (PILT payments are typically received in June).
Although these General Revenues are critically important to the County General Fund, the factors that influence them - such as assessed valuation and acts of Congress - are beyond the control of this Budget and your Board of Supervisors. There is little that can be proactively accomplished to guard against negative potentialities manifesting in the property tax revenue receipts or PILT payments.
Although revenue projections in the Sales Tax revenue code are increased in this year’s General Revenues and Expenditures budget, overall the budget projects no “net” change in sales tax revenues. This is because the triple-flip ended in Fiscal Year 2015-2016, and this changes how the County will receive its sales tax revenue beginning this year. Prior to the triple-flip ending, a portion of the County’s sales tax was received through a swap of property tax funds that was accounted for in the In Lieu of Sales & Use Tax revenue code. This year’s Sales Tax revenue code has been increased by the amount of last year’s In Lieu of Sales & Use Tax revenue, since that revenue will now be received as part of the County’s sales tax allocation.
Further hindering the certainty of Sales Tax revenue projections are known errors but, as of yet, unknown remedies involving State Board of Equalization (BOE) errors in its prior years’ allocations of sales and use tax, realignment, and Public Safety Augmentation Funds (Proposition 172). California counties were notified in the beginning of June of possible negative adjustments to these revenue streams as the result of BOE errors. However, no details have been provided regarding the amounts or timing of the adjustments.
As a result, this year’s Recommended Budget continues to play it safe. Although combined sales tax revenue increased in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 and Fiscal Year 2015-2016, no increases are projected this year. Furthermore, the Recommended Budget decreases Proposition 172 revenue projections in the District Attorney, Juvenile Institutions, Probation, Public Defender, and Sheriff budgets to last year’s actuals. The Recycling and Waste Management budget also attempts to reserve Fund Balance to payback up to $300,000 in Transaction and Use Tax (TUT) revenue. And, at the end of last fiscal year, on June 28, 2016, your Board approved an amendment to the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget that dedicated $147,456 in one-time revenue associated with the end of the triple-flip to a Sales Tax Contingency Fund. The Sales Tax Contingency Fund remains available to backfill reductions in revenue from the State when it gets around to correcting the BOE
errors that are in excess of the reductions already built into the Recommended Budget.
In Fiscal Year 2015-2016, Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue exceeded projections by $687,415. This should be regarded as a TOT “super bloom” and cannot be counted on for the coming year (other than through enhanced Fund Balance). Last year, the Fiscal year 2015-2016 Budget increased projected TOT revenue and, until the Super Bloom in Death Valley, receipt of that revenue was a bit of a roller coaster ride. The second quarter TOT receipts actually dipped below the prior year’s amounts. However, coinciding with Death Valley’s Super Bloom, third quarter TOT revenues came back to black and, by the fourth quarter, TOT revenue was exceeding projections. This year’s Recommended Budget keeps TOT revenue projections the same as last year’s Board Approved Budget which featured relatively aggressive forecasting compared to past practices.
As in year’s past, the County’s TOT revenue will be linked to economic stability or instability in Europe and the strength of the euro, as well as weather conditions. Due to these factors, it is recommended that your Board of Supervisors continue to allow any revenue in excess of projections to remain unbudgeted as a way of bolstering Fund Balance.
For the past three years, the County has experienced compounding decreases in revenue associated with court fines. However, court fine revenue increased in Fiscal Year 2015-2016, exceeding projections by $126,406. As a result, the Recommended Budget adds $90,000 to the amounts included in last year’s Board Approved Budget for these revenue streams. However, given the statewide trend toward lower court fine revenues, this is a bit of a gamble, so these revenues require close monitoring.
In August of 2015, the Treasurer-Tax Collector proposed a change to the County Investment Policy, that was approved by the Board of Supervisors, which increased the maximum percentage of the portfolio’s long-term investments (investments over one year in length) from 35% to an amount comprising 60% of funds on deposit in the County Treasury Pool. This change to the Investment Policy has resulted in the actual Interest From Treasury revenue in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 exceeding projections by $115,778. As a result, Interest From Treasury revenue projections in the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 General Revenue and Expenditure budget are being increased by $95,000. Traditionally, this revenue has been budgeted to the prior year actuals. The Recommended Budget continues this practice by not budgeting more interest revenue than what was received last year. While this is encouraging news for General Fund revenue, Interest From Treasury revenue is not guaranteed to keep increasing and, due to the long-term nature of these investments, market instability, and risk of calls, such revenues should only be conservatively projected a year or two in advance. As such, any incremental increases in interest revenue should be considered short-term and not long-term gains.
Also, the Treasurer-Tax Collector is preparing for a tax sale of delinquent properties, which will result in projected one-time revenue of $175,000. This revenue figure is higher than usual for a tax sale because the last tax sale occurred four years ago instead of on the Treasurer’s preferred two-year cycle. Future tax sales are planned to occur on a two-year schedule, which will result in lower tax sale proceeds from future auctions.
In summary, the majority of projected increases in General Revenues in the CAO Recommended Budget is comprised of Secured Property Tax ($398,280), PILT ($171,141), Fines & Forfeitures ($90,000), Interest From Treasury ($95,000), and net of increases and decreases in other revenue codes.
Non -General Fund
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Recommended Non-General Fund Budget projects revenue decrease by $1,659,620; from $36,522,690 in last year’s Board Approved Budget to $34,863,070 this Fiscal Year.
The decrease in Non-General Fund revenue appears to be directly related to the decrease in State Funded Road budget revenues, as discussed below. However, despite the decrease in Non-General Fund revenue, Non-General Fund expense is only $474,236 lower than last year’s Board Approved Non-General Fund Budget. This is attributed directly to the Road department’s need to use fund balance as discussed below.
The State Funded Road budget reflects a $1,764,253 reduction in State and Federal funding. However, this is just the normal course of projects being completed from the prior year, and is not necessarily reason for concern.
This year, projected Highway Users Tax Account (HUTA) revenue in the Road budget is down $297,560 due to the State’s overestimation of prior year’s HUTA revenues and lower gas prices. There could be further reductions in the future to HUTA, however that will not be known until December 2016. To compensate for the loss of revenue in this year’s Budget, and fund $2,365,268 in increased expenditures, the Road department is relying on $1,023,321 in Road Fund Balance. As discussed in the Road budget narrative, if the State does not resolve the gas tax situation, it will be necessary to restructure Road expenditures in future years’ budgets.
Overall, many of the assumptions associated with this year’s revenue projections remain similar to previous years’ Budgets and include:
	No additional adverse property tax appeals or settlements.
	Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue remaining strong.
	Vehicle License Fee revenue remaining unchanged.
	No revenue being received from the sale of County-owned property.
	Continued strategic use of Realignment funds to provide maximum benefit to the County.
	No future geothermal royalties payments have been projected in the Recommended Budget. Pursuant to current County policy, any geothermal royalty payments that may be received in Fiscal Year 2016-2017 will be treated as unanticipated revenue and not be budgeted.
The sheer number of Operating Transfers that have been made in and out of the General Fund in recent years makes it very difficult to compare changes in revenues and expenditures from one fiscal year to the next.
This year, increases in expenditures are being offset by increases in certain revenues rather than decreases in discretionary expense. However, the reality is that the County can hardly count on increases in revenues to offset increased costs, nor can it continue to rely on reductions in discretionary expenses to maintain fiscal solvency when costs beyond the control of departments continue to rise.
Changes in General Fund expense categories between the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget and costs in the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Recommended General Fund Budget are shown in Table 10.
Table 10.
CAO Recommended Budget
The total Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget is $95,978,087 and represents a $2,263,449, or a 2.4% increase from the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Board Approved Budget of $93,714,638.
Recommended Non-General Fund Budget
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Recommended Non-General Fund Budget totals $39,251,910 in expenditures and $34,863,070 in revenues. The deficit in Non-General Fund budgets is $4,388,840; $1,185,384 more than last year’s Non-General Fund funding gap. Including recommended Operating Transfers, there is sufficient Fund Balance in these budgets to cover the gap between revenues and expenditures. As discussed above, and similar to last year, fund balances - not increasing revenue - are being relied upon to fund expenses that remain high in Non-General Fund budgets. Table 11. shows the Operating Transfers being recommended for Non-General Fund budgets.
Recommended General Fund Budget
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Recommended General Fund Budget totals $56,726,177 in expenditures and $53,072,054 in revenues. General Fund expenditures represent an increase of $2,737,685 or 4.8% over the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Board Approved General Fund Budget of $53,988,492.
The Auditor-Controller is expected to certify the Fund Balance in the General Fund for the year ending June 30, 2016, at the commencement of Budget Hearings. For purposes of preparing the Recommended Budget, General Fund Balance is being estimated as $3,654,123, and this amount is used to balance the Fiscal Year 20162017 Recommended General Fund Budget.
RECOMMENDED CHANGES TO DEPARTMENT REQUESTED BUDGETS
In addition to the differences already discussed, the CAO Recommended Budget differs from the Department Requested Budget as follows. This section of the Recommended Budget will also be used to identify key issues in certain budgets that have not already been discussed.
As discussed last year, the County self-funds trusts to pay for dental and vision insurance costs. Last year it was possible to use funds from these trusts to offset dental and vision insurance costs in General Fund and Non-General Fund budgets while maintaining prudent reserves. Based on the current analysis of these trusts, it is feasible to use a portion of their fund balances to offset dental and vision expense in this year’s Budget. This has resulted in the CAO Recommended Budget making adjustments to dental and vision costs in the Department Requested Budget that again result in approximate one-time savings of $165,000 for General Fund budgets, and $53,000 in savings in Non-General Fund budgets. The County’s actual cost for vision and dental insurance remain roughly the same. However, it should be noted that, next year, these one-time savings will not be available and next year’s General Fund and Non-General Fund budgets are likely to require increases similar to what is being saved this year; approximately $165,000 and $53,000, respectively.
Non -General Fund Budgets
Bishop Airport
Based on last year’s actual revenues, the Recommended Budget increases Auto Parking revenue by $2,300; increases Ramp Fees revenue by $3,300; increases Interest From Treasury earnings by $1,000; and, increases Services and Fees revenue by $2,072.
Bishop Airport ImprovementProiects
The Recommended Budget provides an Operating Transfer In of $96,140 from the Geothermal Royalties Trust for the required match for a $1,573,208 FAA grant to complete the Airport Layout Plan and Narrative, as well as airfield striping, marking, crack-sealing, and terminal fencing improvements. The County Contributions revenue code is being reduced by the same amount as it was a departmental placeholder for the required match pending the Recommended Budget.
CalMet Task Force
The Recommended Budget decreases the Travel Expense - Required obiect code by $6,360, and increases the Travel obiect code by $6,360 to properly reflect the correct obiect code for travel costs in this budget unit.
CAO-Accumulated Capital Outlay
The Recommended Budget provides a $200,000 Operating Transfer In from the Geothermal Royalties Trust to provide funding for the possible construction of a terminal building at the Bishop
Airport to facilitate establishing commercial air service. If the hangar project does not proceed, or other funding is identified, the geothermal funds will be used for similar improvement projects.
Child Support Services
The Recommended Budget reduces revenue in the Family Support Reimbursement - State object code by $20,155, and reduces revenue in the Family Support Admin Reimbursement object code by $39,122. The department budgeted its full allocations from the State which would have resulted in a contribution to the Child Support Services Fund Balance. Also, budgeting the full allocation when it is not needed to maintain the department’s provision of quality services exposes the County to unnecessary risk from possible future State realignment schemes by establishing a higher amount on which the State could base any required County maintenance of effort (MOE). However, the allocations are on a reimbursement basis only, and the department is not able to draw down the allocation without actual expenditures. This change reflects the department’s actual revenues that could be earned, based on the requested expenditures in the budget.
As discussed in the Personnel Actions section above (page 31), as part of its Department Requested Budget, the department sought to change its Authorized Staffing by reclassifying all of its Child Support Officers positions. The CAO Recommended Budget cannot support this request because the department head has not presented documentation that all of the criteria required by the Personnel Rules are met. (If such documentation is forthcoming, it can be considered outside of the budget process, however, it would necessitate the department seeking a Budget Amendment since the CAO Recommended Budget decreases personnel expenses by $17,814 associated with the reclassification request.) Additionally, the proposed range of reclassification requires further study and, as proposed, could create equity issues with other job classifications that would need to be addressed during the next Classification Plan review process.
Criminal Justice Realignment
As discussed in detail on page 92, the Department Requested Budget for Criminal Justice Realignment is only $19,470 below the County’s annual State Allocation last year. Furthermore, $487,757 of the requested appropriation is for ongoing costs, which is within $135,254 of the County’s annual base allocation. There is $115,784 in one-time costs in the Department Requested Budget.
As such, and in keeping with the Criminal Justice Realignment principles first adopted as part of the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget, and reviewed on page 93, the Recommended Budget does not support funding for one of two new requested Addictions Counselors at a cost of $82,176. This will result in the Criminal Justice Realignment expenditures for this Fiscal Year, and for ongoing costs remaining below, albeit barely lower than the County’s annual base allocation, thereby reserving some funds for future expenses.
As noted in the Personnel Actions section above (page 40), the Recommended Budget does support adding one (1) new Addictions Counselor position to the Health and Human Services department’s Authorized Staffing. This recommended position, which is funded with Substance Abuse Disorder funds, can provide counseling services in the Jail (which was the job contemplated for the second requested Addictions Counselor position) without over-expending Criminal Justice Realignment funds.
The Recommended Budget also decreases the Realignment - 2011 revenue code, and corresponding Internal Charges object code by $4,560. The revenue and expense was intended to reimburse Probation for the monthly service fees for 10 iPads. These will not be purchased or budgeted until a policy for the purchases and support of these devices is developed by the Information Services division and approved by your Board of Supervisors.
Deferred Maintenance - Public Works
The Recommended Budget provides a $268,751 Operating Transfer In from the General Fund to support a variety of deferred maintenance projects recommended by the department, as well as other “operational” projects requested by various departments but not recommended as deferred maintenance projects. In addition, the Recommended Budget also: makes a $66,300 Operating Transfer In from the Mental Health budget to fund a new roof and new flooring at the Progress House facility in Bishop; provides a $11,300 Operating Transfer In requested by the Water Department to fund a new suspended ceiling in its Independence offices; makes a $12,000 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust for the Jail Repair and Replacement Evaluation; recognizes a $7,000 Operating Transfer In from the Mosquito Abatement budget to fund heaters in the new Agriculture Building; and, transfers $5,000 from the Health budget to fund a portion of the new flooring at the County’s South Street Building in Bishop.
The deferred maintenance projects, and associated cost estimates, supported by the CAO Recommended Budget are identified in Table 12.
Table 12.
The Probation department has requested security improvements to both its Bishop and Independence offices, which the Public Works department classified as operational projects as opposed to deferred maintenance. While funding is included in this Budget to make improvements at the Probation offices in Bishop, it does not provide for improvements at the Independence office. It is recommended that the Probation department’s Independence office be relocated to the Juvenile Hall to maintain a staff presence in the secure facility during the weekday since it will now only be operated as a detention facility on the weekends.
Also, it should be noted that funding for deferred maintenance projects included in previous years’ budgets but not yet complete has been encumbered, and is therefore available to complete these projects. This includes $16,000 budgeted during last year’s Third Quarter Financial Review along with a donation of $8,000 from the Bishop Senior Center Recreation Committee to replace flooring in the Bishop Senior Center. However, per the request of the Bishop Senior Center Recreation Committee, these funds are now being reserved to paint the exterior of the building.
ESAAA
The Recommended Budget provides an Operating Transfer In from the General Fund of $55,000 for the required match to receive Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging funding from State and Federal agencies. This is in addition to $54,008 in General Fund monies being transferred into the ESAAA budget through the IC-Gold budget (an “overmatch”) to pay ESAAA’s entire A-87 costs, and accurately account for the true cost of this regional program. The total Inyo County General Fund contribution to the regional Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging Program for Fiscal Year 2016-2017 is $109,008. (This is in addition to the $502,073 in General Fund monies being budgeted to the fund the IC-GOLD program to augment ESAAA’s services to Inyo County senior citizens.) As reiterated below, your Board may want to consider inquiring as to Mono County’s willingness to participate in funding part of the $109,008 Inyo County General Fund contribution to ESAAA’s matching costs.
Additionally, the Recommended Budget increases the Salaries and Benefits object category by a total of $9,851 to reflect the cost of correctly compensating the Program’s kitchen staff. The Recommended Budget accomplished this by: increasing Statham Hall Rent revenue by $350 and Big Pine Legion Hall Rent revenue by $100; and, decreasing General Operating expense by $3,000; decreasing Cell Phone expense by $50; decreasing Unemployment Insurance cost by $1,400; decreasing the Office And Other Equipment < $5,000 object code by $750; decreasing the Space & Site Rental object code by $200; decreasing Food & Household Supplies expense by $2,001; decreasing Professional Services costs by $1,500; and, decreasing the Advertising object code by $500.
Fish & Game
The Recommended Budget increases Fish & Game Fines revenue by $1,800 based on the actual amounts received annually for the past several years. Additionally, the Recommended Budget increases the General Operating object code by $5,000 to fund additional project funding recommendations from the Fish & Wildlife Commission that have or may be approved by your Board. There is sufficient fund balance to cover these changes. However, your Board and the Commission are cautioned that recent years’ expenditures have outpaced the amount of fine money being received and that, if the Recommended Budget is approved, there will only be $6,657 remaining in the Fish and Game Fund Balance to fund operating expense and additional projects
Independence Airport ImnrovementProiects
The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to provide a $20,599 Operating Transfer In from the Independence Airport - Special budget for crack repair work. The County Contributions revenue code is being reduced by the same amount as it was a departmental placeholder for the required match pending the Recommended Budget.
Independence Airport - Special
The Recommended Budget makes a $20,599 Operating Transfer Out to the Independence Airport Improvement Projects budget, as discussed above.
LonePine - Death Valiev AirportImprovement
The Recommended Budget provides a $38,288 Operating Transfer In from the Geothermal Royalties Trust to provide matching funds for a $498,756 FAA grant for the Airport Layout Plan and narrative, and lighting design and construction. The County Contributions revenue code is being reduced by the same amount as it was a departmental placeholder for the required match pending the Recommended Budget.
Mosquito Abatement
Based on discussions with the department, the Recommended Budget decreases the Contributions from DWP revenue code by $10,000 in recognition of the continuing billing disputes over services being provided.
The Recommended Budget also decreases Professional and Special Services expense by $7,000 and increases Operating Transfers Out by $7,000 to the Deferred Maintenance budget to fund heaters the department wants installed in the new Agriculture Building. This change provides the funding necessary for Public Works to move forward with the project.
MotorPool Operating
The Recommended Budget decreases overtime by $3,117 based on last year’s actual expenditures. The Recommended Budget also provides for a $408,318 Operating Transfer In from the Motor Pool Replacement budget, discussed below, to pay for the purchase of vehicles budgeted in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Motor Pool Operating budget that were not actually received until this Fiscal Year.
Motor Pool Replacement
The Recommended Budget increases Operating Transfers Out by $408,318 to pay for the purchase of vehicles budgeted in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Motor Pool Operating budget that were not actually received until this Fiscal Year.
Office ofEmergencvServices - Victim. WitnessAssistance Council (District Attorney)
As discussed above in the Personnel Actions section (page 35), the Recommended Budget supports the District Attorney’s request to change the office’s Authorized Staffing by deleting the Victim Witness Assistant position (Range 54) and reinstating the Victim Witness Coordinator position (Range 60). The difference in personnel costs is $5,345, and the grant provides sufficient funding to pay for the increases in this grant to support this request which meets the criteria specified in the Personnel Rules.
Recycling & Waste Management
The Department Requested Budget reflected a deficit of $1,084,515 between projected revenues and requested expenditures. Changes made in the Recommended Budget, discussed below, result in closing this gap by $122,400. Of the remaining $932,615 deficit, $635,000 can be attributed to the following one-time costs: off-road dump truck ($420,000); small scale house ($15,000) and, concrete crushing ($200,000). If these one-time costs are backed-out, the projected revenues and ongoing expenses in this year’s Recycling and Waste Management budget result in a $297,615 operating deficit, including $149,930 in ongoing debt-service payments for CARB- compliant solid waste equipment acquired in the last two years.
Fortunately, there is sufficient Fund Balance to cover these onetime and ongoing costs. The Recycling and Waste Management Fund Balance is the result of the department not fully expending all of its Board Approved appropriations, including Operating Transfers, over a several-year period. However, most of the savings occurred in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 as the result of reducing hours of operation at some solid waste disposal sites; staff vacancies; and, a positive $300,000 anomaly in Transaction and Use Tax (TUT) allocated by the State Board of Equalization.
However, the spike in TUT revenue in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 may be related to other allocation errors plaguing the State Board of Equalization that have recently come to light. If so, this could result in the County needing to “pay back” up to $300,000. This possibility, in part, informs the recommendation to provide a $200,000 Operating Transfer from the General Fund to the Recycling and Waste Management budget. This is similar to the amount of additional General Fund revenue being used to support the Recycling and Waste Management Program in recent Board Approved Budgets; this year’s Recommended Budget preserves this funding capacity for future budgets. The amount of required General Fund contribution necessary to maintain the Recycling and Waste Management Program would be significantly greater if your Board were to decide not to allocate the County’s TUT proceeds to this budget and, instead, use the TUT (which is a General Tax) for funding other County needs.
The Recommended Budget increases the Interest revenue code by $4,500 to recognize higher interest earnings associated with the implementation of the Treasurer-Tax Collector’s recommended changes in the Investment Policy. And, Solid Waste Fees revenue is being increased by $20,000 to more closely reflect the actual revenue received from the County’s permitted waste haulers last year. Finally, the Recommended Budget increases SW Fees for the Bishop-Sunland and Independence landfill revenue codes by $4,000 and $1,000, respectively, to reflect the actual gate fees at these facilities last fiscal year.
The Recommended Budget decreases the requested Maintenance - Fuel & Lubricant object code by $17,000 based on actual expenses for the past five years. Additionally, the Recommended Budget decreases requested General Operating costs by $20,400 to be on par with the amount appropriated in last year’s Board Approved Budget. Finally, requested Professional and Special Services expense is being decreased by $5,000 for costs the department identified as “miscellaneous,” but this object code is still being increased by $38,820 compared to last year’s Board Approved Budget.
The Department Requested Budget sought $80,000 for a new shop building. While a new shop building is needed, the Recommended Budget does not support this request, and staff has been directed to begin discussions with the Public Works department about developing a new, combined shop building for use by the Road department and Recycling and Waste Management Program.
The Department Requested Budget also seeks $420,000 for a new, CARB-compliant off-road dump truck essential for landfill operations. The current dump truck at the Bishop-Sunland Landfill is 13 years old, and will no longer meet California Air Resources Board regulations beginning in 2018. Program staff has also identified used, CARB-compliant dump trucks that can be acquired for $287,000 to $308,000. The possibility of using lease financing to acquire a new or used dump truck was discussed with the Financial Advisory Committee on August 8, 2016. The FAC agreed to recommend financing if the outright purchase of the dump truck could not be accomplished through this year’s Budget. If financing the dump truck was necessary, the FAC recommended using a five-year Treasury loan before opting for the eight-year dealer financing. The annual payments for financing the used dump truck would be $64,169 for five years with a Treasury loan versus $56,000 for six years with dealer financing. The annual payments for financing a new dump truck would be $85,002 for five years with a Treasury loan versus $56,000 for eight years with dealer financing. Although the payments are higher, if financing were necessary, utilizing the shorter-term Treasury loan would reduce the total cost to the County.
The Recommended Budget provides funding for the outright purchase of a new, CARB-compliant off-road dump truck. As indicated by the preceding discussion regarding the Recycling and Waste Management Fund Balance, the existence of this budget’s Fund Balance is not due to balanced revenues and expenditures within the Enterprise Fund but, rather, the Fund Balance accumulating over the past four years as a result of the Auditor-Controller making Board Approved Operating Transfers into the budget and the Recycling & Waste Management budget not being fully expended in any given year due to staff vacancies, etc. As a result, this Fund Balance has grown incrementally and should be considered one-time revenue. As such, it seems appropriate to recommend expending this money on the requested dump truck rather than adding $56,000 to the $149,930 in annual debt service payments already included in the department budget, which would have the effect of possibly increasing the amount of General Fund money needed to bridge future deficits.
While your Board of Supervisors could consider directing the purchase of a used dump truck, this is not being recommended due to sufficient funding for a new dump truck existing, and the fact that the used dump trucks available have between 2,600 hours and 2,700 hours of use. This equates to almost two years’ worth of actual operation in unknown conditions. Your Board of Supervisors could also direct the acquisition of a new or used dump truck using lease-purchase financing but, again, this is not recommended since one-time funding is available for the outright purchase and will avoid adding to the amount of the budget’s structural deficit in future years.
In closing, it should be noted that several operational changes being considered this year could result in clarifying and, possibly, reducing the size of the structural deficit in this budget. The anticipated transition to weighing (as opposed to estimating the volume) of waste received at the Bishop-Sunland Landfill - which receives 73% of the County’s annual solid waste tonnage - will provide accurate tonnage figures and ensure that the current rate structure is being applied correctly. Similarly, the possibility of switching to cashless transactions at solid waste facilities could also help to clarify the status of Recycling and Waste Management Program revenues. Ideally, and barring cost increases beyond the control of the County (e.g., new lease costs, State fees, regulatory compliance issues, new one-time costs, etc.), these programs will be implemented and analyzed prior to any consideration of adjustments to the current rate structure. However, it may take a year or two to gauge the effect of these changes, if they are approved by your Board. For now, as recommended, the Budget provides for immediate and ongoing landfill needs, bridges a million dollar deficit with fund balance and a General Fund Operating Transfer on par with recent Budgets, and anticipates a possible BOE adjustment to TUT revenues.
SCADA Upgrade
The Recommended Budget reduces the County Contribution revenue code by $5,000 which was a departmental placeholder for a requested Operating Transfer In. The Recommended Budget provides an Operating Transfer In of $14,598 from the Independence H2O Upgrade budget. Additionally, the Recommended Budget reflects a subsequent department request to increase the State Grants revenue code by $10,222.
Also at the department’s request to move forward with the SCADA Project, the Recommended Budget decreases External Charges expense by $14,670; decreases Advertising costs by $400; decreases Professional and Special Services by $1,172; and, increases Equipment expenditures by $40,000.
Substance Use Disorders
As noted above, in the Personnel Actions section (page 39) the Recommended Budget deletes an Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Realignment Trust to fund a second Addictions Counselor position. The Recommended Budget supports adding one Addictions Counselor position (Range 57), funded with part of the department’s Substance Use Disorder allocations, which can provide addiction counseling services in the Jail without using up $82,176 in Criminal Justice Realignment funds.
Water
The Recommended Budget increases Other Agency Contributions costs by $15,000 for the County’s initial contribution to the recently formed Indian Wells Valley Groundwater Authority.
General Fund Budgets Agricultural Commissioner
The Recommended Budget increases revenue in the Aid From Mono County revenue code by $12,000, reflecting the department’s agreement that this is the actual amount that Mono County will be charged this Fiscal Year based on last year’s actual department expenditures. Your Board will recall that, by agreement, Mono County funds its share of the Inyo-Mono Agricultural Commissioner’s Office costs by paying 50% of the prior year’s actual expenditures adjusted for shared revenue.
The Recommended Budget also reduces Motor Pool expense by $1,000 at the department’s request. There is a reduction in Employee Physicals expense of $300 for background checks, since seasonal employees do not undergo background checks. However, the Recommended Budget adds $300 in Advertising expense to support the department’s recruitment efforts for vacant positions.
The Recommended Budget reinstates $47,000 in Professional and Special Services expense, added to last year’s Budget during the Third Quarter Financial Review, to support the preparation of an economic impact report analyzing the economic benefits of, and relationships between the agricultural industry in Inyo and Mono counties. The report is also expected to identify opportunities to enhance the economic benefits of the agricultural industry throughout the region. The Recommended Budget also identifies $23,500 in funding from Mono County, from various sources, to fund the Mono County share of the study.
Animal. Control
The Recommended Budget increases State Motor Vehicle in Lieu Tax revenue by $42,682, and Health Realignment revenue by $30,974, to recognize the actual base realignment amounts that will be realized this Fiscal Year.
The Recommended Budget decreases Overtime costs by $12,000, and standby time by $2,000 based on the prior year’s actuals. Last year, additional staff was added to the Animal Services budget to address continuing increases in overtime costs, so there should be no need to further add Overtime expense in this year’s Budget.
The Recommended Budget also decreases General Operating expense by $5,000, and Motor Pool costs by $7,595 to better approximate the prior year’s actual expenses.
Based on a subsequent department request, the Recommended Budget adds $3,000 to the Office and Other Equipment < $5,000 object code for the purchase of a new radio alarm system for the Animal Shelter, which will improve the current telephone line-based alarm system at a lower cost.
Assessor
The Recommended Budget includes a $3,900 Operating Transfer In from Geothermal Royalties. This is based on the Assessor’s analysis of how much time staff will be spending to perform in-house appraisals of the Coso Geothermal power plant. In previous years, this budget was able to benefit from a substantially larger (e.g., >$60,000) Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer In due to contracting for geothermal appraisal services which is an eligible use of these categorical funds.
The Department Requested Budget included $20,000 in revenue from an Operating Transfer In that was, apparently, anticipated to be funded from the Treasurer-Tax Collector’s tax-defaulted land auction. The Recommended Budget eliminates this projected revenue. In addition to departments being prohibited from budgeting Operating Transfers In in their Department Requested budgets, in this case, any revenue generated from the tax-defaulted land auction will be General Fund revenue, and Operating Transfers are not budgeted within the same fund. Also, any revenue generated from the tax-defaulted land auction should be considered one-time revenue and it should be recognized that such General Fund revenue is not the exclusive domain of the department in which it is generated.
The Department Requested Budget paired the $20,000 Operating Transfer to spending $20,000 on new office furniture. The amount of this request is simply not commensurate with the County’s current fiscal reality or past spending practices. However, recognizing that some of the office’s furniture may need to be replaced, the Recommended Budget provides $7,500 (instead of $20,000) for office furniture. This is on par with the cost of recent refurbishments of similar-sized offices. The Recommended Budget also eliminates another $3,000 from the Office and Other Equipment < $5,000 object code that was proposed for electrical box relocation. This project needs to be coordinated through the Public Works department, and the Recommended Budget provides funding for it in the Deferred Maintenance budget.
The Recommended Budget also reduces General Operating expense by $1,000 consistent with last year’s Board Approved Budget and prior years’ actuals. Requested Travel expense is also being reduced by $1,770. As your board may recall, last year the CAO Recommended Budget proposed a one-time increase in travel funding to assist the new Assessor in “getting up to speed” by visiting Assessors’ Offices throughout the State and working with his peers. Travel was increased from $5,300 in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 to $14,000 last year. The $6,500 in recommended travel funding this year is still higher than prior years’ Board Approved funding and last year’s actual travel expense. Motor Pool is being reduced $2,407 based on the past five years’ actuals.
The Department Requested Budget seeks $15,000 in Overtime expense for the Property Tax Management System Project. The Recommended Budget includes $10,000 for Overtime costs. If additional overtime is necessary and justified it would be a candidate for funding from any General Fund Contingencies that are appropriated in this year’s Budget.
Finally, as noted in the Personnel Actions section above (page 35), the Department Requested Budget seeks to provide funding to reinstate a second, full-time Office Technician I (Range 55). In Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the then-Assessor recommended not refilling a retiring Office Technician position, however, the CAO Recommended Budget maintained the position as a B-Par position in recognition of the pending change in Office leadership. The cost of the department’s request to make this position full-time is $28,855. The Recommended Budget does not support this request. However, in previous conversations with the Assessor, as well as the organizational assessment performed in 2015, it seems clear that the office could benefit from reinstating the long-ago deleted Auditor Appraiser position. The Recommended Budget supports adding an Auditor- Appraiser position (Range 78) effective December 31, 2016, and, when it is filled, deleting an Appraiser II position (Range 70), for a total cost increase of $17,064 per year. In addition to adding higher-level staff resources, this change in Authorized Staffing will also support succession planning in the office.
Building & Safety
The Recommended Budget supports adding one Building Inspector position (Range 68) for 11 months at an increased cost of $78,833, contingent on an agreement with the City of Bishop for providing building inspection services. Accordingly, this cost increase is partially offset by the inclusion of $60,000 from the City of Bishop in the Services and Fees revenue code.
This Budget also includes the Associate Building Official position (added to the Authorized Staffing in last year’s Budget, in place of the Senior Building Official position (Range 72) that the Associate Building Official was intended to replace. To the extent that both of these positions were vacant during the first part of this Fiscal Year, there is some salary savings reflected in the Salaries and Benefits object category. However, salary savings is not as much as it otherwise would be due to the need to pay final compensation to the former Associate Building Official.
As a result of these increases in the Authorized Staffing, the Recommended Budget removes $10,000 from the Part Time Employee object code. Your Board will recall that the part-time position and, previously, contracting expenses, were added to the Building and Safety budget when the Authorized Staffing for this budget was reduced from two (2) to one (l) Senior Building Official positions in conjunction with the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program implemented as part of the Service Redesign initiatives in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget. This year’s Budget refines those efforts by providing approximately 1.5 FTEs to provide building inspection services in the unincorporated areas of the County, and partnering with the City of Bishop to fund the approximate cost of the remaining 0.5 FTE that comprises the revamped Authorized Staffing.
The Recommended Budget also increases Professional and Special Services expense by $65,000, and the Contingencies object code by $65,000 to fund the contract of plan-check and building inspection services pending filling the Associate Building Inspector position. It is expected that this position will be filled on October 8, 2016. Therefore, only half of the building and safety services contract is being budgeted, with the other half of the contract cost being put into the Contingencies object code in the event the recruitment is delayed and it becomes necessary to continue utilizing the contract. Use of Contingencies requires subsequent Board approval (4/5ths vote required). If the position is filled, this Contingency funding will be recommended for re-appropriation during the Mid-Year Financial Review. The Recommended Budget also adds another $5,000 to Professional and Special Services costs to fund improvements at the shared office for the Bishop building inspector.
CAO - General
The Recommended Budget reduces the Salary and Benefit object category by $32,791 to represent 12 months of salary savings for the vacant shared Office Technician position.
Contingencies
The Recommended Budget provides $12,000 in General Fund Contingencies which, while less than ideal, is in keeping with recent prior years’ appropriations. Last year’s CAO Recommended Budget proposed $40,302 in Contingencies, and your Board Approved Budget increased this amount to $84,636 using unbudgeted Fund Balance determined to be available for this purpose during last year’s Budget Hearings. In Fiscal Year 2015-2016, it was necessary to use $164,451 from General Fund Contingencies during the Fiscal Year, with the difference between the amount appropriated in the Board Approved Budget and what was actually required being funded through the process of unencumbering previously encumbered contracts in General Fund budgets.
Your Board of Supervisors will have an opportunity to consider increasing the amount of General Fund Contingencies in this year’s Budget using a similar process, if the amount of General Fund Balance certified by the Auditor Controller during Budget hearings is more than the $3,654,123 in Fund Balance relied on to balance the CAO Recommended Budget. Alternately, your Board of Supervisors could increase Contingencies by decreasing appropriations in other General Fund budget units.
Coroner
When your Board made an appointment to fill the unexpired term of the elected Coroner position in October 2015, the candidate indicated that he intended to maintain the department’s historic budget levels allowing for fluctuations in demands for service. This has
not been possible due to the need to begin budgeting for Medical Insurance expense, which is supported in the Recommended Budget.
The Department Requested Budget also seeks funding to: provide pay increases of $200 per month to the Coroner’s salary, and the contract Deputy Coroner positions; and, includes filling the vacant Deputy Coroner position created when your Board appointed the Deputy Coroner to fill the Coroner’s unexpired term. The Recommended Budget supports filling the vacant Deputy Coroner position, effective August 16, 2016, at a reduced salary agreed to by the Coroner. The Recommended Budget also reduces the amount of funding available for possible raises for the filled Deputy Coroner contracts to $150 a month, should your Board be inclined to increase the compensation when these contracts expire in December. As a result, the Salaries and Benefits object category is reduced by $6,097.
County Clerk - General
Following departmental budget meetings, the Recommended Budget increases Real Property Transfer Tax revenue by $2,000 and increases the Clerk Fees revenue code by $250 to more accurately reflect the amount of revenue actually received last year.
County Counsel
The Recommended Budget increases personnel expenses by $2,062 to provide funding for a possible career ladder movement consistent with Personnel Rules eligibility requirements.
The Department Requested Professional and Special Services expense is being reduced by $5,000 for a contract that was already encumbered in the previous fiscal year.
Coun tv Library
The Recommended Budget increases Professional and Special Services object code by $25,000 to fund the contract for completing the Library Automation Project. Similarly, the Recommended Budget adds $19,802 to the Salaries and Benefits object category to provide two (2) temporary Librarian I positions, budgeted at 20 hours per week for six months, to assist with the Project. The Recommended Budget also increases revenue in the Other Agencies revenue code by $25,000 to recognize the contribution from the Friends of the Bishop Library to support the completion of the Automation Project.
As noted above (page 41), the Recommended Budget does not provide funding for a request to add an additional full-time Librarian to the Authorized Staffing for this budget, and deletes funding for an additional A-Par Librarian Specialist, at three hours per week, for the Tecopa Library. Another A-Par position can be hired for the Tecopa Library within the existing Library budget by allocating the 19 hours of staff time, for which funding is provided, among two (2) instead of one (1) A-Par positions. Similarly, and as discussed above, rather than add another Librarian to the Authorized Staffing, the Library can better deploy existing staff by rotating personnel among library branches instead of solely assigning the majority of staff to just one specific branch. Compared to the Requested Budget, the CAO Recommended Budget decreases the Salaries and Benefits object category by $56,051. However, because the Recommended Budget adds $19,802 for temporary staff, the total reduction to the Department Requested increase in personnel expenses is $36,429.
The Recommended Budget decreases Advertising expense by $450 because the need for the appropriation is unsubstantiated, and also reduces Utilities expense by $3,000 based on prior year actuals. Additionally, the Recommended Budget decreases Library Books and Subscriptions object code by $1,240. The Recommended Budget increases the budget for library books and subscriptions by $4,010 over last year’s Budget, and the Library is expected to allocate these funds for the purchase of both traditional books and e-books and other electronic media.
Compared to last year’s Board Approved Budget, personnel expense is being increased $10,399 in this year’s CAO Recommended Budget.
DistrictAttornev- General
The Recommended Budget reduces the State - Public Safety Services revenue code by $10,000. Recent notifications from the State Board of Equalization indicate that the County should expect adjustments to its Proposition 172 disbursements from the State. The adjustment being recommended anticipates that this could result in the County receiving less Proposition 172 money for public safety services, and brings this year’s revenue projection in line with prior years’ actuals pending resolution of the BOE error. The Recommended Budget also reduces Intra-County Charges revenue by $10,000, and increases Operating Transfer In by $10,000 to properly recognize the contribution from the District Attorney’s Civil Penalty and Asset Forfeitures trusts ($5,000 each) to fund additional travel requests.
Based on the department’s actual expenses last year, the Recommended Budget reduces the Professional Services object code by $1,000 for “miscellaneous” services; General Operating expenses by $2,000; and, the Utilities object code by $1,300.
The Recommended Budget also removes $10,133 from the Salaries and Benefits object category to reflect actual costs associated with new personnel, and that two employees will not qualify for the Sick Leave Buy Back benefit included in the Department Requested Budget.
D.A. - Safety
The Recommended Budget reduces Overtime projections by $5,000 to more closely reflect the department’s actual overtime costs last year.
Elections
The Recommended Budget increases the Elections Expense object code by $10,000 to provide additional funding - should it be necessary - for adding the two cannabis advisory measures, and the cannabis business tax measure to printed materials for the November 8, 2016, General Election.
The Recommended Budget removes $80,000 requested by the department in the Equipment object code for partial funding of future elections equipment. Instead, the Recommended Budget adds $80,000 to the Elections Innovations Trust established for this purpose two years ago. As recommended, the fund balance in this Trust will be $160,000. However, your Board of Supervisors is reminded that the Clerk-Recorder’s preliminary estimate for new elections equipment could be as much as $650,000.
Environmental Health
The Recommended Budget increases the State Motor Vehicle In Lieu Tax revenue code by $63,481, and increases the Health Realignment revenue code by $15,190 to recognize the actual base amounts from these funding sources.
The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to increase its Authorized Staffing by adding a B-Par Lab Technician (Range 60) to assist with the department’s water testing activities. The position is budgeted at 20 hours per week for the full year, but is expected to be filled October 8, 2016, for a total expense of $25,815.
The Recommended Budget also recognizes the need to add another $19,110 to the department’s Salaries and Benefits costs as a result of the Planning department determining that it does not need the services of an Office Technician position that has been a shared position between the Planning and Environmental Health departments since Fiscal Year 2014-2015. Since the Environmental Health department does need a full-time Office Technician, the additional personnel cost is being added to this budget on a “temporary basis” to provide funding for the position until it can be reassigned. Doing so eliminates the need to consider laying-off the position, or replacing it with a B-Par Office Technician, for the time being, but adds $34,393 to General Fund costs in this year’s Budget.
Farm Advisor
As the result of a retirement, the Recommended Budget changes the Authorized Staffing for this budget by deleting a Program Coordinator position (Range 66) and adding an Office Clerk III position (Range 52). The recommended level of staffing is consistent with the County obligations to provide staffing to the Farm Advisor’s office under the requirements of the agreement between the County and UC Extension. (The Program Coordinator position represented a level of staffing that exceeded the County’s obligations as a result of the County’s former job reclassification process which has since been changed.) As a result, personnel expenses in the Salaries and Benefits object category are reduced by $20,397 in the Recommended Budget.
The Recommended Budget also reduces Motor Pool expenses by $1,872 to more closely reflect the actual expenditures for the past three years.
Grantsin Support
The Recommended Budget adds $140,000 in “placeholder” funding to allow the Board of Supervisors to consider a contract or contracts with the Inyo County Superintendent of Schools and/or local school districts to fund after-school programs for youth in the county. This is completely discretionary funding and your Board of Supervisors could direct it to be appropriated for any of the other needs identified but not funded in the Recommended Budget (e.g., OPEB Trust Contribution, Elections Innovations Trust, General Reserves, Economic Stabilization Trust, etc., etc.)
GeneralRevenues and Expenditures
The Recommended Budget provides the following Operating Transfers Out from this budget: $80,000 to the Elections Innovation Trust; $200,000 to the Recycling & Waste Management budget; $55,000 for the required match for Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging funding (the IC-GOLD budget also includes another $54,008 General Fund match to the ESAAA budget); and $268,751 for Deferred Maintenance projects.
Health
The Recommended Budget adds $20,000 to the Health Realignment revenue code and the Other Agency Contributions object code to provide contingency funding for covering ambulance service- related fees being charged to Inyo County volunteer fire departments by the Inland Counties Emergency Medical Agency (ICEMA).
The Recommended Budget also removes $5,000 from the Maintenance of Structures object code and adds it to Operating Transfers Out object code to fund a portion of the floor replacement project at the County’s South Street Building in Bishop.
IC-GOLD
The Recommended Budget increases Other Current Charges revenue by $10,000 based on the last year’s actuals. This is revenue associated with the decision to begin charging $5 per meal for meals served through the County’s enhanced senior meal program one day a week at each of the congregate meal sites in Bishop, Big Pine, and Lone Pine. The fact that last year’s revenues greatly exceeded projections indicates that most people are continuing to participate in the senior meal program and have not stopped participating due to insufficient means. This effort represents another success in the County’s ongoing Service Redesign initiative.
The Recommended Budget also adds an Operating Transfers Out expense of $54,008 to the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging (ESAAA) budget. This represents an “overmatch.” The matching funds the County is required to provide as part of it agreeing to operate the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging in Inyo and Mono counties is $55,000 and funded in the ESAAA budget by an Operating Transfer In from the General Revenues and Expenditures budget. The additional $54,008 being paid from the General Fund’s IC-Gold budget is to pay ESAAA’s entire A-87 costs, and accurately account for the true cost of this regional program. Your Board may want to consider inquiring as to Mono County’s willingness to participate in funding these matching costs.
The Recommended Budget removes a $5,300 Operating Transfer Out proposed by the department to fund an ADA compliant storefront at Statham Hall. Funding for this project is being provided as part of the General Fund Operating Transfer In in the Deferred maintenance budget.
Additionally, the Recommended Budget increases the Salaries and Benefits object category by a total of $13,064 to reflect the cost of correctly compensating the program’s kitchen staff.
Jail-CAD/RMS
The CAO Recommended Budget provides an Operating Transfer In of $22,080 from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund the cost of the RIMS Maintenance Contract in lieu of using General Fund monies or AB 443 funds for this purpose. Additionally, the Recommended Budget supports a second Operating Transfer from the Warrant Trust in the amount of $1,785 to provide connectivity to the Superior Court’s JALAN criminal justice case management system. Six years ago, monies in the 911 Trust were available for this contract, but those funds have been expended. The 911 Trust will be monitored for its ability to resume funding these costs in the future.
Jail - General
The Recommended Budget provides a $22,884 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund Jail facility operations associated with the Siemen’s maintenance contract.
Similar to revenue in the District Attorney budget, the Recommended Budget is reducing the State - Public Safety Services revenue code by $20,000 in this budget pending the outcome of the State Board of Equalization’s reconciliation of its Proposition 172 distribution error. The recommended adjustment anticipates the BOE adjustment could result in the County receiving less Proposition 172 money for public safety services, and brings this year’s revenue projection in line with prior years’ actuals. Additionally, per the department’s request during budget meetings, COPS funding is being increased by $8,264 to help reimburse expenses related to safety equipment.
The Recommended Budget decreases Holiday Overtime expense by $2,447 based on prior years’ actuals.
Based also on last year’s costs, and stated department needs, the Recommended Budget decreases the Personal & Safety Equipment object code by $4,000, which still leaves sufficient funding for all life and safety equipment. Similarly, and as in previous years, Inmate Clothing expense is reduced by $5,000; Maintenance of Equipment costs are cut by $500; Office and Other Equipment < $5,000 is decreased by $1,300; Professional and Special Services expenses are being lowered by $2,350; and, the General Operating object code is being reduced by $1,500.
This year, the Recommended Budget is reducing the Travel Expenses - Required object code by $34,989, and increasing the less restrictive Travel Expense object code by $15,593, for a total reduction in travel expense of $19,396 compared to the Department Requested Budget. Combined travel expenses in the Recommended Budget total the same amount included in last year’s Board Approved Budget.
Jail - Security
The Recommended Budget supports the Sheriff’s request for an Operating Transfer In from the AB 443 Trust to fund $23,130 in annual Jail security system costs.
Jail - STC
The Recommended Budget reduces Travel expense by $20,000 to better approximate the level of funding in last year’s Board Approved Budget.
Juvenile Institutions
The Recommended Budget provides a $7,020 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to pay for the cost of the maintenance contract for the Juvenile Hall fire suppression system.
Similar to the District Attorney and Jail budgets, the Recommended Budget also reduces State - Public Safety Services revenue by $24,000 in the Juvenile Institutions budget pending the outcome of the State Board of Equalization’s reconciliation of its Proposition 172 distribution error. The recommended adjustment anticipates the BOE adjustment could result in the County receiving less Proposition 172 money for public safety services, and brings this year’s revenue projection in line with prior years’ actuals.
Based on last year’s expenses, the Recommended Budget reduces the Personal and Safety Equipment object code by $2,500; the Inmate Clothing object code by $500; and the Food and Household Supplies object code by $4,000.
The Department has proposed, and the Recommended Budget supports changing the Authorized Strength for this budget by deleting a Legal Secretary III (Range 64) and adding an Office Clerk III (Range 52) that will be funded from both the Juvenile Institutions and Probation budgets. This results in a combined savings of $26,538 in the Probation and Juvenile Institutions budgets.
For preparation of the Department Requested Budget, the department was asked to budget personnel costs for those positions funded in last year’s Budget, and currently vacant, in the Contingencies object code pending the outcome of Juvenile Services Redesign discussions. At the time the Requested Budget was prepared, vacant positions that were funded in last year’s Budget but currently vacant included two (2) Supervising Group Counselor positions ($173,398), two (2) full-time Group Counselor positions ($143,801), and one B-Par Group Counselor ($37,013) for a total amount of $354,212.
The CAO Recommended Budget moves the $354,212 included in Contingencies in the Department Requested Budget from the Juvenile Institutions budget into the new Out Of County Juvenile Hall budget unit. The Out Of County Juvenile Hall budget will be used to fund, and monitor costs associated with detaining youth in out-of-county facilities, transporting detained youth from and back to Inyo County, and pay associated on-call, standby, and overtime costs. The Out Of County Juvenile Hall budget, including assumptions used to arrive at the budgeted costs, are discussed on page 80. The Recommended Budget deletes the vacant positions that made funding available for the new Out Of County Juvenile Hall budget from the Authorized Staffing for the Juvenile Institutions budget; this includes deleting: two (2) Supervising Group Counselors, two (2) full-time Group Counselors, and one B-Par Group Counselor.
As a result of the redesign of juvenile services, the Group Counselor I/II and Supervising Group Counselor job classifications in the department’s Authorized Staffing are being changed to Rehabilitation Specialists and Senior Rehabilitation Specialists I/II. There are currently nine (9) individuals filling these positions in the Probation department. The Recommended Budget supports zero (0) Rehabilitation Specialists, two (2) Senior Rehabilitation Specialist I’s, and, six (6) Senior Rehabilitation Specialist II’s in the Authorized Staffing for the Probation Department. The ninth currently-filled Senior Rehabilitation Specialist I position is being maintained, but transferred from the Probation department’s Authorized Staffing and added to the Authorized Staffing in the Health and Human Services department’s Mental Health budget where it can be funded through realignment monies and drawing-down Medi-Cal reimbursements when possible.
As a result of these changes, the Recommended Juvenile Services budget is $1,733,510. The Recommended Budget for the new Out Of County Juvenile Hall budget unit is $599,332. Combined, expenses in these two budgets are $2,332,833, compared to the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Board Approved Budget for Juvenile Institutions of $2,148,142. And, overall, Net County Cost increases by $242,989 due to the budget losing revenues compared to last year in addition to the cost increases discussed above.
Kitchen Services
Based on a review of last year’s actual costs, the Recommended Budget increases the Food and Household object code by $41,000. Recall, last year, this budget was estimated based on certain assumptions, and the department has indicated the food costs have increased from the figures used to prepare last year’s budget. The cost of preparing meals for the Juvenile Center last year was estimated at $31,158 and remains in this year’s Kitchen Services budget.
Maintenance - Building & Grounds
The Recommended Budget provides a $17,000 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust: $10,000 for ongoing facilities expenses at the Jail; and, $7,000 for facilities expense at the Juvenile Hall.
During the department’s budget meeting, the department requested that the Authorized Staffing for this budget be changed by deleting the Custodian Supervisor position (Range 58) when it becomes vacant and adding a Lead Building and Maintenance Worker (Range 66) to be more consistent with other divisions within the department. The cost of the department’s request is an additional $10,966. The CAO Recommended Budget supports the requested change in the Authorized Staffing, deleting the Custodian Supervisor position and adding a Lead Building and Maintenance Worker at a Range 66, which clarifies it is not part of a career ladder and is more aligned with the County Classification Plan. As a result, the Recommended Budget increases the Salaries and Benefits object category by $10,966.
Museum.
Based on actual Museum expenses last year, the Recommended Budget decreases Advertising by $1,000; reduces Professional Services by $540; and, reduces Utilities by $3,460.
Out Of County - Juvenile Hall.
The Recommended Budget establishes a new budget unit, the Out Of County - Juvenile Hall budget, to provide funding and track costs associated with using out-of-county juvenile facilities to detain youth, including for mid-week 72-hour holds, after the Inyo County Juvenile Center is transitioned to a weekend-only facility. The Recommended Budget provides $599,332 to fund new standby and callout costs; daily bed cost at out-of-county facilities; and, personnel and motor pool costs associated with transporting youth to out-of-county facilities and back to Inyo for court hearings.
The budget unit was developed in conjunction with the Probation department and relies on detention data provided by the department. The Recommended Budget is based on the following assumptions:
	There will be 35 midweek detentions a year; comprised of 15, 48- hour holds and 20, 72-hour holds. (The Probation department estimated that midweek detentions averaged 31 annually over the past five years).
	There will be four (4) youth detained in out-of-county beds every day of the year. (Bed costs are based on using the highest daily bed cost - Kern County at $175 per day - of the four out-ofcounty facilities with which the County has placement agreements.)
	There will be 104 round trips per year (in addition to the 70 round trips associated with the 35 midweek “72-hour hold” detentions) to take youth to out-of-county facilities and to bring them back for court hearings. These trips assume traveling to the facility farthest away from Independence (Placerville at 544 miles round trip) and assuming 12 hours of travel time entirely at overtime rates.
Hopefully, some of the $599,332 being recommended for this budget will be placeholder funding, and not be used, but it needs to be budgeted all the same. Similarly, the proposed Out Of County Juvenile Hall budget is being prepared based on certain assumptions, and actual costs could exceed the out-of-county placements costs included in this year’s Budget.
Parks
The Recommended Budget provides a $164,630 Operating Transfer In from the Geothermal Royalties Trust to support eligible parks projects.
Based on actual campground revenues received last year, the Recommended Budget increases revenue from Pleasant Valley Campground by $2,000; increases revenue from the campground in Lone Pine by $2,000; and, increases revenue from Diaz Lake by $11,000. However, again based on prior year actuals, the Recommended Budget also decreases revenue from Taboose Campground by $4,000; decreases revenue from the Schober Lane Campground (Brown’s Town) concessionaire agreement by $13,000 to correct a prior year’s over-estimation of revenue; and, decreases revenue from the Tecopa Hot Springs concessionaire agreement by $5,000 since this revenue is deferred one more year as part of contract negotiations. The Recommended Budget also increases the Off- Highway Vehicle revenue code by $675 to reflect budgeting this revenue directly in the Parks budget instead of the Auditor’s Off- Highway Revenue budget unit.
After reviewing last year’s actual expenses, the Recommended Budget decreases the Office and Other Equipment < $5,000 object code by $4,000 for items identified as “miscellaneous”; reduces the Professional and Special Services object code by $2,000; and, decreases the Utilities object code by $7,232. Recommended expenses in these object codes still maintain the appropriations slightly higher than last year’s Board Approved Budget. The Equipment object code is being reduced by $8,000 because this expense was double-budgeted in another object code.
Personnel.
The Recommended Budget increases the Operating Transfers In revenue code by $5,500 to account for reimbursement from a NonGeneral Fund budget for a portion of contract costs funded from the Personnel budget.
The Recommended Budget also reduces Salary and Benefit costs by $82,383 to represent 12 months of salary savings for the vacant Personnel Analyst position. When this positon is filled, it will be funded with Health and Human Services monies corresponding to the amount of personnel services the department utilizes.
The Recommended Budget increases Professional Services by $30,000 to pay for a contract to help with the recruitment of the recently vacated Information Services Director position, and increases Advertising by $4,000 to fund the recruitment for vacant positions.
Planning
The Recommended Budget provides a $40,000 Operating Transfers In from the Geothermal Royalties Trust. $10,000 will be used for eligible planning contracts, and $30,000 will be used to provide matching funds for the grant the County has received for the North Sierra Highway planning effort.
As discussed relative to the Environmental Health budget, the Planning department has determined that it does not need the services of an Office Technician position that has been shared one day each week between the Planning and Environmental Health departments since Fiscal Year 2014-2015. As a result, the Recommended Budget decreases Salaries and Benefits costs in the requested Planning budget by $18,755.
The Recommended Budget also reduces General Operating expense by $1,500 to more closely reflect last year’s actual expenditures.
Probation
For reasons already discussed relative to the District Attorney, Jail, and Juvenile Institutions budgets, the Recommended Budget reduces revenues in the State - Public Safety Services object code by $20,000. However, the Recommended Budget increases revenue in the Electronic Monitoring revenue code by $20,000 to more accurately reflect the actual amounts received the past two years.
Additionally, the Recommended Budget decreases revenue in the Intra-County Charges revenue code by $4,560, and eliminates corresponding expense in the Cell Phones object code by $4,560. This revenue was from the Criminal Justice budget and intended to fund the cost of monthly service fees for 10 iPads. However, while the use of this technology is endorsed, it cannot yet be supported by Information Services, and these devices will not be purchased or budgeted until a policy is proposed by Information Services and approved by your Board of Supervisors.
The Recommended Budget decreases expense in the Personal and Safety Equipment object code by $1,000; maintaining the same level of funding provided for in last year’s Board Approved Budget. The Recommended Budget also reduces the Office and Other Equipment < $5,000 object code by $12,600. This expense is currently budgeted in the RAN budget, and the removal of this expense simply ensures that the expenses are not duplicated. Motor Pool costs have been reduced by $2,000 based on the last year’s actual expenditures.
As already discussed relative to the Juvenile Institutions budget, the department is requesting a change to its Authorized Staffing that deletes a Legal Secretary III positon and adds an Office Clerk III position. The Recommended Budget supports this change in Authorized Staffing which results in a combined savings of $26,538 between the Probation and Juvenile Institutions budgets.
Public Works
The Recommended Budget decreases the requested Overtime expense by $2,500 based on last year’s actual overtime costs. Additionally, the Recommended Budget is decreasing Advertising costs by $400, and Travel expense by $1,000, also based on the prior year’s actuals.
The Recommended Budget does not support the department’s request for a reclassification that would require a change in its Authorized Staffing by deleting an Administrative Analyst position and reinstating a Management Analyst position. The department’s previous Management Analyst position was recommended for deletion by the department as part of a comprehensive Public Works/Roads Positions - Service Redesign Agenda Request approved by your Board on April 14, 2015. The department used cost savings associated with this change in Authorized Staffing to fund other position requests, and indicated that the savings to the General Fund would increase over time as a result of changing the Management Analyst position to an Administrative Analyst position. Additionally, as requested, the reclassification request does not meet the requirements of the County Personnel Rules for reclassifications, but could be evaluated as part of the Classification Plan update that will be undertaken, as required by the Personnel Rules, in the next couple of years. This recommendation results in the Recommended Budget making corresponding reductions to the Salaries and Benefits object category in the Public Works, Maintenance - Building & Grounds, Road, Bishop Airport - Operating, Independence Airport - Operating, Lone Pine-Death Valley Airport - Special, Lone Pine Water Systems, Independence Water Systems, and the Laws Water Systems budgets.
Sheriff- General
Similar to the previous three years, the Recommended Budget recognizes, with the Sheriff’s concurrence, the use of AB 443 funds to offset department expenses that might otherwise not be funded by providing a $300,000 Operating Transfer In from the AB 443 Trust. As in years past, this funding will only be transferred into the budget as necessary to meet revenue projections in relation to actual expenditures (e.g., maintain Net County Cost).
The Recommended Budget also accelerates recognition of $100,000 in COPS funding from the COPS Trust. Additionally, during its budget meeting, the department requested an additional increase of $33,062 in COPS funding for the purchase of car cameras and the replacement of ballistic vests and the Recommended Budget supports this request.
The Recommended Budget increases Gun Permits revenue by $500 based on last year’s actual receipts. The Budget also increases Forest Service revenues by $5,000 based on the new contract between the Sheriffs Office and the U.S. Forest Service for off-highway vehicle patrols.
For the same reasons already discussed relative to other public safety budgets, the Recommended Budget reduces revenues in the State - Public Safety Services object code by $80,000 in anticipation of adjustments in the disbursements to the County as the result of a State Board of Equalization error.
The Recommended Budget decreases requested Overtime expense by $5,893; keeping it similar to Overtime costs in last year’s Board Approved Budget. Additionally Holiday Overtime costs are being decreased by $800 to more accurately represent last year’s actual costs.
The Recommended Budget reduces Personal and Safety Equipment expense by $4,000 based on last year’s actuals, but sufficient funding remains to fund all life and safety equipment requests.
The Maintenance of Equipment object code in the Department Requested Budget includes $25,000 for radio maintenance costs associated with a contract with the State of California for “as needed” repairs to radio communications sites. Similar to last year, the
Recommended Budget reduces this amount by $15,000 but acknowledges that additional funds may need to be appropriated later in the year if actual radio maintenance costs charged to this contract exceed $10,000 this Fiscal Year. Additionally, the Recommended Budget further reduces this object code by an additional $8,078 based on last year’s actual expenses. These changes notwithstanding, $20,000 recommended for Maintenance of Equipment expense is still $1,300 higher than last year’s actual expenses.
Additionally, the Recommended Budget reduces expenses in Office and Other Equipment < $5,000 object code by $3,000. Similarly, based on last year’s actuals, it is recommended that expenses in the General Operating Expense object code be reduced by $11,000; the Law Enforcement Special object code be reduced by $15,421; and, the Utilities object code be reduced by $4,718. After some reductions, and subsequent requests by the department to fund a new training initiative, the Recommended Budget increases Professional and Special Services expenses by a total of $4,500.
The Recommended Budget reduces costs in the Travel Expense - Required object code by $60,292, but increases expenses in the less restrictive Travel object code by $17,946. When these object codes are combined, the total travel expense being recommended results in a reduction of $42,346 to the Department Requested Budget. The total recommended travel expense mirrors the amount included in last year’s Board Approved Budget.
The Recommended Budget also reduces Motor Pool expense by $50,000 based on last year’s actual costs.
Sheriff — Safety Personnel
The Recommended Budget increases Operating Transfers In by $6,938 to recognize funding from Health and Human Services for radio training.
The Recommended Budget decreases the Salaries and Benefits object category by a total of $89,636 with the concurrence of the Sheriff. The Department Requested Budgeted included funding for a Deputy position the Sheriff has recently kept, and is willing to keep “frozen.”
The Recommended Budget also reduces the 4850 Time - Workers Comp object code by $4,000 to represent actual costs.
Veterans Service Officer
The Recommended Budget reduces requested Overtime expenses by $1,000 based on actual overtime costs last year. Additionally, Motor Pool expense is being reduced by $444, again based on last year’s actual expenditures.
RESERVES, OPEB TRUST, DEBT SERVICE, AND CONTINGENCIES
As discussed above, and in previous CAO Recommended Budgets, the CAO Recommended Budget does not allocate any contributions to the General Reserve Fund or Economic Stabilization Fund or make any OPEB Trust contribution for future retiree health costs. Nor does the Recommended Budget maintain debt-capacity in the General Fund Budget by reserving former $309,750 in debt-service payments for the Certificates of Participation (COPs) used to construct the Jail. (This was accomplished in Fiscal Year 2011-2012 after the Jail COPs were paid off in February 2011, but since then it has been necessary to use this money to fund ongoing budget expenses instead of saving for future capital projects.) Ideally, the Budget should provide allocations for all of these uses. Furthermore, General Fund Contingencies are only $12,000 and a higher amount is certainly desirable.
Depending on the Fund Balance certified by the Auditor- Controller at the commencement of Budget Hearings, and/or how Budget Hearing deliberations progress, your Board of Supervisors may choose to increase contributions to one or more of these purposes as part of its adoption of the Final Budget. And, depending on the ultimate cost of some of the initiatives funded in this Budget, it may be possible to increase contributions to one or more of these uses through budget amendments later in the Fiscal Year.
ASSUMPTIONS, KNOWN CHANGES, AND OUTSTANDING ISSUES
Assumptions
As noted at the beginning of this Budget Message, all budgets are, in some respect, a gamble. They have inherent risks. Despite everpresent efforts to minimize known risks, the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget is no different; it is presented with certain risks and based on certain assumptions.
Some of the assumptions relied on in balancing this Budget
include:
	The Auditor-Controller will certify Fiscal Year 2015-2016 General Fund Balance, as of June 30, 2016, at or above $3,654,123.
	Remedies for State Board of Equalization allocation errors (the extent of which have yet to be revealed) in sales and use tax disbursements and Proposition 172 (Public Safety Augmentation Fund) funding will not exceed the pre-emptive reductions made to these revenue sources in the Sheriff’s, Probation, Juvenile Institutions, District Attorney’s, Public Defender’s, General Revenues and Expenditures, and Recycling and Waste Management budgets, or exceed the $147,456 reserved for possible paybacks in last year’s Budget.
	Increases in Salaries and Benefits costs for personnel as the result of ongoing labor negotiations with employee bargaining units, or escalating benefit premiums, wHl be funded by some combination of appropriations currently contained in the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget.
	The cost of detaining juvenile offenders in out-of-county facilities will not exceed $599,332; based on the cost of the assumptions identified on page 80, including a total of 179 round trips for taking youth to or bringing them back from out-of-county placements.
	Development and implementation of a Community Corrections Partnership Plan will: (1) conform to County’s AB 109 principles adopted in previous years’ budgets and recommended again here (page 93); and, (2) through the budget authority vested solely in the Board of Supervisors, be required to live within its means - which are limited to State funding allocations - and not rely on contributions from other County funding sources. Ideally, the CCP Plan should propose programs that reallocate, and better use existing County resources with a premium on using NonGeneral Fund resources.
	Public safety subventions being funded at the levels budgeted.
	State funding to counties will not be adversely affected by demands by other branches of government on the Legislature to increase funding at the expense of counties.
	No new revenue streams being created. (This Budget does not anticipate or rely on increases to solid waste disposal fees, new film permit revenue, or the passage of Measure I creating a commercial cannabis tax.)
	Interest earnings will continue to increase as a result of the new Investment Policy championed by the Treasurer-Tax Collector.
	Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax and campground fee revenues will remain the same as last year, and not decrease significantly.
	Receiving no new geothermal royalty payments.
	No appeal of the 2016 Coso Geothermal Power Plant property tax assessment requiring the use of outside consultants (added expense) or resulting in a reduction to the unsecured property tax roll (reduced revenue).
	No adverse settlements to the ongoing Tecopa Sewage Lagoon project dispute that exceed the Tecopa Sewage Lagoon Fund Balance.
	No other litigation decisions, including payments of attorney’s fees, adverse to Inyo County.
	State Airport Improvement Program (AIP) Matching Grants funds being available to offset a portion of the County’s match requirements for FAA grants included in this Budget.
	No loss of grant funding for existing projects.
	Continuing to pay a disproportionate amount of undesignated court fee revenue to the State.
	Receiving no Indian Gaming Special Distribution Fund grant revenue.
	The Authorized Position Review Process will remain in effect, and vacant positions will not be filled prior to the identified fill date to achieve the recommended salary savings (Attachment B).
	Departments will meet or exceed their revenue projections, and manage their expenditures within the appropriation limits established by your Board.
	Department heads will carefully monitor their Board Approved budgets, and State and Federal budget actions - including realignment proposals - and promptly inform your Board and the County Administrator of reductions, or anticipated reductions in revenues, and propose implementing corresponding reductions in expenditures.
Known Changes
Following are potential changes that have been identified as possibly being made in the Final County Budget presented for adoption by your Board of Supervisors or, more likely, shortly thereafter as amendments to the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Board Approved Budget. If other changes are identified, they may be the subject of an addendum to the Budget, or “walked on” during Budget Hearings or during your Board of Supervisors’ adoption of the Final Budget.
Fund Balance
During Budget Hearings, the Auditor-Controller will certify General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2016. If certified Fund Balance is below the $3,654,123 relied upon to prepare this CAO Recommended Budget, your Board of Supervisors will need to make corresponding reduction in expenses, or increases in revenue, to adopt a balanced budget.
If the Fund Balance certified by the Auditor-Controller exceeds $3,654,123, it is recommended that your Board of Supervisors consider appropriating the additional funds to one or more of the following needs:
	General Fund Contingencies
	FAA grant match ($55,000)
	OPEB Trust contribution (for retiree healthcare costs)
	Accumulated Capital Outlay (e.g., reserve former debt-service payments for future capital projects)
	Elections Innovations Trust
	Economic Stabilization Fund
	General Reserve Fund
	Computer System Fund
It is also recommended that your Board of Supervisors refrain from using any additional General Fund Balance that may materialize to enhance funding for ongoing costs, or de facto on-ongoing costs in the County Budget. This would have the effect of needing the same (higher) amount of Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2017 - or some combination of increased revenues or decreased expenditures - to simply maintain this year’s spending plan. Note that this year’s CAO Recommended Budget assumes the General Fund Balance will be the same amount used to balance last year’s Board Approved Budget but is unable to provide funding for the OPEB Trust or higher Contingencies amounts included in last year’s Board Approved Budget.
Bishop Airport ImnrovementProiects
The Bishop Airport will be receiving a $900,000 Federal Aviation Administration grant for Phase I of a terminal apron rehabilitation project. This project, and development of a passenger terminal are the two primary improvements needed at the Bishop Airport to pursue commercial air service and proceed with obtaining Part 139 Certification. Initial funding for development of a passenger terminal is provided in the Recommended Budget, however, receipt of this new FAA grant was only recently confirmed and the grant revenue and project costs need to be included in the Bishop Airport Improvement budget. Additionally, it will be necessary to recognize $45,000 in State matching funds, and identify a $55,000 County match. The County match could be funded from any “unbudgeted” Fund Balance, if it exists when the Auditor-Controller certifies Fiscal
Year 2015-2016 Fund Balance at the commencement of Budget Hearings.
Outstan ding Issues
This year’s Budget addresses many County needs and department requests intended to better serve the community. However, there are still many outstanding issues, in addition to those already discussed above, that need to be kept in mind relative to this and future years’ budgets:
NewLabor Contracts
The County is presently negotiating new labor contracts with the Deputy Sheriffs Association (DSA), Elected Officials Assistants Association (EOAA), and Inyo County Employees Association (ICEA). Possible increases in labor costs will not be known until the contract negotiations are complete and the new labor agreements are ratified. The Recommended Budget does not attempt to speculate as to what these costs might be as doing so could unduly influence the negotiation process. Any additional costs resulting from new labor contracts will need to be funded from appropriations being included in this year’s Budget. For example, Health and Human Services will be expected to fund any increased Salaries and Benefits costs for its staff within the department’s respective budget units, and this could be accomplished through various appropriations changes, including the use of salary savings, recognizing new revenue if available, or other mechanisms. Specific budget adjustments necessary to fund new labor agreements will be undertaken during the Mid-Year Financial Review assuming negotiations have ended and the new labor agreements are ratified.
Criminal Justice Realignment Funds
In Fiscal Year 2011-2012, the State of California realigned the state criminal justice system to transfer responsibility for incarcerating and supervising certain adult offenders from the State to counties through the passage of AB 109 and related legislation. There is unanimous agreement among California counties that Criminal Justice Realignment allocations from the State (just $0.45 - $0.50 cents on the dollar compared to what the State spent) left counties woefully underfunded to carry out the work associated with these new State mandates. Rural counties, like Inyo, were particularly disadvantaged by a funding formula that did not adequately account for the impacts of fluctuations in caseload among a relatively low number of offenders. Essentially, the funding Inyo County was designated to receive was, and is insufficient to fund both programs and services needed to hit the ground running AND fund desirable new facilities or fund ongoing costs associated with additional personnel.
Recognizing that the County was dealt a poor hand by the State, and determined to hedge its bets and walk away from the table without losing money, the Board of Supervisors adopted the following Criminal Justice Realignment principles as part of the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget:
	Future modifications and amendments to the Community Corrections Plan must be implemented within Criminal Justice Realignment funding constructs; otherwise Criminal Justice Realignment risks becoming, essentially, to some degree an unfunded State mandate that could require the Board of Supervisors to consider taking money away from other County needs.
	Reject any Community Corrections Plan (4/5ths vote required) that cannot be implemented (e.g., demonstrate adequate budget) with public safety realignment funding provided by the State, or County monies your Board is willing to re-appropriate from other programs.
	Require County public safety and human services departments to absorb costs associated with implementing public safety realignment within their existing budgets. If we are really talking about changing the way we conduct the business of criminal justice and rehabilitation, and not simply expanding the criminal justice industrial complex, then costs associated with old programming methodologies should give way to new ones. If your Board of Supervisors accepts community corrections plans that simply add layers of new infrastructure instead of re-structuring and re-integrating existing infrastructure, there will never be enough money to fund this endeavor.
	Continue to utilize a centralized budget (as is again included in the year’s Budget) and/or cost centers to manage funds; consider having involved departments submit quarterly billings for pre-
approved costs as opposed to simply transferring funds into those departments’ budgets.
The Board of Supervisors has reaffirmed this Criminal Justice Realignment Policy in each subsequent year’s Board Approved Budget, and it has well-served the County and the safety of the community well.
To the extent that the Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney and Health and Human Services departments have adhered to these principles, criminal justice realignment has been implemented in Inyo County, so far, without major impacts to the County Budget or public safety. Additionally, the County’s relatively modest annual allocation of Criminal Justice Realignment funding from the State has been judiciously used, allowing some money to be saved for one-time needs and future expenses, such as the construction of an adult Area Resource Center or similar facilities.
Based on statistics presented to the Community Corrections Partnership last year, there has been more than a 50% reduction in the Probation department’s caseload since the inception of criminal justice realignment in Fiscal Year 2011-2012. This has allowed, and correlates to the Probation department providing a broader array of programs and services, such as a robust Electronic Monitoring Program, more Risk Assessments, and expanded Pre-Trial Services. These expanded services, which extend beyond Probation and include a new Re-entry Coordinator position and more services in the Jail, and the reduced Probation caseload speaks strongly to the promise and potential of criminal justice realignment. The Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney and Health and Human Services departments, along with the other criminal justice partners comprising the Community Corrections Partnership are working together and doing a good job of effectively implementing criminal justice realignment in our community.
Requests for use of Criminal Justice Realignment Funds in this year’s Department Requested Budget total $603,541. Of this, $115,784 is associated with one-time costs, and $487,757 is to fund ongoing costs; including funding for two (2) new positions in the Health and Human Services department. The County’s base allocation of Criminal Justice Realignment funding in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 is $623,010. (This does not include the annual growth allocation, which fluctuates based on multiple variables and is always received a year in arrears -
in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 the growth allocation was $38,236 - and should never be counted on as ongoing funding.)
 
The CAO Recommended Budget seeks to arrest this trend, and does not support the request to use Criminal Justice Realignment monies to fund one (1) of two (2) new Addictions Counselor positions being requested in the Health and Human Services department’s Substance Use Disorders budget. The Recommended Budget does support adding one (l) new Addictions Counselor II to the Authorized Staffing, paid for with proceeds from the Substance Use Disorder allocation instead of Criminal Justice Realignment funds. In keeping with the Criminal Justice Realignment Policy, this new position will be able to provide addictions counseling services in the Jail without using dwindling Criminal Justice Realignment funds.
In contrast, and not entirely in keeping with the Criminal Justice Realignment Policy, the Recommended Budget supports adding a new Psychotherapist position to the Authorized Staffing in the Health and Human Services department’s Mental Health budget to provide services in the Jail. Similar to the Jail services being provided by the Re-entry Coordinator position added to the Budget in Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the Psychotherapist’s work is not eligible for Medi-Cal billing reimbursement because services are being provided to an incarcerated population. The recommendation to support adding this position to the Authorized Staffing with Criminal Justice Realignment funds is not entirely keeping with the Criminal Justice Realignment Policy because it might be possible to fund this new position from the Mental Health Realignment base allocation and Mental Health Services Act funds, and preserve Criminal Justice Realignment funds for other purposes.
In recommending this new position, it is hoped that some of the services being provided in the Jail by the Psychotherapist, as well as the Re-entry Coordinator, will begin to be provided outside of the Jail where they may be eligible for Medi-Cal reimbursement. The more that Health and Human Services funds can be used to offset the cost of these and other positions providing criminal justice realignment services, the more Criminal Justice Realignment funding will be available to support the cost of additional staff, facilities, and programming. This speaks to the need to continue conserving Criminal Justice Realignment allocation funds. Refraining from fully spending the full Criminal Justice Allocation amount, and continuing to accrue savings in the Criminal Justice Realignment Fund, is the most likely means the County has of being able to fund and develop a noncustodial facility - such as an Area Resource Center - for adult offenders. Once such a facility is established, there will be additional draw-down from Health and Human Services funding, which will
preserve General Fund and Criminal Justice Realignment funding for other needs.
Other than not supporting the use of the Criminal Justice Realignment allocation for a second Addictions Counselor position, the CAO Recommended Budget supports the rest of the Community Corrections Partnership’s funding request, but does so conditionally.
The preceding analysis is intended to demonstrate the need to continue to carefully and intelligently manage and monitor Criminal Justice Realignment funds. The funding requests supported by the Recommended Budget will still result in using $521,365 of this year’s Criminal Justice Allocation compared to the $623,010 allocation received last year; preserving only about $100,000 this year for longer- term needs. There are opportunities to further reduce Criminal Justice Realignment expense - such as requiring the new Jail Psychotherapist to be funded out of Mental Health Realignment and MHSA funds, or deleting a currently vacant Deputy Probation Officer position which is currently funded at six months in the Department Requested Budget - but these actions are not being recommended at this time. As discussed below, they can be considered as part of the opportunities that are presenting themselves for further redesigning criminal justice services.
Health and Human Services Realignment Funds
The Health and Human Services department has worked closely with the Budget Team to bring requested expenditures in the Mental Health, Public Health, and Social Services budgets in line with the respective base realignment allocations for these budgets. Doing so is important to preserve fund balance in each of the realignment trusts. The Public Health budget is exceeding its base realignment allocation by $99,420, however, the department indicates that this draw-down on Health Realignment Fund Balance is temporary, and will only occur this year as the department looks at opportunities to restructure this budget.
The strategic use of Health and Human Services Realignment Funds has, and continues to provide an opportunity to offset costs in other parts of the Budget and preserve other funding sources, such as Criminal Justice Realignment. As such, these budgets, and use of realignment funds, needs to be carefully monitored to preserve future budget capacity and flexibility.
This year’s Recommended Budget supports adding 12 new positions to the Authorized Staffing in Health and Human Services budgets. And, this is accomplished within the base allocation amounts for Mental Health, Public Health, and Social Services Realignment. However, it will be critical to monitor billing reimbursements for many of these positions, as well as new HHS positions added in recent budgets (e.g., FIRST Program Supervisor, Re-entry Coordinator, etc.) to ensure the positions are drawing down funds that decrease reliance on the HHS Realignment (or Criminal Justice Realignment) allocations to fund them. Similar to the preceding discussion of Criminal Justice Realignment Funds, the more that these positions can draw-down from Medi-Cal reimbursement and other funding sources, the more Health and Human Services realignment can be preserved and used to fund other programs and services.
In addition to the cost impacts of ongoing labor negotiations, as well as the need to monitor and manage key realignment allocations, many of the outstanding issues identified in prior years’ budgets remain in play, and could affect this or future years’ budgets. These outstanding issues include but are not limited to:
	The County’s outdated, unsupported, and failing telephone system still needs to be replaced with Voice Over Internet Protocol, or some other technology.
	If the Consolidated County Office Building project does not proceed, other means of addressing long-term County office space needs and associated costs will need to be pursued.
	Both the Road department and Recycling and Waste Management program need to continue to replace aging equipment to comply with CARB regulations.
	Federal PILT and Secure Rural School funding is basically year- to-year.
	As State and Federal funding becomes more scarce, and costs continue to increase, the County needs to continue to revisit its own schedule of fees - preferably in a comprehensive manner - to ensure that the fees cover a reasonable portion of the cost of providing services.
	The County needs to continue to develop and implement strategies to reduce the amount of future General Fund monies
that are, or may be required to support the Recycling and Waste Management Program.
	This Budget benefits greatly from lower fuel and utility costs. Any significant spike in fuel or utility costs will have to be addressed through the use of Contingencies or other cost-saving measures.
	Efforts to upgrade criminal justice case management system in the District Attorney’s office and Probation department are progressing, and the new systems will provide greater functionality and capability for both departments. However, because it has been necessary to upgrade the systems independently of one another and the Superior Court’s new JALAN software system, there could still be lapses in integration between the three case management systems, and associated increases in costs.
	The ongoing HUTA reduction continues to intensify the need for the Public Works department to use its Road Fund Balance, and manage the Road budget with an awareness of impacts to cash flow as well as its future Fund Balance.
	It is unlikely that Indian Gaming Special Distribution Funds will be available from the State this year.
	Policy issues and impacts of suspended State mandates still need to be evaluated on a department-by-department basis in discussions with your Board. To date, only the Clerk-Recorder has brought such an item forward. Depending on your Board’s disposition toward these suspended mandates, there could be some budgetary savings if your Board elects to forego maintaining compliance with the former mandates.
	As departments continue to apply for various grants, it is important to emphasize that these new grants be used to offset ongoing costs, or reduce the cost of implementing one-time projects whenever possible.
	The potential for ongoing economic instability still exists.
LOOKING AHEAD
Any of the outstanding issues discussed above have the ability to negatively impact this year’s Budget, as well as future years’ budgets. Looking ahead to next year and the Fiscal Year 2017-2018 Budget, expected costs increases include:
	Labor costs account for 51% of this year’s Recommended Budget (and 68% of the Recommended General Fund Budget) . As such, the outcomes of current contract negotiations with employee bargaining units will have a significant impact on costs in the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Budget.
	The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget, and this year’s Recommended Budget benefitted from a dental and vision insurance rate holiday as a result of applying fund balances that had accrued in the self-funded trusts the County maintains for these benefits. The rate holiday will end next year, and as a result General Fund budgets will be faced with an additional $165,000 in dental and vision costs, and Non-General Fund budgets will incur about $53,000 in higher costs.
	Employee and retiree health insurance costs will most certainly increase - the only question is how much? (This year’s health insurance cost increase was $431,992 for current employees and $567,404 for retirees).
	Pension costs for miscellaneous employees will increase by at least $693,408, with the General Fund portion estimated at $332,095.
However, if the Board of Supervisors takes advantage of opportunities to reduce pension costs by as much as $12,823,993 over the next 20-years, as presented below, next year’s pension cost increase for the County’s non-safety employees would increase by $1,595,850, with the share assigned to General Fund budgets estimated at $764,304.
Should your Board decide to pay off this unfunded pension liability over a 10-year period, cost savings to the County is estimated at $28,337,744. To realize this savings, the County’s non-safety pension costs would increase by $2,370,045 next year, with the General Fund paying an additional $1,135,091.
Based on these costs alone, next year’s General Fund Budget expense will increase by more than $497,095, plus health insurance cost increases, plus the cost of any increases to salaries and benefits negotiated in new labor contracts. And, if the Board of Supervisors decides to save substantial money over the long-term by paying down pension liabilities over a 20-year or 10-year period, next year’s General Fund expense could increase by as much as an additional $929,034 to $1,300,091, respectively.
Of course, next year’s budget will likely continue to be affected by the same lingering issues identified in last year’s Budget Message:
	PILT permanency
	Continued reliance on the entire General Fund Balance
	Unsustainable reliance on Operating Transfers from key trusts
	Fewer vacancies available to generate salary savings
	Disproportionate increases in some law enforcement costs
	Greater reliance on fund balances by Non-General Fund budgets.
In thinking about the Fiscal Year 2017-2018 Budget, a key question is whether General Fund revenues are likely to increase enough to fund these projected increases in personnel costs, as well as increases in non-personnel costs for services and supplies, fuel and utilities, liability and workers compensation, etc. Of course, as discussed above some, but certainly not all of these cost increases may be somewhat mitigated through a flexible as opposed to fixed use of Health and Human Services Realignment funds and the County’s Criminal Justice Realignment allocation. And, as demonstrated this year, opportunities still abound for Service Redesign initiatives.
OUTSTANDING OPPORTUNITIES
CalPERSRetirement Costs
CalPERS will begin charging the County for unfunded liabilities associated with the pension plan for the County’s miscellaneous employees. This is similar to the unfunded liability payments CalPERS began charging the County in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 for safety employees at an additional cost of $407,724 the first year. Although the CalPERS payment structure reduces the percentage rate applied to
payroll, the employer’s share of unfunded liability payments - which, for Inyo, includes both the employer’s and employee’s share of costs - will be charged separately, and the combined pension costs (e.g., the unfunded liability charge plus a percentage of payroll costs) will represent a substantial increase over this year’s retirement plan costs.
Making a lump-sum payment for the employer’s share of unfunded liability, as it does now for unfunded liability payments for safety employee pension costs, will save about $90,000 a year compared to making monthly payments. However, the lump sum payment will reduce salary savings that will accrue to Fund Balance because the County will be paying the employer’s share of unfunded liability based on actuarial assumptions rather than payroll, so there will be no retirement cost savings associated with vacant positions.
Assuming the County elects to make the minimum payment, and pay its unfunded liabilities for miscellaneous non-safety employee pensions over a 30-year period, next year’s lump-sum payment is estimated to be $2,713,962, and represents about an $693,408 increase from this year’s costs. However, the County has the option of paying these costs over 20 years or 10 years. Table 14. shows the increased costs associated with these shorter amortization periods, and the associated savings to the County, which are substantial.
Based on this analysis, Figure 7. shows the estimated cost of paying the employer’s share of unfundedliability payments over a 30- year period as it would apply to General Fund, Health & Human Services, and Non-General Fund budgets.
If your Board of Supervisors wanted to pursue achieving $12,823,993 in savings by paying the employer’s share of unfunded liability payments over a 20-year period, Figure 8. estimates how the cost would be assigned annually between General Fund, Health & Human Services, and Non-General Fund budgets.
And, if your Board of Supervisors were to pursue paying down the unfunded liability costs over a 10-year period - which would result in saving the County $28,337,744 over 10 years - Figure 9., below, shows what the annual cost would be to General Fund, Health & Human Services, and Non-General Fund budgets. 
Service Redesign
This year’s Recommended Budget benefits greatly from the Service Redesign work that was a critical component in balancing the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 County Budget and last year’s budget. This includes revamping management of the town water systems; implementing a Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan; beginning to change Recycling and Waste Management operations; modifying the senior meal program; purchasing bell provers for the Weights & Measures program (instead of contracting for services); and, consolidating meal preparation for the Jail and Juvenile Hall in the Jail kitchen. And, as this year’s efforts to expand the array of juvenile services demonstrates, Service Redesign is ongoing in Inyo County. Continuing to search out Service Redesign opportunities will play a critical role in continuing to deliver key services while costs outpace revenues.
Implementation of the Juvenile Services Transition Plan this year may yield opportunities to save costs in Fiscal Year 2016-2017, by reducing the amount of money that is being reserved for out-of-county juvenile hall costs or by allowing some current General Fund costs to be funded by Health and Human Services budgets.
Additionally, the indication that Probation caseloads may have decreased by almost half between Fiscal Year 2011-2012 and last year provides opportunities to explore more Service Redesign initiatives in the Probation department and devote more resources to serving adult offenders, and reducing recidivism, through the Sheriff, Probation, and Health and Human Services departments. Accomplishing this with long-term cost savings to the General Fund will require out-of-the box thinking, flexibility in the use of Criminal Justice Realignment and Health and Human Services Realignment funds, and close collaboration between the Health and Human Services department and Probation department and all criminal justice partners.
Last year’s Budget identified several outstanding Service Redesign ideas that may still provide opportunities for maintaining services and enhancing efficiencies, and identified new opportunities that may be worth exploring. The ideas presented below are certainly not exhaustive, nor are they absolute in their promise of generating additional budgetary savings or efficiencies; they may, however, serve as additional building blocks on which to construct future County budgets. Your Board of Supervisors is asked to continue to encourage the pursuit of these and other Service Redesign opportunities. Things worth looking at include, but are not limited to:
	Reviewing and revising the County Vehicle Policy.
	Reviewing and revising the County Travel Policy.
	Examining long-standing grants with an eye toward offsetting General Fund expense.
	Looking at alternatives to contract laundry services; including dispersed on-site laundry facilities, or expanding the Jail laundry to provide centralized services.
	Examining the possibility of the Eastern Sierra Weed Management Area program providing contract services to Inyo and Mono counties’ Road departments.
	Continuing to analyze ways to increase efficiencies and reduce costs in County-operated kitchens by evaluating opportunities to coordinate menus; consolidate purchasing to increase buying power; and, integrate the use of staff and kitchen resources.
	Reviewing and analyzing uses of 1991 Realignment funds to benefit General Fund programs. Realignment funds already support portions of various General Fund services ranging from County Counsel to Information Services and Personnel. In addition, Health Realignment funds are apportioned to the Animal Services and Environmental Health budgets, and 1991 Social Services Realignment includes an allocation to juvenile justice programs in the Probation department. Are the uses of Realignment funds being maximized? What other opportunities exist?
	Reviewing duplicative efforts to provide programs and services between Health and Human Services and other General Fund departments, like Probation.
As stated last year, these are only suggestions and other opportunities certainly exist and new ones will emerge.
CONCLUSION
This year’s Budget provides for ongoing County services and programs without cuts in funding relative to last year’s Board Approved Budget. Like Will O’Conely, the protagonist that launched this ditty, this year’s Budget may not sport fancy rings or fancy things but it does fund new positions, implements several new initiatives, and identifies money for infrastructure improvements and economic development. It forecasts increasing costs and associated opportunities in hopes of staving off a deadman’shandin future budgets.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Picking a tasty song lyric or touching stanza from a poem, or coming up with some other quote to introduce the Budget Message is good clean fun. The rest of the budget process is a lot of work. A lot of hard work.
The work of preparing the County Budget falls on staff in all County departments. And, as discussed above, but probably not sufficiently, this Budget would have been much more difficult to prepare if not for the continued efforts of those departments committed to maintaining and building upon the cost savings and efficiencies generated in the last two years’ County Budgets. In return, the Recommended Budget endeavors to recognize and support reasonable requests, and strives to enhance funding for department budgets where warranted based on performance or the promise of improved services.
However, the really hard work of pulling the Budget together is performed by Denelle Carrington, the County Budget Analyst, and the Auditor-Controller, Amy Shepherd. Their commitment of time and energy, as well as their patience and good humor needs to be recognized and appreciated.
The teamwork, across the County, that goes into preparing the County Budget is tremendous and getting better. Thank you.
I want to close by encouraging your Board of Supervisors to adopt the CAO Recommended Budget, which is balanced, strives to maintain all of the Board of Supervisors’ established priorities, and responds favourably to many department requests and initiatives.
Continued on next page 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
	Adopt the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Budget as Recommended by the County Administrator, including the recommendations presented herein.
	Provide direction with regard to the use of Fund Balance the Auditor-Controller may certify below or in excess of $3,654,123.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize and direct the County Administrator and Auditor Controller to approve and make payments, greater than $10,000 to Inter-Agency Visitor Center, Cal Expo Exhibit and Tri-County Fairgrounds as provided for in the Advertising County Resources budget.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize and direct the County Administrator to develop and execute contracts with all ongoing Grants-In-Support program funding recipients identified in the Grants-In-Support Budget.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize the County Administrator to proceed with hiring requests by departments for the new positions added to the authorized staffing, and funded, in accordance with the Final Budget without requiring the departments to return before the Board of Supervisors following the authorized position review process.
	Reaffirm the County Criminal Justice Realignment Policy adopted in Fiscal Year 2011-2012.
	Set adoption of the Final Budget for September 13, 2016, or September 20, 2016, depending on when Budget Hearings conclude.
