INTRODUCTION
Yeah, right. Money may not be a concern for the tomb-robbing antagonist cited above. However, the ongoing provision of public services is a journey that requires money. And, as Frank Benest noted during his Innovations in Service Redesign workshop with your Board of Supervisors on December 17th, when the money gets tight, the journey can get messy.
The cAo Recommended Budget presented here is balanced by relying on $2,980,817 in General Fund Balance. This represents a 25% reduction, or nearly a $1,000,000 decrease in the size of the structural deficit in the County’s General Fund Budget compared to Fiscal Year 2013-2014.
Last year, the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Board Approved Budget required using the entire General Fund Balance of $3,976,086 to close the gap between projected General Fund revenues and budgeted expenses. The Introduction & Summary to last year’s budget cautioned that, if all other expenses and revenues remained equal, specific personnel cost increases would increase the size of the structural deficit in this year’s General Fund Budget to $5.04 Million, and in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 the structural deficit would be $6.19 Million.
Viewed against last year’s analysis, the structural deficit remaining in this year’s Recommended General Fund Budget is over $2 Million, or nearly 41% less than it was projected to be. Getting here has not been easy; the journey has been long and, at times, perhaps a bit messy. Here are some snapshots:
	County departments that embraced the Service Redesign path generated $665,559 in savings approved by your Board of Supervisors prior to the preparation of this year’s budget.
	Nine County employees elected to participate in the Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan generating $365,468 in net savings to departmental General Fund budget requests, and $108,936 in net savings to Non-General Fund budget requests. Since the Non-General Fund participants are staff assigned to the Recycling and Waste Management program, their participation in the separation plan reduced that budget’s need for a General Fund Operating Transfer this year by $108,936. Overall, the Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan generated $474,404 in General Fund savings in this year’s Recommended Budget.
	The Recommended Budget relies on $531,642 in General Fund Salary Savings.
	Other CAO Recommended reductions to the Department Requested Budget result in $429,642 in non-personnel related General Fund savings.
	Recommended Operating Transfers into the General Fund total $741,598 in additional revenue.
In addition to reducing services and supplies expenditures, and delaying or not filling vacant positions, the Recommended Budget also requires departments to increase their use of shared job positions. Certainly, the steps taken to balance the Recommended Budget will impact the provisions of County programs and services, albeit not nearly to the degree had the above actions not been taken. The Recommended Budget does not require staff lay-offs or the elimination of County services, but it is not without consequences.
Additionally, while the size of the structural deficit in the County’s General Fund Budget is as small as it has been in nine (9) years, trends first identified in last year’s Budget continue to suggest that the methods used to balance this year’s Budget cannot be sustained.
	The General Fund Balance available to bridge the budget gap is expected to be less than the amount of the General Fund Balance used last year. And, there are reasons to believe that General Fund Balance will continue to get smaller and smaller in the near future.
	While the amount of Operating Transfers into the General Fund is about the same as last year, the General Fund Budget is continuing to use more revenue from key trusts than the trusts receive each year. Fund Balances for the Geothermal Royalties Trust, the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust and, to a lesser degree, the AB 443 Trust are being depleted.

	Public safety costs are growing faster than, or at the expense of reductions in other General Fund services.
 At a time when the General Fund Budget is relying on less Fund Balance, Non-General Fund budgets appear to be increasing use of their fund balances and need to be carefully monitored. For example, the Water department has drawn down its fund balance from $782,046 to $383,847 since 2012.
In addition to these negative trends, known General Fund personnel costs are still expected to increase by more than $1,000,000 in next year’s Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget. So, while the shrinking of the structural deficit in the General Fund Budget by 25% is reason for optimism, the journey ahead is not free of peril and may still visit way stations of disappointment.
SUMMARY
As recommended by the County Administrator, the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 County Budget is balanced (as required by law). The Recommended Budget totals $88,489,707 in expenditures and $83,698,492 in revenues. The General Fund portion of the CAO Recommended Budget is $51,166,172 in expenditures and $48,185,355 in revenues, and relies on having $2,980,817 in Fund Balance available from Fiscal Year 2013-2014.
The Auditor-Controller will certify Fiscal Year 2013-2014 General Fund Balance when Budget Hearings begin on September 3rd. If the certified Fund Balance turns out to be higher than the $2,980,817 relied upon to balance the Budget, your Board of Supervisors will have an opportunity to explore uses for the additional money in this year’s Budget. As discussed later in this section, there are many unmet needs in the Recommended Budget that could be lessened through the use of additional General Fund Balance. However, if the Auditor-Controller certifies Fund Balance lower than the necessary $2,980,817, your Board of Supervisors will then need to consider making reductions to the CAO Recommended Budget.
In contrast to the CAO Recommended Budget, the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Department Requested Budget - based on department budget requests that are also presented here - seeks $88,418,507 in expenditures against $81,544,079 in revenues, with a General Fund component of $52,349,775 in expenditures and $47,179,359 in revenues. The Department Requested Budget results in a $5,170,416 General Fund deficit; $2,189,599 more than the General Fund Balance relied upon in the CAO Recommended Budget. (Table 1.)
Table 1.
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended County Budget is sufficient to:
 Provide core County services and programs, and avoid significant reductions to, or the outright elimination of other services and programs.
 Avoid additional staff reductions through lay-offs.
 Provide funding to complete construction of a new County Animal Shelter with generous community donations, and a new Agricultural Warehouse.
 Implement a Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan that will save the General Fund almost $475,000 this fiscal year.
 Identify $110,474 in matching funds to support Federal Aviation Administration grants for improvements to the Bishop and Lone Pine airports.
 Fund the third year of debt-service on the County’s Property Tax Management System project.
 Continue funding the Tech Refresh program at the budget unit level rather than relying on Computer System Fund Balance.
 Ensure the flow of State and Federal funding for Eastern Sierra senior citizen services continues by providing a $55,500 Operating Transfer from the Inyo County General Fund to the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging. This Operating Transfer is necessary to ensure that ESAAA has the matching funds required from Inyo and Mono counties to access State and Federal funding, and is therefore able to continue implementing senior services on a regional basis. This is in addition to the $589,163 in General Fund money spent to fund the Inyo County Growing Older Living with Dignity (IC GOLD) program.
 Continue to operate the Inyo County Growing Older Living with Dignity (IC GOLD) program for senior citizens in Inyo County with $589,163 in General Fund monies; a decrease of $6,835 from last year’s Budget. IC GOLD maintains the County’s longstanding commitment to serving its older residents by supplementing and enhancing the core senior services paid for with State and Federal monies through the historically underfunded Inyo-Mono Area Agency on Aging (formerly IMAAA) program.
 To fund the costs of labor agreements negotiated last year, as well as anticipated labor agreements with the Elected Officials Assistants Association and the Inyo County Probation Officers’ Association.
 Support limited new position requests, and departmental reorganizations to enhance capacity or reduce costs.
 Fund $314,000 in Deferred Maintenance projects, through a combination of grants, the use of designated or categorical monies, and General Fund Operating Transfers;
 Provide General Fund Operating Transfers necessary to maintain services provided by key enterprise fund programs, such as Recycling and Waste Management (formerly Integrated Waste Management), and the Laws Water System.
 Fund retiree healthcare costs, and continue funding the County’s “pay-as-you-go” costs ($1,706,345) without dipping into the Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust the County established in Fiscal Year 2009-2010. The balance in the OPEB Trust is $5,119,911 as of June 30, 2014.
 Identify funds necessary to reimburse CalPERS for retiree healthcare costs as a result of CalPERS billing errors to the County and its retirees.
 Cover $217,815 in increases for employee pension benefit costs that are beyond the County’s control.
 Continue providing some funding, albeit at reduced levels, for the County’s Grants-In-Support budget and Advertising County Resources budget, (excluding the Community Project Sponsorship Program).
 Provide $15,000 in General Fund Contingencies.
It is, however, also important to recognize that this Budget leaves many County needs unfulfilled, and others only partially fulfilled. Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge that the Recommended Budget does not:
 Make any contribution to the County Economic Stabilization Fund or the General Reserve Fund, which are relied on to help smooth-out unexpected decreases in revenues and/or increases in expenditures that cannot be absorbed with budgeted appropriations.
	Deposit additional funds in the Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust the County established to begin addressing unfunded retiree healthcare liabilities. Last year’s budget made a $100,000 contribution to the OPEB Trust; $150,000 was added in Fiscal Year 2012-2013; there was a $500,000 contribution in Fiscal Year 2011-2012; and, $1,000,000 was deposited in Fiscal Year 2010-2011.
	Attempt to reserve historical debt service payments as a means of saving funds for future capital expenses, or contribute any additional funding to the Accumulated Capital Outlay budget.
	Provide an adequate level of General Fund Contingencies considering ongoing revenue uncertainties, and the need to hedge against the possibility that at least some of the department expenses that have been cut in the Recommended Budget could materialize later in the year.
	Dedicate any funding for Community Projects Sponsorship Program grants, typically budgeted at $100,000.
	Provide funding at the same level as last year to the community partners through the Grants-In-Support program. In fact, funding for this program has been reduced by half.
	Set aside funding for a protracted legal challenge, should it materialize, to the City of Los Angles’ proposed Solar Ranch power project.
	Preserve funding necessary to accomplish the hoped-for reorganization of Administration to enhance staff capacity in Information Services and create a Natural Resources/Economic Development staff position. As a result, this Budget does not recommend creating a severely needed Assistant Information Services Director position, or the much hoped for positions of Deputy County Administrator - Natural Resources and Economic Development Analyst.
	Begin to address the many departmental needs, identified in the Statements of Underfunding submitted with this year’s budget narratives but not included in the Department Requested budgets.
	Contribute additional funding that can be set aside in the Computer System Fund to address more of the County’s critical technology needs, including replacing the County’s telephone system and accelerating the Tech Refresh program.
	Identify funding to pay for over $1 Million in anticipated personnel cost increases in next year’s Fiscal Year 2015-2016 General Fund Budget.
	Identify sufficient staff or fiscal resources to aggressively pursue projects not associated with core County services.
ARRIVING AT THE RECOMMENDED BUDGET
As presented, this Budget document presents, and identifies the differences between the Department Requested Budget and CAO Recommended Budget for the Fiscal Year 2014-2015. It also describes the steps taken to ultimately submit a balanced Budget for consideration by your Board of Supervisors.
The wants and needs of departments usually exceed what the Budget Officer is comfortable recommending the County can afford, and this year is no different. Although much of last year was spent examining ways in which the County could increase efficiencies and save money while preserving services, the Department Requested General Fund Budget expenses still exceed what the Budget Officer can recommend by $1,183,603. Ultimately, however, it is the efforts of your County departments - the staff and department managers - that make this Budget possible. In addition to complying with the County’s standard and rigorous Budget Parameters, departments were eventually asked to achieve pro-rata reductions across all General Fund budgets that amounted to a 3.5% reduction from last year’s Board Approved General Fund Budget. While not all General Fund departments were able to successfully implement creative budget solutions and/or meet their targeted cuts, some General Fund departments were able to exceed their targeted reductions to the benefit of all. These efforts, as well as the ensuing ramifications should not be overlooked when considering this year’s Budget.
As described in greater detail below, the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended Budget is once again balanced by the combination of several actions that reduce or defer costs and, in some instances, identify alternative sources of revenue. As in past years, these actions include using a combination of Fund Balance, Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund and Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, and salary savings associated with recommending delaying or avoiding filling vacant General Fund positions. However, in contrast to previous years, trends first identified in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Budget suggest that some of these methods may be becoming a less reliable means of balancing the Budget.
While there is a certain amount of give-and-take inherent in any budget process, this year’s Budget favors taking. The CAO Recommended Budget reduces non-personnel costs in General Fund budgets by $429,642; the relative severity of which can be contrasted to the previous year budgets when the CAO Recommended Budget reduced non-personnel costs in General Fund budget by just $127,913. While necessary and sufficient, these cuts can have a compounding negative effect. In addition to impacting the County’s day-to-day functionality in the delivery of services, implementation of programs, or maintenance of infrastructure, reducing expenses also makes it more likely that the money that is appropriated through the budget process will be actually spent. As discussed in further detail below, this could result in reducing year-end Fund Balance available to balance next year’s budget.
This year’s Recommended Budget again identifies certain funding requests which are being reduced or eliminated - not because they are unwarranted, but because it is not feasible to fund all of the requests within the budget priorities being proposed in this Budget - but which may be the subject of future funding requests and budget amendments that need to be considered on a case-by-case basis later in the fiscal year. These are projects and costs which, if they materialize later in the year, will either need to be, or should be considered for funding; but for which the immediate need for funding is not certain. These recommended reductions are identified along with possible sources of funding later in this Introduction and Summary.
The Introduction & Summary of the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended Budget continues to provide additional detail, where appropriate, to changes the Recommended Budget is making to specific departmental budget requests. This is intended to provide, perhaps, more of the thinking behind the recommended changes, and the expanded narrative also serves to alert your Board of Supervisors to outstanding issues and potential policy considerations.
In additional contrast to previous years, there are less vacant positions on which to draw salary savings. Last year’s Budget relied on $940,085 in salary savings, and in Fiscal Year 2012-2013 the amount of salary savings used to balance the Budget was $808,401. As indicated in Attachment B, this year’s Recommended Budget only identifies $531,462 in General Fund salary savings available to balance the Budget.
This speaks to the recent success the County has had in filling vacant positions with qualified individuals, many of which were internal County recruitments. However, it also highlights that as the County shrinks the size of its workforce - through attrition, separation incentive programs, and an increased reliance on shared positions - there will be less salary savings available to balance the Budget at the beginning of the year, and contribute to Fund Balance at the end of the year.
The Recommended Budget once again benefits from the strategic use of Operating Transfers from key trusts to the General Fund. The use of these monies continues to be a critical means of increasing revenue in the General Fund to pay for specific projects and services. Operating Transfers into the General Fund have increased by $41,597 in this year’s Budget; from $700,001 last year to $741,598 this year. There is cause for concern that, in most cases, the transfers from these trusts continue to exceed the prior year’s receipts; resulting in diminishing fund balances. For example:
	AB 443 Trust. A total of $583,047 in AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) money is being used to balance the Recommended Budget, however, the County only received $486,989 in AB 443 funds in Fiscal Year 2013-2014.
	Geothermal Royalties Trust. The Recommended Budget relies on $485,067 in geothermal royalties funds ($281,893 benefits the General Fund, and $203,174 benefits Non-General Fund budgets). However, last year, the County received only $355,851 in royalties payments.
	Criminal Justice Facilities Trust. In Fiscal Year 2013-2014, the County received $59,560 in Criminal Justice Facilities payments associated with Court fines. Similar to recent years’ budgets, the Recommended Budget is relying on $145,645 in Criminal Justice Facilities monies and of this $70,745 is for on-going maintenance expenses.
The Auditor-Controller will certify the actual Fiscal Year 20132014 General Fund Balance on September 3rd. As noted earlier, and per direction from your Board, the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended Budget has been balanced by assuming no more than $3,000,000 in projected Fund Balance compared to the $3,976,086 relied upon in last year’s Board Approved Budget. In actuality, this year’s Recommended Budget requires $2,980,817 in General Fund Balance to eliminate the shortfall that remains between projected General Fund income and expenses after all recommended actions are applied in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended General Fund Budget. As a result, the structural deficit in the General Fund Budget has been reduced by almost $1 Million, or 25% from last year. However, for reasons described above and below, the means for continuing to bridge this budget gap may not be sustainable.
Fund Balance
As part of your Board of Supervisors’ adoption of the Final County Budget for Fiscal Year 2014-2015, it is anticipated that the Auditor-Controller will certify the General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2014, as being at least $2,980,817. This is the amount of Fund Balance needed to fill the shortfall between projected income and projected expenses in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended General Fund Budget, including providing $15,000 for General Fund Contingencies.
The Recommended Budget leaves many legitimate needs unfunded. If the Auditor-Controller should certify a higher Fund Balance, your Board of Supervisors’ can use the difference to address some of the under-funded or unfunded needs identified in this Budget. But, if the certified Fund Balance is lower than projected here, it will be necessary to make cuts to the CAO Recommended Budget.
As frequent readers of Inyo County budgets already know, it is not unusual for the County to rely on using the prior year’s General Fund Balance to help balance the current year’s Budget. And, the existence of a prior year’s General Fund Balance is, on its own, not a cause for concern. The existence of General Fund Balance is an indicator that, overall, the County is living within the limits of its spending plan for that year (e.g., under-spending appropriations and/or over-achieving revenues). If General Fund Balance did not exist at the end of a fiscal year, it would mean that departments matched their budget projections exactly (which is very unlikely). And, if a negative General Fund Balance exists, it indicates that, as a whole, departments either over-spent appropriations, under-achieved revenues, or both - so, on its own, the existence of Fund Balance is a good thing.
However, as foretold in last year’s Budget, and emphasized again here, the County cannot continue to rely on annual increases in the size of its General Fund Balance. This year’s available Fund Balance is likely to be considerably less than last year’s $3,976,086. And, for the reasons being discussed in this report, Fund Balance in future years may continue to decrease - which makes the decision to reduce reliance on General Fund Balance by 25% (or almost $1 Million) a prudent one.
Per Board direction, this year’s Recommended Budget assumed available General Fund Balance would not exceed $3,000,000, which is $976,086 less than was used to balance the County’s Fiscal Year 20132014 Board Approved General Fund Budget. As indicated in Table 2., General Fund Balance has ranged between $3,510,346 and $3,976,086 in the past six (6) years, and the General Fund Budget has usually been balanced to available Fund Balance. As a result, the size of the County’s structural deficit has been allowed to grow whenever Fund Balance allows it.
While many components, including accounts receivable, prior years’ encumbrances, and claims on cash, factor into the Fund Balance calculation, a simplified analysis shows the County’s General Fund Balance can usually be primarily attributed to salary savings that accrues after the Budget is approved; lower-than-anticipated expenditures in other categories of expenses; and, achieving budgeted revenues.
Although described in previous years’ budget messages, for the benefit of the first-time or casual reader, this year’s Introduction & Summary of the Recommended Budget again describes these elements of Fund Balance in detail. While this year’s discussion has been updated to incorporate new trends affecting Fund Balance and the Budget, long-time readers, and students of prior years’ Budget Messages might prefer to read ahead to the Geothermal Royalties discussion on page 18.)
Salary Savings
Use of anticipated salary and benefit savings, tied to currently vacant staff positions, is routinely employed as part of the budget process to reduce the size of the shortfall that exists between the Department Requested and CAO Recommended budgets. This year, the CAO Recommended Budget relies on only $531,462 in General Fund salary savings to reduce the expense associated with the Department Requested Budget. This is a $408,623 decrease from last year’s use of $940,085 in salary savings. This drastic reduction in salary savings is a cause of concern for future budgets because the “leaning” of the organization will likely continue to reduce the amount of salary savings that can be taken to facilitate adopting the Budget. As this trend continues, and especially in light of known increases in expenses in future years, salary savings will probably become less of a reliable budget balancing tool.
Because of the conservative approach usually taken when budgeting salary savings, there will almost always be additional salary savings in the Budget after it is adopted. For example, a position budgeted as providing three months of salary savings may actually take four or five, or even seven months to fill, thereby generating additional savings. Unless this savings is re-appropriated elsewhere in the department’s budget during the fiscal year - a practice discouraged by the County Administrator and Auditor-Controller (since salary savings is associated with on-going expense) - it will show up as part of the Fund Balance calculation at the end of the year.
However, there will also always be vacancies that arise later in the year that simply cannot be anticipated at the time the Budget is prepared; employee turnover is simply a reality of the workforce in most organizations. While it is reasonable to anticipate that there will always be additional “unanticipated” or, perhaps more accurately, “unbudgeted” salary savings that accrue due to employee turnover throughout the year, it is not easy to anticipate what the amount of that savings might be, or in which department it might be realized. It is neither practical nor prudent to attempt to guess which departments might experience vacancies after the Budget is adopted and then try to adjust their budgets accordingly in advance. Again, because of this phenomenon, there will always be some unbudgeted salary savings in the County Budget at the end of the year to contribute to Fund Balance - unless the savings is re-appropriated to other expense categories in departments’ budgets. The matter of whether this unanticipated salary savings ultimately shows up as Fund Balance is largely dependent on whether departments avoid over-spending their budgets and achieve all of their budgeted revenues.
Last year’s Budget noted that the ongoing, higher-than-usual reliance on salary savings to prepare the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 and Fiscal Year 2013-2014 budgets may reduce the amount of salary and benefits cost savings available at the end of the year to contribute to Fund Balance that will be needed for the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget. This hypothesis is being borne out. The General Fund Balance being used to balance this year’s Budget benefits from approximately $1,968,497 in salary and benefit savings realized during Fiscal Year 2013-2014, after budget adoption compared to $2,026,348 in Fiscal Year 2012-2013.
Unanticipated Salary Savings History
While the practices and realities described above explain how we arrive with salary savings at the end of a budget year, they do not necessarily explain why the dollar amount is so high. In general, when
contemplating the amount of money associated with salary savings, and all the variables at work, it is perhaps most useful to consider that the amount of money generated by salary savings is a direct reflection of the fact that personnel costs currently account for 67.9% (or, $34,787,447) of the County’s General Fund Budget. Furthermore, with respect to the amount of salary savings generated in Fiscal Year 20132014, it is important to stress that your Board’s continuation of the Authorized Position Review Process during the year continued to slow the County hiring process significantly, albeit not to the degree of years past. Without the Authorized Position Review Process, it is likely that the amount of additional salary savings contributing to Fund Balance would have been less.
Under-Expenditures
In addition to savings from position vacancies that arise during the year, under-expenditures in non-personnel categories of expenses also contribute to Fund Balance. Based on past analysis, there is rarely a single budget, or a group of budgets that routinely budget far more than they actually spend (which would be to the detriment of tighter, ‘more realistic’ budgets). Rather, analysis continues to reveal that under-expenditures can generally be segregated into two categories: one category being singular, high-priced expenditures - such as a capital improvement project, a consulting contract or a large, one-time purchase - that, for any number of reasons, do not materialize in the year in which they are budgeted; and, the second category being budgets with small savings spread across multiple expense object codes that, when taken together, add up to significant savings. Under-expenditures in the first category are likely to show up again as expenses in the following year’s budget.
However, it is the second category of under-expenditure (small savings adding up to big dollars) that is usually more prevalent, and usually accounts for greater savings. With very few exceptions, year-in and year-out, most departments manage their budgets effectively, and save money wherever they can. The savings may not be a lot; a couple hundred dollars here, and a thousand dollars someplace else. But, considering that the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Budget included 134 budget units, even a savings of a thousand, or couple thousand dollars (in a budget of a few hundred thousand or even a million dollars) can quickly add-up to a large amount of money when the County Budget is considered as a whole.
These “small but mighty” efforts need to be acknowledged and appreciated. However, as noted above, (outside of failing to fully realize revenues, or a series of large, unexpected and compulsory expenses) it is this category of under-expenditure most likely to disappear and shrink the size of Fund Balance in future years. Unlike salary savings, in most years it is far less certain that the County can always count on a lot of little savings adding up to big savings at the end of the year - particularly when services and supplies expenditures are continually reduced in most budgets. This year, the Recommended Budget makes $429,642 in non-personnel cuts - $301,729 more than last year - to Department Requested General Fund budget. This means there is even less for department’s to save and contribute to year-end Fund Balance.
Revenue Realization
Realizing budgeted revenues is a critical factor in determining year-end Fund Balance that cannot be overemphasized. For every dollar of revenue that is budgeted, but not achieved, year-end Fund Balance is decreased by a dollar. Although the accrual period will not close until August 31st, it appears that in Fiscal Year 2013-2014, actual General Fund revenues were approximately $1,777,953 less than the Board Approved Budget, and approximately $2,509,145 less than the Working Budget.
While departments continued, by-and-large, to do a commendable job in achieving budgeted revenue, remember that the overall figures benefit from the fact that under-realized revenues in some budgets are off-set, or masked by higher than anticipated revenues in other budgets. For example, this year Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax (HTOT, or TOT) revenue appears to be about $325,323 higher than projected in the Board Approved Budget. Without this “extra” TOT revenue, revenue in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Board Approved Budget would be under-achieved by $2,103,276, and by $2,834,468 in the Working Budget.
In other words, the General Fund Balance available to use in this year’s budget could have been even higher if all revenue projections in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Working Budget had been fully achieved, and much higher if revenue projections were met in addition to the receipt of additional, unbudgeted General Fund revenue. This raises an important issue. A primary purpose of the County’s Mid-Year and Third Quarter Financial Review processes is to revise budget projections as necessary. When a department reports that it will not, or it becomes apparent that a department might not achieve budgeted revenues, the Working Budget should be amended to reflect the decrease in revenues AND, pursuant to the County’s Budget Control & Responsibility Policy expenditures need to be decreased accordingly. Failure to do both has the effect of doubling the impact the loss of revenue has on the bottom line.
Based on the data provided above, it appears that, collectively, not only are departments failing to report decreases in revenue projections during the Mid-Year and Third Quarter Financial Review processes, but departments are increasing revenues throughout the fiscal year even when original revenue projections cannot be met. While this may be more a collective phenomenon, and might have less to do with individual budgets increasing revenues when they should be decreasing revenues, the fact remains that total revenue is, ultimately, being under-achieved.
Therefore, as always, a key factor to maintaining the integrity of the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget, and not eroding the year-end Fund Balance available for the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget, is that departments must meet their budgeted revenue projections, and decrease their expenditures by a corresponding amount when they cannot meet revenue projections.
The need to attain budgeted revenues is more critical than ever due to the Budget continuing to rely on slightly less conservative revenue projections than years past. Revenue projections have typically been budgeted conservatively to guard against “Pollyanna spending,” and often provided “extra” revenue at the end of the year that masked under-achieved revenues elsewhere in the Budget. However, beginning with the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Budget, and continuing again last year, some projected revenues were bumped up to reflect recent trends; thereby leaving much less room for error, or opportunity for Fund Balance to benefit from unanticipated revenue.
Geothermal Royalties
Besides Fund Balance, the CAO Recommended Budget also relies on use of Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund and Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to off-set General Fund expenses.
The use of Geothermal Royalties money to offset certain eligible expenses in General Fund budgets (and in Non-General Fund budgets that would otherwise require General Fund Operating Transfers) replaces funding that would otherwise need to be paid from the General Fund.
Pursuant to County policy, Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers are only made from revenue already received in the Geothermal Royalties Fund, and do not rely on geothermal royalty revenue that is expected, but has yet to be received this fiscal year. In Fiscal Year 2013-2014, the Geothermal Royalties Fund received $355,851 in new royalties payments, all which (and then some) are being appropriated in this year’s Budget.
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended Budget includes a total of $485,067 in Geothermal Royalties Fund Operating Transfers. These are used to off-set $281,893 eligible expenses in the General Fund Budget, and $203,174 in the Non-General Fund Budget.
Table 5.
Geothermal Operating Transfer History
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended Budget again proposes the use of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers to the Assessor budget, $69,648, to fund the portion of the annual mining and geothermal assessment contract with Harold Bertholf and Associates attributable to preparation of the annual tax assessment for the Coso geothermal power plant. However, it does not include the cost of funding consultants to respond to assessment appeals - meaning that more Geothermal Royalties are being relied upon to off-set other General Fund cost than in past years.
Not having to fund geothermal property tax appeal costs in this year’s Budget means that the Geothermal Royalties funds are available to fund other critical needs, including identifying $112,274 in County matching funds for two airport improvement grants that have been applied for this year, and are included in this Recommended Budget. The Recommended Budget also supports $25,000 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer to the Natural Resources budget to continue to support the County’s natural resources planning initiatives relative to federal land use planning and renewable energy development. As currently configured and recommended, it would be difficult for this year’s County Budget to support these Non-General Fund activities with General Fund revenues.
Similarly, Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers are being recommended to support various initiatives in General Fund budgets that would otherwise have to rely on General Fund financing at the expense of other programs and services, be modified in scope and ambition, or eliminated all-together. In addition to the Assessor’s geothermal property tax consultant contract noted above, the Recommend Budget includes the use of $192,245 in geothermal monies to support costs in the Parks & Recreation budget. Additionally, geothermal funds are being used to fund the reroofing of the Independence Legion Hall, totaling $65,900, in the Deferred Maintenance budget (See Table 6.)
Table 6.
If not for the availability of the Geothermal Royalties money, the General Fund might have been required to fund all of these costs; something that might not be possible without reductions to other areas recommended for funding in this Budget.
The amount of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers used to balance this year’s Budget leaves only $223,534 in the Geothermal Royalties Fund. However, the remaining Fund Balance would be lower except that not all of the Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers included in last year’s Budget materialized, thereby bolstering the amount of Geothermal Royalties Fund Balance available for this year’s Budget.
The wisdom of budgeting only Geothermal Royalties funds accrued in the Geothermal Royalties Fund - and not budgeting projected Geothermal Royalties revenues expected to be received in the current year - has served the County very well. In recent year’s geothermal royalties payments to the County have become unreliable. Although the Geothermal Royalties Trust accrued $355,851 last year, in Fiscal Year 2011-2012 the County only received $266,457 in geothermal royalties payments from the Federal and State governments.
In addition to being directly affected by the amount of production at the Coso geothermal power plant (which, in turn, affects the plant’s payment of royalties to the Bureau of Land Management), this critical revenue source has been subject to a host of hostile political machinations. For example, there have been several attempts in recent years to completely eliminate Federal geothermal royalties payments to counties.
Criminal Justice Facilities Trust
The Inyo County Board of Supervisor’s created the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, by resolution, in 1982 for the purpose of acquiring, rehabilitating, constructing, financing and leasing suitable criminal justice facilities, including all facilities necessary or incidental to the operation of such criminal justice facilities. The Trust currently holds approximately $811,821, including $59,560 in new revenue received in Fiscal Year 2013-2014. (Last year’s contribution was down from the $60,749 received in the Trust in Fiscal Year 2012-2013, which was even less than the $78,648 received in Fiscal Year 2011-2012.) Current law (California Government Code Section 76103) permits the funds to be used for “county criminal justice facilities” which “includes, but is not limited to, jails, women’s centers, detention facilities, juvenile halls, and courtrooms. (Emphasis added.)” The Sheriff’s Lone Pine Sub-Station falls within this definition. The Criminal Justice Facilities Trust should not be confused with the Courthouse Construction Trust that exists to provide funding for the acquisition, rehabilitation, construction and financing of court facilities and, due to recent legislation, falls under the control of the State Judicial Council.
This year’s Budget relies on using $145,645 in Operating Transfers from the County’s Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to balance the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 County Budget. This is $22,243 less than the $167,888 in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers necessary to balance the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 County Budget. This year’s Recommended Budget includes $19,500, estimated by Public Works and Information Services as necessary to complete the Lone Pine Sub Station project, including upgraded information systems.
Additionally, $41,600 in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers to the Deferred Maintenance budget are recommended for termite control in the Historic Courthouse, and completion of fire suppression system work in the Jail and Juvenile Hall. There is also $11,800 budgeted for interior painting of the Courthouse, as well as $2,000 for tree removal at the Deputy Sheriff housing in Shoshone. Similar to last year, a $17,000 Operating Transfer is recommended from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust into the Public Works department’s Maintenance of Building & Grounds budget to pay for the cost of budgeted maintenance activities at the Jail and Juvenile Hall. A $7,000 Operating Transfer to the Juvenile Institutions budget, and a $22,216 Operating Transfer to the Jail - General budget are recommended to fund the facility operational costs, such as the maintenance contracts with Siemens. Trust funds are also being used to fund $24,529 in on-going costs associated with the CAD/RMS software system for the Jail.
The Recommended Budget proposes using $205,230 less in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers compared to last year’s Budget. However, the use of $98,696 of these funds for ongoing expenses needs to be contrasted with the amount of revenue coming into the Trust. While the Fund Balance remains robust, as noted above, in Fiscal Year 2013-2014, the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust only received $59,560 in new revenue.
Ideally this year’s Budget would seek to minimize the use of Criminal Justice Facility Trust since these designated funds could be an obvious source of funding the pro-rated share of costs for Sheriff’s Bishop Sub-Station, as well as District Attorney and Probation offices, if your Board of Supervisors elects to proceed with the Consolidated Office Building Project. However, your Board of Supervisors could also be asked to consider using more of these funds later in the year to fund criminal justice related costs not included in the Recommended Budget.
AB 443 Trust
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended Budget includes the use of $583,407 from the AB 443. The Sheriff again supports the recommendation for a $300,000 Operating Transfer from the AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) Trust to off-set departmental costs.
Also, as originally agreed upon in the Fiscal Year 2007-2008 Budget, both the Requested and Recommended budgets provide for continuing the use of AB 443 Funds to fund the five (5) additional Correctional Officer positions added to the Sheriffs Authorized Staffing in 2007, which provided greater operational flexibility, and placed more deputies on the street. The Sheriff has elected to leave two of these positions vacant, so AB 443 funds are only being used to pay for the cost of three (3) Correctional Officer positions at $259,917.
In total, the Recommended Budget recognizes $583,047 in AB 443 funds. However, in contrast, last year the County only collected $486,989 in AB 443 funds.
In past years, the County has been conservative in its use of AB 443 funding because, like other State public safety subventions, the reliability of this funding was very volatile and subject to political whimsy in Sacramento. The reliability of this critical funding source has improved significantly with protections afforded through Criminal Justice Realignment; one of the few true silver linings, thus far, in this landmark State initiative.
Fortunately, as a result of the Sheriffs stewardship, and the Sheriff and Board of Supervisors working in concert not to become overly-reliant on these funds, the Recommended Budget still leaves a balance of $1,671,201 in the County’s AB 443 Trust - not factoring money that should be received this year. And, while the AB 443 funds should not be relied upon as a panacea for ongoing and escalating costs in the Sheriff’s department, this reserve, as well as annual AB 443 payments, could become an essential bridge to maintain public safety services if, as this Budget foretells, the need to significantly reduce future County budgets materializes.
COPS Trust
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget does utilize $75,000 funds from the Sheriffs COPS Trust to offset equipment and supplies in the Sheriff’s requested budget. Additionally, the District Attorney budget is utilizing $6,900 from this trust for safety equipment. Similar to the use of the AB 443 funds, every effort is being made to preserve the Sheriff’s COPS Trust funds for future needs which could include funding equipment and supplies eliminated from this year’s Requested Budget.
Personnel Actions
Also in contrast to recent years’ budgets, this year’s Budget does recommend a limited number of new positions. Many of these positions have already been approved by your Board of Supervisors in recent months. However, the Recommended Budget also calls for deleting 16 positions based on department requests and as a result of the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program (see Attachment E).
Position Adjustments
As a result of recent Personnel Rule changes incorporated into new labor contracts last year, most position adjustments that used to be regulated to approval through the budget process are now, instead, performance based. As a result, this Budget does not contemplate position adjustments such as career ladders (e.g., movements from a II to III), equity adjustments, or reclassifications. Departments are responsible for budgeting for career ladders for those employees who may be eligible, based on performance, during the coming fiscal year. The Personnel Rule changes provide specific processes, outside of the budget process, to pursue equity adjustments and reclassifications.
New Position Requests
The County of Inyo Manpower Report (Attachment C) identifies, by department, authorized staffing levels (full-time and B-PAR employees) as of July 1, 2014. (Note: The Manpower Report identifies authorized staffing at the department-level, but not yet at the budget unit level.) Because the Health and Human Services department has numerous employees spread across multiple budgets, a table showing the Department’s Authorized full-time and B-PAR staff, and how they are allocated among various programs, is also provided (Attachment D) to guide your Board of Supervisors in its review of the Health and Human Services budgets.
The Recommended Budget supports funding for all of the new positions included in the Department Requested Budget and already approved by your Board of Supervisors:
	Child Support Services changed its authorized strength and received permission to hire a full-time Child Support Attorney I- IV (previously authorized as a B-PAR position);
	Public Works and Planning, through Service Redesign, created a new shared (50/50) Project Coordinator position, and both departments reduced their Authorized Strength accordingly; with Public Works deleting an Engineering Technician position and Planning deleting a Planning Coordinator position;
	Health & Human Services changed its authorized strength by adding a new Administrative Analyst to track and evaluate programs in order to maximize efficiency and effectiveness.
The CAO Recommended Budget also endorses the adding the following new positions:
Research Assistant (Range 60/62) to the Water department’s authorized staffing. This position was approved in last year’s Budget contingent on funding. It is proposed for funding in this year’s Budget with Water Fund monies, and is one of the positions that the CAO may recommend becoming a shared position with another department (TBD).
AB109 Re-entry Services Coordinator (Range 73) to the Health & Human Services department’s authorized strength. This position was approved in last year’s Budget contingent on funding. This position will be funded through Criminal Justice Realignment funds in the Community Corrections Budget and, as such, it will be a grant funded position dependent on the continued support from these funds. Additionally, this position will have the ability to bill Medi-Cal for allowable services provided to clients and all revenues earned by this position will be put back into the Community Corrections Budget as an offset to the cost of the position.
2 B-PAR Program Service Assistant II’s (Range 42PT) to the Health and Human Services department’s authorized strength. These positions will be funded with IC Gold funds and ESAAA funds. Upon filling, the department will delete 4 A-PAR Program Service Assistant positions and use the B-PARs to deliver the services, giving the department more flexibility with delivery days and routes.
Probation Officer (Range 70) to the Probation department’s authorized strength. This is not a “new” position per se, but replaces a vacant Deputy Probation Officer with an AB 109 funded Deputy Probation Officer that will be funded with a combination of AB 109 Community Corrections funds and General Fund monies that were previously used to fund a Juvenile Group Counselor. As a result, this position becomes a grant funded position that will be dependent on the continued provision of Community Corrections funds and General Fund monies being contributed to AB 109, as well as the achievement of specific outcomes.
Salary Savings
As noted during this year’s Budget Workshops, some departments have preemptively proposed using salary savings, associated with vacant staff positions in their Department Requested budgets.
The CAO Recommended Budget includes recommendations for additional salary savings. Almost all of the salary savings being recommended by the CAO, $531,462, occurs in the General Fund; only $173,402 in salary savings is recognized in Non-General Fund budgets. Table 3. above provides the trend of General Fund salary savings over the past 6 years. The Position Vacancy/Salary Savings Table (Attachment B) identifies salary savings by department and staff position, and includes the earliest date that the position can be filled to realize the anticipated salary savings.
As noted above, the calculation of CAO Recommended salary savings is usually intentionally conservative. The fact that this year’s recommended salary savings is $408,263 less than the amount used to balance last year’s Budget may portend a trend that - due to the elimination of positions, and departments being more aggressive in filling their vacant positions - salary savings will be less of a tool for balancing budgets in future years. And, because there are fewer positions from which to draw salary savings, to generate the salary savings necessary to balance this year’s Budget, many of the positions have been left vacant for the entire fiscal year. A balanced budget notwithstanding, this has a double-negative effect of diminishing service capacities in this year’s Budget and eroding Fund Balance that will be available to balance next year’s Budget.
The Budget also deletes sixteen (16) vacant and/or VSIP positions shown in Attachment E. However, eliminating these position does not result in salary savings for the Budget since funding for the positions was not included in the respective departments’ budget requests.
The use of salary savings to help balance the Budget is assumed to be preferred to eliminating filled positions. However, over the long term, taking salary savings from whichever positions happen to be vacant, forgoes performing any strategic analysis of which positions are the most critical to meeting the service priorities established by your Board of Supervisors.
Much of the General Fund salary savings is realized by leaving positions vacant in the County Administrator’s authorized staffing. As a result, the ability to utilize some of these vacant positions to restructure the department to provide for a critically needed Assistant Information Services Director, as well as dedicated natural resources and economic development staff does not exist.
FISCAL OVERVIEW
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended Budget projects an overall increase in revenues of $6,722,277, from $76,976,215 in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Board Approved Budget to $83,698,492 in this year’s Recommended Budget.
The remarkable increase in budgeted revenues is attributable primarily to almost $4.8 Million in new State Funded Roads revenue to fund resurfacing projects. The Road budget is also recognizing over $800,000 in new revenue. A new Great Basin Air Pollution Control Grant budget has been established to recognize $615,259 in revenue for air pollution control projects. Over $600,000 in new revenue is being recognized to fund the Agricultural Warehouse, and the Budget recognizes over $460,000 in new revenue to complete the Animal Shelter project.
The Recommended General Fund Budget projects an increase in revenues of $1,826,200 (3.0%); from $46,359,155 in projected General Fund revenue in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Board Approved Budget to $48,185,355 in projected General Fund revenue in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended Budget. When Operating Transfers into the General Fund are subtracted from both years’ revenue projections - there were $700,001 in Operating Transfers to the General Fund in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Board Approved Budget and there are $741,598 in Operating Transfers to the General Fund in this year’s Recommended Budget- projected revenues have increased from last year’s Board Approved General Fund Budget by $1,084,602. This contrasts with last year when the same analysis showed a $557,283 increase in General Fund revenues (after Operating Transfers into the General Fund were backed out).
Most of the increase in projected General Fund revenues can be attributed to increases in Health and Human Services revenue which totals an additional $941,241 in the Budget as well as $333,000 for a new Planning grant. The Recommended General Fund Budget also benefits from almost $300,000 more in General Revenue & Expense budget revenue; almost $300,000 in additional Criminal Justice Realignment money being transferred to General Fund budgets; an additional $63,323 in County Cost Plan (A-87) charges revenue; and, $75,000 in COPS funding.
The City of Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP) property tax payment - which is calculated using the constitutionally prescribed Phillips formula, and accounts for about 48% of the County’s secured property tax roll - is up 4.04% (compared to 0.45% last year), for a total secured tax roll increase of 2.45% or $823,557. The County’s share of this is expected to be $243,773. Last year, the secure tax roll increased by 1.24%. However, without the increase in LADWP valuation there would be minimal increase in property tax revenue.
While there is more certainty around revenues and expenses associated with the Coso property tax assessment process, the fact is the power plant property continues to decline in value; a decline which continues to have dire consequences for County General Fund revenues. The County’s share of the assessed value of Coso this year (barring appeals) is $1,047,235 compared to $1,119,061 last year.
The Coso plant still has enormous and critical influence on the County Budget. With the possible exception of Federal PILT funding, the combination of geothermal royalties payments and geothermal revenues and expenses associated with Coso property tax assessments continue to represent one of the single greatest ‘local’ revenue variables, and pose the most substantial threat to future County revenues. These factors, however, remain largely beyond the control of this Budget and your Board of Supervisors, and the situation provides little that can be proactively accomplished to guard against negative potentialities.
Vehicle License Fee (VLF) revenue is expected to increase by $118,372 compared to last year’s Board Approved Budget. This is encouraging considering that the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget reported that VLF revenue had been decreased by $615,000 in the last three Recommended budgets. (Fiscal Year 2012-2013 was the only year in the past five years that VLF revenue showed an increase, and then only of $50,000.)
Generally, sales tax is projected to remain stable with a relatively small decrease (e.g., $30,000) being recommended. However, some additional increases may occur during the year as a direct result of the sales and use tax audits that continue to be performed by Muni Services. The fee for this audit is 25% of the additional sales tax revenue collected for the County. This additional revenue and related expense is not accounted for in this Budget, and appropriation changes and budget amendments will be requested as needed.
In Fiscal Year 2013-2014, Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue exceeded projections by $325,323. Despite a 3.98% increase in HTOT in Fiscal Year 2013-2014, the HTOT projections for Fiscal Year 2014-2015 remain unchanged in recognition that last year’s Budget relied on an aggressive increase in HTOT. As in year’s past, the County’s HTOT revenues will be linked to economic stability or instability in Europe and the strength of the euro. Due to this factor, it is recommended that your Board continue to allow any revenue in excess of projections to remain unbudgeted as a way of bolstering Fund Balance.
Many of the other assumptions associated with this year’s revenue projections remain similar to previous years’ Budgets and include:
	No additional adverse property tax appeals or settlements.
	Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue remaining constant.
	Vehicle License Fee revenue modestly increasing.
	Sales tax revenue slightly declining.
	No revenue being received from the sale of County-owned property.
	Continued strategic use of realignment funds to provide maximum benefit to the County.
	No future geothermal royalty payments have been projected in the Recommended Budget. Pursuant to current County policy, any geothermal royalty payments that may be received in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 will be treated as unanticipated revenue and not be budgeted.
The following graph, General Fund Revenues by Category, Figure 1. illustrates the sources of General Fund revenues in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended Budget. 
The sheer number of Operating Transfers that have been made in and out of the General Fund in recent years makes a comparison of changes in revenues and expenditures from one fiscal year to the next very difficult. A cursory review seems to indicate that, over the years, decreases in revenues are being relatively matched by decreases, or only slight increases in spending. However, the realities continue to be that the County cannot continue to rely on reductions in discretionary expenses to maintain fiscal solvency, and costs beyond the control of departments continue to rise.
Taxes - Sales 1.83%
Licenses & Permits 0.94%
Fines & Forfeitures 2.07%
Changes in General Fund expense categories between Fiscal Year 2013-2014 and costs in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended Budget, are shown in Table 7. 
CAO Recommended Budget
The total Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended Budget is $88,489,707 and represents a $6,727,245, or a 8.28% increase from the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Board Approved Budget of $81,726,462.
The following graph, Total County Expenditures, Figure 2., below, demonstrates the categorical division of the Budget, as recommended. 
Non -General Fund Budget
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended Non-General Fund Budget totals $37,323,535 in expenditures and $35,513,137 in revenues. The deficit in Non-General Fund budgets is $1,810,398; $1,036,237 more than last year’s Non-General Fund funding gap. Including recommended Operating Transfers, there is sufficient Fund Balance in these budgets to cover the gap between revenues and expenditures. Table 8. shows the Operating Transfers being recommended for Non-General Fund budgets.
General Fund Budget
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended General Fund Budget totals $51,166,172 in expenditures and $48,185,355 in revenues. General Fund expenditures represent an increase of $830,931, or 1.65% over the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Board Approved General Fund Budget of $50,335,241.
The Auditor-Controller is expected to certify the Fund Balance in the General Fund for the year-ending June 30, 2013, on September 3rd. For purposes of preparing the Recommended Budget, General Fund Balance is being estimated as $2,980,817, and this amount is used to balance the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended General Fund Budget.
The following graph, General Fund Expenditures by Function, Figure 3., demonstrates the categorical division of the General Fund Budget, as recommended. 
RECOMMENDED CHANGES TO DEPARTMENT REQUESTED BUDGETS
In addition to the differences already discussed, the CAO Recommended Budget differs from the Department Requested Budget as follows. This section of the Recommended Budget will also be used to identify key issues in certain budgets that have not already been discussed. 
Non -General Fund Budgets
Animal. Shelter
This is budget unit being adjusted to recognize ICARE’s donation to the project in the amount of $416,000 as an Operating Transfer from the Animal Shelter Building Trust. Additionally, the project requires a $45,000 Operating Transfer from the CAO- Accumulated Capital Outlay (ACO) budget. The Animal Shelter budget has $339,444 in Fund Balance which, when combined with these Operating Transfers, is sufficient to cover the remaining $739,339 in building costs.
Public Works projects the total Animal Shelter project to cost $836,000. Some of these costs were incurred last fiscal year, when this budget was established using $200,000 from the CAO-ACO budget and $175,000 from the Animal Shelter Donation Trust.
Agriculture Building Project
This is a new budget unit established to isolate appropriations for the Agricultural Commissioner’s warehouse project. The department’s budget request sought only to recognize $641,046 in project revenue; from Inyo and Mono counties’ respective Ag Commissioner Building trusts, and a $100,000 Inyo County Treasury Loan. The Recommended Budget identifies $59,742 in new expenditures. There is a prior year encumbrance of $441,332, which this budget also provides for. As of July 31, 2014, $139,972 has been spent on the project, making the total project cost $641,046. Debt service payments for the Treasury Loan are and will be budgeted in the Agricultural Commissioner’s budget.
CAO-Accumulated Capital Outlay
An Operating Transfer of $45,000 is being recommended from this budget to the Animal Shelter budget to fund completion of the project.
The Recommended Budget also includes $10,000 to fund the cost of the Engine 18 mural proposed for the Legion Hall in
Independence as the restored locomotive is moved from Dehy Park to the Eastern California Museum.
Deferred Maintenance — Public Works
The Recommended Budget provides funding for a variety of deferred maintenance projects through a $74,000 General Fund Operating Transfer; a $71,400 Operating Transfer from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust; and, a $65,900 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer.
Projects recommended for funding in this budget include: Jail Fire Sprinklers Phase II; Historic Courthouse Termite Control; Historic Courthouse Interior Paint; Independence Legion Hall Re-Roof; Independence Legion Hall Interior Paint; ADA Transition Plan; Big Pine Town Hall Interior Paint, Big Pine Town Hall Southern Exterior Paint; BP Town Hall Roof; Tecopa Appliance Installation; Statham Hall Door Replacement; Shoshone Deputy Housing Tree Removal; and, Lone Pine Sheriff’s Sub-Station Improvements.
A $3,500 Operating Transfers from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust is also being made to the Information Services budget to complete computer network work at the Lone Pine Sub-Station.
The Recommended Budget also includes $5,000 in revenue from Health and Human Services to fund an ADA Compliance Plan for the HHS Building in Independence.
The Recommended Budget does not allocate funding for the Independence Legion Hall Floor (hopefully this project can be funded next year); staff travel expense; or, staff expense associated with installing a new generator in Tecopa.
Additionally, the Recommended Budget proposes funding several projects requested in the Deferred Maintenance budget with Great Basin Unified Air Pollution Control District funds upon approval from the GBUAPCD Board. These projects include: Jail HVAC; Statham Hall Heater; South Street Window Replacement; South Street Insulation; and, Jail Water Heater/Boiler. (See the Great Basin APC Grant budget for other projects that these monies could fund.)
Eastern Sierra Weed Management
The Recommended Budget moves $50,000 in revenue from the services and fees revenue code to the other agency contributions revenue code. This is funding paid by the Water department from the LORP trusts to cover the County’s share of the cost of combatting invasive weeds in the Lower Owens River Project area. This change will help to isolate this revenue source and associated policy issues. In light of the apparent failure of Los Angeles Department of Water and Power to control weeds on Los Angeles-owned lands outside the LORP area, your Board may wish to revisit the legitimacy of paying for half of the invasive weed work in the LORP as a shared cost-between the County and LADWP. An argument can be made the LADWP should be funding 100% of this work, which could still be performed by the Weed Management Program.
The Recommended Budget also adds $3,524 to aid from Mono County revenues to reflect 50% of the program’s A-87 costs being paid by Mono County. This change was requested by the department.
Also, due to insufficient Fund Balance to cover the department’s budget request, it is necessary to reduce expenditures as follows: $5,000 from general operating expense; $3,000 from maintenance of equipment - materials; and, $2,000 from unemployment.
Bishop Airport Improvement
The Recommended Budget provides a $103,598 Operating Transfer from Geothermal Royalties to provide matching funds for a FAA grant.
Great Basin Air Pollution Control Grant
This is a new budget being established in the Recommended Budget to account for $615,259 the Great Basin Unified Air Pollution Control District has allocated to Inyo County for air pollution control projects. Projects funded with these monies must be approved by the GBUAPCD Board. Potential projects will be presented for your Board’s consideration and approval later this year, and the approved projects will be forwarded to the District Board for approval.
The following projects have been preliminarily identified for possible funding through this budget. All projects proposed for funding will be presented to the Board of Supervisors later this fiscal year. Projects endorsed by the Board will be transmitted to the GBUAPCD Board for funding consideration.
Estimated Cost
$40,900
$10,500
$20,300
$10,300
$15,300
$60,000
$75,000
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
Potential Project
Jail HVAC
Statham Hall Heater
South Street Window Replacement
South Street Insulation
Jail Water Heater & Boiler
Board Meeting Webcast
Lone Pine Sub Station Parking Lot
Teleconferencing/Teletraining Rooms
Big Pine Veteran’s Path
Millpond Surface Improvements
Diaz Lake Surface Improvements
CARB Compliant Landfill Equipment
So County Wood Chipper
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
Independence Water System Upgrade
The Recommended Budget provides a $6,080 Operating Transfer Out to the SCADA budget for grant matching funds.
Laws Water System Upgrade
The Recommended Budget provides a $77 Operating Transfer Out to the SCADA budget for grant matching funds.
Lone Pine Water System Upgrade
The Recommended Budget provides a $9,235 Operating Transfer Out to the SCADA budget for grant matching funds.
Lone Pine Airport Improvement
The Recommended Budget provides an $8,676 Operating Transfer from Geothermal Royalties to provide matching funds for a FAA grant.
In addition, at the department’s request, the Recommended Budget recognizes: a $10,789 Operating Transfer Out from the Lone Pine Airport Operations; an increase of $8,827 in state grants revenue; and, an increase of $176,543 in federal grants revenue to fund the cost of an airport Layout Plan for the Lone Pine Airport. Professional and special services expenses are increased by a corresponding $196,159.
Mosquito Abatement
With the department’s concurrence, the Recommended Budget adds $10,000 for an Operating Transfer to a newly established Mosquito Reserve Trust which is intended to provide reserves for high water (high mosquito) years and future capital expenses.
Motor Pool
In addition to adjusting salary and benefit costs to reflect new personnel allocations, the Recommended Budget also establishes $50,000 in contingencies for possible future acquisition of fleet management software.
Natural Resource Development
The CAO Recommended Budget adds a $25,000 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer to this budget for natural resource planning efforts.
Recycling & Waste Management (formerly Solid Waste)
The Recommended Budget once again endorses using the County’s share of Transaction and Use Tax (TUT) proceeds - a general tax estimated at $1,215,000 - to offset the cost of the County’s recycling and solid waste mandates. This leaves a deficit of $489,837 which is bridged using a combination of Fund Balance and a recommended General Fund Operating Transfer of $100,000.
The Recommended Budget reflects 9-months of salary savings ($86,878) associated with implementation of the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program. A Gate Attendant position is being deleted and, instead of being backfilled, the vacated Administrative Secretary position will be filled, part-time by sharing an Office Technician already assigned to Parks and Recreation and Motor Pool.
It should be noted that the need for the relatively low General Fund Operating Transfer, despite a nearly $100,000 increase in regulatory-related costs, reflects the recent elimination of four staff positions (including the Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan buyouts). Without these positions being eliminated, the General Fund Operating Transfer to Recycling & Waste Management would need to be close to $500,000.
SCADA
The Recommended Budget eliminates the General Fund Operating Transfer from the Public Works budget necessary for the match for this water system project. Instead, the match is recommended to come from a pro-rata share of each of the three town water system upgrade budgets.
Tobacco Tax Grant 12-13
The Recommended Budget adds $11,275 of revenue to Health Realignment and adds $19,125 of expense to prior year refunds to allow the Department to finalize the Fiscal Year 2009-2012 Tobacco Plan and pay back the State the $19,125 that was unspent in the three year plan. There is sufficient fund balance to cover the remaining $7,850.
Water
The department’s Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Fund Balance is $383,847, and the Department Requested Budget relies on $228,471 of the Fund Balance. As previously reported, the department’s Fund Balance is rapidly dwindling and the expenditures being requested by the department in this year’s budget cannot be duplicated next year without an increase in revenue (because there will not be sufficient Fund Balance to cover the costs). Your Board may want to keep this in mind before authorizing hiring the requested Research Assistant position.
General Fund Budgets
Advertising County Resources
The Recommended Budget makes no changes to the Department Requested budget for Advertising County Resources, which eliminates $100,000 for funding the Community Project Sponsorship Program grants. However, should the Auditor-Controller certify the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 General Fund Balance at more than the $3 Million being relied upon to balance this year’s budget, it is recommended that your Board use some of the additional revenue to restore funding for the Community Project Sponsorship Program.
Agricultural Commissioner
The department’s Requested Budget is markedly higher than last year’s Board Approved Budget due to the assessment of County Cost Plan charges and providing for $52,000 in debt service payments for the department’s warehouse project. Both of these costs are included in this General Fund budget unit to provide a mechanism for assessing Mono County its share of the costs (which will be paid in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget per the counties’ cost-sharing arrangement).
The Recommended Budget reduces expense for office and other equipment by $600, employee physicals by $350, and travel by $3,000 based on prior year actuals while accounting for full staffing in the department.
Animal. Control
In addition to salary savings, the Recommended Budget removes funding for one of two requested chairs from the office and other equipment costing less than $5,000 object code.
Assessor
The Recommended Budget includes a Geothermal Operating Transfer of $69,648 to pay for the portion of the Assessor’s contract with Harold W. Bertholf, Inc. associated with the Coso Operating Company property tax assessment process. (Note: This is distinguished from the separate contract with Harold W. Bertholf, Inc. that is occasionally funded in the CAO budget for work assisting the County with property tax appeals made by Coso Operating Company.)
The Recommended Budget reduces travel expense by $3,000 to encourage efficiencies in managing the department’s travel cost. For example, it appears that trips to southeastern portions of the County can be consolidated, and the staff travel outside the County can be accomplished by more direct routes.
In anticipation of the office’s Office Technician III retiring in January, the Recommended Budget is predicated on changing the vacated position to an Office Technician II and sharing it with the Clerk-Recorder’s Office which has an Office Technician II position participating in the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program effective December 1st. The resulting savings is $19,987 in this budget.
The Department Requested Budget included six-months funding for the department’s long-vacant Administrative Analyst position. The Recommended Budget reduces this amount to three- months funding (resulting in $19,993) in anticipation of the position being shared with another department.
Auditor-Controller - General
The Recommended Budget increases personnel costs by $2,130 to fund the cost of changing the department’s Authorized Staffing by deleting an Office Clerk and adding an Office Technician that can be shared with Administration, generating an overall General Fund savings of $64,348.
Professional and special services expense is being reduced by $2,500 to reflect the office insourcing property tax administration calculation.
Auditor-Controller - General Revenues & Expenditures
The Recommended Budget increases other agency contributions expense by $16,000 to fund the cost of paying Road Audit findings associated with money that grant-funded projects, no longer in existence, still owe the Road department.
Board of Supervisors
The Recommended Budget adds $5,000 for travel expense to approximate last year’s actuals, which still represents a nearly $25,000 reduction in travel expense from last year’s Approved Budget.
Building & Safety
The Recommended Budget reflects 9-months of salary savings ($88,165) associated with a Senior Building Inspector participating in the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program. Thirty-percent of the annual savings ($30,000) is added to part-time salaries to provide for potential temporary or contract building inspector services in the southeast parts of the County.
In anticipation of the reduced staffing, cell phone expense is being reduced by $250; general operating expense is being reduced by $200; travel expense is being trimmed to $2,000; and, motor pool expense by reduced $10,000.
Contingencies
The Recommended Budget includes $15,000 in General Fund Contingencies. Certainly, a more substantial sum is preferable. Typically, Contingencies are budgeted for unknown expenses that might arise during the fiscal year. This year, however, the Recommended Budget once again makes reductions to specific expenses in certain General Fund budget units which can - at least reasonably - be anticipated as possibly being necessary later in the year. These reductions (such as reducing communications site maintenance funding in the Sheriff’s budgets) are identified elsewhere in this report and could certainly require the use of Contingencies funding. Your Board is reminded that subsequent expenditure of these funds requires separate Board approval.
CAO
The Recommended Budget reduces expenses for office and other equipment costing less than $5,000 by $600, and travel expense by $1,000, in closer approximation to last year’s actuals. Also, internal charges revenue is reduced by $711 to reflect less homeland security grant money available to partially offset grant administration costs.
Coroner
The Recommended Budget reduces professional special services expense by $4,500 to reflect the elimination of the department’s secretarial services contract. Based on last year’s actuals, mileage reimbursement expense is being reduced by $1,000, and travel costs are being reduced $500.
County Clerk - General
The Recommended Budget reflects 7-months of salary savings ($27,408) associated with an Office Technician II participating in the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program after this fall’s elections. The vacated position will be refilled and shared with the Assessor upon retirement of an Office Technician in the Assessor’s Office in January.
County Counsel
The Recommended Budget supports the department’s request to replace a full-time Office Clerk with an A-Par position. The Recommended Budget also proposes reducing professional and special services expense by $5,000 and general operating expense by $3,000 in recognition of overestimated shredding costs and historical actuals. Rents and leases of equipment expense is being reduced by $3,879 based on prior year actuals; and, travel expense is being reduced by $1,500 based on five-year historical costs and the fiscal realities facing the County. Utilities expense is being cut by $300 based on last year’s actuals.
The Recommended budget also relies on three-months of salary savings associated with the Deputy County Counsel IV vacancy that will occur at the end of August. Filling of the position will be evaluated in conjunction with other staffing and contract configurations.
Coun ty Library
The Recommended Budgets adds $16,883 to the Library budget to provide funding for the recently approved B-Par Library-Museum Assistant to become a full-time employee should your Board want to increase the Authorized Staffing in the Library and Museum budgets.
The Recommended Budget also adds $3,489 to office and other equipment costing less than $5,000 to fund the cost of a cataloging station in the Bishop library branch, and adds $2,000 to motor pool to better facilitate staff circulation amongst the branches.
District Attorney - General
Net County Cost in the Department Requested Budget is increasing by $105,738 compared to the Board Approved Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Budget. This increase is primarily attributed to increase personnel expenses associated with replacing two Deputy District Attorney I position with two Deputy District Attorney IV positions (a difference of $61,392).
As noted previously, the Recommended Budget does not support the department’s request to fill its vacant B-Par Legal Secretary position resulting in $24,522 in salary savings (over nine-months).
The Recommended Budget reduces professional and special services by $3,000 based on prior year’s actuals and the “miscellaneous” nature of the department’s itemization. Travel expense is being reduced by $10,000, which still appropriates more than prior years’ actuals (Fiscal Year 2012-2013 $11,763; Fiscal Year 2013-2014 $7,491). The only other reduction is $3,000 in motor pool expense based on historical usage.
D.A. - Safety
The department’s overtime budgets being reduced by $12,000 based on recent actual expenses.
Disaster Services - CAO
The Recommended Budget again supports the Requested Budget in continuing to cover the cost of sending four (4) County employees assigned to Section Chief roles in the Emergency Operations Center to intensive, out-of-county training opportunities.
Economic Development-CAO
The Recommended Budget, again, reluctantly proposes generating salary savings by deferring the hiring of the vacant Deputy County Administrator for the entire year.
Elections
At the request of the department, the Recommended Budget adds $5,300 in previously unanticipated filing fee revenues.
Environmental Health
The Recommended Budget reduces personnel costs by $9,158 to reflect the Environmental Health sharing the Office Tech III position with the Planning department one day per week.
Additionally, the Recommended Budget reflects salary savings ($108,614) associated with the Lab Tech II (delete) and REHS III (replace with REHS I at mid-year) participation in the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program. The elimination of this position will also reduce motor pool expense, so the Recommended Budget reduces motor pool costs by $8,000.
At the department’s request, the Recommended Budget recognizes $48,000 in state grant revenue associated with the department’s one-time allocation of $228,000 in grant money associated with its LPA delegation agreement with the state. Also, at the request of the department, the Recommended Budget adds $48,000 to professional and special services expense to fund the cost of the CUPA inspection services contract the department recommended to the Board of Supervisors earlier this summer. The department has recently indicated that reduced CUPA expenditures associated with implementation of the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program and this inspection services contract could result in a reduction of CUPA associated revenue from the State. As a result in may be necessary to revisit this projected revenue.
Farm Advisor
The Recommended Budget adds $12,193 in other contributions revenue predicated on the expectation the University of California Cooperative Extension Program will contribute funding to supplement the cost of the County providing a higher level of staff support to the Farm Advisor’s Office than is required by the contract between the County and UC Extension. This is the amount of the difference between the salary and benefit costs for the Program Coordinator position being provided by the County at the request of a former Farm Advisor, and the cost of an Office Technician (although the contract can be interpreted as only requiring the County to provide the services of an Office Clerk III; a $22,000 difference).
Gran ts -In Suyyort
The Recommended Budget makes no changes to the Department Requested budget for Grants-in-Support, which halves the amount of funding available to provide to last year’s GIS partners. However, should the Auditor-Controller certify the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 General Fund Balance at more than the $3 Million being relied upon to balance this year’s budget, it is recommended that your Board use some of the additional revenue to restore GIS funding to last year’s levels.
This year’s funding request is:
	California Indian Legal Services: $4,000
	Community Connections for Child Care: $15,000
	Eastern Sierra Avalanche Center: $2,500
	Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery; $5,000
	Inyo Council for the Arts; $19,564
	Laws Railroad Museum; $12,904
	Wild Iris: $7,432
Recall that in in Fiscal Year 2012-2013, recognizing the County’s ability to consider funding new GIS Program grant applications was not expected to improve in the foreseeable future, the
GIS program was been changed to make specific, line-item awards to each of the entities with which the County had an established and ongoing GIS funding relationship in the same amount each organization received the previous year. (In doing so, it was noted that, if reductions in funding were necessary, or increases in funding possible, the changes would be applied on a pro-rata basis.
IC GOLD
The Recommended Budget adds $3,900 to maintenance of equipment - materials to rebuild the walk in freezer at the Bishop Senior Center. The cost would have been almost $10,000 if not for the use of Parks & Recreation staff to complete the repairs.
Information Services
The Recommended Budget provides a $3,500 Operating Transfer for communications upgrades at the Lone Pine Sub Station from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust.
Invo Complex Fire
The Recommended Budget is recognizing $117,417 in state grant revenue that was previously deferred in anticipation of the possible need to refund this money to the state. The payback to the state is included in this year’s Budget, so the offsetting revenue must be recognized.
Jail - CAD/RMS
An Operating Transfer of $24,529 from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust is recommended to fund the cost of the RIMS Maintenance Contract in lieu of using General Fund monies for this purpose. Additionally, a second Operating Transfer from the Warrant Trust of $1,700 is being used to provide connectivity to the Superior Court’s JALAN criminal justice case management system. Four years ago, 911 Trust Funds were available for this contract, but those funds have been expended. The 911 Trust will be monitored for ability to resume funding these costs in the future.
Jail - General
As discussed above, the Recommended Budget again includes a $22,216 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund the Jail facility operations, all of which is the maintenance contract with Siemens originally funded through the Department Requested Budget. The Recommended Budget reduces personal and safety equipment expense by $10,000 to be more aligned with prior years’ actuals and facilitate competitive purchasing (e.g., $20,000 for kitchen gloves = @ $1/pair and 365 days per year enough funding to provide 54 pairs of gloves per day; Fiscal Year 2013-2014 year-to-date actuals are about $18,363). Inmate clothing expense is being reduced by $3,000 to better approximate historical costs. An increase of $1,000 is recommended in office and other equipment costing less than $5,000 to pay for the cost of a replacement refrigerator (costing $4,000; the difference will be made up by other reductions in this object code). Professional and special services expense is being reduced by $5,000, and general operating expense by $1,000 based on historical trends.
The Recommended Budget adds $15,000 to department’s requested food and household supplies budget in recognition that the department’s food costs exceeded budgeted appropriations by $40,000 in Fiscal Year 2013-2014.
Requested travel appropriations are being reduced by $19,000 in closer approximation to the $12,496 spent in Fiscal Year 2013-2014 and in recognition of austerity measures required by the County’s fiscal realities.
Jail - Security
The Recommended Budget supports an AB 443 Trust Operating Transfer, requested by the Sheriff, to fund $21,330 in annual Jail security system costs.
Juvenile Institutions
The Recommended Budget includes a $7,000 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund the cost of the Juvenile Hall fire suppression maintenance contract. Revenues to have been increased by $4,000 to reflect use of Youth Offender Block Grant funds to fund the department’s security console request consistent with the department’s request to use YOBG funds to fund other security upgrades at the Juvenile Hall.
The Recommended Budget also reduces food and household supplies expense by $7,901, to $45,000 which reflects the last two years’ actual expenses. Health-employee physical expense has been reduced by $7,300 to reflect less anticipated hiring within the division (with $2,300 being added to the Probation division) and be more aligned with historical averages. And, general operating expense has been reduced by $3,500 in keeping with actual expenses the last two years. Travel expense has been reduced by $9,000 to reflect last year’s actuals.
Lone Pine Sub-Station
This budget unit is being deactivated. Costs for work necessary to complete the project - communications upgrades, signage, exterior painting and landscaping - are being budgeted in the recommended Information Services budget ($3,500) and the Deferred Maintenance budget ($16,000) and funded using Operating Transfers from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust.
Maintenance — Building & Grounds
This budget will receive a $17,000 Operating Transfer from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust; $10,000 for on-going maintenance expenses at the Jail and $7,000 at the Juvenile Hall.
The Recommended Budget reduces expense for personal and safety equipment by $800 based on last year’s actuals. Similarly, a reduction of $6,000 is recommended in the maintenance of structures — materials object code based on historical expense. Also, based on last year’s actuals, the Recommended Budget reduces general operating expense by $7,000.
Museum
The Recommended Budgets adds $16,759 to the Museum budget to provide funding for the recently approved B-Par Library- Museum Assistant to become a full-time employee if your Board should want to increase the Authorized Staffing in the Library and Museum budgets.
Parks
The Recommended Budget provides for a $192,245 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer to support parks maintenance and operation costs.
The Recommended Budget adds $70,000 in insurance payment revenue that will be used to offset all but $20,000 of the cost of replacing a parks dump truck destroyed by arson. The Recommended Budget also moves the associated appropriation from equipment expense to vehicles expense.
Due to limited suppliers, as well as State Fish and Wildlife prohibitions on fish stocking in many waters due to drought conditions, funding for fish planting has been eliminated from the Recommended Budget. However, $5,000 is being added to fund the initial printing of a warm water fisheries map that also promotes County parks and campgrounds.
The Recommended Budget also provides $35,000 in other agency contributions to facilitate the repair of the depot roof at the Laws Historical Park.
Additionally, the Recommended Budget reflects 9-months of salary savings ($66,247) associated with implementation of the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program, and adds $35,849 for potential seasonal and part-time replacement positions.
Personnel.
The Recommended Budget adds $184,920 to other benefits expense to fund the cost of implementing the Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan. Accordingly, Personnel Contingencies expense is being reduced by $184,920, as well as an additional $337,736 that is not anticipated as being needed for other personnel cost reduction initiatives. Funding is being reserved in Contingencies to fund possible cost reduction initiatives - such as Social Security alternatives, providing in-house dental-vision insurance administration, etc. - that may be implemented later this year to bridge the Fiscal Year 20152016 Budget gap.
Planning
The Recommended Budget features a $20,000 Operating Transfer from the Geothermal Royalties Trust to defer planning expenses associated with the department’s contract with Willdan.
The Recommended Budget increases personnel expense by $9,158 to pay for the department’s share (20%) of sharing an Office Technician III with the Environmental Health department.
The Recommended Budget decreases travel expenses by $4,000 based on last year’s actuals while still recognizing increased expenses with the REGPA project.
Probation
The Recommended Budget reduces professional and special services costs by $2,500 to reflect costs that correspond to 50% match provided by AB 678 funds (alternately, SB 678 revenue could be increased by $2,500). Expense for general office costs is being reduced by $10,000 to reflect that actuals the prior two years have never exceeded $31,000 (the department is requesting over $85,000 in appropriations) while still accounting for projected expenditures funded with SB 678 and AB 109 funds. Overtime costs have been reduced by $2,000.
Travel has been reduced by $6,000 based on last year’s actuals, and the ambiguous “miscellaneous” justification provided by the department. Motor pool expense is being reduced by a total of $16,000; $6,000 of which corresponds to reductions in miscellaneous travel expense. The additional $10,000 reduction is based on in-county court travel expenses.
Health-employee physical expense has been increased by $2,300 to reflect hiring that is anticipated in Probation rather than Juvenile Institutions.
Additionally, the Recommended Budget reflects a Deputy Probation Officer (DPO) III participating in the Voluntary Separation
Incentive Program, and backfilling the position with a DPO I for an overall savings of $11,675. Furthermore, as noted above, the Recommended Budget also relies on three-months salary savings in the “new” DPO I position.
Finally, the Recommended Budget is predicated on fifty-percent of one the department’s Office Technician positions being assigned to Health and Human Services department where the position will still assist the Probation department with Title IV billings while being partially funded from HHS budgets. This results in $26,882 in General Fund savings.
Public Administrator - Public Guardian
The Recommended Budget reflects 9-months of salary savings ($66,651) associated with implementation of the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program, and provides $6,893 in bridge funding associated with Health and Human Services providing staff resources conservatorship and estate work.
The Recommended Budget also eliminates $4,105 in office space and site rental expenses to reflect Health and Human Services picking- up this expense as part of its provision of “deputy” support services to the office. Motor pool expense has been reduced by $1,000 based on last year’s actuals.
Public Works
The Recommended Budget reduces requested expenditures for cell phones by $200; office and other equipment by $2,150; and, employee physicals by $500 in keeping with prior year actuals while still providing additional funding for department initiatives.
Recorder
The Recommended Budget reflects an Office Technician II participating in the Voluntary Separation Incentive Program ($47,133 in savings) effective November 30th, and backfilling the position with a shared Office Technician II beginning in January ($19,725 for three- months) for a total savings of $27,408.
Sheriff — General
Similar to the previous three years, the Sheriff has consented to the use of in AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) funds to offset department expenses that might otherwise not be funded. Accordingly, the Recommended Budget includes a $300,000 Operating Transfer in from the AB 443 Trust. As in year’s past, this funding will only be transferred into the budget as necessary to meet revenue projections in relation to actual expenditures (e.g., maintain Net County Cost).
In addition, the Recommended Budget also accelerates recognition of $75,000 in COPS money from the COPS Trust.
The Recommended Budget reduces overtime expense by $10,000 which is $2,131 less than last year’s actual overtime costs charged to this budget. (Overall, the Sheriff’s combined overtime costs, across all department budgets, in Fiscal Year 2013-2014 was $492,336.)
The Recommended Budget also reduces personal & safety equipment expense by $5,000 based on last year’s actual and ambiguous itemized costs. There remains more than sufficient funding for life and safety equipment, and COPS funding can be used to off-set some of the recommended reductions.
The maintenance of equipment expense includes $25,000 for radio maintenance costs associated with a contract with the State of California for as needed repairs to radio communications sites. The Recommended Budget reduces this amount by $15,000 acknowledging that these funds may need to be appropriated later in the year if actual radio maintenance costs charged to this contract exceed $10,000 this fiscal year. Additionally, the Recommended Budget reduces this object code by an additional $6,281. The $20,000 recommended for maintenance of equipment expense is still more than $8,000 higher than last year’s actual expenses. Expenses for maintenance of equipment - materials is being reduced by $1,000 based on historical actuals.
Based on analysis, expenses for office and other equipment costing less than $5,000 is being reduced by $4,000. Similarly, professional and special services expenses are being reduced by $8,000 which still provides funds in excess of last year’s actuals. Office space and site rental expense is being reduced by $8,000 to better approximate last year’s expenses while providing for cost escalators. The Recommended Budget eliminates $10,000 from general operating expense based on last year’s actuals. Utilities expense is being reduced by $7,500 also based on last year’s actuals.
After supporting the department’s request for increased travel expenses in recent years’ budgets, this year the Recommended Budget reduces travel expense closer to the six-year average cost for actual travel expense, about $73,000. (Historically, actual travel expense has been: $50,013 in 2009; $58,517 in 2010; $108,216 in 2011; $63,461 in 2012; $72,424 in 2013; and, $82,672 in 2014.)
RESERVES, OPEB TRUST, DEBT SERVICE, AND CONTINGENCIES
As discussed above, the CAO Recommended Budget does not allocate any contributions to the General Reserve Fund or Economic Stabilization Fund; make any OPEB Trust contribution for future retiree health costs; nor does it budget to reserve former debt-service payments. Ideally, the Budget should provide allocations for all of these uses. Furthermore, General Fund contingencies are only $15,000, and a higher amount is certainly desirable.
Depending on the Fund Balance certified by the Auditor- Controller on September 3rd and/or how Budget Hearing deliberations progress, your Board of supervisors may be able to increase contributions to one or more of these purposes as part of its adoption of the Final Budget. And, depending on the ultimate cost of some of initiatives funded in this Budget, it may be possible to increase contributions to one or more of these uses through budget amendments later in the fiscal year.
ASSUMPTIONS, KNOWN CHANGES, AND OUTSTANDING ISSUES
Similar to previous years, the Recommended Budget is based on certain assumptions and not without certain risks.
Assumptions
Balancing this Budget relied on the following assumptions:
	The Auditor-Controller will certify Fiscal year 2014-2015 General Fund Balance at or above $2,980,817 Million.
	No new reductions in State or Federal funding.
	No significant downturn (or upturn) in the economy that could affect economically-sensitive revenues.
	No drastic reduction in tourism visitation adversely affecting Hotel Transient occupancy Tax and campground fee revenues.
	No adverse settlements to the Tecopa Sewage Lagoon project dispute exceeding the Tecopa Sewage Lagoon Fund Balance.
	No appeal of the 2014 Coso property tax assessment.
	Changes to the Community Corrections Partnership implementation plan, developed to enable the County to meet the goals of Criminal Justice Realignment, will: (1) adhere to the County’s AB 109 principles adopted in previous years’ budgets; and (2) continue to live within its means - which are limited to State funding allocations - and not rely on contributions from other County funding sources.
	Other costs associated with public safety realignment being adequately funded by the State, or absorbed into existing budgets.
	public safety subventions being funded at the levels being reported by the recipient departments.
	State Airport Improvement Program (AIP) Matching Grants fund being available to off-set a portion of the County’s match requirements for FAA grants included in this Budget.
	No decreases in Highway Users Tax Account (HUTA) or other Road revenues from the State.
	No litigation decisions, including payments of attorney’s fees, adverse to Inyo County.
	Departments will meet or exceed their revenue projections, and manage their expenditures within the appropriation limits established by your Board.
	Receiving no new geothermal royalty payments.
	Receiving no positive adjustments to sales tax and Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenues as a result of audits.
	The Authorized Position Review Process will remain in effect, and vacant positions will not be filled prior to the identified fill date to achieve the recommended salary savings (Attachment B) or Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan savings (Attachment E).
	Department heads will carefully monitor their Board Approved budgets, and State and Federal budget actions - including realignment proposals - and promptly inform your Board and the County Administrator of reductions, or anticipated reductions in revenues, and propose implementing corresponding reductions in expenditures.
	Continuing to pay a disproportionate amount of undesignated court fee revenue to the State.
	No new revenue streams being created. (This Budget does not rely on increases to solid waste disposal fees, new film permit revenue, or any other increases in fees or charges not already approved by your Board of Supervisors.)
	No loss of grant funding for existing projects.
	Receiving no Indian Gaming Special Distribution Fund grant revenue.
Known Changes
Following are potential changes that have been identified as possibly being made in the Final County Budget presented for adoption by your Board or, more likely, shortly thereafter as amendments to the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Board Approved Budget.
Cal-Met
Depending on the outcome of further research regarding available Fund Balance, fee and charges expense in this budget may need to be amended to add an additional $25,000 for payment to the Sheriff.
District Attorney
The Superior Court has informed the County that it is upgrading its JALAN software system used by the Court (as well as the Probation department and District Attorney’s office) to manage criminal justice cases, and has signed a contract with a vendor to accomplish this exclusively for the Court. This has resulted in the Probation department and District Attorney’s Office needing to evaluate their respective needs and options with respect to case management systems in conjunction with Information Services. Funding has been identified in the Community Corrections budget to fund the cost of a new case management system for the District Attorney’s Office, however, neither this funding nor the corresponding expense is currently included in the District Attorney’s budget. Once the department, in conjunction with Information Services identifies the case management system that will best meet its needs, the budget will need to be amended to fund the cost of the system.
Fund Balance
During Budget Hearings on September 3rd, the Auditor- Controller will certify General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2014. If certified Fund Balance is below the $3,000,000 relied upon to prepare the Recommended Budget, your Board of Supervisors will need to make corresponding reduction in expenses, or increases in revenue, to adopt a balanced budget.
If the Fund Balance certified by the Auditor-Controller exceeds $3,000,000, it is recommended that your Board of Supervisors consider appropriating the additional funds to one or more of the following needs:
	Accumulated Capital Outlay (e.g., reserve former debt-service payments for future capital projects);
	Computer System Fund
	Contingencies
	Community Project Sponsorship Program ($100,000)
	Economic Stabilization Fund
	General Reserve Fund
	Grants-In-Support ($56,400)
	OPEB Trust contribution (for retiree healthcare costs);
	Any of the department requests not funded in the CAO Recommended Budget
It is also recommended that your Board of Supervisors refrain from using any additional General Fund Balance that may materialize to enhance funding for ongoing costs, or de facto on-ongoing costs in the County Budget. This would have the effect of needing the same (higher) amount of Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 2015
-	or some combination of increased revenues or decreased expenditures
-	to simply maintain this year’s spending plan. As noted throughout this Introduction & Summary, next year’s General Fund Budget is already expected to be at least $1 Million higher than this year’s Recommended Budget.
IFAS
The County’s financial management software, IFAS, is in need of a series of programming overhauls. Information Services staff have been working with the Auditor’s Office and vendor to accomplish this as time and resources permit. However, the magnitude of some of the issue recommends supporting greater reliance on the vendor to accomplish some of the major improvements. As Information Services identifies the resources to define and delineate this project, a budget amendment will be prepared to provide the funding necessary to accomplish it.
Additionally, the purchase of additional software modules, such as the long-hoped for budget module will be evaluated and possibly recommended for funding.
Sheriff - Safety
This budget needs to be amended to add $7,418 in expense that keeps ‘disappearing’ from both the Requested and Recommended Budget due to an apparent gremlin in the system.
Telephone System Replacement Project
As noted above, the CAO Recommended Budget does not add funding to the Computer System Fund, which is currently being used to budget this year’s appropriations for the Property Tax Management System project. However, this Fund was established to provide a source of funding for a host of other technological initiatives (or other projects). During the year, it may be necessary to consider using this Fund to pay for the cost of replacing the County’s outdated, unsupported, and failing telephone system (with Voice Over Internet Protocol, or some other technology) or other County needs, such as the IFAS overhaul described above.
Outstan ding Issues
In addition to the usual pitfalls and landmines that can positively or negatively impact any budget, there are many specific issues your Board of Supervisors is urged be remain cognizant about relative to the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget as well as future County Budgets:
	Depending on the outcome of a currently circulating Request For Proposals, the County may need to be prepared to temporarily or permanently re-assume operation of the Tecopa Hot Springs and Campground, or modify or close the facility.
	Labor negotiations with the Inyo County Probation Officers Association are ongoing. It is assumed that Personnel Contingencies will be sufficient to fund any cost increases associated with any contract that may be ratified.
	Both the Road department and Recycling and Waste Management program are evaluating and will be making recommendations relative to CARB requirements and the need to replace aging equipment.
	Departments will hopefully continue to develop and propose Service Redesign initiatives that should be encouraged and implemented whenever warranted. Ideas proposed but not refined last year will need to be pursued.
	The new, higher, baselines for certain revenue streams, such as Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax receipts, that remain in this year’s Budget continue to mean there is less room for error in revenue projections and attainment. There could also be less additional “unanticipated” revenue available at the end of the year to make up for shortfalls stemming from under-achieved revenue in other areas of the Budget. This could affect Fund Balance available to balance next year’s Budget.
	The potential for ongoing economic instability still exists.
	The County needs to continue to develop and implement strategies to reduce the amount of future General Fund monies that are, or may be required to support its enterprise funds and programs funded with categorical monies, such as the Town Water Systems, the Solid Waste program, and the Bishop Airport. While not easy, significant strides have been made in the past year as evidenced by the reduction or elimination of the need for General Fund Operating Transfers in many of these budgets. Making these programs self-sustaining is, perhaps, the primary aspect of this and future budgets over which your Board of Supervisors has the greatest ability to positively affect General Fund expenses and for future budget stability.
	Without the availability of Prop 1B road funds, which had to be expended by the end of June 2013, it is now necessary to rely on Road Fund Balance to cash flow all County road projects in the future. As such, it is critical that the Public Works department monitor its Road Fund Balance, and manage the Road budget with an awareness of potential implications on Fund Balance and cash flow.
	Due to its funding dilemmas faced by the Superior Court of Inyo County, the Court is in the process of re-negotiating its current Memorandum of Understanding with the County to reduce, or cap the Court’s reimbursement of services the County provides to the Court. Most notably, this process could affect the funding the Sheriff receives for providing mandated Court security (e.g., bailiffs) services, but could also affect revenues the County receives for providing payroll services, custodial services, some personnel and benefits administration services.
Additionally, the Judicial Council of California (JC) (formerly State Administrative Office of the Courts (AOC)) and the Public Works department may need to develop a new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for the provision of maintenance services for Court operations in the Historic Courthouse unless the Court moves to its own facility. There is currently no MOU in place, and the County is essentially providing services to the State (which is responsible for all Court operations) for free. Execution of the Maintenance MOU could result in the County realizing additional revenues consistent with the actual costs of providing maintenance services to the Courts, and offset General Fund expense in the Maintenance - Building & Grounds budget. No revenues from these maintenance services are presently included in the Recommended Budget.
	While mitigated somewhat by the new photovoltaic electricity project installed at County buildings in Independence, uncertainty over fuel and utility costs continue to have the potential to adversely affect revenues (e.g., airport fuel costs) and expenses planned for in the Recommended Budget.
	It is unlikely that Indian Gaming Special Distribution Funds will be available from the State this year.
	Policy issues and impacts of suspended State mandates still need to be evaluated on a department-by-department basis in discussions with your Board. To date, only the Clerk-Recorder has brought such an item forward. Depending on your Board’s disposition toward these suspended mandates, there could be some budgetary savings if your Board elects to forego maintaining compliance with the former mandates.
	As departments continue to apply for various grants, it is important to emphasize that these new grants be used to off-set ongoing costs or reduce the cost of implementing one-time projects whenever possible.
	As State and Federal funding becomes more scarce, and costs continue to increase, the County needs to continue to revisit its own schedule of fees - preferably in a comprehensive manner - to ensure that they cover a reasonable portion of the cost of providing services.
	The Environmental Health department needs to review its analysis regarding how recent personnel actions could impact various department revenue streams.
	As highlighted last year by the proposed LADWP Solar Ranch project, ongoing issues related to the use of Inyo County’s natural resources - ranging from renewable energy facility siting to the Inyo National Forest Management Plan Update; from critical habitat designations to water export; from Wilderness designations to other federal land use decisions - will continue to require a dedication of time and resources this Budget may or may not be able to fully support.
LOOKING AHEAD
In addition to the Outstanding Issues described above, there are two specific issues that require your Board of Supervisors’ ongoing consideration:
Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 CAO Recommended Budget continues to identify trends which could negatively impact future County Budgets:
	Diminishing General Fund Balance;
	Unsustainable reliance on operating Transfers from trusts into the General Fund;
	Fewer vacancies available to generate salary savings
	Increasing public safety budgets at the expense of other General Fund budgets
	And a great reliance on Non-General Fund Balances by NonGeneral Fund budgets.
Additionally, as identified in last year’s budget, personnel related costs in next year’s Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget will increase by at least another million dollars. And, other cost increases are inevitable.
It is essential that the steps that County departments initiated in the past year to reduce the size of the County’s General Fund structural deficit, and its associated reliance on Fund Balance and Operating Transfers from key trusts, continue and are expanded. Continued proactivity is the best way to minimize the need for severe reductions in staff and the drastic reduction in services.
There are several promising Service Redesign initiatives - such as in-house, jailhouse laundry services - that can be developed further. And, hopefully, the Service Redesign ethos will continue to take root and guide County staff in identifying and implementing additional efficiencies that maintain and, ideally, improve services while minimizing costs. Additionally, the Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan initiated this year will generate additional savings in next year’s budget.
However, to continue to reduce the County’s reliance on Fund Balance to bridge its budget gap, and respond to cost increases that outpace the County’s ability realize new revenue, a multiplicity of initiatives will need to be pursued. Some of the policy issues that will be brought before your Board later this year in support of the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget include:
	Revising the County Travel Policy;
	Revising the County Vehicle Policy;
	Reviewing long-standing grants with an eye toward offsetting General Fund expense;
	Evaluating costs, and opportunities for savings, across all County operated kitchens;
	Proposing strategic partnerships; and,
	Pursuing opportunities to address office space costs
Criminal Justice Realignment
The impacts of Criminal Justice Realignment (AB 109) continue to present significant fiscal, public safety, and even social challenges, as well as opportunities, to the County and the community we serve. This year, the State will establish a more permanent AB 109 allocation formula that will determine the funding levels counties will receive for funding realigned criminal justice programs. It is critical that the County, to the extent practical, fully participate in, and advocate for its interest during the development of the permanent allocation formula. This will require a concerted effort by your Board,
working with affected County departments - Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney, Health & Human Services, and Administration - as well as community partners including the Superior Court, City of Bishop, local Tribes, and contract public defenders.
Additionally, the Criminal Justice Realignment principles adopted as part of the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget, and reaffirmed in each subsequent year’s Board Approved Budget, should be revisited and reaffirmed again as part of adopting this and future years’ Budgets. These principles include:
	Future modifications and amendments to the Community Corrections Plan must be implemented within Criminal Justice Realignment funding constructs; otherwise Criminal Justice Realignment risks becoming, essentially, to some degree an unfunded State mandate that could require your Board of Supervisors to consider taking money away from other County needs.
	Reject any Community Corrections Plan (4/5ths vote required) that cannot be implemented (e.g., demonstrate adequate budget) with public safety realignment funding provided by the State, or County monies your Board is willing to reappropriate from other programs.
	Require County public safety and human services departments to absorb costs associated with implementing public safety realignment within their existing budgets. If we are really talking about changing the way we conduct the business of criminal justice and rehabilitation, and not simply expanding the criminal justice industrial complex, then costs associated with old programming methodologies should give way to new ones. If your Board of Supervisors accepts community corrections plans that simply add layers of new infrastructure instead of re-structuring and reintegrating existing infrastructure, there will never be enough money to fund this endeavor.
	Continue to utilize a centralized budget (as is again included in the year’s Budget) and/or cost centers to manage funds; consider having involved departments submit quarterly billings for pre-approved costs as opposed to simply transferring funds into those departments’ budgets.
CONCLUSION
In many respects, the preparation of this year’s Budget commenced with the adoption of the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 County Budget. And, it is likely that all County departments, and particularly staff in the Administrator’s Office and Auditor-Controller’s Office, will need to immediately begin working on measures to balance the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget.
Preparing the County Budget is a long and, often times, arduous process. Challenging decisions have to be made. Submitting a balanced County Budget cannot be accomplished without the support, cooperation, and understanding of all County departments, and especially not without the untiring and dedicated work of the CAO’s fiscal staff including Kelley Williams, Pamela Hennarty, Brandon Shults, Patricia Gunsolley, and, most recently, Denelle Carrington; as well as the tireless assistance provided by the Auditor-Controller, Amy Shepherd, and her staff. Thank you.
I want to close by encouraging the Board to adopt the CAO Recommended Budget, which is balanced, strives to maintain all of the Board of Supervisors’ priorities, does not result in any layoffs, and supports reasonable service levels in core programs.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
	Adopt the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget as Recommended by the County Administrator and presented herein.
	Provide direction with regard to the use of Fund Balance the Auditor-Controller may certify in excess of $2,980,817.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize and direct the County Administrator and Auditor Controller to approve and make payments, greater than $10,000 to Inter-Agency Visitor Center, Cal Expo Exhibit and Tri-County Fairgrounds as provided for in the Advertising County Resources budget.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize and direct the County Administrator to develop and execute contracts with all Grants- In-Support program funding recipients identified in the Grants- In-Support Budget. 
 Set adoption of the Final Budget for September 16, 2014.
(Note: The September 16, 2014, date for approval of the County Budget is dependent on completion of the Budget Hearings by September 10th and staffs ability to incorporate any changes directed by your Board into the Final Budget Agenda Request Form. If Budget Hearings last longer, or result in substantial changes that need to be implemented, the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 County Budget will need to be adopted at a Special Meeting of the Board of Supervisors before October 2nd.

