The proposed Fiscal Year 2012-13 County of Kern Recommended Budget is submitted for your consideration. The
recommended budget represents consideration of impacts, consequences, alternatives and difficult choices by
departmental and County Administrative Office staff. The budget was prepared in accordance with the Board's
adopted budget development guidelines and with consideration of the Board's focus on maintaining public safety,
protecting children and families, and supporting sustainable communities.
FY 2011-12 was the fourth consecutive year in which the Board of Supervisors declared a fiscal emergency in
order to promote fiscal caution and impose constraints on County services. While there is ongoing volatility due to
the State Budget situation, Kern County is benefitting from increased discretionary and program revenue that has
mitigated immediate fiscal concerns; therefore, a declared fiscal emergency will not be recommended for FY 2012-
13 at this time. Departments are still encouraged to strive for efficiencies and to exercise continued fiscal restraint
in order to position the County for future challenges.
The budget again seeks to balance spending between services and capital needs such as capital projects, roads, and
equipment. The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget was developed with emphasis on isolating one-time resources
for application to one-time expenditures wherever possible to promote long term fiscal stability. Therefore, growth
in ongoing revenues was dedicated to increased operational service levels, while one-time sources such as year-end
carry-forward were applied to projects and designations. This budget allocates approximately $41 million towards
deferred major maintenance and capital projects and $5 .1 million towards additional road maintenance and
construction.
The budget proposes to add 152 employee positions. Fifty-five (5 5) of the positions are the direct result of the AB
109 State Criminal Justice Realignment Act and 61 positions are associated with various State and federal programs
for the Department of Human Services. Over the past four years, virtually every County department has been
required to make some level of sacrifice and exercise significant "belt-tightening" in their operations. Many
departments are now proposing to fill some positions that have been held vacant and unfunded over the past few
years.
General Fund discretionary revenues are estimated to increase this year by $27 million or about 7.79% while the
cost of providing services in this fund have increased by $45 million or about 6.8% (excludes capital and major
maintenance projects). The County is receiving increased property and sales taxes, but these revenues alone are not
sufficient to support the continued growth in operational costs. Direct program revenues specifically dedicated to
public protection departments such as Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds and AB 109 realignment revenues
were pivotal in accommodating the budget requests of the public safety departments. Budgets for criminal justice
departments within the General Fund increased approximately $43 .6 million or 15% and these budgets represent
nearly 43% of the General Fund's budget. The County General Fund contribution to criminal justice departments is
$181 million or 41% of total General Fund contributions. The County's General Fund net carry-forward balance
was $44.5 million, of which approximately 37% was comprised of one-time sales and use tax revenue generated
from significant construction activity for federally funded road projects and wind energy turbine projects.
The County Administrative Office's primary goal in developing the Recommended Budget has been to: 1) keep
most discretionary and public protection programs as intact as possible; 2) appropriate resources to quality of life
programs; 3) provide funding to prevent further deterioration of the physical infrastructure on which many services
depend, and 4) maintain reserves that meet the County's known cost increases and liabilities. Achieving this
balance continues to be a challenge.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
The proposed FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget for Kem County totals $2.5 billion. The recommended budget for
the operating governmental funds, which includes the General Fund, totals $1.55 billion, which is $70 million or
4.7% higher than the budget for FY 2011-12. Non-operating governmental funds, consisting of special revenue and
capital project funds, have budgets totaling $328 million. This is an increase of $170 million from FY 2011-12, of
which $152 million is attributable to the new fund, County Local Revenue Fund 2011 Realignment, that was not
included in the FY 2011-12 adopted budget.
In addition to the above total, the recommended budget includes budgets for other funds totaling $657 million for
enterprise funds such as Airports, Kem Medical Center, and Waste Management; internal service funds such as
Workers' Compensation and Group Health; grant-funded programs administered by Employers' Training Resource .
and Community Development programs; and County Service Area funds that are special districts under the Board
of Supervisors. These budgets have decreased by less than .5% from last fiscal year.
Program-specific revenues for operating governmental funds are projected to remain the same as the previous fiscal
year at $1.1 billion. Program-specific revenues are required by law to be spent for specific, mandated programs or
direct reimbursements for the cost of providing services, and the Board of Supervisors has no discretion in using
them. These costs account for nearly 72% of the total budget for the operating governmental funds. Most State and
federal subventions must be used to operate health and human services programs. Discretionary revenues for the
General Fund controlled by the Board are 28% of the budget, and the County must use much of this money to
match mandated State and federal programs. Program-specific revenue received by General Fund departments is
estimated to increase by approximately $24 million and discretionary revenue is estimated to increase by nearly $27
million compared to the FY 2011-12 adopted budget.

AVAILABLE RESOURCES
Discretionary revenue for the General Fund is budgeted at 7.79% above the level for FY 2011-12. A significant
portion of discretionary revenue is comprised of property taxes and sales and use taxes. A 7.4% increase in
assessed values from FY 2011-12 will generate greater property tax revenues that will enable the County to offset
some cost increases this fiscal year. Property taxes within both the General Fund and the Fire Fund are estimated to

grow by a combined $14.5 million in FY 2012-13, an 8% percent increase above the previous fiscal year. Most of
the increase is attributable to oil and gas and wind energy property valuations.
Sales and use tax and sales tax in-lieu revenue estimates are approximately $8 million more than budgeted in FY
2011-12. The County received nearly $17 million in unanticipated sales tax last fiscal year primarily generated by
one-time construction of major road projects and wind energy turbines. It is anticipated that this construction
activity will be completed by the end of FY 2013-14 and revenues will stabilize at normal levels. For this reason,
the one-time revenues from FY 2011-12 were isolated in the budget and were used to finance one-time
expenditures and designations for future use. It is recommended that this practice be continued into FY 2012-13 to
avoid establishing operational ongoing costs, such as salaries, that will not be sustainable in the future. Petroleum
products and equipment and continuing gains from higher fuel prices also contributed to increased sales tax
receipts.
The County is estimated to receive approximately $14 million more in Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds
than budgeted in FY 2011-12. This revenue source is the result of a half cent sales tax and, as such, is also being
impacted by the significant one-time revenues from construction activity. This revenue increase was pivotal in
meeting the increased budget requests from public safety departments. The revenue levels for this funding source
are anticipated to decline over the next two years.
The County’s net available carryover balance from the fiscal year ending June 30, 2012 was $44.5 million. As fund
balance carryover is a one-time source, a large portion of this balance was recommended for one-time projects and
specific purpose designations.
EMPLOYEE COST INCREASES
Employee salary and benefit costs (including retirement and healthcare) continue to rise, especially among public
safety positions. It is anticipated the required County retirement contribution will increase by $15 million in FY
2012-13 and by an additional $17 million in FY 2013-14. Beginning in March 2012, all new and future safety
employees were placed in a new lower benefit retirement tier that will reduce future pension liabilities. Last fiscal
year, many employee groups came to the negotiating table to help the County to achieve immediate cost savings in
health benefits and future cost savings in retirement benefits. They offered benefit concessions resulting in
approximately $5 million of health benefit savings in FY 2012-13, although these savings are partially offset by
salary increases that were also negotiated.
The County’s overall cost for employees’ salaries and benefits is projected to increase in FY 2012-13 by
approximately $50.6 million, which is reflected in each department’s budget. Over the past four years, departments
have absorbed employee cost increases by deferring needed capital improvements and equipment and by deleting or
not funding departmental positions. Many departments continue to rely on Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits,
spending $4 million in prior accumulated savings to fund a portion of their FY 2012-13 employee costs. The
recommended staffing for FY 2012-13 is approximately 8,883, a total increase of 152 positions from the FY 2011-
12 adjusted budget.
PROVISIONS FOR RESERVES, DESIGNATIONS, AND CONTINGENCIES
The County Administrative Office recommends the following General Fund identifiable contingencies, reserves,
and designations.
 Appropriations for Contingencies: $9.3 million — Appropriations for Contingencies earmark funds
against unexpected future costs or costs that are identified after the County Budget is adopted. The
recommended amount is funded solely from the General Fund. The funding level includes earmarks for
uninsured litigation, Grand Jury indictments, reclamation costs for Planning, abatement costs for Code
Compliance, project costs for the Kern County Museum, potential increased costs resulting from indigent
defense cases and general purpose contingencies.
4
 Designation for Department of Human Services: $15.5 million ($3.1 million increase) — This
designation is the result of a one-time carryover balance within the Department of Human Services’ Funds
00130 and 00140 due to an accounting change by the Auditor-Controller. The accounting change allowed
the department to accrue revenues for up to nine months after June 30. This produced a one-time “catchup”
of budgetary revenue that allowed a reduction in the County contribution request for FY 2011-12.
Since it is unknown how the funds will stabilize after this change, the recommended budget designates the
additional funds to help offset future General Fund contributions.
 Tax Liability Reserve: $4 million (no change)— This reserve earmarks funds for the potential loss of
County property tax proceeds due to: 1) Assessment Appeals Board’s decisions in favor of the taxpayer; 2)
tax roll adjustments by the Assessor; or 3) resolution of court cases related to disputed property
assessments. The reserve has been maintained at approximately 10-12% of the anticipated contingent
liability.
 General Reserve (formerly Fiscal Stability Designation): $40 million ($2.8 million increase) — This
reserve represents the transfer of the Fiscal Stability Designation that was maintained in Fund 00003 in FY
2010-11 to the General Fund. The designation was converted to a general reserve to comply with GASB 54
requirements. In accordance with Government Code section 29086, except in cases of a legally declared
emergency, a general reserve may only be canceled or decreased at the time of adopting the budget, thus
protecting the reserve from unintended uses. The proposed increase of $2.8 million will achieve a balance
that equates to approximately 6% of General Fund appropriations for FY 2012-13.
 Designation for Retirement Contributions: $14.6 million ($2.3 million increase) — This reserve earmarks
funds to mitigate known increases to the County’s retirement contribution for employees in future years.
The projected increase in County retirement costs for FY 2013-14 is approximately $17 million.
 Designation for PILT/TARP: $0 ($101,900 decrease) — This designation earmarks funds allocated from
the federal government under the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP). The remaining balance of
$101,900 has been included in the Planning Department’s budget for costs associated with the Joint Land
Use Implementation, Indian Wells Valley Community Plan and for the Airport Land Use Compatibility
Plan.
 Designation for Sheriff’s Aircraft $977,207 (no change) — This designation earmarks funds for the long
term maintenance of and periodic replacement of aircraft components, including propellers and engines, as
required by Federal Aviation Administration regulations. The current balance of the designation is
$977,208 and no changes to the designation are recommended.
 Designation for Information Technology Projects $450,000 — This designation earmarks funds for
information technology projects, including the Auditor-Controller’s cost accounting and payroll
programming efforts.
 Designation for Infrastructure Replacement $12 million ($6 million increase) — This designation
earmarks funds for capital asset replacement and was established with one-time construction sales tax
receipts in FY 2011-12. In addition, 50% of the increment from property taxes attributable to wind energy
property valuations is deposited to this account annually.
 Designation for KMC Working Capital $6 million —This designation is new in FY 2012-13 and is
recommended as a long-term plan to mitigate the ongoing cash advance concerns that have impacted the
General Fund for several years. The General Fund accommodates up to a $70 million annual cash advance
to KMC. KMC’s ongoing working capital shortfall associated to timing of major revenue streams is
estimated to be $30 million. Setting aside $6 million over the next five years would establish this working
capital and provide enhanced cash stability for the General Fund.
KERN MEDICAL CENTER
Kern Medical Center (KMC) will face FY 2012-13 with significant fiscal challenges. Patient revenue and State
Disproportionate Share Hospital funds are expected to remain flat. With increases in retirement costs and increased
demand to replace older equipment, KMC must seek alternative methods to maintain a balanced budget.
Cash flow will remain a challenge. The outstanding General Fund loan to the hospital enterprise fund as of June
30, 2012 was $58.1 million, an increase of $24.4 million from the prior year. This increase was primarily due to
changing payment protocols for the Delivery System Reform Incentive Payments (DSRIP) and delays in federal
approval of a claiming process for the Low Income Health Plan (LIHP). Cash flow timing issues are expected to
continue in FY 2012-13 due to the lengthy process of obtaining federal matching dollars. The recommended
budget for the General Fund includes a reduction to the fund balance carry forward of $4.1 million that was
determined by the Auditor-Controller to be non-spendable due to the long-term status of a portion of KMC's
outstanding advance at June 3 0, 2012.
STATE BUDGET IMPACT
This year's State Budget does not present direct threats to County finances, but it hinges on voter approval of the
Governor's November 2012 ballot initiative to increase tax revenues by an estimated $5.9 billion annually. In case
the initiative fails, the budget includes $5 .9 billion in trigger cuts that would fall mainly on schools, including K-14
and higher education. If the measure fails, it is uncertain whether the Legislature will allow the trigger cuts to occur
or would re-open the budget to seek further cuts in other areas including County-operated programs.
Besides anticipated revenues from the ballot measure, the State's $15. 7 billion budget deficit for FY 2012-13 was
closed primarily through spending cuts totaling $8.3 billion that did not substantially impact County finances. A
nearly $4 million cut in the County's allocation to administer CalWORKs administrative funds will be offset by
County savings from unexpended prior administrative funds. A smaller cut to child care funding for CalWORKs
recipients will be similarly absorbed by accumulated savings.
The new State budget will yield higher dedicated State sales tax revenues to restore Child Welfare Services budget
cuts and to provide increased assistance to foster care families. The State Budget also greatly increases funding to
help counties pay the cost of supervising many adult and juvenile criminal offenders who will be shifted from State
to local responsibility under a major realignment of public safety responsibilities enacted in 2011. The County's
$23 .4 million share represents a 50% annualized increase over FY 2011-12 funding for this State mandated
responsibility. The Governor's November initiative also includes constitutional guarantees of county funding for
realigned public safety responsibilities.
County impacts from the initial round of State cuts have been built into the recommended County budget. However,
given the uncertainty about whether voters will approve the tax revenues needed to fill the remainder of the State
budget gap and whether the Legislature will seek cuts to County programs if the Governor's initiative fails,
assumptions regarding further unknown potential cuts are not built into this recommended County budget. Your
Board may therefore need to revisit the budget to accommodate mid-year State budget impacts.
PROGRAM IMPACTS
The County must again seek to balance the allocation of resources between ongoing service needs, quality of life
programs and the maintenance and renewal of facilities and equipment that support those services. While
discretionary revenues are improving, employee salary and benefit costs are growing at a greater pace and the State
budget continues to be an unquantifiable threat to local government resources. Therefore, the FY 2012-13
5
Recommended Budget represents our best effort to maintain services and infrastructure against further erosion.
The budget attempts to focus one-time revenue sources towards one-time expenditures and on-going sources
towards operational costs.
The recommended budget adds a net total of 152 full-time positions. Fifty-five positions are associated to public
safety for AB 109 realignment. Sixty-one ( 61) new positions are created in the Department of Human Service's
CalWORKs, CalFresh and Foster Care programs that are supported by program funds.
Protecting public health and safety remains the top priority of the recommended budget for the operating
governmental funds, which again devotes more appropriations to the public protection (37%) than to any other
function, including public assistance (29%). In FY 2012-13, criminal justice departments including the Sheriff,
Fire, Probation, District Attorney and Public Defender departments were allocated $43.6 million in additional
appropriations from FY 2011-12. A significant portion of this additional allocation is offset by increased
Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds and AB 109 Criminal Justice Realignment revenue, both of which are
considered to be ongoing operational sources.
The Sheriffs budget includes an increase of $10 million in salaries and benefits costs as a result of retirement,
health benefits and workers' compensation cost increases. The total budget for the department includes an increase
in appropriations of $25.5 million or 14.4%. The budget also contains funding for a new lease payment for $3.6
million in planned vehicle and computer replacements. The recommended budget includes capital project costs of
$12.8 million to replace the wastewater plant at the Lerdo facility, $4.1 million for the re-roof of buildings at Lerdo
and $1.3 million to retrofit the Buttonwillow substation.
The recommended budget increases the District Attorney's budget by 10.92% and allows the department to operate
at a status quo level. The Forensic Science Division's recommended budget includes $300,000 for a DNA robot to
assist in the processing of DNA samples.
The Fire Department's recommended budget will allow the department to add 30 staff and to set aside $3.3 million
for equipment. The department received a two-year Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER)
grant award of $7 million that allows three-man stations in several outlying areas; however, the budget also
includes an additional General Fund allocation of $4.5 million that is required to sustain the funding of staff hired
through a previous SAFER grant that expired last fiscal year. The budget also includes the design of the Hart Flat
Fire Station and land acquisition for the Lake Isabella Fire Station to be constructed in the future.
The Probation Department's budget includes an increase in appropriations of $15. 7 million or 25%. The budget
includes increased costs for 50 youth housed at the State Department of Juvenile Justice Youth Facility due to the
FY 2012-13 State Budget. The department is adding 28 positions that are funded primarily by AB 109 realignment
funds and $2.4 million in additional Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds.
The Department of Human Services has been the most impacted by the State Budget. Many of the department's
programs have been realigned, which has changed the way in which revenues are received by the department. The
budget includes the addition of 61 positions that are funded by program revenues.
The recommended budget provides additional resources for the Parks Department to add five extra-help positions
during the peak season to maintain park areas and $125,000 for the replacement of aging equipment.
The Library's recommended funding level allows the department to largely maintain current levels of service. The
budget includes an additional allocation of $100,000 for books and materials and $100,000 for the purchase of selfcheckout
systems at several branches.
6
The Planning Department's budget includes the addition of two Planners and the Code Compliance Department's
budget includes the addition of one Code Compliance Officer to re-establish some service levels in these respective
areas.
Several contributions to community programs are included in the recommended budget. The Special Services'
budget provides funding totaling $825,000 to organizations, such as the Volunteer Center of Kem County, Arts
Council of Kem, Bakersfield Museum of Art, Bakersfield Symphony, Community Action Partnership of Kem
County (CAP), Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA), Edwards Community Alliance, Southwest Defense
Alliance, Valley Fever Vaccine Project, San Joaquin Valley Quality Cotton Growers Association - Shafter
Research Center, California State University, Bakersfield - Small Business Development Center and the Kem
County Museum.
RENEWING INFRASTRUCTURE IN AN ERA OF FISCAL CONSTRAINT
Equipment and infrastructure are essential to the long-term quality of services to the people of Kem County. The
County Administrative Office prioritizes requests for capital projects and equipment in the following order: legally
mandated, health and safety, preventive maintenance, cost reduction, and extent of direct public use or benefit.
Fiscal constraints over the past four years have forced the County to defer many pressing capital and maintenance
needs for roads, parks, fire protection, and other important services to the public. Deferral of the County's major
maintenance and other capital projects has now reached an estimated backlog of $300 million, and deferred
equipment purchases now total at least $100 million by conservative estimates.
This year's budget contains several ongoing and new major maintenance and capital projects as well as equipment
purchases that will help to improve transportation, public safety, and the delivery of services in Kern County. The
recommended budget includes $3 .6 million in re-budgeted capital projects that were initiated last fiscal year. The
following are the proposed new capital projects for FY 2012-13:
Replacement for Inmate Barracks -Lerdo Minimum Security: $3.5 million is estimated to replace the 30 yearold
barracks in lieu of extensive ongoing maintenance and repairs.
Replacement of Domestic Water and Wastewater Treatment - Lerdo Minimum Security: $12.8 million is
estimated for a new well, domestic water distribution, pump station, waste treatment plant, and refurbishment of
retention basins and dissipation systems.
Engineering Study Upgrade of HVAC System - Lerdo Pre-Trial Facility: $125,000 is estimated to obtain a
mechanical engineering study to provide a plan for upgrading the heating units.
Outlet Gate - Lake Ming Dam: $158,000 is estimated to replace the inoperable outlet gate so that water can be
released from the lake if needed to comply with State regulations.
Hall of Records - Modernization and Property Acquisition: $450,000 is estimated to expand the functionality
to the public at the County Recorder's office. The projects are fully funded through Special Revenue funds and
have no General Fund cost.
Lobby Security Upgrades - Treasurer-Tax Collector: $150,000 is estimated for improvements and security
upgrades at this department.
Replacement of Piezometers - Buena Vista Aquatic Recreation Area (BVARA): $50,000 is estimated to
replace sensors that monitor and measure seepage and water-loss or migration in compliance with State and federal
regulations.
7
Expand Capacity - Emergency Communications Center: $815,000 is estimated to expand dedicated space and
equipment for the Fire Department to increase flexibility in coordinating response to multiple incidents
simultaneously. $3 53,000 will allow a similar expansion of capacity for the Sheriffs dispatch area.
Replace Water Tanks - Tehachapi Mountain Park: $322,000 is estimated to replace the water tanks that
provide domestic water service to the campgrounds and day use area.
Seismic Retrofit - Buttonwillow Sheriff Substation: $1.3 million is estimated to retrofit this facility to protect
the safety of staff and members of the public.
Caliente Creek Restoration - ESPS: $200,000 is estimated to obtain a feasibility study for the restoration of
Caliente Creek by the Engineering, Surveying and Permit Services Department.
Design and Engineering of Fire Station #11 - Hart Flat: $500,000 is estimated for design and engineering to
relocate the station from Keene to Hart Flat to remedy the lack of infrastructure and domestic water in the current
location.
Land Acquisition for Fire Station #72 - Lake Isabella: $500,000 is estimated for land acquisition to replace the
current station with expanded and improved base camp facilities for seasonal crews fighting wildfires in the area.
Road Repair I Maintenance I Construction: The budget allocates $6.7 million or $1.6 million more than in FY
2011-12 towards road maintenance that will provide the overlay of 45 .1 miles, reconstruction of 5 miles of roads
too deteriorated to be improved with an overlay and 156 miles of seals. The budget includes additional funding of
$3.5 million for an emergency access road on Standard Street near a refinery on Rosedale Highway and
replacement of the Cache Creek Bridge, which burned down in a recent fire in Tehachapi. The following projects
are continued into this fiscal year: County bond projects, completion of an undercrossing at Hageman Road and
Allen Road and of the Seventh Standard Road widening project, as well as interchange modifications at Olive
Drive and Highway 99.
Major Maintenance: The County Administrative Office is recommending expenditures totaling more than $20
million to renovate existing County infrastructure. Some large maintenance projects include replacement of the
heating and air conditioning system at the Public Services Building, storm drainage repair, and several parking lot
replacements.
Equipment: The recommended budget contains $17 million to replace Garage inventory, Roads vehicles and
heavy equipment, computers, a DNA robot for the District Attorney's Forensic Sciences Laboratory, and other
smaller departmental equipment. The budget provides $389,000 to the Parks Department to replace vehicles and
various equipment.
PREPARING FOR FUTURE CHALLENGES
The past five years have challenged your Board's ability to achieve fiscal sustainability and provide for the
increasing demand for public services. The proposed FY 2012-13 County of Kern Recommended Budget will meet
this goal. Equally important is your Board's ability to look to the future and prepare for the even greater challenges
to be faced in FY 2013-14 and beyond. Accordingly, we look to avoid one-time funding solutions and steer a
course that leads the County toward ongoing revenues that adequately fund needed services while setting aside
reserves for addressing deferred infrastructure maintenance, future economic downturns and other unexpected
costs.
In addition to the continued State Budget crisis, the County anticipates the following known and potential fiscal
impacts:
8
$17 million increase in retirement contribution costs for FY 2013-14;
$1.25 million loss of the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) grant for the Sheriffs
Department;
$4 million impact due to the use ofBSI credits to fund salaries in FY 2012-13;
$14 million impact to the General Fund due to a one-time reduction in General Fund contribution for the
Department of Human Services in FY 2012-13;
$4.1 million determined to be non-spendable for FY 2012-13 due to KMC's cash advance, which more
than doubled from FY 2011-12;
Over $10 million reduction in Sales and Use Tax revenues over the next two years as the County has been
receiving significant one-time sales taxes from road and wind energy construction projects that will soon be
completed;
Over $20 million new and ongoing operational costs associated to a new jail facility, if approved;
Unknown costs associated with the effects of the Affordable Health Care Act;
$133 million in unfunded liability for Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB);
$1.6 billion in unfunded liability for retirement; and
$399 million in pension obligation bonds (POBs).
CONCLUSION
Kern County continues to face significant internal challenges such as increases in employee retirement and health
care costs, reliance on one-time funding solutions, deferred maintenance of critical infrastructure, increasing cost of
public safety operations, and projected shortfalls in ongoing revenues. Additionally, external factors such as the
Great Recession, the nationwide anemic economic recovery, and inability of the State to balance its budget have
resulted in the realignment of State programs to counties without guaranteed funding. All of these factors increase
the uncertainty of achieving a structurally balanced County budget.
The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget is balanced within available resources. The budget meets the most
important needs of the people of Kern County and fulfills the County's legal mandate to protect public health and
safety.
At the August Budget Hearings, members of the public are invited to comment to your Board on the budget
recommendations presented here. The County Administrative Office will work closely with your Board and with
County departments to resolve budget issues and to enact a budget that meets the County's legal obligations and the
needs of the people of Kern County.