The proposed Fiscal Year 2013-14 Recommended Budget is submitted for your consideration. The recommended
budget represents consideration of impacts, consequences, alternatives and difficult choices by departmental and
County Administrative Office staff. The budget was prepared in accordance with the Board's approved budget
development guidelines and with consideration of the Board's focus on maintaining public safety, protecting
children and families, and supporting sustainable communities.
The budget again seeks to balance spending between services and capital needs such as capital projects, roads, and
equipment. The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget was developed with emphasis on isolating one-time resources
for application to one-time expenditures wherever possible to promote long term fiscal stability. Therefore, growth
in ongoing revenues was dedicated to increased operational service levels, while one-time sources such as year-end
carry-forward were applied to projects and designations. This budget allocates approximately $32 million towards
deferred major maintenance and capital projects.
The budget proposes to add a net of 75 employee positions to various departments. Forty-five of the positions are
requested for the Department of Human Services to facilitate implementation of health care reform and other
federal programs. Nineteen positions are proposed to be added for criminal justice departments, thirteen of which
are for the AB 109 State Criminal Justice Realignment Act. Eleven other positions were added to enhance
program functions in various departments. Departments were encouraged to maintain status quo staffing for
programs supported by the General Fund to the greatest extent possible as the County looks to future fiscal
challenges including the need to fill numerous positions for the new jail facility that will result in increased
operational costs of at least $25 million annually beginning in FY 2016-17.
General Fund discretionary-use revenues are estimated to decrease this year by $1.9 million, or .52% while the cost
of providing services in this fund have increased by $15.5 million or about 3.8% (excludes capital and major
maintenance projects). Discretionary revenues are declining primarily due to a one-time refund for property taxes
of $7.3 million and the expected decline of one-time sales taxes generated from construction activity. The "gap"
between estimated available funding and the amount required to maintain County services at the recommended
level was roughly $4.5 million. To mitigate the gap and in recognition of the one-time property tax refund, funds
were recommended for release from reserves and designations to help balance the budget. The net carry-forward
balance for the General Fund at June 30, 2013 was $36 million.
Direct program revenues specifically dedicated to public protection departments such as Proposition 172 Local
Public Safety Funds and AB 109 realignment revenues were once again pivotal in accommodating the budget
requests of the public safety departments. Budgets for criminal justice departments within the General Fund
increased approximately $18.8 million or 5.2% and these budgets represent nearly 47% of the General Fund's budget. The County General Fund contribution to criminal justice departments is $193 million or 43% of total
General Fund contributions.
The County Administrative Office's primary goal in developing the recommended budget has been to: 1) keep
most discretionary and public protection programs as intact as possible; 2) appropriate resources to quality of life
programs; 3) provide funding to prevent further deterioration of the physical infrastructure on which many services
depend, and 4) maintain reserves that meet the County's known cost increases and liabilities. Achieving this
balance continues to be a challenge. Almost without exception, the budget and staffing recommended by the
County Administrative Office are consistent with the relative budget priorities identified by the department heads.
County department heads, appointed and elected alike, have worked diligently and cooperatively with County
Administrative Office staff in a team effort to forge a balanced budget that minimizes adverse impacts on direct
services to the public.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
The proposed FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget totals $2.629 billion. The recommended budget for the operating
governmental funds, which includes the General Fund, totals $1.576 billion, which is $23 million or 1.5% higher
than the budget for FY 2012-13. Non-operating governmental funds, consisting of special revenue and capital
project funds, have budgets totaling $358 million. This is an increase of $29 million, or 8.4% from FY 2012-13, of
which $8 million is attributable to growth in various accounts of 2011 realignment programs such as AB 109
prisoner realignment.
In addition to the governmental funds, the recommended budget includes budgets for other funds totaling $695
million for enterprise funds such as Airports, Kem Medical Center, and Waste Management; internal service funds
such as Workers' Compensation and Group Health; grant-funded programs administered by Employers' Training
Resource and Community Development programs; and County Service Area funds that are special districts under
the Board of Supervisors. These budgets have increased by 2.4% from last fiscal year.
Program-specific revenues for operating governmental funds are projected to remain the same as the previous fiscal
year at $1.1 billion. Program-specific revenues are required by law to be spent for specific, mandated programs or
direct reimbursements for the cost of providing services, and the Board of Supervisors has minimal discretion in
using them. These costs account for nearly 68% of the total budget for the operating governmental funds. Most
State and federal subventions must be used to operate health and human services programs. Discretionary-use
revenues for the General Fund controlled by the Board are 23% of the budget, and the County must use much of
this money to match mandated State and federal programs. General Fund departments are estimated to receive a
net total of $3 .6 million more in program revenues than last fiscal year.
AVAILABLE RESOURCES
Discretionary-use revenue for the General Fund is budgeted at $1.9 million, or .52% less than in FY 2012-13. A
significant portion of discretionary revenue is comprised of property taxes and sales and use taxes. While total property tax assessments increased by 2.43% from FY 2012-13, the County is impacted by a significant property
tax refund that will reduce the FY 2013-14 revenue estimate. The refund to be issued on a natural gas property is
impacting the General Fund by $7.3 million and the Fire Fund by $3.9 million. Property taxes within both the
General Fund and the Fire Fund, after the refund is applied, are estimated to decline by a combined $2. 7 million in
FY 2013-14, a 1 % decrease from the previous fiscal year.
Sales and use tax and sales tax in-lieu base revenue estimates for FY 2013-14 total $43 million which is $3.3
million less than budgeted in FY 2012-13. The County received approximately $6 million in unanticipated sales tax
last fiscal year primarily generated by one-time construction of major road projects and wind energy turbines. As
anticipated, this construction activity has substantially slowed and revenues are stabilizing to normal levels. For this
reason, the one-time revenues from FY 2012-13 were isolated in the budget and designated for future use.
Petroleum products and equipment, in addition to automobile sales continue to produce strong base receipts for the
County.
Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds significantly increased in FY 2012-13 from one-time construction
activity as well, as this revenue source is the result of a half cent sales tax. This revenue was pivotal in meeting the
increased budget requests from public safety departments last fiscal year. In FY 2013-14, departments are estimated
to receive $73 million which is $4.2 million more than in FY 2012-13. The increase in allocation is associated to
one-time carry forward from FY 2012-13. The revenue levels for this funding source are anticipated to stabilize to
normal levels over the next two years. A portion of the one-time revenue from this fund was recommended to assist
with funding one-time public safety capital projects in the General and Fire Funds.
The General Fund's net available carryover balance from the fiscal year ending June 30, 2013 was $36 million. As
fund balance carryover is a one-time source, a large portion of this balance was recommended for one-time projects
and specific purpose designations.
EMPLOYEE COST INCREASES
The County's overall cost for employees' salaries and benefits is projected to be $1.027 billion which is an increase
of approximately $21.4 million from FY 2012-13 and is reflected in each department's budget. In the anticipation
of escalating pension obligation bond costs and expectation to staff the new jail facility in FY 2016-17, status quo
staffing levels were encouraged in the budget development process. Over the past several years, departments have
absorbed employee cost increases by deferring needed capital improvements and equipment and by deleting or not
funding departmental positions. Many departments continue to rely on Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits,
spending $4.2 million in prior accumulated savings to fund a portion of their FY 2013-14 employee costs. The
projected staffing for FY 2013-14 is 9,126, a total increase of 75 positions from the FY 2012-13 adjusted budget.
PROVISIONS FOR RESERVES, DESIGNATIONS, AND CONTINGENCIES
Reserves, designations and contingencies are a vital fiscal tool to mitigate future known and unknown liabilities and
capital needs. The recommended budget for the General Fund isolates approximately $10.4 million in the
Appropriation for Contingencies to earmark funds against unexpected future costs or costs that are identified after
the County Budget is adopted. In addition, the FY 2013-14 recommended balance for various reserves and
designations in the General Fund total $96.9 million. Recommended changes to reserves and designations are as
follows:
~ Designation for Department of Human Services: $15.5 million (no change) - The designation for the
Department of Human Services (DHS) sets aside funds to stabilize future contributions to DHS that fund
mandated local match. The current balance is $15,454,000. The County contribution continues to be
impacted by the accounting for DHS revenues and may be additionally impacted by health care reform. The
recommended budget has no changes to this account.
Tax Liability Reserve: $5.6 million ($4.5 million decrease) -The purpose of the Tax Litigation Reserve
is to earmark funds for the potential loss of County property tax proceeds due to: 1) Assessment Appeals
Board decisions in favor of the taxpayer; 2) tax roll adjustments by the Assessor; or 3) resolution of court
cases related to disputed property assessments. The reserve was increased in FY 2012-13 by $6 million in
anticipation of a property tax refund on a particular natural gas property. The recommend budget proposes
canceling $4.5 million in FY 2013-14 to offset the refund. The reserve has been maintained at
approximately 10-12% of the annual property tax contingent liability identified for the General Fund. The
proposed amount of funding is considered adequate to meet the potential loss of County property tax
proceeds due to property tax disputes.
General Reserve (formerly Fiscal Stability Designation): $40 million (no change) - The recommended
budget achieves a balance that approximates 5.2% of the General Fund's FY 2013-14 appropriations.
Except in cases of a legally declared emergency, a general reserve may only be canceled or decreased at the
time of adopting the budget, thus protecting the reserve from unintended uses. It is fiscally prudent to
maintain reserves to sustain fiscal stability and retain creditworthiness with financial rating agencies.
Designation for Retirement Contributions: $14.6 million (no change) -This reserve earmarks funds to
mitigate known increases to the County's retirement contribution for employees in future years. The
projected increase in County retirement contribution for FY 2014-15 is $21.6 million.
Designation for Sheriffs Aircraft $977,207 (no change) - This designation earmarks funds for the long
term maintenance of and periodic replacement of aircraft components, including propellers and engines, as
required by Federal Aviation Administration regulations. The current balance of the designation is
$977,208 and no changes to the designation are recommended.
Designation for Information Technology Projects $366,319 (no change) - This designation earmarks
funds for information technology projects, including the Auditor-Controller's cost accounting and payroll
programming efforts.
Designation for Infrastructure Replacement $6.8 million ($524,397 increase) - This designation
earmarks funds for capital asset replacement and was established primarily with one-time construction sales
tax receipts in FY 2012-13. In addition, 50% of the increment from property taxes attributable to wind
energy property valuations is deposited to this account annually.
Designation for KMC Working Capital $10 million ($4 million increase) - The designation for Kem
Medical Center (KMC) working capital was established in FY 2012-13 and is recommended as a long term
plan to mitigate the ongoing cash advance concerns that have impacted the General Fund for several years.
The General Fund accommodates annual cash advances to KMC. KMC's ongoing working capital
shortfall associated to timing of major revenue streams is estimated to be at least $30 million. In general,
the goal of establishing the working capital designation is to ensure that the KMC is able to continue its
operations and that it has sufficient cash flow to satisfy both maturing short-term debt and upcoming
operational expenses. $6 million was set aside in FY 2012-13 for this purpose and an additional $4 million
is proposed for FY 2013-14 for a balance of $10 million that will provide enhanced cash stability for the
General Fund.
Designation for Blight Remediation $1.2 million (new) - This designation is new for FY 2013-14 and
was approved by the Board in December 2012. The program is intended to assist communities with
addressing blight and the associated problems that are a result of deteriorated and abandoned properties.
The program is funded through the set aside of $1.2 million annually of property tax increment generated
from wind energy properties.
Designation for Renewable Energy Neighborhood Enhancement Wind Business Investment Zone
(RENEWBIZ) $1.1 million (new) - This designation is new for FY 2013-14 and was approved by the
Board in December 2012. The program is intended to encourage and promote economic reinvestment and
revitalization in communities within the Second District impacted by wind energy property. The program is
funded through the set aside of a percentage of property tax increment generated from the wind energy
properties. For FY 2013-14, 10% of the increment, or $1,113,307 has been designated for this purpose.
Designation for Kern County Museum Capital Project $750,000 (no change) - This designation for
capital projects for the Kem County Museum was established in FY 2012-13. The Board approved a
contribution towards the construction cost of a new orientation center that will be built over the next three
years.
Designation for Environmental Health Enhancement Program $373,664 ($24,720 increase) - This
designation for Environmental Health Program enhancements is excess collections for the program
remaining at fiscal year-end that were not spent during the fiscal year. As these funds are collected through
fees specifically for the environment health function, the funds are set aside for future use by the
department. The balance for FY 2013-14 is $373,664.
KERN MEDICAL CENTER
Kem Medical Center (KMC) will face FY 2013-14 with significant challenges. The passage of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) presents both opportunities and significant challenges to KMC. On
January 1, 2014, ACA will extend health insurance coverage to currently uninsured people. The immediate
challenges will be to respond to the demand for services and to adjust to a reimbursement process for those
uninsured individuals that were previously covered by cost reimbursement programs. In addition, changes imposed
by the State to fund the implementation of ACA will affect KMC as well. In order to cover increased administrative
costs triggered by growing caseload, outreach, and enrollment efforts under ACA, the State will redirect health
realignment funding away from counties and into the State coffers. The Brown Administration assumes that
counties will achieve enough savings to offset losses in realignment funding as a result of expanding eligibility for
patients who are currently served by county indigent health programs. KMC could lose up to $4.3 million in FY
2013-14.
Cash flow continues to impact the resources of the General Fund. The outstanding General Fund loan to the
hospital enterprise fund as of June 30, 2013 was $85.4 million, an increase of $27.2 from the prior year.
Management of the hospital has indicated that the loan may be up to approximately $154 million by November
2013 in order to facilitate the payment of several required intergovernmental transfers to the State.
The recommended budget for the General Fund includes a reduction to the fund balance carry forward of $9.1
million that was determined by the Auditor-Controller to be non-spendable due to the long-term status of a portion
of KMC's outstanding advance at June 30, 2013. In addition, the Auditor-Controller determined that $9.5 million of
the loan balance to be uncollectible and a write-off is included in the FY2013-14 recommended budget. To help
mitigate the cash flow impacts to the General Fund, the designation for KMC Working Capital in the General Fund
is recommended to increase by $4 million for a total balance of $10 million for FY 2013-14.
STATE BUDGET IMPACT
The chief impact of the FY 2013-14 State Budget on County finances will be the State's expansion of Medi-Cal
under the federal Affordable Care Act. Under the expansion, the State could transfer up to $21 million annually in
health care realignment funds from the County when the Act is fully implemented in 2017. For FY 2013-14, the
initial loss of realignment funds could reach more than $4.3 million, although the final details of the plan remain
uncertain. 
Fortunately, the Governor's initial proposal to expand program realignment into CalWORKs and other social
services - with a further loss of realignment funds from counties to the State - was not enacted as part of the budget
this year. The chief impact of the new State Budget on Human Services will be the addition of $11 million in State
funds, primarily for 45 new employees to handle anticipated rapid growth in Medi-Cal applications as the County
assumes responsibility for signing up and newly eligible patients administering their ongoing eligiblity under the
Medi-Cal expansion.
The Governor's successful November initiative to provide increased taxes for schools also included dedicated tax
revenues to help counties pay the cost of supervising adult and juvenile criminal offenders whom they are mandated
to treat and supervise under criminal justice realignment (AB 109, Chapter 15 of Statutes of 2011). The County's
FY 2012-13 share of $23.4 million in AB 109 funding is projected to grow to nearly $27.8 million in FY 2013-14
as statewide AB 109 revenues reach nearly $1 billion. However, the County's funding per offender remains the
lowest in the State because its AB 109 offender caseload continues to outstrip State projections and only 60% of the
funding formula is based on offender caseloads.
The known impacts from the FY 2013-14 State Budget have been built into the recommended County budget.
However, uncertainty remains about the final amount of health care realignment funds that the County will lose. In
addition, a recent U.S. Supreme Court ruling ordering the State to reduce prison populations could send more State
inmates to County facilities. Your Board therefore may need to revisit the budget to accommodate mid-year State
budget impacts.
FEDERAL BUDGET IMPACTS
In January of 2013, the federal government enacted a series of automatic, across-the board cuts known as
sequestration. These cuts will mainly impact County programs receiving federal funding. For FY 2013-14,
Workforce Investment Act funding, a revenue source for the Employers' Training Resource department, will
decrease by $394,000. This loss in revenue was offset by other grants, and therefore will have no impact to
services. Further, the Senior Nutrition Program was significantly impacted, reducing revenue by $212,000. The
department is able to cover this loss of funding by using available fund balance for FY 2013-14, but providers have
been instructed to work towards reducing their Senior Nutrition Program budgets for FY 2014-15. Lastly, the
Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant is slated to be cut by 5%, or $200,000. The Federal Office
of Management and Budgets has not approved the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Sequester Plan to date. The recommended budget allows for the Substance Abuse Program to absorb anticipated
cuts in funding with corresponding reductions in services and supplies, and will not impact service levels to the
public.
PROGRAM IMPACTS
The County must again seek to balance the allocation of resources between ongoing service needs, quality of life
programs and the maintenance and renewal of facilities and equipment that support those services. While
discretionary revenues are improving, employee salary and benefit costs are growing at a greater pace and
healthcare reform continues to be an unquantifiable threat to local government resources. Therefore, the FY 2013-
14 Recommended Budget represents our best effort to maintain services and infrastructure against further erosion.
The budget attempts to focus one-time revenue sources towards one-time expenditures and on-going sources
towards operational costs.
Public Protection
Protecting public safety remains the top priority of the recommended budget for the County operating governmental
funds. Budgets for public protection departments total $606 million, or 39% of County operating funds' budget and
receive nearly 60% of the net General Fund contribution allocation. Once again this is more than any other County
function, including public assistance that represents 30% of the County operating funds' budget. In FY 2013-14, criminal justice departments including the Sheriff, Fire, Probation, District Attorney and Public Defender
departments were allocated $19.6 million in additional appropriations from FY 2012-13. A portion of this
additional allocation is offset by increased Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds and AB 109 Criminal Justice
Realignment revenue, both of which are considered to be ongoing operational sources. The recommended budget
adds a net total of nineteen positions for safety departments. Thirteen positions are associated to public safety for
AB 109 realignment.
The Sheriffs budget includes an increase of $4.7 million in salaries and benefits costs as a result of negotiated
salary increases, retirement increases and funding positions that previously were vacant and unfunded in prior
years. The total budget for the department includes an increase in appropriations of $8.6 million, or 4.1 %. The
Sheriff is adding five positions in the budget, three of which will be dedicated to rural crime investigation. The
budget also contains funding for a new lease payment for $2. 7 million in planned vehicle replacements. The
recommended budget includes capital project costs for Sheriff facilities of $26 million of which $10 .4 million is for
the remaining match for the new jail facility. In addition, $1.5 million is included for various major maintenance
projects.
The recommended budget increases the District Attorney's budget by 9.24% and allows the Criminal Division to
add five new positions and fund seven positions that previously were vacant and unfunded. Seven of these positions
are funded by AB 109 realignment. The Forensic Science Division's recommended budget includes the addition of
one Criminalist position and funding to fill one other position held vacant in previous years. In addition, the
department plans to purchase $290,000 in laboratory equipment.
The Public Defender's budget includes an additional allocation from AB 109 realignment funds of $600,000 to
assist with significantly increased case workloads. The department is using the funds to add three positions to
support the activity. The Indigent Defense Program (IDP) is also incurring significant cost increases due to caseload
resulting in a cost increase of nearly $1 million over FY 2012-13.
The Fire Department's recommended budget will allow the department to maintain status quo staffing levels and to
purchase $1.4 million in equipment. In FY 2012-13, the department received a two-year Staffing for Adequate Fire
and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant award of $7 million that allows three-man stations in several outlying
areas. This grant expires after FY 2013-14 and the department will need $3.5 million to continue to support the 30
additional staff added in FY 2012-13. The budget also includes $1.4 million for construction costs related to the
Pine Mountain station replacement and an additional $1.8 million is designated for future fire station replacements.
The Probation Department's budget includes an increase in appropriation of $3.8 million or 4.5%. The increase is
primarily associated to salaries and benefits that grew due to negotiated salary increases and additional AB 109
funded staff. The budget once again includes funding to staff the third pod of the Kem Crossroads Facility at a cost
of $2.26 million that was added in FY 2012-13 during budget hearings.
The Board has made concerted efforts to assist communities with addressing blight and the associated problems
that are the result of deteriorated and abandoned properties. The Code Compliance Department's budget includes
the addition of one Code Compliance Officer and two administrative positions to enhance the department's
nuisance abatement efforts.
Public Assistance
The Department of Human Services (DHS) is continuing to develop its analysis of the impact of the Affordable
Care Act (ACA), which is effective January 1, 2014. The potential fiscal impact of ACA on the department is not
yet known, but the department is hiring staff to assist the public as mandated by the program. Forty-five positions
were approved by your Board in FY 2012-13 for this purpose. Included in the budget are an additional forty-five
new positions for CalWORKs, CalFresh and healthcare reform programs that are supported by program funds.
The Aging and Adult Services Department is adding five positions that will allow the department to enhance Adult
Protective Services, including their Conservatorship programs, the cases of which are continually becoming more
legally complex. In addition, the department will be able to reinforce quality assurance in In-Home Supportive
Services.
Education, Recreation and Community Programs
The recommended budget provides additional resources for the Parks Department to cover increases in utilities and
maintains status quo staffing levels. Major maintenance projects in the amount of $1.4 million and capital projects
of $1.8 million are also planned for various park facilities.
The Library's recommended funding level allows the department to predominately maintain current levels of
service. The budget includes the same allocation as last fiscal year of $233,000 for books and materials. The
department plans to make the final purchases of self-checkout systems at several branches this fiscal year that
should promote staff efficiency.
Several contributions to community programs are included in the recommended budget. The Special Services'
budget provides funding totaling $1.1 million to organizations, such as the Volunteer Center of Kem County, Arts
Council of Kem, Bakersfield Museum of Art, Bakersfield Symphony, Community Action Partnership of Kem
County (CAPK), Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA), Edwards Community Alliance, Southwest Defense
Alliance, Valley Fever Vaccine Project, Greater Antelope Valley Economic Alliance, Kem Adult Literacy Council,
San Joaquin Valley Quality Cotton Growers Association - Shafter Research Center, California State University,
Bakersfield- Small Business Development Center and the Kem County Museum.
RENEWING INFRASTRUCTURE IN AN ERA OF FISCAL CONSTRAINT
Equipment and infrastructure are essential to the long-term quality of services to the people of Kem County. The
County Administrative Office prioritizes requests for capital projects and equipment in the following order: legally
mandated, health and safety, preventive maintenance, cost reduction, and extent of direct public use or benefit.
Fiscal constraints over the past four years have forced the County to defer many pressing capital and maintenance
needs for roads, parks, fire protection, and other important services to the public.
The budget contains several ongoing and new major maintenance and capital projects as well as equipment
purchases that will help to improve transportation, public safety, and the delivery of services in Kem County. The
recommended budget includes $16.3 million in re-budgeted capital projects that were initiated last fiscal year. The
following are proposed as projects for FY 2013-14:
Phase II of the LeRoy Jackson Park Expansion: $1.6 million is estimated for the purchase of plants and the
improvement of low-water landscaping and lighting.
Feasibility Study - Golden Hills Sanitation: $300,000 is estimated for a planning study of options for the
community's wastewater treatment and disposal issues. It is estimated that the State may fund $250,000 of this
study.
Land Acquisition - Lake Isabella Fire Station #72: $650,000 is estimated to purchase the land intended to
replace the current station with expanded and improved base camp facilities for seasonal crews fighting wildfires in
the area. State funding is available to fund $500,000 ofthis purchase.
Hall of Records - Annex Elevator: $228,000 is estimated to install an elevator that improves access and meets
the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) standards. The project is funded by the Recorder Fund.
Land Acquisition - Golden Hills Fire Station: $100,000 is estimated to purchase land for a future fire station in
this underserved area. The purchase will be funded by the Fire Fund.
Krista and Weldon Water Projects: $675,000 is estimated for projects to provide clean water to these regional
areas. State funding in the amount of $625,000 is estimated to be available for these projects.
Design - Lake Isabella Fire Station #72: $530,000 is estimated for the construction design of a replacement
facility. State funding is available to fund $500,000 of this cost.
Construction Match -New Jail Facility: $3,982,852 is budgeted as a portion of the cash match necessary for the
construction of the new jail facility financed through the State's AB900 program.
Road Repair I Maintenance I Construction: The budget allocates $5.7 million towards road maintenance that
will provide the overlay of 51. 7 miles and 64.2 miles of seals.
Major Maintenance: The County Administrative Office is recommending roughly $10 million in appropriation to
renovate existing County infrastructure. The projects consist primarily of parking lot, roof and other facility
repairs.
PREPARING FOR FUTURE CHALLENGES
The past several years have challenged your Board's ability to achieve fiscal sustainability and provide for the
increasing demand for public services. In the coming years, the County faces the challenge of continuing to
provide quality services to its residents while managing the impacts of revenues not increasing sufficiently to cover
increased costs. Accordingly, we look to avoid one-time funding solutions and steer a course that leads the County
toward ongoing revenues that adequately fund needed services while setting aside reserves for addressing deferred
infrastructure maintenance, future economic downturns and other unexpected costs.
In addition to the general economy and State and federal budget impacts, other major challenges facing the County
include the following:
$21.6 million increase in retirement contribution costs for FY 2014-15;
$3.5 million loss of grant funding from the Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER)
grant for the Fire Department;
$4.2 million impact due to the use ofBSI credits to fund salaries in FY 2013-14;
Potential significant KMC receivable adjustments impacting the General Fund cash flow;
Over $6 million reduction in Sales and Use Tax revenues over the next two years as the County has been
receiving significant one-time sales taxes from road and wind energy construction projects that will soon be
completed;
$60 million needed for a construction match towards the Thomas Roads Improvement Project;
$25 million new and ongoing operational costs associated to a new jail facility in FY 2016-17;
Unknown costs associated with the effects of the Affordable Health Care Act;
$133 million in unfunded liability for Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB); and
$369 million in pension obligation bonds (POBs).
CONCLUSION
Kem County continues to face significant internal challenges such as increases in employee retirement and health
care costs, reliance on one-time funding solutions, deferred maintenance of critical infrastructure, increasing cost of
public safety operations, and projected shortfalls in ongoing revenues. All of these factors increase the uncertainty
of achieving a structurally balanced County budget. The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget is balanced within
available resources. The budget meets the most important needs of the people of Kem County and fulfills the County's legal mandate to protect public health and safety. As you conduct public hearings and deliberate on the
FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget, your Board's leadership and strong fiscal management will assist the County
in once again maintaining that critical balance between service demands and limited financial resources.
At the August Budget Hearings, members of the public are invited to comment to your Board on the budget
recommendations presented here. The County Administrative Office will work closely with your Board and with
County departments to resolve budget issues and to enact a budget that meets the County's legal obligations and the
needs of the people of Kem County.
