This letter transmits the Proposed Budget for Fiscal Year 2016-17, which marks my 23rd
budget as the County Administrative Officer in Kings County. During that time we have
all witnessed ups and downs in the County's ability to carry out its core functions,
primarily driven by the national, state and local economies, which are also driven by
factors such as the ongoing drought conditions that are beyond your Board's immediate
control. I have developed proposed budgets with the help of numerous people over the
years, including my own staff as well as 20+ Department Heads and their respective
staffs. While there have been many disagreements over the years, I cannot emphasize
enough how well your Board promotes an atmosphere of teamwork, getting everyone to
"pull" in the same direction for the betterment of Kings County.
As you know, our resources are limited and we cannot fund nor recommend all of the
requests we receive in the budget each year. This year is no exception as my staff has
worked tremendously hard to just maintain a status quo budget with the most-appreciated
support of all of the County Department Heads and their respective staffs. While at times
it's difficult to reach agreement, I can't express my appreciation enough for everyone's
willingness to cooperate at the end of the day. The following is a general overview of the
spending plan.
Budget Overview
The overall budget picture for California continues to be improved, however revenues
that were flowing into the state are now slowing with other ominous signs on the horizon.
For instance, an Associated Press story in the San Francisco Chronicle on April 28, 2016
titled "Fed Keeps Key Rate Unchanged and Provides No Timing Hints" indicated that the
federal reserve was keeping its benchmark interest rate unchanged "against a backdrop of
a global economic slump." This was due primarily to China, Europe and other major
economies struggling and potentially threatening U.S. growth. More recently, a New
York Times story printed in the Fresno Bee on May 29, 2016, titled An 'Ugly' Jobs
Report Stirs Slowdown Fears, indicated that employers nationwide only added 38,000 workers in May, "A troubling sign that the economic recovery may have stalled, at least
temporarily, and a sharp slowdown in hiring that is expected to push back a decision by
the federal reserve to raise interest rates." This growth in jobs was the lowest monthly
growth since September, 2010.
At the state of California level, revenues in April 2016 took a hit, as both sales taxes and
income taxes came in below projections. Prior to April, the state's major taxes; sales,
income and corporate, had been slightly above estimates, so the decline in April was
significant enough to send fiscal year-to-date revenues dipping nearly one percent ($869
million) below projections. This drop bolstered Governor Brown's call for fiscal restraint
and imploring the legislature to add to reserves to guard against the next recession.
Locally, Kings County continues to struggle with a five-year drought. While rainfall
totals were better in 2015-16, the amount of precipitation and snow accumulation in the
mountains was well short of what was needed to put a dent into the drought. Concerns
continue about the impact of the drought on local sales tax revenues and property values
overtime.
Given this global, state and local back drop, staff is proposing a budget that is primarily
an attempt to maintain the status quo in services. While there is an increase in positions,
they are mostly driven by state and federal program changes, together with the planned
opening of Phase II of the jail, and the opening of the new court, for which the Sheriff has
assumed some of the state-funded responsibilities. The majority of departments remain
relatively flat, but primarily having to absorb additional benefit costs, including
retirement and health insurance rate increases. It should be noted that staff is proposing
to at least partially address the Board's concerns with one-person fire stations, with a
complete elimination of such remaining stations contingent on the passage of Measure K,
which is undetermined at the time of the drafting of this budget message.
Budget Totals
The overall Proposed Budget totals $321,351,485 or about $2.7 million less than last
year's Adopted Final Budget.
The General Fund Budget is $222,045,652 or approximately $13.5 million (6.5%) more
than last year's budget of $208.5 million. This increase is largely due to significant
staffing increases in the Human Services Agency and Sheriffs Department. The latter
primarily associated with the opening of Phase II of the Kings County Jail and the
opening of the new court.
Total recommended positions are 1,529.66 full-time equivalents (FTE's), which is a net
increase of59.l FTE's over the adopted total in2015-16.
Overview by Function
Given the assumptions described above, together with more detailed information
described in the narratives for each department, the recommended Budget can be broadly
outlined by function as described below:
 General Government
County Departments that are described as General Government functions include the
Board of Supervisors, Administration, Department of Finance, Assessor, County
Counsel, Human Resources, Elections, Radio Communications, Insurance, and
Support of Organizations. Also included in this functional group is the General Fund
Contribution to Other Funds, such as Building Maintenance and Surveyor.
The General Government function totals $20.6 million, approximately $515,000 less
than last year. The decrease is due primarily to a reduction in the General Fund
contribution to the Accumulated Capital Outlay (ACO) Fund, which offsets typically
higher costs in the general government function driven primarily by increased salary
and benefit costs. The latter typically includes increased health insurance and
retirement rates, which will generally be found throughout the budget. The reduction
in General Fund contributions to ACO is a result of the utilization of nearly $1.8
million in Pre-2004 state mandated costs that the state authorized last year and is not
repeated in 2016-1 7.
 Public Safety
Public Safety departments are divided into three categories: 1) Criminal Justice
Departments, including the District Attorney, Sheriff, Probation, and the various
divisions they run, such as the Victim-Witness Program, Jails, and Juvenile Center;
others in this category include costs related to the Courts, such as Defense of the
Indigent Accused in the Consolidated Courts Budget, and the Court Reporter. Also
within the Criminal Justice category are Child Support and the Minors Advocacy
Unit. 2) Other Protective Services, such as Ag Commissioner/Sealer, Planning and
Building Inspection, Public Guardian, and Recorder, and 3) Fire.
These budgets total $87.9 million, up approximately $4.8 million over 2015-16.
Increases can be identified across virtually all areas of the Public Safety function
budget units, reflecting the increased demands on the system, in no small part, driven
by additional responsibilities under AB 109 Realignment. The expansion of the jail
due to the AB 900 project also drives cost increases here as staffing for the increased
capacity continues to be ramped up in the jail budget.
The Consolidated Courts budget involves primarily payments to contract defense
services for the indigent accused, maintenance of effort requirements and utility
payments as prescribed under the Trial Court Funding Act. These costs are primarily
paid for through court generated fines and fees. These are down due to the Court
shifting to a new automated system but we anticipate these revenues will be rebounding as the courts get caught up. The cost of utilities has been virtually
eliminated with the move by the courts into their new building.
The Child Support Budget continues to have to survive within its existing allocation
federal and state funding, which is increasingly problematic as their allocated is
essentially flat. The Child Support Director has requested a contribution to augment
their allocation and she may wish to discuss this further with your Board.
The Fire Department budget is down slightly from last year, but that is a result of a $1
million purchase of fire engines that is not repeated in 2016-17. Outside of this drop
in fixed asset purchases, the Fire Fund is proposed to once again receive a $500,000
augmentation from Hazardous Waste Taxes to add six additional firefighters to add
staffing to some of the one-person stations. The outcome of Measure K will
determine our ability to completely address this issue, versus partially addressing it.
As this budget message was being drafted, the outcome of the vote on Measure K was
still undetermined, as it stood at 66.3 yes votes with more votes to count. If it does
ultimately pass, staffs plan all along has been to bring modifications to the Proposed
Budget for both Fire and the Sheriff for your Board's consideration during Budget
Hearings.
 Roads
The Roads budget totals $12.1 million, which is approximately $480,000 less than
last year. The Roads budget is down as revenues earmarked for road construction and
maintenance continues to erode. Again this year, it should be noted that federal
funding for roads continues to be at risk as federal gas tax receipts are not coming
close to keeping up with demand. Both the federal and state governments are trying
to address this issue but have not landed on a solution to date, even though the
Governor called for a special legislative session last year which is still in effect.
 Health
The Health function includes the Public Health Department and all of its divisions,
Behavioral Health and Alcohol and Other Drug Programs Administration, and the
First Five Commission. Total appropriation is $35.9 million, or approximately $3.7
million higher than last year.
Most of this increase is in Behavioral Health programs which are up approximately
$3.2 million over last year at $22.8 million, once again reflecting the ongoing
implementation of additional programs funded by the Mental Health Services Act
(MHSA). No General Fund discretionary revenue beyond the required maintenance
of effort is included in Behavioral Health programs.
The First Five Budget, at $2.2 million, reflects what was approved by the First Five
Commission, which has spending authority over this program, up approximately
$240,000 over 2015-16.
 Welfare
The Welfare function includes Human Services Administration, Categorical Aid,
Child Abuse Prevention and the Job Training Office.
Total recommended appropriations for Human Services, including Categorical Aid, is
$86.5 million, easily the largest department in the County. This is up approximately
$6.1 million over last year. Of course, this is the total appropriations, of which the
vast majority is offset by revenue from the state and federal government. The
majority of this increase is due to continued implementation of the Affordable Care
Act, however it's worth noting that this budget proposes no transfer of moneys from
the Health Realignment Fund to support Human Services programs for the third year
in a row. Increases here also include additional staff to handle the increase in Child
Protective Services caseloads and new responsibilities required per state law.
The Job Training Office is down approximately $160,000 reflecting anticipated
adjustments in federal funds supporting these programs.
 Education
The Education function includes the Library and Cooperative Extension programs.
The combined recommended Budget for these in 2016-17 is approximately $2.4
million, essentially unchanged from last year.
The Library Fund continues to live within its means, and the Cooperative Extension
program continues to be reorganized together with the Tulare County program.
 Recreation
The Parks Division of Public Works is the only budget unit in this function. It is
recommended at $2.6 million, up slightly over last year.
 Capital Outlay
The recommended budget for Capital Outlay is $43.6 million. The largest project,
which was re-budgeted from 2015-16 is Phase III of the Jail project, otherwise known
as the SB 1022 project. This is the bill number that authorized state funds for jail
projects for which Kings County successfully applied. This project is budgeted at
$19 .2 million.
The remaining portion of the Phase II, AB 900 project is re-budgeted at $7.2 million,
which is all that remains to finish that project which should be completed before the
end of July, 2016. This is down approximately $19.5 million from last fiscal year.
The SB 81 project for the juvenile facility is re-budgeted at $11.5 million, down
slightly from last year reflecting the expenditure of up-front costs associated with the
project in 2015-16.
Other various projects total $5.8 million, the details of which can be found in budget
unit 700000.
 Debt Service
Debt Service covers payment on debt in two areas - Pension Obligation Bonds, which
are accounted for in a separate fund; and Construction Debt, which accounts for
payments on the Cogeneration Plant, payment on the Revenue Bonds, issued to
finance the construction of the first and second phase of the new Jail, payment on
debt issued for the expansion of the Central Plant, and for other energy savmg
projects, such as the solar energy producing shade structures.
Pension Obligation Bonds are budgeted at a cost of approximately $1.4 million, offset
by charges to the Criminal Justice Departments in the retirement appropriations. This
will be the twelfth year of payments on the variable portion of these bonds. The
decision to finance half of the cost of these bonds with variable rate instruments has
turned out to generate significant savings to the County, as these rates over the last
several years have dipped well below 1.0%. This continues to be one of the reasons
that Kings County does not have an unfunded liability for safety pensions as high as
many other agencies.
The revenues to pay for the Cogeneration Plant, Central Plant upgrade, and the solar
projects are incorporated into the utilities charges for all the County departments. No
noticeable changes in those appropriations will be detected, as utility savings as a
result of these projects will offset the cost of financing them.
The cost of financing the first two phases of the jail total $1.2 million, the same as
last year, the first year reflecting the refinancing of the Phase I bonds.
 Internal Service Funds
This functional category includes Information Technology, Motor Pool Services,
Public Works, Liability Self-Insurance, and Workers' Compensation. The cost of
these departments is applied to operational departments and is therefore reflected in
the appropriations for other functions. Workers' Compensation costs are on the rise,
continuing the additional $1.1 million recommended appropriation that was initiated
in 2015-16, while other insurance costs are also up. Changes in departmental budgets
for Workers' Compensation, up or down, are a reflection of claims and exposure in
each department.
Recommended Information Technology charges to departments overall reflect a static
cost for 2016-17. Individual departments may not be necessarily up or down,
however, as several projects are currently underway directly impacting their LT.
Charges. The LT. Internal Service Fund also includes the Purchasing, Record
Storage/Microfilm, Central Services, and Telecommunications functions.
I would like to extend my appreciation to my staff and others who formed the team to
assemble this Proposed Budget, as well as all the Department Heads and their respective
staffs who continue to assist us in balancing our Budget.
My staff that deserves special recognition are Rebecca Campbell, Interim Assistant CAO,
Deb West, former Assistant CAO, Karen Azevedo and Domingo Cruz, Administrative
Analysts, Francesca Lizaola, Risk Assistant, and Angela Valenzuela, Secretary to the
CAO. Others deserving of recognition include, but may not be limited to, Rob Knudson
from the Department of Finance and Jonathan Cruz and John Jones from Information
Technology, as well as Darlene Nunes from Central Services.