While the overall budget picture for California seems to be improving, Kings County
continues to feel the effects of slow recovery from the so-called Great Recession,
undoubtedly exacerbated by the four-year old and counting, extreme drought. To this
point, one cannot easily identify a specific direct impact of the drought in the County
budget, but it continues to be a drag on the economy, and if relief in the form of heavy
rainfall and snow in 2015-16 is not forthcoming, there can be no doubt that it will impact
sales tax revenues and property values over time. Also, now that the state has
implemented legislation requiring a groundwater management program, it remains to be
seen how this will impact property values, particularly in the next five to ten years as the
program for Kings County unfolds, presumably with the assistance of the various water
districts and the Water Commission in Kings County.
- State Budget Impact
At the time this budget message was drafted, the Governor had just released his May
Revision to his 2015-16 Budget as proposed in January, 2015. State revenues continue to
grow at a much faster pace than previously projected for 2014-15, which results in more
revenue to also be projected for 2015-16. While the vast majority of the several billion
dollars that the state will receive in both 2014-15 and 2015-16 will be allocated to K-14
schools per Proposition 98, it does leave the state in position to pay back local
governments for pre-2004 state mandates. The governor is proposing to do this in two
payments, the first of which is scheduled to be made before June 30 of this year. Kings
County's share of this mandate reimbursement is approximately $1.3 million with an
additional $300,000 in interest owed to be received next fiscal year. This total $1.6
million is proposed to be transferred to the Capital Outlay Fund, reflecting their "one-time" nature. Staff is proposing the funds be appropriated for an expansion of the Human
Services facility and at least $1 million to be appropriated in contingencies. These can
then be utilized for possible land acquisition for properties adjacent to the Government
Center that staff believes is important to accommodate long-tenn future growth.
Another change in the state budget that impacts Kings County is a slight increase in
AB 1 09 Realignment Funds, which are primarily driven by sales tax. More detail on how
these funds will be utilized is discussed below.
- Expansion of the Kings County Jail
The AB 900 Jail Expansion Project should be completed in spring of 2016. The project
will utilize the full $33 million in state funds toward the $43 million project, of which $6
million has been financed through bonds. Annual debt service of approximately
$500,000 per year will begin in the 2015-16 fiscal year. AB 1265, the partial
replacement of the lost state subventions for the Williamson Act and Fannland Security
Zone programs have been identified as the source of funding to make this annual
payment.
Staffing for the expanded jail will continue to be a challenge, but one we are working
with the Sheriff on phasing in over time. Although AB 109 Realignment Funds allocated
to the County will likely be up slightly next year, there continues to be more demand for
personnel, programs, and other costs beyond what the County can afford for the new
responsibilities under AB 109. Staff will continue to work with the Community
Corrections Partnership on allocating these funds based on criteria that will reduce
recidivism and hopefully increase future allocations. Probation will receive funding for
additional workload of supervising the so-called non-serious, non-violent, non-sexual
offenders that are now the responsibility of counties. We will also continue to work with
other County departments, including Behavioral Health, Public Works, JTD, and private
providers, such as Champions, for alternative to incarceration programs, such as
Samuel's House, which recently opened in unincorporated Kings County.
The County will also work with Probation to continue to integrate funds generated by SB
678 to compliment the alternatives to incarceration programs, but this source of funds is
not certain to continue although the Governor has included an appropriation again in the
state's 2015-16 budget.
The County also was awarded another $20 million for the expansion of the jail under SB
1022. This project is proposed to focus on beds and program space to treat inmates for
drug and alcohol abuse, mental health issues, and other factors, that if treated, will likely
assist in reducing recidivism. This project will not be staff intensive and should be easier
to absorb in future County budgets than the AB 900 project.
- Another Issue Resultingfrom Realignment
One major unanticipated impact that has been tied directly to realignment is the
astounding increase in the workload of the Child Protective Services (CPS) Division of
the Human Services Agency. This not only impacts CPS, but also results in additional
staffing to handle the workload in the Health Department, County Counsel, Minors
Advocates and Behavioral Health. The Human Services Agency, as a result of this
case load increase and the impacts of the Affordable Care Act, has a proposed increase of
35 positions. In order to handle this increase in hiring, the Human Services Department
will assist in funding another position in Human Resources, in addition to funding
positions in the other departments described above.
- Increased Costs, Flat Revenues
Last year, staff suggested that we were proposing a budget that might reflect a more
stable fiscal situation than we had experienced in previous fiscal years since the recession
hit in 2008-09. Part of the reasoning for that was the assumption that the General Fund
beginning fund balance was anticipated to keep rising, driven by savings on the
expenditure side of the budget coupled with higher than anticipated revenues to provide a
more secure "fiscal footing" going forward. This projection was not driven by a growing
property tax as a result of property value increases, which many counties in the state are
experiencing, some even in double-digit percentages. When final fund balance numbers
came in for 2014-15, it was lower than expected by approximately $1 million. This made
our fiscal situation somewhat more tenuous and precluded staff from utilizing higher than
anticipated fund balance to help with unfunded costs in workers' compensation. While
we do anticipate an increasing fund balance again, staff is still recommending an
increased appropriation, presumed to be ongoing, for workers' compensation by $1.1
million. This adjustment is reflected in all operating departments.
Discretionary General Fund Revenues are anticipated to increase approximately 5.9% in
2015-16, which is better than last year, but still not as robust as pre-recession levels and
not as high as other counties. This is also due to a number of property value adjustments
to some large tax-paying entities in recent years.
This Discretionary Revenue that is primarily used to pay for General Government and
Public Safety Departments is struggling to keep pace with cost increases, some of which
are beyond the Board's control. This includes retirement costs, which will continue to
increase as CalPERS has to recover from investment losses incurred in 2008-09. Some
costs, subject to negotiation with the various bargaining units, are within the control of
the Board. It should be noted that staff has attempted to accommodate a salary
adjustment as part of the Proposed Budget to coincide with the third and final year of the
negotiated contracts with all of the bargaining units. Again, this is subject to Meet and
Confer provisions as spelled out in the existing labor agreements.
Revenues that are increasing are typically one-time in nature, including the statemandated
claim reimbursement as described above. Another of these is Hazardous
Waste Taxes. Arguably, these revenues are not "one-time" but as a matter of policy they have essentially been treated as such. The first $150,000 of these revenues are committed
to assisting with the water project in Kettleman City. This year, for the first time in
several years, it is anticipated that another $350,000 will be paid to the County. In
keeping with past practice in more recent years, these funds are proposed to be
transferred to Capital Outlay.
Budget Totals
The overall Proposed Budget totals $332,703,650 or about $23.3 million more than last
year's Adopted Final Budget.
The General Fund Budget is $207,442,887 or approximately $18.0 million (9.5%) more
than last year's budget of $189.4 million. This increase is largely due to significant
staffing increases in the Human Services Agency and Sheriffs Department.
Total recommended positions are 1,467.71 full-time equivalents (FTE's), which is a net
increase of62.50 FTE's over the adopted total in 2014-15.
Overview by Function
Given the assumptions described above, together with more detailed information
described in the narratives for each department, the recommended Budget can be broadly
outlined by function as described below:
 General Government
County Departments that are described as General Government functions include the
Board of Supervisors, Administration, Department of Finance, Assessor, County
Counsel, Human Resources, Elections, Radio Communications, Insurance, and
Support of Organizations. Also included in this functional group is the General Fund
Contribution to Other Funds, such as Building Maintenance and Surveyor.
The General Government function totals $21.0 million, approximately $3.7 million
more than last year. This increase, which will typically be repeated throughout the
functional areas of the entire budget, consists of additional cost for assumed salary
and retirement cost increases but the single biggest reason for this increase is in
contribution to other funds. This reflects an increase of nearly $2.2 million, most of
which is due to the Governor's proposed repayment of pre-2004 mandated costs.
These funds, given their one-time nature, are proposed to be utilized in the capital
outlay funds, thus the contribution from the General Fund.
Other increases of note include County Counsel, reflecting a large increase in Child
Protective Service (CPS) cases for which the office provides legal representation for
the CPS division of the Human Services Agency and Insurance, which is up
$100,000. More detail of these, as with all budget units can be found in the narrative
for each budget unit.
  Public Safety
Public Safety departments are divided into three categories: 1) Criminal Justice
Departments, including the District Attorney, Sheriff, Probation, and the various
divisions they run, such as the Victim-Witness Program, Jails, and Juvenile Center;
others in this category include costs related to the Courts, such as Defense of the
Indigent Accused in the Consolidated Courts Budget, and the Court Reporter. Also
within the Criminal Justice category are Child Support and the Minors Advocacy
Unit. 2) Other Protective Services, such as Ag Commissioner/Sealer, Planning and
Building Inspection, Public Guardian, and Recorder, and 3) Fire.
These budgets total $82.6 million, up approximately $3.7 million over 2014-15.
Increases can be identified across virtually all areas of the Public Safety function
budget units, reflecting the increased demands on the system, in no small part, driven
by additional responsibilities under AB 109 Realignment. The expansion of the jail
due to the AB 900 project also drives cost increases here as staffing for the increased
capacity continues to be ramped up in the jail budget.
Although the cost for the Victim-Witness budget continues to be in the Public Safety
function, it's worth noting that it is now a division of the District Attorney's Office as
opposed to Probation, as approved by your Board in May, 2015.
The Fire budget is up, most notably the Homeland Security Grant Budget unit and the
Office of Emergency Management. This is in part due to a change in match
requirements. More detail can be found in the narrative of those budgets. Also, it
should be noted that the Fire budget is the only contested budget for the 2015-16
fiscal year.
 Roads
The Roads budget totals $12.5 million, which is approximately $300,000 higher than
last year. The Roads budget continues to go up as funds rollover on previously
budgeted but not completed projects. Again this year, it should be noted that federal
funding for roads continues to be at risk as federal gas tax receipts are not coming
close to keeping up with demand. Both the federal and state governments are trying
to address this issue but have not landed on a solution to date, even though the
Governor's proposed budget outlined in great detail the magnitude of the problem.
 Health
The Health function includes the Public Health Department and all of its divisions,
Behavioral Health and Alcohol and Other Drug Programs Administration, and the
First Five Commission. Total appropriation is $30.4 million, or approximately $3.2
million higher than last year.
Most of this increase is in Behavioral Health programs which are up approximately
$3.0 million over last year at $19.6 million, once again reflecting the ongoing implementation of additional programs funded by the Mental Health Services Act
(MHSA). No General Fund discretionary revenue beyond the required maintenance
of effort is included in Behavioral Health programs.
The First Five Budget, at $1.9 million, reflects what was approved by the First Five
Commission, which has spending authority over this program, essentially unchanged
from last year.
 Welfare
The Welfare function includes Human Services Administration, Categorical Aid,
Child Abuse Prevention and the Job Training Office.
Total recommended appropriations for Human Services, including Categorical Aid, is
$80.4 million, easily the largest department in the County. This is up approximately
$9.7 million over last year. Of course, this is the total appropriations, of which the
vast majority is offset by revenue from the state and federal government. The
majority of this increase is due to continued implementation of the Affordable Care
Act, however it's worth noting that this budget proposes no transfer of moneys from
the Health Realignment Fund to support Human Services programs for the second
year in a row. Increases here also include additional staff to handle the dramatic
increase in Child Protective Services caseloads as described above.
The Job Training Office is up approximately $200,000 reflecting anticipated
adjustments in federal funds supporting these programs.
 Education
The Education function includes the Library and Cooperative Extension programs.
The combined recommended Budget for these in 2015-16 is approximately $2.4
million, unchanged from last year.
The Library Fund continues to live within its means, and the Cooperative Extension
program continues to be reorganized together with the Tulare County program,
however it now reflects a contractual relationship with Tulare County for the Master
Gardener program for expanded services in Kings County.
 Recreation
The Parks Division of Public Works is the only budget unit in this function. It is
recommended at $2.5 million, essentially unchanged from last year.
 Capital Outlay
The recommended budget for Capital Outlay is $69.9 million. The largest project,
which was re-budgeted in 2014-15 and is proposed to be re-budgeted again in 2015-
16, is the Phase II Jail Expansion as described above. In addition, the Phase III Jail Expansion SB 1022 project, at $20.4 million is also proposed to be re-budgeted from
last year. A major addition this year is the proposed $11.6 million SB 81 project
which the County successfully applied for with the state. This will remodel the
Branch Jail into a facility for the entire Juvenile Hall population.
Other project details can be found in Budget Unit 700000.
 Debt Service
Debt Service covers payment on debt in two areas - Pension Obligation Bonds, which
are accounted for in a separate fund; and Construction Debt, which accounts for
payments on the Cogeneration Plant, payment on the Revenue Bonds, issued to
finance the construction of the first and second phase of the new Jail, payment on
debt issued for the expansion of the Central Plant, and for other energy saving
projects, such as the solar energy producing shade structures.
Pension Obligation Bonds are budgeted at a cost of approximately $1.3 million, offset
by charges to the Criminal Justice Departments in the retirement appropriations. This
will be the eleventh year of payments on the variable portion of these bonds. The
decision to finance half of the cost of these bonds with variable rate instruments has
turned out to generate significant savings to the County, as these rates over the last
several years have dipped well below 1.0%. This continues to be one of the reasons
that Kings County does not have an unfunded liability for safety pensions as high as
many other agencies.
The revenues to pay for the Cogeneration Plant, Central Plant upgrade, and the solar
projects are incorporated into the utilities charges for all the County departments. No
noticeable changes in those appropriations will be detected, as utility savings as a
result of these projects will offset the cost of financing them.
 Internal Service Funds
This functional category includes Information Technology, Motor Pool Services,
Public Works, Liability Self-Insurance, and Workers' Compensation. The cost of
these departments is applied to operational departments and is therefore reflected in
the appropriations for other functions. Workers' Compensation costs are on the rise,
requiring an additional $1.1 million recommended appropriation in 2015-16, while
other insurance costs are also up. Changes in departmental budgets for workers'
comp, up or down, are a reflection of claims and exposure in each department.
Recommended Information Technology charges to departments overall reflect a
higher cost for 2015-16. Individual departments may not be necessarily up or down,
however, as several projects are currently underway directly impacting their LT.
Charges. The l.T. Internal Service Fund also includes the Purchasing, Record
StoragelMicrofilm, Central Services, and Telecommunications functions. 
I would like to extend my appreciation to my staff and others who formed the team to
assemble this Proposed Budget, as well as all the Department Heads and their respective
staffs who continue to assist us in balancing our Budget.
My staff that deserves special recognition are Deb West, Assistant CAO; Rebecca
Campbell, Deputy CAO; Anthony Loza, former Management Analyst, Michelle Speer,
Administrative Analyst, Francesca Lizaola, Risk Assistant, and Angela Valenzuela,
Secretary to the CAO. Others deserving of recognition include, but may not be limited
to, Rob Knudson from the Department of Finance and Jonathan Cruz and John Jones
from Information Technology, as well as Darlene Nunes from Central Services.