The current economic outlook for the nation and California shows positive growth for the
remainder of 2014, gaining strength in 2015. Positive economic growth gained
momentum towards the end of 2013 with strong gains in the stock market and
continued improvement in housing, marked by increases in home prices. The labor
market is also improving led by employment gains in the construction industry. As a
result, the unemployment rate has continued a downward trend. In January, the
unemployment rate fell to 9 percent compared to 11.8 percent for the same month last
year.
The economic outlook, although positive, continues to face challenges and
uncertainties. Low housing inventory and tighter lending standards remain a challenge
to the housing recovery. In addition, tapering of the federal bond buying program has
resulted in an increase in interest rates which can potentially hinder economic growth
and place another burden on consumers. Nevertheless, the economic recovery of the
last year is encouraging and we will continue to monitor economic indicators as we
move forward throughout the budget process.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
Since Fiscal Year (FY) 2008-09, as a result of the past recession, the County has faced
significant budget challenges that have strained locally generated revenues, which we
use to finance the net County cost (NCC) portion of our budget. These challenges were
managed without major service reductions, layoffs, or furloughs. This achievement was
made possible through the leadership of the Board, County managers, and the hard
work of all County employees. The Board’s long-standing conservative budget
practices, and our strong compliance to fiscal policies, enabled us to weather these
trying economic times.
As we proceed to the first stage of our annual budget process, we find that the slow
pace of the economic recovery, coupled with unavoidable cost increases and the need
to fund critical programs, will challenge our budget. It is important to note that although
the economy is showing signs of recovery, our principle concern is whether this
recovery is sustainable. Accordingly, the focus of this year’s budget is stabilization and
prudent growth.
The primary drivers of unavoidable cost increases are for salaries and employee
benefits. The County’s retirement contribution rates will increase primarily due to the
losses sustained by the Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association
(LACERA) in FY 2008-09, and the reduction in the assumed investment rate of return
and changes in actuarial assumptions. Under California county retirement law, liabilities
not funded through member contributions are the responsibility of the employer.
LACERA’s funding policy calls for asset gains and losses to be smoothed over a fiveyear
period, and the unfunded portion of the liability to be amortized over thirty years.
This marks the fifth and final year of smoothing of the losses suffered back in FY 2008-
09. This is an important milestone since all of those losses have now been incorporated
in the County budget and we anticipate our retirement costs will be more stable going
forward. In addition, health insurance premiums for County employees also increased
unavoidable costs.
For the first time since August 2008 for safety employees and January 2009 for the
remaining employees, the County approved salary increases. During this five (5) year
period of economic challenges, employee labor groups actively partnered with the
County by agreeing to zero salary increases to help the County weather the crisis. The
increases were approved in FY 2013-14 and now must be incorporated in the 2014-15
Recommended Budget.
Program Changes
Outlined below are some of the significant program changes that are financed with
locally generated revenues.
? Citizen’s Commission on Jail Violence (CCJV) – Provides the second year of
funding ($36.5 million ongoing) to implement the CCJV recommendations. This,
coupled with ongoing funding provided in FY 2013-14, brings the total ongoing
funding amount for the CCJV implementation to $56.5 million.
? Cadre of Administrative Reserve Personnel (CARP) – Eliminates the
CARPing program by providing $18.0 million to the Sheriff’s Department for the
second year of a two-year funding plan.
? In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Program – Increases funding for the
IHSS program by $12.8 million based upon State law that requires counties to
provide a 3.5 percent inflation increase to the counties maintenance of effort
base amount.
? Inpatient Bed Cost Increases – Reflects a $6.3 million increase for the
Department of Mental Health as a result of a cost-of-living adjustments (COLA)
for both State hospital beds (6 percent COLA) and Institutions for Mental
Diseases (IMD) beds (4.7 percent COLA). The department contracts for these
beds from private providers and the State, which provides critical care for
individuals who require these services and helps to alleviate overcrowding of
emergency rooms and hospital inpatient beds throughout the County.
? Public Library Hours Restored – Restores funding of $3.6 million to allow the
Public Library to restore library hours as they were in FY 2009-10, prior to the
services curtailments.
? Juvenile Day Reporting Center (JDRC) – Transfers $2.3 million in annual
funding from the Provisional Financing Uses budget unit to the Probation
Department as approved by the Board on March 4, 2014. JDRCs provide a
community-based alternative to incarceration. This adjustment adds 17.0
budgeted positions to the Probation Department.
? Animal Care and Control – Transfers $1.1 million funding from the Provisional
Financing Uses budget unit to the Department of Animal Care and Control to
provide additional resources for the Antelope Valley Communication Center ($0.7
million) and to conduct criminal investigations ($0.2 million), as well as funding
for the replacement of the department’s voice recorder system ($0.2 million).
This recommendation also adds 13.0 budgeted positions.
In addition, we are recommending important program changes that are financed with a
variety of outside revenues sources, primarily with State and federal funding.
? Child Welfare Services – Reflects funding of $15.4 million and adds 100.0
children social workers to reduce caseloads and improve child safety along with
26.0 clerical and support staff that will assist social workers in their role to protect
children. This increase is fully offset with State revenues.
? Promoting Safe and Stable Families/Partnership for Families (PFF) –
Provides $5.0 million to continue this community-based child maltreatment
prevention initiative. The initiative was designed to address the needs of families
with children five years of age or younger and pregnant women who are at risk
for child maltreatment in the County. The Department of Children and Family
Services has identified ongoing funding from 2011 Realignment to continue this
program.
? CalWORKs Child Poverty and Family Supplemental Support – Increases
both appropriation and State revenues by $71.7 million for the Department of
Public Social Services (DPSS) to support a five (5) percent increase in the
CalWORKs aid grant.
? Expanded Subsidized Employment – Reflects a $37.3 million increase in both
appropriation and revenue for DPSS as a result of additional dedicated
subsidized employment funding for CalWORKs participants.
? Family Stabilization Program – Increases funding by $6.9 million for DPSS for
the Family Stabilization program and adds 35.0 budgeted positions. The
CalWORKs Family Stabilization Program is a new component of the 24-Month
Early Engagement Redesign for the CalWORKs Welfare-to-Work program,
effective January 1, 2014. The Family Stabilization program will provide
intensive case management and services to address the needs of families who
have identified barriers that are destabilizing the family and would interfere with
participation in Welfare-to-Work activities or services.
Revenue Increases
Just as the economy has improved, so have a majority of the County’s revenues and we
are once again forecasting increases in a variety of locally generated revenues along
with increases in statewide sales tax revenues. For 2014-15, the Assessor is
forecasting a preliminary assessed valuation increase of 4.06 percent. The assessed
valuation increase would have been greater had it not been for a recent period of low
inflation. Since the forecast is preliminary and the Assessor is scheduled to release
updated forecasts in May 2014, with a final assessment roll forecast in July 2014, our
office will continue to work with the Assessor’s office to monitor and update our property
tax projection accordingly. In addition to the changes in assessed valuation, we are
recommending a $40.0 million (ongoing) increase in property tax revenue residual from
the dissolution of redevelopment agencies.
Again, we are seeing year-over-year growth in Proposition 172 Sales Tax and
Realignment Sales Tax. Based upon this increase and a survey of local economic
forecasts, we have assumed a 4.0 percent growth factor in our overall sales tax
projection for the 2014-15 Recommended Budget. Like property taxes, we will continue
to monitor these revenue sources and update our projections going forward, throughout
the budget process.
The increases in property and sales taxes, however, are partially offset by a
$13.2 million reduction in recording fee revenues. The Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk
is experiencing a significant drop in a variety of recording filings.
Health Services
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) was implemented on January 1, 2014 and the
Department of Health Services (DHS) is continuing to develop its analysis of the impact
of the ACA. With the support of the Board and the CEO’s Health Care Reform Task
Force, DHS and its many partners are working together to transform its system into an
integrated care delivery model. An integrated care model will enable its system to
provide the right care, at the right time, in the right location, by the right provider.
The Department has developed preliminary estimates to project the impact on its
budget regarding what is likely to occur in FY 2014-15. However, because of the
unpredictability of what will actually take place as the ACA implementation rolls forward,
the Department cautions that significant revisions to the budget may become necessary
as the estimates are refined to align with actual experience. Further, the estimates
included in the budget are solely based on the impact to the Department and do not
factor in any sharing with the State under Assembly Bill (AB) 85, Redirection of 1991
State Health Realignment. The Department continues to work with the State to develop
data formats, procedures, and protocols that will be used to determine the amount.
The Department’s 2014-15 Recommended Budget is fully funded with available
resources. The Department’s Hospital Enterprise Fund reserve was used in prior years
to fund Departmental expenses; however, it is anticipated to be depleted in FY 2013-14.
The Department is closely monitoring this issue and updates will be provided in future
budget phases. The Recommended Budget provides funding for:
? A net increase of 737.0 new positions and $17.0 million in related funding for the
standardized nurse staffing plan for various patient care areas, primarily to meet
State mandated AB 394 nurse staffing ratios and hospital-based clinic needs.
? An increase of 26.0 new positions and $1.5 million in related funding, offset with
the decrease of 26.0 vacant budgeted positions, for the first year of a two-year
plan to deploy Senior Community Health Workers (SCHW) at DHS facilities to
more efficiently serve the Department’s sickest, and hardest to serve patients,
and to support increased empanelment of patients in medical home teams.
? An increase of 20.0 new positions and $2.5 million in related funding, offset with
20.0 vacant budgeted positions, to hire Registered Nurses that have completed a
training program to become Advanced Practice Registered Nurse Practitioners.
? An increase of $4.0 million to expand the Housing for Health program by
increasing the number of recuperative beds in the South Los Angeles area,
implementing the flexible housing subsidy pool, and increasing the number of
housing units available to homeless DHS patients.
? A net increase of $15.4 million for four months of funding for DHS’ support of
patient care for the new MLK Community Hospital that is anticipated to open in
the Spring of 2015.
Looking Forward
Looking forward, the County faces uncertainty with several programs, including the roll
out of the ACA, as noted earlier, and potential recommendations from the Blue Ribbon
Commission on Child Protection. Funding for the Blue Ribbon Commission
recommendations will be addressed in subsequent budget phases.
During the budget crisis, we utilized reserves and capital funds to help balance our
budget. We continue our work to strengthen the County’s Rainy Day Fund and address
the County’s significant deferred maintenance and capital improvement needs. The
County also utilized ongoing departmental budget curtailments to help achieve a
balanced budget during the budget crisis. On average, departments suffered a 15
percent reduction to the NCC portion of their budgets while at the same time absorbing
certain employee benefit cost increases. Some departments also have structural
deficits caused by several years of curtailments and cost absorptions. Although we
have restored some critical curtailments, strong consideration should be given in later
stages of the budget process to strategically restore some of the remaining curtailments
and addressing structural deficits as locally generated revenues increase.
The County has taken steps to prefund Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB), by
creating a trust fund with an initial deposit of $448.8 million, updating our budget policy
to earmark excess available fund balance to be deposited in the trust fund, and
reaching agreement with our labor partners to reduce this benefit for future County
employees. Although these are important steps in the right direction, serious
consideration needs to be given to developing and implementing future actions to fund
this benefit.
POTENTIAL STATE/FEDERAL BUDGET IMPACTS
State Budget
On January 9, 2014, the Governor released his 2014-15 Proposed State Budget, which
includes $106.8 billion in State General Fund expenditures. Unlike recent years, the
proposed budget assumes $4.0 billion in additional State revenues and contains no
significant reductions to County-administered programs. Given the State’s positive
revenue outlook, some members of the Legislature have expressed an interest in
restoring the reductions to education and health and human services programs made in
recent years when the State faced significant budget shortfalls.
The proposed budget assumes $6.7 billion in federal funding to provide Medi-Cal
coverage for newly eligible persons. It also continues AB 85, which among other things,
modifies the 1991 Realignment revenue allocation mechanism to calculate potential
County savings resulting from the ACA and to redirect a portion of the potential savings
from counties to the State. AB 85 contains Los Angeles County-specific language
developed by the Department of Health Services and the Brown Administration to
determine the Department’s expenses and revenues and how to calculate the potential
savings that will be shared with the State.
Since the State budget situation continues to unfold and remains fluid, we are deferring
recommendations to align the County budget with actions by the Governor and the
Legislature until later phases of the State Budget process when their situation
becomes clearer. Similarly, we are deferring Public Safety Realignment (AB 109)
budget adjustments, since AB 109 allocations to counties are expected to be addressed
in the Governor’s May Budget Revision.
Federal Budget
Difficulties at the Federal level have made it difficult to enact annual appropriations bills
needed to fund federal programs and operations. The Federal government was shut
down during the first 16 days of Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2014, which began on October 1, 2013, because Congress neither had enacted any FFY 2014 appropriations
bills nor a Continuing Resolution to temporarily fund Federal programs and
operations. Full-year FFY 2014 appropriations were not enacted until
January 17, 2014.
Due to these difficulties, it is highly unlikely that federal legislation will be enacted that
will significantly reduce mandatory (entitlement) programs, such as Medicaid,
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Title IV-E Foster Care and Adoption
Assistance, Child Support Enforcement, and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program, through which the County receives the vast majority of its overall Federal
revenue from mandatory (entitlement) programs. The County’s total federal revenue
will increase in 2014-15 since Medicaid revenue, which, by far, is the largest source of
federal revenue to the County, will grow significantly due to the ACA Medicaid
expansions.
The County currently receives its Title IV-E Foster Care revenue through a waiver,
which expires on June 30, 2014. Under this waiver, the County receives annual capped
Federal allocations which grow 2 percent a year, and which provide the County with
greater flexibility over the use of funds. At this time, the State of California is
negotiating the waiver’s extension with the Federal government. The main waiver
extension issue is its financial terms and conditions – that is, how much Federal waiver
funding would be provided in future years. This is especially important because, under
current State law, counties are responsible for financing all non-Federal child welfare
costs.
The funding outlook for Federal discretionary programs, which are funded through
annual appropriations bills, is more promising than it was one year ago. This is
because, in December 2013, Congress enacted the Bipartisan Budget Act which
increased the overall discretionary spending cap to $1.012 trillion in FFY 2014 and
$1.014 trillion in FFY 2015 from the post-sequester FFY 2013 level of $986 billion.
CAPITAL PROJECTS/EXTRAORDINARY MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS
Capital Projects
The 2014-15 Recommended Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget appropriates
$772.5 million for continued development, design, and construction of projects that
address high-priority health, public safety, recreation and infrastructure needs.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget also reflects a decrease of $104.0 million from the
2013-14 Final Adopted Budget, due to the completion of 18 projects in 2013-14 and
expenditures for ongoing projects. In addition, several bond-financed projects, which
are not accounted for in the Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget once bonds have been issued, were also completed. Such projects include the Martin Luther King, Jr.
Multi-Service Ambulatory Care Center, High Desert Multi-Service Ambulatory Care
Center, Harbor-UCLA Surgery and Emergency Room Expansion, Bob Hope Patriotic
Hall Renovation, and Coroner Project.
The 2014-15 Recommended Budget appropriates $35.8 million for soil and groundwater
investigation, monitoring, and remediation projects at County-owned sites in the cities of
Downey, Carson, and throughout unincorporated Los Angeles County.
The County continues to address facility needs resulting from the enactment of AB 109,
the State’s Public Safety Realignment Act, which resulted in an influx of new inmates
into County jails. The 2014-15 Recommended Budget appropriates $147.5 million for
facility improvements to various jail facilities, and an additional $40.3 million is being
recommended to construct a reconfigured juvenile detention facility at Camp Kilpatrick
to accommodate a new evidence-based rehabilitation and educational model. The
project is partially funded by a State grant.
In addition to these environmental and public protection projects, the County continues
to refurbish and construct new libraries, parks and beach facilities to enrich the lives of
County residents, as well as address its own governmental needs through the
construction of new facilities, such as a new countywide data center.
Sustainable Design Program
In January 2007, the Board of Supervisors approved the establishment of the
Sustainable Design Program as a component of the County’s Energy and
Environmental Policy. The purpose of the Program is to support the County’s goal of a
20 percent reduction in its facilities’ energy and resource consumption by the year 2015
through the integration of sustainable, “green building” technologies into the designs
of the County’s capital improvement and refurbishment projects. The 2014-15
Recommended Budget for Capital Projects/Refurbishments reflects the County’s
continued commitment to the idea of sustainability, with the incorporation of sustainable
design technologies into 155, or 47 percent, of the County’s 330 active building or
refurbishment related projects.
Extraordinary Maintenance
The County continues to direct ongoing investment to meet performance requirements
and expectations for its facilities. The 2014-15 Recommended Budget appropriates
$140.9 million for high-priority repairs, maintenance, and accessibility modification
needs at County facilities, including juvenile halls, animal shelters, County beaches,
parks, and for various roof repairs throughout the County. 
