The current economic outlook for the nation and California shows slow positive growth
for the remainder of 2012 and into 2013. Retail sales are showing strength as
household positions improve and consumer confidence grows. County sales tax
revenues are now on pace to return to pre-recessionary levels by 2012-13. Although
the County’s unemployment rate remains high, the labor market has made modest
gains recently and economists expect this downward trend to slowly continue.
Unfortunately, the housing market continues to struggle with many obstacles in the way
of a recovery. Those obstacles include the high unemployment rate, foreclosures,
negative equity and tighter lending standards. In spite of this, some economists are
predicting that the end of 2012 may be a turning point in the housing market.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
Since 2008-09 the County has faced significant budget deficits in the net County cost
(NCC) portion of our budget. NCC is that portion of our budget financed with locally
generated revenues. These deficits have been managed without service reductions,
layoffs or furloughs. This achievement has been made possible through the leadership
of your Board, County managers and the hard work of all County employees. The
Board’s long-standing conservative budget practices and our strong compliance to fiscal
policies set us in a good position to weather these trying economic times. Our budget
solution strategy during this period had been to close the budget gap through a
combination of ongoing departmental curtailments and new revenue solutions coupled
with one-time funding from County reserves and reductions in the County’s capital
program. To control costs the County has also aggressively pursued savings through
our Efficiency Initiative Program and implemented a hard-hiring freeze and a freeze on
non-essential services, supplies and equipment. Throughout this difficult period,
employee labor groups have actively partnered with the County by agreeing to zero
salary increases, while step increases for County managers were and continue to be
suspended.
Today, we face a much more manageable ongoing deficit estimated to be $75.8 million
and as a result, for first time in four (4) years, the Recommended Budget does not
include any departmental curtailments. The table below outlines the progress that has
been made in closing our budget gap.
Our principle strategies to deal with the past budget deficits was to judiciously use
reserves built up over the last decade, capital funding and structural changes to
departmental budgets along with savings through aggressively pursuing efficiencies.
Had the County relied solely on departmental curtailments, the impact to County
services and its residents would have been much more draconian and would have
resulted in the reduction of critical services and the layoff of a large number of County
employees. This would have surely put an even greater strain on an already fragile
local economy. We believe that the effects of the recession on our budget (i.e., declines
in revenues and increases in assistance caseloads) are a cyclical consequence of the
recession and its aftermath. Over the last four years, structural changes to the budget
came from departmental curtailments of approximately $360.1 million. These measured
actions, along with the use of one-time funding sources, have allowed us to more
strategically achieve a balanced budget by maintaining sustainable core services.
Through this strategy we have sought to avoid wholesale reductions to department
budgets, and will continue to conservatively use one-time funding solutions to bridge us
forward. The County’s reliance on one-time budget solutions continues to decline and for 2012-13 reflects less than two percent (2%) of the County’s ongoing locally
generated revenues. In contrast, the savings from efficiency initiatives has totaled
$245.9 million, which represents five percent (5%) of the County’s ongoing locally
generated revenues.
Unavoidable Cost Increases
The primary drivers of unavoidable cost increases are employee benefits. The County’s
retirement contribution rates will increase by five percent (5%) primarily due to the
losses sustained by the Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association
(LACERA) in FY 2008-09. The investment losses suffered by LACERA created an
unfunded actuarial accrued liability of $9.4 billion as of June 30, 2011. Under California
county retirement law, liabilities not funded through member contributions are the
responsibility of the employer. LACERA’s funding policy calls for asset gains and
losses to be smoothed over a five-year period, and the unfunded portion of the liability
to be amortized over thirty years. In addition, increases in health insurance premiums
for County employees and the restoration of the deferred compensation match are
contributing factors effecting unavoidable cost increases.
Revenue Increases
As the economy begins to slowly improve, we are forecasting increases in a variety of
locally generated revenues along with increases in statewide sales tax revenues.
For the second year in a row, the Assessor is forecasting an increase in assessed
valuation. Since the forecast is preliminary and the Assessor is scheduled to release
updated forecasts in May 2012 with a final assessment roll forecast in July 2012, our
office will continue to monitor and update our property tax projection accordingly.
Once again, we are seeing year-over-year growth in Proposition 172 Sales Tax and
Realignment Sales Tax. Based upon this increase and a survey of local economic
forecasts, we have assumed a 3.5 percent growth factor in our overall sales tax
projection for the 2012-13 Recommended Budget. Like property taxes, we will continue
to monitor these revenue sources and update our projections going forward throughout
the budget process.
During the past three years, the high unemployment rate caused many to seek public
assistance from the County. This in turn caused assistance caseloads and costs to
dramatically increase. The cost of providing general relief (GR) is particularly acute,
since the County bears the entire cost of providing this assistance. The 2011-12 budget
assumed that the GR caseload would peak in December 2011 and gradually decline
ending 2011-12 with an average caseload of 112,487. With the drop in the
unemployment rate and our Board-approved GR restructuring efforts being
implemented, we are beginning to see a decline in the ranks of the GR caseload. The
GR caseload appears to have peaked in August 2011 at 113,034 and continues to
decline with the January 2012 caseload at 106,186. This drop in GR caseload has
resulted in a $27.4 million reduction in cost to the 2012-13 budget.
As stated earlier, we recommend that the $75.8 million budget gap be solved with
one-time budget solutions. Since it appears that we have weathered the worst of the
economic crisis and the economy is growing slowly, we believe that it is fiscally
responsible to utilize one-time funding sources to help bridge our budget gap. It is
important to note that neither the Reserve for Rainy Day Fund ($93.2 million) nor the
Provisional Financing Uses-Economic Reserve ($83.6 million) were used to close this
year’s budget gap. These reserves remain intact and available to address future
uncertainties.
We must also keep in mind that as the County’s budget situation improves, we must do
whatever is necessary to grow these reserves. If the County’s revenue situation
improves in the coming months, we would likely recommend that some of this increase
be used to supplement County reserves. County budget policy requires a ten percent
(10%) reserve of locally generated revenues be set aside in the Reserve for Rainy Day
Fund.
Countywide Efficiency Efforts
The County continues to aggressively explore efficiencies as a means to generate
ongoing and one-time savings while improving operations. With the support of your
Board, our office has placed a high emphasis on both countywide and departmental
efficiencies over the last three (3) years, working with departments to cut operating
costs through diligent efforts and innovative reengineering of existing processes. The
County’s ability to avoid the serious cutbacks and layoffs that many other jurisdictions
have suffered in this economic crisis is in part due to these cost-saving efforts.
Major examples of the County’s efficiency initiative projects include:
? Dramatically lower pharmaceutical drug costs through streamlined/volume
purchasing and inventory management ($100.3 million per year);
? Conversion of General Relief recipients to collect Supplemental Security Income
($18.6 million one-time savings);
? Negotiation of enterprise software licenses ($10.8 million one-time savings);
? Improved Medi-Cal claims processing and reduction of denied days ($8.0 million
per year);
? Increased clinic participation and expansion of industry-sponsored assistance to
reduce indigent client medication costs ($6.1 million per year);
? Systematic monitoring and termination all unused phone/data lines ($5.5 million
per year);
? Increased collections through offering payment plans at hospitals ($2.5 million
per year);
? Requiring all county contractors to be current on their personal and real property
taxes ($1.9 million one-time savings); and Countywide, these initiative projects have resulted in $245.9 million in savings through
March 2012, and we estimate savings of $255.0 million by the end of the current fiscal
year.
OTHER FUNDING RECOMMENDATIONS
Listed below are some important recommendations included in the 2012-13
Recommended Budget.
? Public Works’ Road Fund – Reflects a $77.3 million decrease in appropriation
and financing primarily due to the deletion of one-time funding for unincorporated
area road projects, construction and maintenance activities ($62.1 million) and
various changes in operations ($35.3 million). These funding decreases are
partially offset by a $20.1 million increase in Traffic Congestion Management
program funding.
? Mental Health Services Act – Reflects a $58.6 million increase in appropriation
for the Department of Mental Health primarily to continue the expansion of
Prevention and Early Intervention (PEI) mental health contracted services. Also
reflects funding for 8.0 positions to implement a countywide program to address
the needs of veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan, active duty personnel,
and their families. This increase in appropriation is fully offset with State Mental
Health Services Act funds and, where appropriate, federal funds.
? Mental Health Services for Special Education Pupils (AB 3632) – Reduces
both appropriation and revenue by $128.4 million for the Departments of Mental
Health ($82.4 million) and Children and Family Services ($46.0 million) along
with the elimination of 63.0 budgeted positions at the Department of Mental
Health. This reduction is reflective of the State’s transfer of responsibility for the
AB 3632 program from counties to school districts.
? Sheriff’s Department – Reflects an increase a $13.4 million in appropriation fully
offset with contract law enforcement services revenue primarily for services
provided to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA). This adjustment
adds 109.0 budgeted positions.
? Sheriff’s Department – Reflects a $3.4 million increase in appropriation fully
offset with revenue from the 2011 COPS Hiring Program Grant. Your Board
accepted the grant award in November 2011. This adjustment adds
25.0 budgeted positions.
? Energy Efficiency Projects – Reflects a $2.2 million investment to establish a
revolving fund that finances various retro-commissioning, monitoring-based
commissioning, and lighting efficiencies projects throughout the County. These
projects are expected to generate utility costs savings that would recover the
costs of the projects over a two-to-four year period.
HEALTH SERVICES
There are major changes taking place in the Department of Health Services' operations
and Medi-Cal revenue streams as a result of the 1115 Waiver, particularly the Healthy
Way LA (HWLA) matched program, the transition of Seniors and Persons with
Disabilities (SPDs) into Medi-Cal managed care, the transfer of the Office of Managed
Care's lines of business to L.A. Care, and the State's transfer of various programs to the
County, including health care for inmates previously treated in the State prison system,
etc. There are also major changes related to national health care reform in the future,
including changes associated with the proposed health insurance exchange.
These significant program and system changes are complex and require the
Department to develop new methods of projecting revenue based on new types of
patient and payer mixes and different utilization patterns. The Department is working on
improvements in data collection at the facilities and the development of various revenue
projection models, which will provide more reliable revenue projections for future years
as more experience is gained with the new programs and the other changes taking
place throughout the system.
The Recommended Budget includes a revenue placeholder of $132.0 million while the
Department continues to work diligently to develop and improve its revenue projections,
which the Department will revise in a future budget phase.
POTENTIAL STATE/FEDERAL BUDGET IMPACTS
State Budget
On January 5, 2012, the Governor released his 2012-13 Proposed State Budget, which
includes $92.6 billion in State General Fund expenditures. The budget plan projects a
current year deficit of $4.1 billion and a $5.1 billion deficit for 2012-13. The Governor’s
plan calls for solving the 18-month deficit through a combination of $4.2 billion in
expenditure reductions, a temporary tax increase and revenue solutions totaling
$4.7 billion, and various other solutions estimated at $1.4 billion. The Governor’s plan
also sets aside $1.1 billion as a reserve.
Based upon an analysis of the Governor’s budget, we estimate that the impact to the
County would result in a net loss of approximately $12.1 million at this time. The estimated loss primarily affects mental health and social service programs. Since the
State budget situation continues to unfold and remains fluid, we are deferring
recommendations to align the County budget with actions by the Governor and the
Legislature until later phases of the State Budget process when their situation becomes
clearer. Similarly, we are deferring Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) budget
recommendations since AB 109 allocations to counties are expected to be addressed in
the Governor’s May Budget Revise. Furthermore, given that this program is relatively
new, it is important to continue to track actual expenditures for at least six (6) months to
ensure the appropriateness and accuracy of the funding allocation.
Federal Budget
On February 13, 2012, President Obama released his proposed $3.8 trillion budget for
Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2013, which will begin on October 1, 2012. As estimated by
the Office of Management and Budget, the federal budget deficit will drop from
$1.3 trillion in FFY 2012 to $901 billion in FFY 2013. The President’s Budget would
increase overall non-security discretionary spending from $1.0 trillion in FFY 2012 to
$1.0 trillion in FFY 2013, the same levels as in the Budget Control Act of 2011, which
increased the federal debt limit and reduced projected federal expenditures. It does not
propose significant net reductions in entitlement (mandatory) spending, such as
Medicaid, Title IV-E Foster Care and Adoption Assistance, TANF, and Child Support
Enforcement, which account for most of the federal revenue received by the County.
It is widely expected that major federal budget decisions, including the enactment of
FFY 2013 appropriations and possible extension of major expiring tax provisions, will be
deferred until after the November elections. Given the divided government and major
partisan differences, it is unclear whether major budget legislation can be enacted
during a “lame duck” session before the end of the year. In each of the previous three
election years, Congress enacted continuing resolutions, which left the completion of
appropriations bills to the next session of Congress. Since major federal budget
legislation is unlikely to be enacted until December 2012 at the earliest, and major
changes enacted in federal legislation typically have a delayed effective date, it is highly
unlikely that any future federal budget actions will have any effect on the County’s
budget during 2012-13.
CAPITAL PROJECTS/EXTRAORDINARY MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS
Capital Projects
The 2012-13 Recommended Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget appropriates
$1.1 billion for continued development, design, and construction of projects that address
high priority health, public safety, recreation, and infrastructure needs. The recommended appropriation reflects a decrease of $51.4 million from the 2011-12 Final
Adopt Budget, due to the completion of 17 projects in 2011-12. The recommended
2012-13 appropriation is highlighted by the following appropriations:
? $367.0 million for public protection facilities, such as new construction at the
Biscailuz Center Training Academy, construction of new fire stations in the Santa
Clarita Valley, implementation of fire station privacy and access improvements,
potable water system upgrades at fire stations, security improvements at
Probation juvenile halls and camps, and construction of a new animal shelter in
the east Antelope Valley;
? $151.8 million for recreational facilities including construction of swimming pool
facilities, community buildings, and gymnasiums at County parks, and facility
refurbishments at County beaches;
? $107.9 million for general government facilities highlighted by the construction of
a new Countywide data center in Downey;
? $380.0 million for health, public health, and mental health facilities, including
build-out of a community hospital and construction of a new multi-service
ambulatory care centers at the Martin Luther King Jr., medical campus and High
Desert in the Antelope Valley, construction of a mental health outpatient clinic at
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, completion of a new public health center in South
Los Angeles, and construction of new surgery and emergency suites at
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center;
? $69.9 million for construction of new or replacement libraries in the
unincorporated area of Stevenson Ranch, the San Gabriel Valley and Manhattan
Beach; and
? $58.6 million for high priority infrastructure improvements in the County’s roads,
flood control and aviation facilities, soil and groundwater investigation and
remediation activities, beautification of the County’s Easter Hill complex and
watershed testing efforts.
Sustainable Design Program
In January 2007, your Board approved the establishment of the Sustainable Design
Program as a component of the County’s Energy and Environmental Policy. The
purpose of the program is to support the County’s goal of a 20 percent reduction in its
facility’s energy and resource consumption by the year 2015 through the integration of sustainable, “green building” technologies into the designs of the County’s capital
improvement and refurbishment projects.
The 2012-13 Recommended Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget reflects the
County’s continued commitment to the ideal of sustainability, with the incorporation of
sustainable design technologies into 138, or 48.4 percent of the County’s 285 active
building or refurbishment related projects (projects related to land acquisition or
non-structural in nature have been excluded from this count). In 2012-13, Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification is being pursued on 23 projects,
including 21 that are expected to be certified at a level of Silver, and two at a Gold level,
including the Martin Luther King Jr., Center for Public Health.
Extraordinary Maintenance
The County’s infrastructure requires ongoing investment to meet performance
requirements and expectations. As part of the Deferred Maintenance Program,
approved by the Board of Supervisors (Board) on September 28, 2010, the 2011-12
final budget appropriated funds for critical repairs at public health centers, community
and senior centers, County cultural institutions, and County waste water treatment
facilities. By the close of 2011-12, 80 percent of those designated critical repairs and
maintenance will be complete. The 2012-13 Recommended Budget appropriates
$111.9 million for the remainder of these and other high priority repairs, maintenance
and accessibility modification needs at County facilities, including juvenile halls, animal
shelters, County beaches, parks, and for various roof repairs throughout the County. 