The Recommended Proposed Budget for Fiscal Year 2016-17 is a balanced budget that provides funding consistent with your
Board’s priorities, continuing in the attempt to begin to restore funding levels within the Public Safety Departments and provide
funding necessary for information technology system upgrades and replacements. Restricted funding for Health and Welfare
programs continues to increase this fiscal year, but is dictated by the State and Federal Governments without much discretion at
the local level.
Due to the fiscal prudency of your Board, exceptional efforts of the County Management Team and steady economic growth, the
County Budget is balanced and maintains the $4.1 million Reserve for Future Budgetary Needs as well as a $2.4 million
Contingency budget. Based on the economic growth, revenues continue to be strong in the Community Economic Development
Department and County Clerk/Recorder’s Office. The proposed budget includes a new Sheriff’s Canine Program financed
through donations; Fire services to be provided to the new Riverstone Development; the newly created Water and Natural
Resources Department and associated groundwater sustainability program which will be fully reimbursed by grants; and funding
to begin the necessary task of replacing critical Information Technology systems.
As directed by your Board, efforts are well underway to strengthen the County’s longer term financial condition by focusing on
economic development opportunities. Though the community benefit and financial benefits from these efforts will be longer term,
in 2016-17, the County should begin to realize some economic benefit from new developments countywide, including the start of
the Riverstone development project in the Rio Mesa Area. Economic development efforts will continue this year with a continued
focus on new residential/commercial/industrial development opportunities and ramped up efforts in the area of sports tourism.
It is worth noting that the 2015-16 Fiscal Year brought significant accomplishments: the Board approved an MOU with
Chukchansi allowing the Casino to reopen and resume the reimbursement of costs related to services provided by the Sheriff
and Fire Departments; the Board approved salary increases based on a compensation study for all classifications countywide as
prepared by Cooperative Personnel Services – this action was necessary to address pay disparities that could lead to an
increasing number of employees leaving to work for other agencies; the new kitchen for the Department of Corrections, paid
primarily from State grant monies, was opened and created significant efficiencies within their operation; the Sheriff’s
Department completed their move into the new Sheriff’s Headquarters; and the Opterra Energy Savings Project became fully
operational.
The continuation of a selective hiring freeze is recommended again in 2016-17 as a cost containment measure. It is important to
note that the proposed budget is consistent with your Board’s direction to avoid the use of the limited Teeter Fund reserve and
borrowed funds to finance the operations of the County.
Governor Brown signed the 2016-17 State budget into law on June 27, 2016. Part of the State Budget impacting counties is still
being modified through trailer bills and will be brought before your Board once details are finalized.
The 2016-17 General Fund Budget has an overall increase of $32.3 million over the 2015-16 Fiscal Year. The following is a
brief recap of General Fund functions and other points of interest:
? The General Government category reflects an increase of $5.8 million over Fiscal Year 2015-16. The increase is primarily
from the compensation study and related salary adjustments given to County employees, costs related to Information
Technology Projects and full year payment on the Energy Savings Project.
? The Public Protection category has increased $9.8 million over Fiscal Year 2015-16. The increase is primarily due to the
following: the compensation study and related salary adjustments given to County employees; the addition of the Sheriff’s
Canine Program and Emergency Operations budgets; increases in the contract with CAL FIRE and the new services
related to the Riverstone Project; increased costs associated with the Public Defender’s contract; increases resulting from
the creation of the Water and Natural Resources Department and a grant related to the Groundwater Sustainability
program.
? The Health and Sanitation category has increased $4.8 million over Fiscal Year 2015-16. The increase is primarily related
to the compensation study and related salary adjustments given to County employees, and costs necessary to care for
patients within the Behavioral Health System.
? The Public Assistance category has increased $11.6 million over Fiscal Year 2015-16. The increase in this category is
primarily related to the compensation study and related salary adjustments given to County employees, In Home
Supportive Services MOE increase, the administration of the Housing Support Program, Subsidized Employment,
Affordable Care Act, Protective Services programs and changes in the IT rate restructure, which are generally financed by
State and Federal funds.
? The Education category (Library and Agricultural Extension) has increased $0.3 million over Fiscal Year 2015-16. This
increase is primarily related to compensation study and related salary adjustments given to County employees and an
increase necessary for augmenting the Library’s books and subscription appropriations.
The preliminary General Fund Balance for the period ending June 30, 2016, as projected by the Auditor’s Office in
cooperation with the Administrative Office, is estimated at $10.5 million. The Auditor’s timely completion of the County’s
2014-15 Financial Statements has allowed for a more accurate beginning balance at June 30, 2015 than was the case in
the last several years. The Auditor’s Office is scheduled to complete the final June 2016 Fund Balance calculation in the
fall of this year after the final close-out of the 2015-16 fiscal year.
? The Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS) recently notified the County that the miscellaneous employees rate
will increase from 23.080% to 24.523% for Fiscal Year 2016-17. The current PERS rate for Law Enforcement employees
is 25.932% and will increase to 29.776%. It is anticipated that the rates will increase again in the 2017-18 Fiscal Year.
? Employee Compensation Increases All compensation adjustments that have been agreed to in a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) have been budgeted in the individual Departmental budgets.
? The first payment of a ten-year payment plan is included for the Government Center debt service payment of $1,552,938.
The original bonds for this building were refunded in 2015-16 resulting in lower annual payments. A total of $694,426 is
also included for the payment associated with the Energy Savings Project. The 2015-16 Fiscal Year included an interest
payment only.
? Appropriations for Contingency is budgeted at $2,424,416, which is unchanged from the previous year. Funds are
included in the contingency account to cover costs associated with multi-defendant special circumstance cases being
handled by appointed Public Defense Attorneys, payout costs related to retirements; county matches associated with
grants and other unanticipated events. This reserve amount may change at Final Budget depending on any reductions in
State funding or changes in Fund Balance.
? In 2015-16 an independent firm completed a Compensation Study for all classifications countywide. Based on the results
of the study, your Board approved salary increases in an effort to address such pay disparities that could lead to an
increasing number of employees leaving to work for other agencies. The County invests a significant amount of time and
resources into training and developing its employees, and that investment will be lost if steps aren’t taken to retain
employees.
? All previous fiscal commitments by your Board have been included in this Budget.
