Our Financial Outlook is Improving
The proposed two-year budget is balanced and is structurally sound. Because of our past decisions to reduce spending by over $30 million and reduce our workforce by 11%, we now have a structurally sound budget that maintains critical services and sets money aside to reduce our long-term retiree liabilities. What does this mean to our community and our organization? It means that our community can count on the current service level of over 200 County programs that improve the quality of life for our residents. It means our employees can spend more time focusing on how we can fulfill our mandates and improve how we deliver vital services now that our staffing levels are more secure. And it also means that we are continuing to pay down our unfunded retiree liability to help reduce the likelihood of future service reductions.
We are making progress on reducing our long-term retiree liabilities and this budget contains an additional $14 million beyond our required payments to reduce these liabilities even further. This past year we reduced our unfunded retiree liabilities by $98 million. Our past efforts led all three independent bond rating agencies to give Marin County the highest rating of AAA, making Marin one of only two California counties with an AAA rating from all major rating agencies.
Despite our improving fiscal outlook, there are still risks related to pension rate uncertainty and potential state/federal budget cuts. There are also significant emerging needs such as road infrastructure maintenance, homeless and mental health services, and technology improvements. This recommended budget includes one-time funds to address these and other emerging needs.
Over the long-run, to maintain a balanced budget, new ongoing spending will need to be offset with reduced spending in other areas or with increased ongoing revenue sources. As we return to fiscal stability, we must also continue to stay ahead of the curve by responding to emerging community needs, understanding major trends, and encouraging a culture of innovation.
Recommended Allocation of Current Year, One-Time Revenues
Based on our discussion with your Board at our FY 2013-14 March budget workshops, we are recommending the allocation of approximately $9.8 million for one-time high-priority needs.
First, a significant adjustment is recommended for the allocation of additional Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) revenues that have been held in reserve since 2004 pending a state audit. The California State Controllers' Office recently issued a property tax audit report for the County of Marin pursuant to Government Code §12468, which audited property tax computation, collection and apportionment procedures utilized by the County of Marin from July 1, 2004 to June 30, 2011. Based on the issuance of this final audit report, the County of Marin will be dispersing additional ERAF revenues for the period under audit, resulting in an additional $7.8 million for the County (including interest). In addition, we are recommending the designation of $2.0 million from our one-time reserve for pension liabilities. Total recommended one-time allocations are summarized below:
•
$3.9 million for the ATOM financial system designation;
•
$2.0 million for pension rate stabilization reserve;
•
$2.3 million for Civic Center office modernization of vacated Civic Center office space;
•
$1.0 million to the Road Maintenance program;
•
$350,000 for Community Development Agency customer service enhancements; and
•
$250,000 for support of the County's 5-year business improvement plan.
One-time FY 2014-15 allocations are detailed at the end of this Budget Message.
New Two-Year Budget for FY 2014-16
Greater financial stability at the federal and particularly the state level has resulted in more predictable revenues and creates an opportunity for longer term budget planning. To encourage longer-term planning, this recommended budget is our first two-year budget, recommending budget appropriations for FY 2014-15 and a plan for FY 2015-16. The budget includes line item detail for both years. Next year, we will have a more streamlined budget process that will focus on recommended changes to our adopted FY 2015-16 budget plan.
Performance Planning
Performance Management remains a key strategy in the County's Strategic Plan, adopted in 2001. Your Board implemented Managing for Results (MFR) to achieve the long-term vision of a “well-managed county” and MFR is a tool that helps the County “do the most important things well.” Performance plans are an integral part of the MFR program as they highlight important issues, provide data regarding service delivery and outcomes, and identify priorities to inform resource allocation and operational management. Individual department performance plans were reviewed and discussed in public hearings in March, and are incorporated with any revisions in the department sections of this recommended budget.
A Balanced Budget
As the economy has improved, property tax and sales tax revenues have rebounded. As a result, we are projecting moderate revenue growth over the next two years. This growth is offset by estimated salary and benefit costs for our workforce - including cost of living adjustments (COLA) for most staff consistent with bargaining agreements through June, 2015. This COLA represents the first COLA for most County staff in five years. The budget also includes annual operating costs at the Marin Commons Emergency Operations Facility for facility maintenance costs for the Sheriff and networking costs for IST, partially offset by lease savings and increased rental revenue.
State and Federal Risk Remains
Many of the County's safety net services are largely supported by state and federal funds. Because more than 30% of County services are funded by the state, any additional budget cuts are likely to result in a reduced level of safety net and other services that the County is able to provide to residents. While the County's budget is now more structurally balanced than it has been for some time, the County simply does not have the capacity to backfill the portfolio of programs currently funded by, and often performed on behalf of, the state while continuing to maintain structural balance.
With release of the state's May Revision on May 14th, the state is clearly on better fiscal footing - though uncertainties and risks do remain, most notably including health care costs with implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act. Updated figures reflect increased state revenues of $2.4 billion. However, these are largely offset by increased state expenditures relating to the costs of health care, drought, and other programs.
The Governor's January Proposal had included various efforts to eliminate what the Governor called the “Wall of Debt” facing the State. Included among these proposals was a scheduled repayment plan of obligations for pre-2004 local government reimbursable mandates starting in FY 2015-16 of about $900 million statewide, eliminating these obligations entirely by FY 2017-18. The Governor's proposal had implied these would be paid down over two years (about 83% in FY 2015-16 and the remaining 17% in FY 2016-17). The May Revision adjusts that payment plan as follows: $100 million in 2014-15, $748 million in 2015-16, and $52 million in 2016-17.
The proposed $100 million of repayment in FY 2014-15 includes $73 million for counties. Marin may receive $500,000 to $750,000 of one-time funding in FY 2014-15. We have updated the Financial Management and Guidelines in the County Overview section of this recommended budget to adopt a policy to deposit these revenues into the County's one-time reserve to ensure that they are appropriately allocated for one-time purposes.
It has also become clear that federal reductions are likely in coming years as pressure builds to address the nation's growing debt burden. Approximately 10% of the County's budget is dependent upon federal revenues. We maintain approximately $5 million in one-time reserves to help establish a glide path in the event the County suffers significant cuts to critical state or federally-funded programs without sufficient time to transition to a lower level of service.
Future Pension Costs
Although investment earnings have been relatively strong in recent years, the Marin County Employees’ Retirement Association (MCERA) Board is scheduled to discuss policy changes later this year which may have an adverse impact on the County's pension expenses. Changes to the discount rate, amortization schedules or mortality assumptions would increase the County's annual required contributions and, if significant, would require expenditure reductions to balance the budget. The impact of these changes is unlikely to be quantifiable until the end of the year. Staff will continue to monitor the situation and update your Board periodically.
Policy Issues Facing the County
Just as we planned our response to the greatest recession since the Great Depression, we need to look ahead and consider the emerging issues that we will need to address in the years ahead. We must remain open to new and better ways of achieving our vision of a safe, healthy and sustainable community. What follows is a brief discussion of some of the major emerging policy issues facing the County in the years ahead.
Five Year Business Plan
The services we provide to the community contribute greatly to the high quality of life we enjoy. To maintain and enhance the quality of life of our community, we need to ensure that we are effectively responding to our future challenges and opportunities. By engaging our workforce, our Five Year Business Plan will help to identify strategies to respond to the expected retirements of 1 in 3 employees over the next five years. It will also help identify technology investments so that we can meet the rapidly changing expectations of our residents and our workforce for modern customer service practices. Lastly, it will identify how we can best adapt the changes in our community as it grows older and more diverse.
Addressing Equity Gaps in Health
On an overall basis, the County ranks highest in California in health and life expectancy. But within the County there are differences among our communities that require greater focus. For example, the County is the healthiest County in the state, but life expectancy can vary by as much as 17 years within Marin. How can we improve longevity and health outcomes for all of our residents, especially those that are less fortunate? Preventable heart disease is a key cause of Marin's gap in life expectancy. Health Care Reform provides an opportunity to improve health access and the quality of the care provided, but supporting healthy eating and active, tobacco-free lifestyles is even more important. Over the next year, Health and Human Services will work with your Board to adopt targets to reduce childhood obesity and improve access to health care in those communities that are experiencing lower life expectancy.
Road and Bridge Improvements
The County maintains 419 miles of road, consisting of 1,100 lane miles. Maintaining infrastructure for all modes of public mobility is an essential service and affects nearly every county resident. Last year, your Board adopted a policy that, for five years, allocates to the road and bridge capital program 50% of any available year-end General Fund balance in excess of what's required to support the General Fund operating budget. These additional investments are intended to help achieve the Board's goal of improving the County's Pavement Condition Index. Consistent with your Board's policy, this proposed budget includes an allocation of $4 million toward new deferred road and bridge maintenance projects in FY 2014-15, bringing the County's investments over the last six years to approximately $28 million.
Partnership Efforts
The County works with a number of non-profit agencies to provide services on behalf of the County. This budget includes approximately $500,000 to provide a cost of living adjustment for those community-based organizations that have not received an increase over the past five years. Another example is our ongoing partnership with the Agricultural Institute of Marin to create a plan for a new farmers' market at the Christmas Tree Lot site that includes a market building and a covered market canopy that is consistent with the Civic Center Master Design Guidelines and acceptable to the community.
Business Process Improvements and Technology Investments
The coming year will also bring important focus to business improvement efforts, including selection of a new enterprise resource planning (ERP) system to replace SAP. An important part of this implementation will be to use this system replacement project as the opportunity to change our business processes to better reflect public service best practices. This budget also includes one-time technology investments to begin to meet the growing expectations of our residents and employees. For example, the budget will include $550,000 over the next two years for investments in resident-focused applications development to help residents better access County services such as business license applications, finding a polling place, building permit applications, or a mobile County Fair application to guide visitors in locating events, exhibits and vendors. We are also investing is the creation of more fillable forms on the County website.
Open and Transparent County Budget & Spending
We also need to explore more avenues for constructive engagement with residents to continually improve our services, as well as to understand their concerns and priorities, in an era of declining trust in government nationally. One avenue toward enhancing trust and engaging residents includes transparency. As one example, we intend to introduce this summer a web-based interface called OpenGov to publish our County budget in a way that allows the public to easily and graphically inquire about the County's budget.
Continuing Efforts to Reduce Unfunded Liabilities
Our pension and retiree liabilities came about based on many decisions that were made over the last 40 years. These liabilities cannot be eliminated in five years, but your Board has taken many steps to reduce them now and for future generations. Specifically, your Board has done the following in recent years:
•
Created a lower cost retiree health plan for all employees hired after 2008;
•
Negotiated with miscellaneous bargaining units a less costly 2% at age 61.25 retirement tier for new employees that became effective in 2012;
•
Capped the County's contribution to employees' share of cost to 2% (for miscellaneous) and 3% (for safety) of salary;
•
Implemented the California Public Employees' Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA), which, among other statewide reforms, mandates for new, non-reciprocal employees after January 1, 2013 a 2.0% at age 62 pension plan for non-safety employees and a 2.7% at age 57 formula for new safety employees;
•
Adopted a policy to dedicate County PEPRA savings for the first five years toward reducing the County's unfunded liability, estimated to save up to $3 million over PEPRA's first five years;
•
Utilized $46 million in one-time reserves to pay down our unfunded pension liability and created a retiree health trust to eliminate our unfunded retiree health liability over the next 30 years; and
•
Directed staff to begin exploring an employee optional hybrid defined benefit/defined contribution plan to address newer generation interest in the portability of retirement benefits while also better sharing market risk.
Our employee groups have been important partners in these and other reform efforts. Any additional proposed changes
regarding pension benefits would occur through negotiated agreements with our bargaining groups.
Based on your Board's direction, we are recommending the designation of an additional $2.0 million of one-time reserves to
supplement our pension rate stabilization reserve to mitigate fluctuations in required contributions due to the volatility of market
earnings.
Managing for Results / Overview of Proposed FY 2014-15 Budget
Managing for Results (MFR) Program Continues to Align Resources with County's Mission, Values and Goals
The Proposed Budget has been guided by the County's Managing for Results (MFR) process. MFR is designed to achieve your Board's vision of being a results-oriented and customer-focused organization whose resources are aligned with its overall mission, values, and goals. MFR helps us by continuously improving our services to ensure we are doing the most important things well.
A primary focus of MFR is the development and use of performance measures to help assess the quality of County programs and overall progress in achieving the County's most important priorities. Departments have enhanced their efforts in developing meaningful measures to provide key results of program performance. Throughout the year, departments will measure their success and make any necessary adjustments to achieve their program objectives.
Departments have identified three to five Key Measures that communicate important outcomes and information related to department programs. These high level performance measures are intended to highlight information that is important to County residents, departments, and County policymakers for achieving specific Countywide goals. These measures are located within the department sections of the Proposed Budget document. A comprehensive list of department performance measures can be found in the Performance Measures section.
With the County having reached a relative level of budget stability after several years of fiscal challenge, we intend to explore efforts to improve the Managing for Results (MFR) program to better communicate outcomes, including work with the Board and departments to develop countywide indicators.
Overview of Expenditures and Revenues
The FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget for all funds is increasing by 5.8% overall. The Proposed General Fund budget is increasing by 5.7%, including approximately $8.0 million in one-time expenditures. The budget is balanced and reflects sound financial practices. For example, ongoing revenues are used for ongoing expenditures while one-time revenues support one-time spending.
The General Fund is the primary fund for most County programs and services. The FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget includes $312 million in General Fund revenues and $455.6 million in revenues for all funds.
The FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget for all funds is $489.6 million, a 5.8% increase from the FY 2013-14 Approved Budget (see table below). The General Fund budget for FY 2014-15 is $392.9 million, a 5.7% increase versus the prior year. With a required use of prior year fund balance of $28.0 million for FY 2014-15, approximately $20 million is required for ongoing General Fund operations.
Significant Baseline Adjustments Included in the Recommended Budget
Elections
The Elections Department includes $720,000 in recommended one-time funding for elections during FY 2014-15. Costs relate primarily to FY 2014-15 Federal mid-term election, Gubernatorial and other statewide races - including costs for printing voter pamphlets and ballots; postage for voter pamphlets and vote-by-mail ballots; and poll worker costs.
Public Works
Public Works includes 3.0 FTE new positions in its Building Maintenance program to ensure adequate maintenance for County facilities, including a 1.0 FTE Stationary Engineer, a 1.0 FTE Building Maintenance Worker II, and a 1.0 FTE Building Maintenance Worker III.
In addition, Countywide costs for utilities and fuel are increased by approximately $640,000 to reflect increased costs in recent years.
Information Services and Technology
Baseline funding for networking costs is increased beginning FY 2014-15 by approximately $75,000 relating to the opening of the new Marin Commons Fund Emergency Operation Facility. In addition, PC Lease spending will increase Countywide by approximately $666,000 next year, largely to reflect the need to replace Windows XP computers that are no longer being supported by Microsoft - as well as the fact that many computers have aged with reduced replacement in recent years due to the economic downturn.
Fire
County Fire includes an increase of $100,000 which, when combined with a set-aside from the FY 2013-14 budget, will allow the department to establish a 20% match for an approximately $1 million grant application to replace the department's self-contained breathing apparati (SCBA).
Budget Change Proposals (BCP's)
As in previous years, departments submitted Budget Change Proposals (BCPs) to request additional funds for departmental operational needs. Given our limited ability to fund new initiatives, we are very selective in recommending new positions and expenses. Positions recommended below are extra hire or limited term, consistent with the one-time or short-term duration of the recommended projects.
The Proposed Budget recommends $4,238,000 in total BCP funding for the next two fiscal years. Of this amount, a total of $2,793,600 is for one-time expenses over the course of FY 2014-16, including authorization for a total of 5.75 FTE limited term positions. For ongoing purposes, allocated FY 2014-16 funding totals $447,000 General Fund on a cost-covered basis. In addition, $997,400 in ongoing BCPs for the Library is financed with the use of available fund balance within Fund 20300, including a total of 7.35 FTE pending voter approval of continued Measure A funding June 3, 2014. Recommended funding and authorization for any positions is detailed below.
General Fund allocations will be included in the Non-Departmental budget for allocation during the year, and as a budgeted contingency for special revenue fund BCPs. For multi-year BCPs, after the budget is approved, departments will be allocated first year appropriation for spending in FY 2014-15 and second year funding in a budgeted contingency to be carried forward into the second year of the two-year budget.
FY 2014-15 One-Time Allocations for Emerging Issues
General Fund one-time funds of approximately $8 million are being used to support one-time spending for FY 2014-15. In addition to the $2.8 million in recommended one-time BCP's detailed above, FY 2014-15 one-time allocations are recommended for the following uses:
•
$4.0 million for needed maintenance of County roads and bridges consistent with your Board's policy to reserve 50% of any available year-end General Fund balance in excess of what's required to support the General Fund operating budget (5% of budget, or approximately $20 million) to address deferred road & bridge maintenance. This allocation represents the second of a five-year policy commitment.
•
$500,000 for homeless infrastructure to facilitate efforts toward a more permanent winter shelter for the homeless
•
$350,000 to replace seating in the Board of Supervisors' Chambers
•
$125,000 for drought relief efforts, in particular ensuring adequate water for Marin's farms and dairies
•
$125,000 for temporary toilet facilities in West Marin locations
•
$100,000 for a prescription drug misuse initiative
The County is on more stable footing because of the actions taken by your Board over the past several years. Over the next two years, we need to continue our efforts to innovate and to improve how we provide critical community services. I look forward to working with your Board, our employees and the public to achieve our shared goal of making our community safer, healthier and more sustainable.
I want to thank your Board and all of our employees for their leadership, collaboration and support. In particular, I want to recognize the efforts of the Department of Finance, Information Services and Technology, and the Human Resources Department for their assistance in the preparation of this budget. Most importantly, I would like to recognize my staff for their significant contributions, thoughtfulness and dedication throughout this budget process.
