Like most local governments, due to the economic downturn, the County has faced many budget challenges over the past five years. I am pleased to report that our long-term restructuring efforts and the hard work of our employees has paid off. The budget I am submitting for your consideration is balanced and structurally sound. As we return to fiscal stability, we must also continue to stay ahead of the curve. We need to make sure that we respond to emerging community needs, understand major trends, and encourage a culture of innovation.
Despite our recent budget challenges, the County has worked with our many community partners to achieve excellent outcomes. Within California, for example, Marin County has the following:
Second lowest rate of those living in poverty;
Lowest level of violent crime;
Highest ranking in health outcomes;
Highest voter turnout;
Highest rate of waste diversion; and
AAA bond ratings by Moody's, Fitch and Standard & Poors, the three major credit rating agencies.
The Board has already taken three separate budget actions since last summer to balance next year's budget. They include the following:
Accelerating payments to pay down our unfunded retiree liability by $46 million, which reduces our ongoing costs by over $3 million annually;
Approving $2.2 million in ongoing savings by eliminating 14.80 FTE General Fund positions through the Voluntary Separation Incentive (VSIP) Program (see Attachment A); and
Approving budget adjustments of $2.1 million to close our remaining budget gap for FY 2013-14, including the elimination of an additional 1.50 FTE General Fund vacant positions (see Attachment B).
Not included in our multi-year projections are yet unknown impacts of future State and Federal revenue reductions. Many of the County's safety net services are largely supported by State and Federal funds. Because more than 30% of County services are funded by the State, any additional budget cuts are likely to result in a reduced level of safety net and other services that the County is able to provide to residents. While the County's budget is now more structurally balanced than it has been for some time, the County simply does not have the capacity to backfill the portfolio of programs currently funded by, and often performed on behalf of, the State, while continuing to maintain that structural balance.
The State budget appears to be more stable than at any time in recent memory with an improved economy and voter approval last fall of Proposition 30, Governor Brown's revenue ballot measure which will generate an additional $6 billion in new State revenue through FY 2018-19 through an increased quarter cent sales tax for four years and increased personal income tax rates on upper-income taxpayers for seven years.
We will also continue to monitor efforts in Sacramento as legislators consider the State's approach toward implementation of the Federal Affordable Care Act (ACA) health care reform. While the ACA is anticipated to increase access to health care, California's decision to implement a State-based or local-based implementation of Federal health care reform could have important consequences to the County's budget as we anticipate proposals to realign current State funding streams to implement the ACA in California.
It has become clear that Federal reductions are likely in coming years as pressure builds to address the nation's growing debt burden. The President and Congress earlier this year allowed $85 billion in Federal reductions to be implemented via 'sequestration' cuts, anticipated to save over $1 trillion over the next 10 years. We will continue to monitor local impacts of these sequestration cuts, or alternatives negotiated by Congress in coming months. Approximately 10% of the County's budget is dependent upon federal revenues, thus our exposure is less than that of State reductions.
We maintain approximately $5 million in one-time reserves to help us establish a glide path in the event the County suffers
significant cuts to critical State or Federally-funded programs without sufficient time to transition to a lower level of service.
Bond Rating Upgrade
Over the past several years, we have cut ongoing expenses by over $30 million and reduced our workforce by 11%. As a result of our long-term restructuring actions, the independent bond rating agency Moody's recently gave Marin County a rating upgrade to AAA, making Marin one of only two California counties with an AAA rating. Below is an excerpt from their upgrade statement:
“The Issuer Rating upgrade primarily reflects the county's sound financial management, demonstrated throughout the economic downturn, and its proactive approach to reducing financial pressures posed by pensions and post-employment benefits. The county's financial profile has consistently compared very favorably with other major metropolitan counties in California and the US, and these recent cost-cutting measures position the county well to maintain that comparative advantage. The county's financial health and sound management is reflected in ample General Fund liquidity and reserves, a low debt burden, and sustained structural budgetary balance.”
This accomplishment indicates that, by working together, we can keep the County in sound financial shape and still achieve excellent results. Although we will certainly face future challenges, I am confident that, given our past accomplishments, we will continue to stay ahead of the curve.
Policy Issues Facing the County
Just as we planned our response to the greatest recession since the Great Depression, we need to look ahead and consider the emerging issues that we will need to address in the years ahead. We must remain open to new and better ways of achieving our vision of a safe, healthy and sustainable community. What follows is a brief discussion of some of the major policy issues facing the County in the next few years.
Preparing for the “Silver Tsunami”
The fastest growing age group within Marin is those individuals over 60 years old. Approximately 25% of our residents are now over 60 years of age. More than half of those over 65 live in owner-occupied homes. Given that we are the safety net for our community, how will we help prepare those with limited means and fixed incomes to stay in their homes? How will we plan for housing that would allow our longtime residents to be able to stay in Marin close to their family and friends? What do we need to do to support healthy and active living where our older adults are fully integrated into daily life of the community living independently for as long as desired? How do we plan for an effective, well-coordinated and comprehensive system of care and support that is responsive to the needs of adults with disabilities, family caregivers and older adults? How does the County share these responsibilities with older adults, families, community-based agencies, health care providers and the private sector? We are recommending a $250,000 set-aside in this budget to address the increased demand for aging services, including funds for a community planning process to effectively respond to these challenges with our partners.
Addressing Gaps in Health and Education Outcomes
On an overall basis, the County shares some of the highest rankings in the State, but within the County there are examples of gaps in educational and health outcomes that require greater focus. For example, the County is the healthiest County in the State, but life expectancy can vary by as much as 17 years within Marin. How can we improve longevity and health outcomes for all of our residents, especially those that are less fortunate? Health Care Reform provides an opportunity to improve health access and the quality of the care provided, but creating healthy and safe communities that support healthy eating and active, tobacco-free lifestyles may be even more important. And, since research demonstrates the critical importance of school readiness and reading skills to later success in life, how can we ensure that all Marin students are reading at or above grade level by the time they are in 3rd grade? Over the next few years, we will need to better partner with our schools, parents, our child care and early learning programs to focus on those children that need our support so they can succeed in the future.
Continuing Efforts to Reduce Unfunded Retiree Liabilities
Our pension and retiree liabilities came about based on many decisions that were made over the last 40 years. These liabilities cannot be eliminated in five years, but your Board has taken many steps to reduce them now and for future generations. Specifically, your Board has done the following:
Created a lower cost retiree health plan for all employees hired after 2008;
Negotiated with miscellaneous bargaining units a less costly 2% at age 61.25 retirement tier for new employees that became effective 2012;
Capped the County's contribution to employees' share of cost to 2% (for miscellaneous) and 3% (for safety) of salary;
Began implementing the California Public Employees' Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA), which, among other statewide reforms, mandates for new, non-reciprocal employees after January 1, 2013 a 2.0% at age 62 pension plan for non-safety employees and a 2.7% at age 57 formula for new safety employees;
Adopted a policy to dedicate County PEPRA savings for first five years toward reducing the County's unfunded liability, estimated to save up to $3 million over PEPRA's first 5 years;
Utilized $46 million in one-time reserves to pay down our unfunded pension liability and created a retiree health trust to eliminate our unfunded retiree health liability over the next 30 years; and
Directed staff to begin exploring an employee optional hybrid defined benefit/defined contribution plan to address newer generation interest in the portability of retirement benefits while also better sharing market risk.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Our employee groups have been important partners in these and other reform efforts. Any additional proposed changes regarding pension benefits would occur through negotiated agreements with our bargaining groups.
As the graphic on the following page illustrates, although the County's General Fund contribution toward pension costs are anticipated to increase in FY 2013-14, costs are anticipated to decline beginning in FY 2014-15. Ongoing cost savings of $2.4 million are anticipated because of your Board's decision to contribute over $32 million from reserves to pay down the County's unfunded pension liability. This proposed budget includes a General Fund employer pension cost of $41.3 million; a forecast of future years based upon more recent Marin County Employees Retirement Association (MCERA) actuarial forecasts will be updated as data becomes available.
 Based on your Board's direction, we are recommending the designation of an additional $2.0 million of one-time reserves to
establish a pension rate stabilization reserve to mitigate fluctuations in required contributions due to the volatility of market
earnings.
Road and Bridge Improvements
The County maintains 421 miles of road, consisting of 1,100 lane miles. Maintaining infrastructure for all modes of public mobility is an essential service and affects nearly every county resident. Over the past four years, your Board has contributed over $19 million from the General Fund to support our road and bridges capital program. In March, your Board's adopted a policy that, for the next 5 years, allocates to the road and bridge capital program 50% of any available year-end General Fund balance in excess of what's required to support the General Fund operating budget. These additional investments are intended to help achieve the Board's goal of improving the County's Pavement Condition Index (PCI) from its FY 2012-13 level of 54. Consistent with your Board's new policy, this proposed budget includes an allocation of $2.9 million toward additional deferred road and bridge maintenance in FY 2013-14, bringing the County's investments over a five year period to approximately $22.2 million.
Adapting to Changes in the Workforce
The workforce within the County of Marin has decreased by over 200 positions over the past several years (approximately 11%). Looking ahead, the risk of retirements remains high and in line with the national trends that are driven by the aging Baby Boomer generation. Recently we have experienced older workers remaining in the workforce beyond their eligibility for retirement. While you hear about many people working longer due to economic conditions, we also hear from employees who want to continue to make a difference through their work.
The risk of retirements with our miscellaneous (or non-safety) employees is higher than that of safety employees (these employee groups have different retirement eligibility requirements). We are likely to lose at least one quarter of our miscellaneous employees in the next five years, while the projection is 18% for safety employees. Our oldest workforce is in the Health and Human Services Department where 25% of its employees are over 60 and less than 3% are under 30.
All of our employees have a role in helping us responding to this change. Those who are near retirement can focus on legacy work to help leave the organization better than they found it and preserve the knowledge that they have developed over time. Emerging leaders need to prepare themselves to become our future leaders.
COUNTY OF MARIN PROPOSED BUDGET FY 2013-14 BUDGET MESSAGE
This budget includes a $100,000 ongoing allocation for a countywide tuition reimbursement program to support County employees with their professional growth. The budget also includes support for the County's leadership program with Dominican University. Looking ahead, we may also need to consider additional funding for targeted recruitment incentives to attract difficult-to-recruit talent in competitive fields.
Managing for Results (MFR) Program Continues to Align Resources with County's Mission, Values and Goals
The Proposed Budget has been guided by the County's Managing for Results (MFR) process. MFR is designed to achieve your Board's vision of being a results-oriented and customer-focused organization whose resources are aligned with its overall mission, values, and goals. MFR helps us by continuously improving our services to ensure we are doing the most important things well.
A primary focus of MFR is the development and use of performance measures to help assess the quality of County programs and overall progress in achieving the County's most important priorities. Departments have enhanced their efforts in developing meaningful measures to provide key results of program performance. Throughout the year, departments will measure their success and make any necessary adjustments to achieve their program objectives.
Departments have identified 3-5 Key Measures that communicate important outcomes and information related to department programs. These high level performance measures are intended to highlight information that is important to County residents, departments, and County policymakers for achieving specific Countywide goals. These measures are located within the department sections of the Proposed Budget document. A comprehensive list of department performance measures can be found in the Performance Measures section.
With the County having reached a relative level of budget stability after several years of fiscal challenge, we intend to explore efforts to improve the Managing for Results (MFR) program to better communicate outcomes, including work with the Board and departments to develop countywide indicators. In addition, we will conduct a community survey to obtain resident satisfaction with County services - and will seek resident input to help inform our future priorities.
The FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget for all funds is increasing by 3.9% overall. The Proposed General Fund budget is essentially flat. The budget is balanced and reflects sound financial practices. For example, ongoing revenues are used for ongoing expenditures while one-time revenues support one-time spending.
The General Fund is the primary fund for most County programs and services. The FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget includes $295.2 million in General Fund revenues and $432.5 million in revenues for all funds. A portion of General Fund sources is obligated to support equity transfers for capital projects and debt service payments.
The FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget for all funds is $462.5 million, a 3.9% increase from the FY 2012-13 Approved Budget (see table below). The new Parks Measure A fund accounts for approximately 40% of this all funds increase, funded with new voter-approved sales tax proceeds for park and open space purposes. The General Fund budget for FY 2013-14 is $371.6 million, virtually flat versus the prior year. With a required use of prior year fund balance of $25.8 million for FY 2013-14, approximately $20 million is required for ongoing General Fund operations.
Community Development Agency
8 BUDGET MESSAGE COUNTY OF MARIN PROPOSED BUDGET FY 2013-14
Some departments experienced more significant baseline balancing adjustments. For example, the Community Development Agency (CDA) has experienced a continued slow-down in its Building Inspections Fund fee revenue collections due to the economy. CDA will balance its Building Inspections Fund budget by shifting a 0.30 FTE Planner position to the General Fund Sustainability program, at a cost of approximately $39,400, as well a 0.75 FTE Senior Planner at a cost of approximately $112,300. The added 1.05 FTE to the General Fund, at a total cost of approximately $151,700, will be offset by restructuring a vacant 1.0 FTE Deputy Director of Planning; 1.0 FTE Community Development Coordinator; 1.0 FTE Environmental Planning Coordinator; and 2.0 FTE Principle Planners into 4.0 FTE Planning Managers. This General Fund restructuring will create a General Fund savings of $181,100. The net savings of $29,400 overall contributes to CDA's budget reduction options to help balance the FY 2013-14 budget.
Health & Human Services
In the Department of Health & Human Services, your Board will recall your decision earlier this year to restructure the Public Health Lab program, entering into an agreement with Solano, Sonoma and Napa Counties to regionalize public health lab services in a multi-county relationship. The department realized ongoing savings of approximately $725,000 by doing so, largely by eliminating 4.88 FTE vacant positions overall. While continuing to provide restructured public health lab services to the community in this new regionalized approach, the department will be reinvesting these budget savings within its FY 2013-14 appropriations by allocating $300,000 toward a Rapid Rehousing program; $100,000 to the Center for Domestic Peace; $25,000 toward domestic violence prevention; and another $300,000 to address a chronic inebriates problem within portions of the County.
Parks
With the passage of Measure A in November 2012, the Parks Department will begin receiving dedicated revenues in FY 2013-14 that will enhance its capacity to maintain and manage its existing parks and open space preserves, protect natural resources, and preserve additional open space. Based upon sales tax revenue projections provided by the State Board of Equalization, Measure A is expected to generate approximately $9,780,000 in FY 2013-14.
Consistent with the expenditure plan outlined before your Board on April 16, 2013, $6,652,600 will be budgeted towards Parks & Open Space programs, which includes funding for an additional 11.5 FTE new positions and the transfer of 1.0 FTE from the Open Space District to the new Measure A special revenue operating fund (Fund No. 24590). The budget includes $1,467,000 that will be distributed to cities, towns, and special districts throughout the county, as well as $100,000 that has been budgeted towards professional services expenses associated with farmland preservation efforts. Lastly, $3,127,400 is being set aside within two separate contingency accounts for land acquisition and farmland preservation. All proposed expenditures for projects, services and programs will be fully funded by new revenues and will be separately tracked in the new Measure A special revenue operating fund effective July 1, 2013.
Closing the General Fund Budget Year Gap
To briefly review, we estimated last summer that the County faced a $5.5 million General Fund operating gap for FY 2013-14, or approximately 1.5% of the General Fund Budget - driven largely by slowed property tax growth and increased benefit costs, particularly employer pension costs. We now forecast slow but steady growth in property tax collections ahead as the housing market gradually recovers, as well as flattening to reduced employer pension costs in future years. Despite the slowness of the economic recovery since 2008, because of your Board's proactive efforts we can anticipate greater stability going forward.
At your Board's direction, we began exploring several strategies last summer to reduce the budget gap. We had successfully implemented some of them before your Board's budget and planning workshops in March to narrow our projected gap first to $4.3 million this past fall, then to $2.1 million by March (or approximately 0.5% of General Fund budget). With your Board's approval of an additional $2.1 million in March budget reductions, the County closed its $4.3 million fall operating gap with a total of $2.9 million in expense reductions (or approximately 70% of the overall budget solution) and the remaining $1.35 million (or 30%) in added revenues.
The graphic on the following page illustrates at a high level the steps taken since the summer of 2012 toward balancing our initial $5.5 million FY 2013-14 budget gap:
Ongoing Savings from FY 2012-13 One-Time Investments
Your Board will recall in November the investment of one-time reserves and set-asides to save ongoing costs in a countywide effort to reduce our future year operating gaps. These included the following investments:
Paying down approximately $32 million of our unfunded pension liability this year to reduce the County's required pension contribution by an additional $2.4 million effective FY 2014-15;
Paying down retiree health unfunded liability by approximately $14 million this fiscal year to reduce the County's annual required contribution by an estimated $0.6 million effective FY 2013-14; and
Finally, utilizing one-time reserves to facilitate new ongoing revenues to the County from private lessees at the new Marin Commons facility will generate an additional $0.6 million to the General Fund.
•
•
•
The investment of these one-time reserves set aside over the course of the past five years represents a savings of $1.2 million next year and $3.6 million ongoing in years two through five of our five-year forecast. These actions reduced our FY 2013-14 budget gap to $4.3 million this fall.
Ongoing Savings from Voluntary Separation Incentive (VSIP) Program - Approved “Round 1" Reductions
In October, your Board authorized a 5th phase of the VSIP program to incent voluntary attrition. In recognition that departments have been reducing their budgets for the past several years, the VSIP program was modified to allow departments to utilize the VSIP as long as the reduction achieved an ongoing savings of at least 50% of the value of the separating employee's position. This modification to the program guidelines provided more flexibility in ensuring a successful program, as well as better enabling reorganization or restructuring opportunities for departments.
In January, your Board approved voluntary separations that ultimately resulted in the reduction of 14.80 FTE General Fund positions, saving $2.2 million beginning next fiscal year. These actions reduced our budget gap from $4.3 million to $2.1 million this winter, illustrated in the charts on the preceding pages.
In addition, special revenue operating fund VSIP reductions included Child Support Services (0.38 FTE reduction saving $51,049); the Marin County Library (2.60 FTE saving $193,374); and the Open Space District (1.0 FTE saving $111,232). Please see Attachment A for a summary of already-approved “Round 1" VSIP reductions which are incorporated into the Proposed Budget for FY 2013-14.
Approved March “Round 2" Reductions
Budget Message
Finally, to close the remaining $2.1 million FY 2013-14 General Fund budget gap, departments submitted various options that we studied in February and March. At your budget and planning workshops in late March, your Board approved additional net county cost reductions of $2.1 million, including $1.5 million in new ongoing revenue and $0.6 million in reduced expenditures - including 1.50 FTE net vacant position reductions. No layoffs are recommended to balance the FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget.
Attachment B summarizes these March “Round 2" budget reductions closing next year's budget gap, including anticipated programmatic impacts of the reductions. There are no “Round 2" budget reductions impacting special revenue operating funds; adjustments to these funds are part of the recommended FY 2013-14 baseline budget.
Attachment C summarizes total “Round 1" and “Round 2" budget reductions by department, totaling $4.3 million in ongoing savings -comprised of approximately 70% expenditure reductions and 30% in new ongoing revenues.
Budget Change Proposals (BCP's)
As in previous years, departments submitted Budget Change Proposals (BCPs) to request additional funds for departmental operational needs. Given our limited ability to fund new initiatives, we are very selective in recommending new positions and expenses.
The Proposed Budget recommends $989,963 in total BCP funding. Of this amount, $900,000 is for one-time expenses and $89,963 is on-going or cost-covered. Below is a listing of the recommended BCPs by category:
One-Time Allocations for Emerging Issues
General Fund one-time funds of approximately $5.8 million are being used to support one-time spending for FY 2013-14. In addition to $900,000 for one-time BCP's mentioned above, and one-time spending included in the baseline budget, $1.5 million is set aside for planned one-time payment allocations in July consistent with bargaining agreements.
The budget includes an additional $2.9 million allocation for needed maintenance of County roads and bridges consistent with your Board's new policy to reserve 50% of any available year-end General Fund balance in excess of what's required to support the General Fund operating budget (5% of budget, or approximately $20 million) to address deferred road & bridge maintenance.
A one-time allocation of $100,000 is set aside to serve as a required 20% match for a $500,000 County Fire grant application to replace its self-contained breathing (SCBA) apparati. Fire anticipates receiving notification regarding any grant award this fall. It is anticipated that replacement of all of its SCBA units will cost $1 million in total. The equipment is anticipated to reach its useful life in 2015.
Finally, as mentioned earlier in this Budget Message, the budget also includes a one-time set-aside of $250,000 to address the increased demand for aging services, including funds for a community planning process to effectively respond to these challenges with our partners.
Conclusion
12 BUDGET MESSAGE COUNTY OF MARIN PROPOSED BUDGET FY 2013-14
The County is on more stable footing because of the actions taken by your Board over the past several years. This stability allows the County to refocus our efforts on the many changes we are facing as a community. Over the next year, we need to continue our efforts to innovate and to improve how we provide critical community services. I look forward to working with your Board, our employees and the public to achieve our shared goal of making our community safer, healthier and more sustainable.
I want to thank your Board and all of our employees for their leadership, collaboration and support. In particular, I want to recognize the efforts of the Department of Finance, Information Services and Technology, and the Human Resources Department for their assistance in the preparation of this budget. Most importantly, I would like to recognize my staff for their significant contributions, thoughtfulness and dedication throughout this year-long process.