The County Executive Office respectfully submits the Fiscal year 2013/14 Proposed Budget for
your review and consideration, in accordance with Merced County Ordinance 1679.
Department heads and their staff cooperation and effort throughout the development of this
Proposed Budget is much appreciated.
While certain economic indicators have improved at the national, state and local levels, this
year's budget still proposes challenges. Overall, the county's budget outlook has shown some
promising signs with a slight increase projected in local revenues for FY 2013/14. However,
caution is recommended with expenses still exceeding revenues. The key challenge going
forward with the improving economy is whether to consider further reductions to close the
deficit or identify one time funding or adjustments to bridge the gap.
The region has seen steady year-over improvements to employment figures. The most recent
data shows Merced County's unemployment rate has fallen to 15.5 percent, which is down
from 18 percent a year ago. Along with steadying and some increasing property values, there is
hope that the local economy has stabilized. However any recovery or significant growth in
revenues will be slow and take many years. Next fiscal year, property tax revenue is projected
to remain relatively flat.
In addition, uncertainties still exist related to the effects of the AB 109 realignment, healthcare
reform, the dissolution of redevelopment agencies and the outcome of the State budget that
will have long term implications.
The additional responsibility associated with AB 109 - prison realignment - has been met with
insufficient revenues from the State to manage the influx of offenders. County staff is to be
commended for their efforts to work together and develop key partnerships to meet the many
challenges. Although the County will see some programmatic revenue growth in FY 2013/14, it
still falls very short of the resources required to provide the appropriate full range of services.
Staff continues to work at a statewide level regarding the statewide allocation of AB 109
funding and locally to identify creative ways to maximize the use of resources available to the
system.
The Governor's May Revise drops the Governor's county-based approach, and commits to a
state-led Medi-Cal expansion under health care reform. Newly eligible single, childless adults
would be eligible to enroll and receive Medi-Cal benefits effective January 1, 2014. The
Governor has proposed that the expansion will result in savings to counties for indigent health
care services. However, county funding for indigent health care varies statewide. In addition,
counties anticipate a caseload of uninsured individuals that will remain in the local indigent
health care system during the transition. In Merced County, 1991 Health realignment revenue
is split based on the original state formula : 57 percent toward community health services and
43 percent toward indigent health care services. Some proposals being discussed would shift as
much as 60 percent to the State with 40 percent remaining with the local community health
system. This proposal would result in over a $2 million dollar loss for Public Health programs
and no funding available for any residual indigent population. At the time of this writ ing,
discussions between the State and counties are in process regarding the impact of the Medi-Cal
expansion.
In addition to the state/county structural relationship with the expansion, health care reform
will have other impacts to County Departments. One example, your Board has already
approved the Human Services Agency implementing a regional call center for nine counties to
screen clients for eligibility to health coverage programs and assist with the selection of a
health plan. The call center is to be operational by October 1, 2013 and is 100 percent funded
from Federal and State resources.
While the State Supreme Court upheld the State Legislature's intent to dissolve redevelopment
agencies in December 2011, uncertainties still exist with the determination of enforceable
obligations and the disposition of RDA assets and liabilities. Cities and counties across the state
are still in discussions with the Department of Finance and filing various legal actions regarding
pass through funding and enforceable obligations. Although there has been little impact
related to Merced County's RDA since it was relatively new with little tax growth, there will be
an impact on the countywide apportionment of property taxes, as well as the pass through
agreement from the City of Merced RDA to the Library. However, until the outcome of the
various discussions and legal actions are known, the Proposed Budget does not include any
estimated revenues as a result of the dissolution of RD A's.
The FY 2013/14 Proposed Budget is $462.0 million, which is up from last year's Final Budget of
$432.0 million. Of the $462.0 million, $372.6 is programmatic funding and $89.4 million is
funded from local discretionary resources (net county costs). With local revenues projected at
$66.4 million and a fund balance projected at $18.0 million for a total of $84.4 million, the
Proposed Budget includes approximately $5 .0 million in one-time adjustments/revenues to
balance.
The largest components driving the increase in Net County Costs are approximately $4.5 million
in salary and benefit accounts (a higher employer contribution for retirement, the furloughs
expiring per the labor agreements, and health insurance); approximately $1.0 million in
correctional facilities based on current census numbers; and approximately $1.9 million in
reduced revenue (property tax administrative fees, SB 678, Title IV-E, departmental trusts and
collections, State and Federal funding).
The Proposed Budget is based upon current laws in effect and does not consider proposals
included in the Federal or Governor's May Revise Budget. It is a temporary operating plan unt il
the uncertainty surrounding several economic and state impacts are clarified. These
uncertainties have made it challenging to specifically identify a clear spending plan at this t ime.
Key elements of the budget and final recommendations will hinge on the fund balance or cash
carry over, as well as the outcome of the State Budget.
As information on year end and the State Budget become clearer, staff will be working with all
departments to identify recommendations to m1nim1ze the use of one-time
adjustments/revenue and address any state impacts for your consideration at Final Budget.
