The County Executive Office respectfully submits the Fiscal Year 2016-17 Proposed Budget for your review
and consideration, in accordance with Merced County Ordinance 1679. The cooperation and efforts of
department heads and their staff during the development of this Proposed Budget is greatly appreciated.
While evaluating the state of this year’s budget, the local economy has reached some promising milestones that
establish hope moving forward as various economic indicators appear to be trending in the right direction.
Merced County’s unemployment rate has steadily declined over the past six years and is now at pre-recession
levels, the job growth rate is increasing, the economic output growth rate is up and median home prices are
steadily rising.
Although the County’s budget has begun to stabilize with the improved financial outlook, the prospect of a
strengthening economy has been tempered by sluggish revenues from the State. Governor Brown’s May
Revision shows a reduction of $1.9 billion in tax revenue, reflecting low April income tax receipts and
lackluster sales tax receipts. There is also the potential for another economic downturn on the horizon. The
historical economic cycle shows that recessions occur on average every five to six years, and it has been seven
years since the end of the last recession. With the Central Valley still rebounding from the last recession, it is
sensible to address every budget with a modest approach.
While the local budget situation has improved, there are still uncertainties that diminish the potential for a truly
stabilized economy. One of the foremost factors creating uncertainty in the local economy right now is the
ongoing impacts of the drought. The most recent data show Merced County has moved to “extreme drought”
intensity from “exceptional drought” intensity following a full year of above average rainfall. However, more
than four years of drought is having a lingering effect on the economy, considering agriculture is the County’s
top economic driver. In a best-case scenario, the recovery from this drought emergency will continue at a
modest pace.
Despite the uncertainties with the State and local economies, this year’s financial standing provides some
opportunity to consider actions that would improve the County’s service model and address key service areas.
The Proposed Budget contains recommendations on public safety, ongoing implementation of water
regulations, investments in technology systems and infrastructure, improvements to public access and investments in employee safety, as well as beginning to restore staffing in development/permitting and support
service areas that were impacted the most through the recession.
By continuing a fiscally prudent approach to this year’s Proposed Budget, the County has the ability to maintain
and further its goal of a sustainable budget.
STATE BUDGET
Unless there are any significant changes forthcoming, the State budget over the next two years is in balance
despite reduced revenue expectations. However, the Governor’s office is projecting that the State’s
commitments will soon surpass projected revenues. The annual shortfall is projected to be more than $4 billion
by FY 2019-20. Some of this projected figure can be attributed to the expiration of the temporary increase to
sales and income taxes implemented through Proposition 30 in 2012. Whether to extend those income tax rates
for another 12 years will be up to voters this November.
Regardless of the outcome on the tax extension, this projected shortfall from the State is another solid indicator
of why it is important to have the foresight to brace for another downturn in the economy. The State is trying to
lessen the impact of the next recession through its Proposition 2 “Rainy Day Fund.” It would behoove the
County to also exercise financial caution in the coming years.
Further uncertainties remain with State program reforms and their impacts to County services. One such
restructuring is the Continuum of Care Reform under Assembly Bill 403 (Stone). The legislation, already
signed into law and effective January 1, 2017, calls for comprehensive reform efforts regarding the physical and
emotional development of foster youth as well as increasing youth placements in family settings while
transitioning away from group homes. This reform represents a major restructuring that is anticipated to place
additional requirements on social services, probation, and mental health agencies without adequate funding to
carry out required tasks. In addition to restructuring the youth placements, other responsibilities include the
certification of short-term residential treatment centers and treatment foster family agencies through mental
health plans, evaluating provider performance, and providing core services such as mental health treatment and
social services. The extent of these impacts will be realized as the legislation is implemented over the next year.
Transportation funding remains a challenge for State and local governments as deteriorating infrastructure
becomes a growing problem. With diminished fuel excise tax revenues resulting from more fuel efficient
vehicles, the source of funding for road repair has fallen well below the necessary level. There are three
different transportation funding proposals under consideration by the legislature that would generate between
$3.6 billion and $7 billion a year. These proposals include several modifications to funding mechanisms, such
as increasing fuel excise taxes, increasing vehicle licensing fees and imposing annual fees for zero-emissions
vehicles. Staff will continue to monitor these three transportation funding proposals as they are considered by
lawmakers.
COUNTY BUDGET OVERVIEW
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is $576.6 million, which is up $39.5 million from last year’s Final Budget of
$537.1 million. This increase is primarily due to the Mental Health Facility Remodel Project, which is funded
by dedicated program revenues. Without the Mental Health Facility Remodel Project, the overall Proposed Budget would be $522.3 million, or down $14.8 million from last year. Of the $576.6 million, $463.6 million is
programmatic funding and $113 million requires funding from local discretionary resources (net county costs).
With local revenues projected at $82.7 million and a projected fund balance of $29.0 million for a total of
$111.7 million, the Proposed Budget includes approximately $1.3 million in one-time adjustments/revenues to
balance the shortfall. While these numbers have improved upon those from prior years, challenges still exist
with the economy and this budget process needs to be approached with caution, especially with the heavy
reliance on fund balance. Reducing dependence on the fund balance will be critical to current and future
financial stability.
As in the past, the Proposed Budget continues the priority of restoring or augmenting public safety efforts. It
reflects the continued commitment and priority by the Board to provide our public safety personnel with the
necessary resources. Law enforcement and our local justice system play vital roles in our communities, and the
Board has been supportive of these areas in a variety of ways, including funding capital projects, increasing
staffing and authorizing equipment purchases. In prior fiscal years, the Board has allocated more than $30
million in additional investments for public safety efforts, and the public safety/justice functions continue to
maintain the greatest share of County discretionary resources at 54 percent.
The County relies on the publically-elected law enforcement leaders to make recommendations to solve issues
related to their departments. For example, the past two year’s budgets allocated resources based on these
recommendations that focused on the homicides and gang violence issues in our communities by establishing a
specific patrol unit in high-risk communities and beginning to develop an analytical intelligence-gathering
function in the Gang Task Force. State funding is currently being sought to help carry out this strategy. If this
proposal is successful, staff is committed to identifying the necessary resources for any match requirements at
Final Budget.
The County is also moving forward with plans to renovate its John Latorraca Correctional Center through funds
recently awarded by the State. Under Senate Bill 863, the FY 2015-16 State Budget included $500 million for
local jail reconstruction. The County was awarded $40 million from the State for the work. The total project
budget is approximately $45 million, which is made up of $40 million in State funding, $4 million in County
match and $1 million in County in-kind match. These funds will help address security and infrastructure
concerns at the John Latorraca Correctional Center while improving the capacity to house programs that reduce
recidivism. In addition to the one-time capital cost for the project, an increase of approximately $1.0 million in
staffing will be necessary by the end of the project. The Proposed Budget includes recommendations that
continue the next phase of additional staffing as a result of the renovation project.
As part of the effort to reduce recidivism and prison overcrowding, the Governor’s Administration has
continued to emphasize the State’s Public Safety Realignment through Assembly Bill 109. The funding
formula was recently restructured to provide better equity for Valley counties that often face more difficult
socioeconomic factors than coastal counties. This balance in funding allocation together with the County’s
ongoing commitment to providing services to address offender issues has continued to advance the
Administration’s goals of reducing recidivism. Since the County is now in a better position with the revised
funding formula, staff is working with the local Community Corrections Partnership regarding additional
recommendations that would increase services based on evidence-based practices and focus additional efforts
on the Gang Task Force for Final Budget. With public safety programs and proposals in constant shift at the State level, the County will continue to work with its local public safety partners to identify new methods to
combat crime in our communities.
During the past couple years, the Board has undertaken significant strategic planning efforts toward economic
development with Castle Commerce Center being one of the key areas. The focus has been on facilitating a
public-private partnership to bring investments to the facility and develop the infrastructure necessary to support
a job-creating industrial user. Staff anticipates our logistics consultant having a prospectus presented to the
financial community in the fall of 2016. Depending on the development of prospectus, it may be necessary to
bring further recommendations at Final Budget.
There have been some encouraging signs across the County showing that economic development efforts are
trending in a positive direction. Last year, the County saw a 67 percent increase in the number of Conditional
Use Permits and a 24 percent increase in Administrative Applications compared to the previous year. This
suggests that business is growing and provides some hope for a stabilized economy. The Proposed Budget
includes recommendations to restore some staffing and further invest in technology related to permitting
activities, as well as to complete the one-stop permitting center.
The Proposed Budget is based upon current laws in effect and does not consider proposals included in the
Federal or Governor's May Revise Budget. It is a temporary operating plan until the uncertainty surrounding
several economic and State impacts are clarified. These uncertainties have made it challenging to specifically
identify a clear spending plan at this time, which necessitates the further review of some areas. Key elements of
the budget and final recommendations will hinge on the fund balance or cash carry over, as well as the outcome
of the State Budget.
As information on year-end and the State Budget become clearer, staff will continue working with all
departments to identify options and recommendations to further address the shortfall and address key priority
service delivery areas for your consideration at Final Budget.