The County Executive Office respectfully submits the Fiscal Year 2015-16 Proposed Budget for your review
and consideration, in accordance with Merced County Ordinance 1679. The cooperation and efforts of
department heads and their staff during the development of this Proposed Budget is greatly appreciated.
The County's budget continues to recover and stabilize as we move further from the economic recession that
lasted from 2007 to 2009, severely impacting revenues and services. However, it is crucial to approach the next
few years with caution. The historical economic cycle shows a recession occurs on average every five to six
years. Although revenues have grown, it has been six years since the end of the last recession, and the
Governor's May Revise suggests proceeding cautiously in anticipation of the next downturn. Valley counties
normally take longer to rebound from economic downturns, making a modest budget approach even more
sensible for this region.
Furthermore, hopes for a stabilized economy continue to be diminished by a worsening drought. Now in its
fourth year, there are no indicators that the current dry conditions are relenting. The 2014 water year was the
driest on record for the State. With agriculture serving as Merced County's top industry, this drought will have a
continued drawdown effect on the regional economy and employment. This crisis adds a significant degree of
uncertainty to an otherwise improving budget outlook.
Although uncertainty exists, the improving outlook does provide an opportunity to begin evaluating some
strategic areas. The Proposed Budget does include certain recommendations on public safety, water issues,
labor, economic development and one-time resources toward long term deferred maintenance and infrastructure
issues. If the revenue outlook continues to improve, then further recommendations would allow this trend to
moderately continue. By taking a tempered and prudent approach to spending, the County can be positioned to
minimize the effects of the next economic downturn and hopefully maintain a sustainable budget.
STATE BUDGET
California's rebounding economy resulted in a $6.7 billion increase in General Fund revenues compared to the
January budget. The majority of this (approximately $5.5 billion) will be used on schools. Proposition 2 - the
State's Rainy Day Fund - will also absorb $633 million of the additional revenue. An additional $633 million
will go toward paying down debts and liabilities. The Administration is taking a cautious approach to managing the spike in revenue as opposed to making significant long-term funding commitments. The May Revision
commits new spending to three additional areas: assistance for the State's lowest-income workers, a two-year
freeze on tuition for undergraduates at State universities, and health care and safety-net services for
undocumented immigrants who gain Permanent Residence Under Color of Law statutes under the President's
executive actions.
The on-going drought is imposing hardships on California's 58 counties, but continues to severely impact the
Central Valley. While several efforts have been made at the County level to address groundwater supplies and
assist individuals suffering from the drought, the State has also provided resources toward managing the crisis.
Since Governor Brown declared a state of emergency in January 2014, approximately $1.9 billion has been
appropriated to aid communities impacted by the drought and fund critical water infrastructure projects. The
May Revision includes an additional $2.2 billion in one-time resources to continue these efforts. The purpose of
this funding is to protect and expand local water supplies while addressing emergency conditions.
Transportation funding continues to be a challenge as deteriorating infrastructure across the State becomes a
growing problem. Shrinking fuel excise tax revenues resulting from more fuel-efficient vehicles has diminished
the State's primary source of funding for repairing and maintaining transportation infrastructure. The
Administration is currently working with the Legislature on transportation proposals and hopes to develop a
funding package by the end of the year. There are several potential options to fix this funding system from a
long-tenn perspective, including a mileage-based revenue collection methodology. Many of the immediate
discussions have revolved around increases to fuel excise taxes and increased registration fees to generate
additional revenues for the State, counties and cities. A transportation funding package could bring State and
local governments closer to a more reliable solution for roadway maintenance revenues.
COUNTY BUDGET OVERVIEW
The FY 2015/16 Proposed Budget is $505.8 million, which is up $16.6 million from last year's Final Budget of
$489.2 million. Of the $505.8 million, $400.7 million is programmatic funding and $105.1 million requires
funding from local discretionary resources (net county costs). With local revenues projected at $76.0 million
and a projected fund balance of $27.5 million for a total of $103.5 million, the Proposed Budget includes
approximately $1 .6 million in one-time adjustments/revenues to balance the shortfall.
Many of the recommendations included in the FY 2015116 Proposed Budget focus on one-time costs without
creating ongoing financial commitments, a portion of which deals with long term deferred maintenance and
infrastructure issues. There is also a shift in how future finances are managed under the new finance/human
resources/payroll system, requiring changes in the budget unit numbering and order included in the Proposed
Budget. The new system also shifts the County from a cash basis to an accrual basis, resulting in a one-time
impact to the General Fund. Any budget adjustments related to the change to an accrual basis will be brought at
Final Budget once actual year end numbers are known.
In order to address the ongoing drought and declining groundwater levels locally, the Board of Supervisors
unanimously adopted a groundwater ordinance on March 17, 2015. The purpose of the ordinance is to prohibit
the unsustainable extraction/conveyance of groundwater outside of a basin. Several exemptions and processes
are in place to minimize the impact to operations of water districts and other users with long-term sustainable
groundwater management plans. This ordinance will transition the County into recently-passed state legislation known as the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act (SGMA), which calls for more stringent groundwater
oversight. SGMA will require County staff to work together with various local agencies to develop
Groundwater Sustainability Agencies (GSA), which are responsible for managing groundwater basins and
developing Groundwater Sustainability Plans. GSAs must be formed by June 30, 2017. Merced County will
continue working to help achieve the guidelines outlined in the SGMA legislation. In order to accomplish this,
the Proposed Budget recommends allocating some staffing and contractual resources toward implementing the
groundwater ordinance and SGMA.
During the past couple years, the Board has invested resources toward economic development activities to keep
the County competitive, improve the local business climate and further develop resources. Most recently, A
Memorandum of Understanding was approved by each city that formalized the collaborative relationship
between the County and each of those jurisdictions pertaining to economic development roles and
responsibilities to benefit the entire community. These efforts will continue into the new fiscal year, as well as
efforts to bring further commercial activity to Castle Commerce Center. The Proposed Budget does include
resources specifically meant for finding an investment partner to help bring additional improvements to Castle.
The State's Public Safety Realignment through AB 109 continues to serve as the Administration's solution to
reduce prison overcrowding, costs and recidivism. The funding formula has been restructured to provide better
equity for valley counties that often deal with worse socioeconomic factors than various coastal counties. This
balance in the funding allocation coupled with the County's continued commitment to establishing best-practice
services that address the full range of offender issues should work toward accomplishing the Administration's
goal of reducing recidivism. The restructured formula provides an opportunity to restore some public safety
positions and increase capacity for supportive and rehabilitative services, such as the Day Reporting Center.
The Proposed Budget is based upon current laws in effect and does not consider proposals included in the
Federal or Governor's May Revise Budget. It is a temporary operating plan until the uncertainty surrounding
several economic and State impacts are clarified. These uncertainties have made it challenging to specifically
identify a clear spending plan at this time, which necessitates the further review of some areas. Key elements of
the budget and final recommendations will hinge on the fund balance or cash carry over, as well as the outcome
of the State Budget.
As information on year-end and the State Budget become clearer, staff will continue working with all
departments to identify options and recommendations to further address the shortfall and address key priority
service delivery areas for your consideration at Final Budget.
