In June 2014, a proposed Budget was presented in detail built upon reduced resources with competing needs. The challenges Mono County
faces continue due to sluggish economic recovery and the reality that how we did business previously must adapt to the resource base we have.
To transform into a truly innovative and sustainable operation, difficult choices have been made; focus and discipline in our actions is required.
Balancing a one-year Budget is necessary and we should not let that obligation cloud our need for long-term fiscal discipline and greater
openness.
The FY 2014-2015 CAO Recommended Budget as published is balanced and totals $65.9 million with a General Fund component of $34.4
million. It funds 265.4 Full Time Equivalents. The Board direction from the June workshops, including the straw votes from the General Fund
and Non-General Fund Policy items has been incorporated. As is required by state law, this Budget must be balanced and must be adopted by
October 2nd.
We balanced the Budget using a series of strategies that were presented at the FY 2013-2014 Midyear budget session on February 11th. These
strategies yielded varying levels of savings. This took tremendous work with all departments to preserve core services.
In summary, and presented in the Table below, is how the gap was closed:
1. Rebasing Labor costs (achieved): Paramedics labor budget was reduced by $433,641 and Deputy Sheriff’s negotiations (DSA) were
completed with a $26,325 increase netting savings of $407,316.
2. Rebasing Labor costs (sought) - Furloughs (temporary savings through unpaid time off): We remain in active negotiations with our
employees in the Mono County Public Employees group on this and thanks to these ongoing talks intend to bring forward resources that
can undo some of the more difficult aspects of this Budget on September 16th.
3. Workforce Reduction through Attrition: The County implemented the Mono County Voluntary Separation Incentive by using one time
funding and saved $588,040 all of which was used to balance the Budget. These positions will not be filled for at least two fiscal years and
these savings will help us beyond this one year.
4. Strategic Planning and Re-Design of County Services: This process is well underway thanks to our employees. Savings are occurring and
more importantly new ideas are being heard and explored for efficacy. These ideas will take the longest to implement and are part of the
broader Strategic Planning effort. We must have a longer term plan built on culture change.
5. Fund Balance: This is the unused savings from prior year’s Budget to close the gap. Projected at $1.5 million this source did not meet
expectations and came in at $1.17 million.
6. Use of Reserves: The use of Reserves as a strategy was employed in prior years and drained Reserves from over $6 million to their legal
County policy minimum 5% of General Fund expenditures. Due to unprecedented FY 2013-2014 midyear cuts, $737,331 was placed into
Reserves and was then able to be used this year in balancing the Budget. This leaves our reserves at their minimum.
7. Layoffs: Cost savings alternatives to furloughs or other concessions will need to be in place by September 16, 2014 or the legally mandated
balancing of the Budget will require involuntary reductions (layoffs) equal $490, 417. The depth and scope remains in our talks with labor
units.
The challenges Mono County faces continue due to sluggish economic recovery and the reality that how we did business previously no longer
applies. We must adapt to the resource base we have. The private sector economic recovery of the eastern Sierra is slow and is not broad
reaching. Local governments lag in the impacts of any upturn and it will be years before today’s activity impacts our revenues in a meaningful
way. Meanwhile, costs and the requirements for quality service continue.
As Mono County brings down costs to align with our resources on a sustainable moving forward basis, how we restructure, truly “who are we?”
is the question we must answer. The information presented during the June Budget Workshops remains our condition. On September 16th, the
changes between the proposed Budget of June and the Recommended Budget presented here will be highlighted and final direction requested.
Tremendous appreciation is given to the staff and the department leadership for developing their best responses to our financial challenges. All
of our organization’s work is reflected in this Recommended Budget for your consideration.
Thank you to our employees who bring the Budget to life and for their unwavering public service to the residents and visitors of Mono County. It
is their commitment, which ensures the foundation of this thriving community.
