Mono County is an incredible place where our quality of life is the cornerstone of
everything we do. The County government exists to provide the critical services in the
most efficient manner and should reflect the spirit of honoring the past, acknowledging
the present and planning for the future. County services should be the foundation to
creating the opportunities, infrastructures and services for residents and visitors present
and future. Elected officials, staff and volunteers are trustees for this breathtaking county.
Decisions must be mindful of lasting impacts as well as addressing long term challenges
and immediate needs.
Entering this year, Mono County weathered five years of recession as revenues
diminished due to a flagging real estate market, reduced tourism and a growing demand
for public services. As the California and national economies recover, Mono County is
still seeking to find a firm, financial foundation. Although the Nation is in modest
recovery and California shows signs of the renewed economic rebound, Mono’s recovery
is not and will not be equal to pre-recession levels.
Mono County’s economy is slowly on the mend and our County government must
transform itself to the new normal while addressing long term challenges. It is this new
economic reality that requires us to change how we do business.
The Recommended Budget is balanced. It totals $63,177,543 with a General Fund
component of $35,738,734. It funds 285.1 Full Time Equivalents. It invests in
infrastructure, safe communities, economic and environmental stewardship and
strengthens civic services and community engagement. It both guides services and
programs for the next year and is the foundation for the Board of Supervisor’s and staff
effort to build a higher performing, strategically focused organization.
The Recommended Budget is presented in the context of required transformation.
Building upon the unprecedented public budget town hall meetings held for the first time by the County this year (See Appendix B for Notes, Questions and answers from those
sessions), the needed next steps include:
? Strategic Planning – We will continue the strategic planning effort started by the
Board to guide and improve County services, focus investments and strengthen
Mono County through an informed dialogue with the community;
? Increasing transparency and understanding of County budget and services –
By producing more frequent and accessible budget and program information, we
will communicate what, why, and how we serve the community;
? Strengthening our workforce – The County is a service organization driven by
core values to provide superior public services with committed employees. Through
professional development, training, recognition, innovation and accountability, we
will have the workforce with the skills to best serve Mono County residents and
visitors.
This Recommended Budget was built upon the current fiscal reality, the need to shift to
long-term planning, staff and department input, community dialogue and collaboration.
The document weighs the choices across the silos of government services and makes
budget recommendations to invest in our most critical services. Where possible,
departments requested budgets and we endeavored to make the request and the
recommended budget align. Where this was not possible, we worked to preserve
community services provided by the department and address the County’s longer term
fiscal issues. The detailed departmental budgets which follow demonstrate the ongoing
efforts to efficiently utilize scarce resources.
The Recommended Budget:
? Is balanced;
? Begins to rebuild the Reserves ($50,000 added);
? Funds Clean Air Vehicle mandates for first year to meet 2018-2028 deadlines
($1 million this year);
? Funds landfill services including closure cost schedule as mandated by current
solid waste system needs;
? Invests over $1.22 million in economic development and tourism services;
? Proposes no layoffs;
? Reduces an empty management position in Animal Control;
? Maintains public safety at current service levels;
? Maintains County’s local commitment to roads ($550,000);
? Provides health and safety services for all communities of Mono County;
? Increases transparent budget process for 2014-2015 and aligns with Fiscal Year
moving forward;
? Advances the Board initiated County Strategic Planning effort;
? Funds the Senior Meal program at prior year levels.
This Budget does not: 
 
?	Replenish reserves quickly; 
?	Provide any resources for employee compensation increases; 
?	Dedicate needed resources for larger technology, road or other infrastructure investments; 
?	Provide resources for long term facility re-configuration or upgrade. 
 
Mono County Budget Overview 
 
The Mono County Recommended Budget is made up of Funds: 1) The General Fund which is primarily comprised of local property, sales and tourism taxes; Charges (fees) for services, some state and federal revenues and use of prior year fund balance. The GF is approximately 55% of the Total Budget. 2) All other funds come from special restricted revenues and are primarily from state and federal funds for specific programs and services. All other funds represent 45% of  the Total Budget. The total number of Full Time Equivalent employees is 285.1
The Recommended FY 2013-2014 Total Budget is funded from several sources including:
•	33% from Property, Sales and Tourist taxes;
•	10% from Charges for Services; 
•	15% from Other sources; 
•	31% from State/Federal revenues; 
•	11% from use of Prior year Fund Balances. 
FY 2013-2014 FY Total Recommended Budget Overview – The Total Budget includes all funding sources and is how all county services are funded.  The Total Budget has all state and federal funds for state and federal programs which counties must administer. 
 
?	26% for Law Enforcement – Sheriff’s Department, Jail, District Attorney, Probation; 
?	20% for Public Works which includes roads, county buildings and facilities; 
?	15% for General Government –Board of Supervisors, County Administration, 
Finance, Assessor, County Counsel, Information Technology, Fund for Contingencies; 
?	10% for Public Health Services – Behavioral (Mental) Health and medical services for unserved; 
?	8% for Social Aid Programs – Social Services; Child Welfare; Economic Assistance; Job Training/Workforce Investment; Medi-Cal eligibility; Cal Fresh;   
?	7% for Paramedic Services; 
?	5% for Enterprise Funds (administered within departments but created to be self sustaining funds) which include Solid Waste, Cemeteries and Airports; 
?	4% for Community Service Areas (CSAs) – Special Districts to provide particular services to specific communities; 
?	2% for Economic Development – Economic Development staff; Tourism marketing; Fisheries Commission; support of local non-profits; 
?	2% for Civic Services – Elections, Clerk/Recorder; 
?	2% for Capital Improvements – Parks, County buildings, accessibility projects and other public infrastructure; 
?	1% for Internal Service Funds – Motor Pool and Office equipment 
The FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget General Fund -- The General Fund is a subset of the Total Budget and is primarily funded by local sources (33%). It also receives some funding from charge for services (10%); State and federal revenues (31%) and unexpended prior year (Carry Over) funds (11%).
The General Fund has the greatest discretion by the Board of Supervisors to support services. For the FY 2013-2014 
Recommended Budget,  the General Fund uses include to the following services: 
 
?	44% for Law Enforcement – Sheriff’s Department, Jail, District Attorney, Probation; 
?	24% for General Government – Board of Supervisors, County Administration, 
Finance, Assessor, County Counsel, Information Technology, Fund for Contingencies; 
?	15% for Public Works which includes roads, county buildings and facilities; 
?	12% for Paramedic Services; 
?	1% for Public Health Services – Behavioral (Mental) Health and medical services for unserved; 
?	3% for Civic Services – Elections, Clerk/Recorder; 
?	2% for Economic Development – Economic Development staff; Tourism marketing; Fishery Commission; support of local non-profits; 
?	Less than 1% for Social Aid Programs – Social Services; Child Welfare; Economic Assistance; Job Training/Workforce Investment; Medi-Cal eligibility; Cal Fresh;
Mono County’s Budget remains in declining position – Since 2003, the overall Budget trend has been upward for our County budgets. However, since 2010 County Total Budgets have been headed downward. 
The real estate market fueled property tax bubble is over and we are still correcting from its collapse. Southern California’s real estate market recoveries have previously been leading indicators for Mono County.  Traditionally, there has been an 18-24 month lag between the two private markets.  The County will have some time in seeing recovered property tax incomes as an additional delay in realizing any increase in property tax rolls.
Counties across California have an additional 18-24 month period before the increased property values convert to revenues for the jurisdiction. The FY 2012-2013 Mono County Property Tax Roll Valuation closed down .38%.  Current staff estimates indicate the possible increase of .50 to .75% increase.  Very modest if realized and delayed in impact. 
 
General Fund Aligning Revenues with Expenses -- Mono County’s General Fund must align annual Revenues and Expenses and minimize reliance on Carry-Over Funds. The General Fund for the last 10 years follows the same real estate bubble path and is still finding the new lowered base. 

Although use of Carry Over Funds is an accepted budgeting practice in both private and public sectors, we should be wary of deep reliance on them. Carry Over funds result primarily from Salary Savings.
As we improve our budgeting, use of Carry Over funds should diminish unless for building reserves, 
strengthening contingencies, or funding onetime events. As with any household budget, if a family happens to have some money left over at the end of the month, that should not be an invitation to spend it next month on new ongoing expenses. The FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget uses $6.678 million ($3.554 million in the General Fund) of Carry Over Funds, but has directed them to one time expenses where feasible. 
Doing more with less people – Mono County is filled with committed, hard working employees who serve the community every day. They too have weathered through difficult economic times and continued to serve the community as their ranks have dwindled and their responsibilities grown.  
 
Labor costs represent approximately 51% of our costs and those costs drivers impact our budget. Due to increased compensation costs (salary and benefits) from 2001 to 2008 combined with revenues not meeting pace with those costs from 2009 to present, employee costs remain an ongoing challenge. The County currently has less Full Time Equivalent employees than it did in 2003 yet our cost are not less and this trend could continue. It is required of us to have a conversation about re-basing total compensation costs across all employees groups.  
 
Although this Recommended Budget does not require layoffs, it does not have any room for expanding our workforce through the General Fund or looking at any compensation increases. We must face a threshold question: Will we be an organization of more people with lower compensation costs or one with less workers who make more? 
 
This question requires ongoing analysis, dialogue with our employees and the understanding that our service levels are driven by our staff members. This issue must be addressed in this and future budget cycles. The recommended Budget funds 285.1 Full Time Equivalents (FTEs). 
Policy Items -- In each budget cycle, County departments review services and staffing levels and present Policy Items for Board consideration. For FY 2013-2014, the departments submitted $8.39 Million in Policy Item requests. The Recommended Budget is proposing $2.97 million or 35.3% of the requests.  In reviewing the Department or standing policy driven requests, the lens of long-term issues and diminished resources was used.  
 
The Board has the option to delay Policy Item requests until Midyear Budget review in case unexpected revenue or expenses occur. The following list reflects the department, the Policy Item Request and the CAO’s Recommended Budget’s funding of that item.
Mono County Long Term Liabilities and Unmet Needs 
 
As the FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget was built, we focused on the Board’s direction to ensure unmet long-term liabilities were quantified and began to be addressed. As departments assessed the issues, the costs of these liabilities and unmet needs have been estimated.  
 
The following table reflects currently identified issues that the County must address.  The costs are estimates and will be refined.  Further, the list may grow but as we do the needed strategic planning and focused budget work, the list will be addressed. 
State and Federal Issues -- The 2013-2014 State Budget passed with minor fanfare.  The largest issues of concern going into the deliberation were the impacts of the Affordable Care Act, ongoing realignment costs and the state of the economy. Although the final impacts of the federal roll out of the Affordable Care Act are still being analyzed, for Mono County we will see more uninsured starting to receive services.
Realignment remains an ongoing challenge and requires us to plan for the future of our jail facilities.  Although the ongoing work between the various departments via the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) will create new innovative methods for dealing with lesser offenders (home confinement and transitional community based services), the growth of long term inmates will impact both the staff and the facilities. We must re-double our efforts to find planning grants and find long term funding to address these impacts.  
Federal budget challenges will also impact Mono County.   The County is seeing impacts through the reductions in staff capacity at the Forest Service and other federal agencies.  Mono County’s future is built upon the economic activity associated with access to the incredible places of the Eastern Sierra. In addition, economic development areas such as film and television activities require the federal government to be an able partner in accessing public lands.  
The other federal action which could impact the Mono County Budget is in the Property In Lieu of Taxes (PILT) payment.  Due to Sequestration, a uniform cut across federal expenditures, there was concern that we would lose the entire payment.  Ultimately, it was $13,736 less than last year or 2% less. As there is not any reliable information about its future availability currently, staff will be monitoring this funding and continue to seek out advocacy efforts with our Congressional delegation to protect this funding source.
Budget Town Hall Meetings and Furthering the 
Strategic Plan Process -- Early in 2013, the Board of Supervisors launched development of the Mono County Strategic Plan. Given the County’s reducing resources and the increasing, unaddressed liabilities, a Strategic Plan is required to shift the County organization from being reactive to short term crises to proactive in addressing long-term issues.  
In the first half of 2013, the Board held five public sessions and began collecting and identifying critical issues facing the County.  These Board meetings were on January 15th, March 12th, April 19th, May 14th and 21st.  The draft document capturing these issues is in Appendix A.  
 
In addition to these sessions, the Board directed staff to host public town hall meetings on the Budget throughout Mono County.  These Budget town hall meetings were a first for the County. There were six of them and were held in each Supervisorial District and geographically throughout Mono County.  
 
The meetings were held in the following locations: 
 
?	Crowley Lake on July 8th with 20 attendees; 
?	Bridgeport on July 9th with 12 attendees; 
?	Walker on July 11th with 27 attendees; 
?	Chalfant Valley on July 15th with 6 attendees; ? Mammoth Lakes on July 16th with 11 attendees; ? June Lake on July 18th with 24 attendees. 
 
A few members of County Staff attended all of the meetings with the largest turnout of staff being at the both the Bridgeport and Mammoth Lakes meetings due to these being full Board of Supervisors meetings.  An additional outreach to employees included sending an electronic copy of the town hall presentations (Appendix C) and the request that staff send in their feedback. These comments along with those written comments from the public are included in Appendix D.  
 
These meetings were an opportunity to collect comments and questions about the Budget and bring the conversation to the public. Staff has attempted to provide responses that are included in Appendix B. From these meetings there were some ideas which are already under review and some new ones which will require further follow up. This public engagement process is not a one-time event and reflects the Board’s and staff’s commitment to transparency and how we can better serve the community. Appendix D confirms comments received from the public after the community meetings ended. 

In building the Recommended Budget, the issues raised in the initial Board led Strategic Planning sessions and in the Budget Town Hall meetings were considered. However, in order to truly begin a long term Strategic Plan development, more work is needed.   
 
Moving forward from this new commitment to transparency and public engagement, Strategic Planning will continue after this Budget season.  Strategic Planning takes time and will require all of us to participate and to ensure the public is at the table.  
 
We are recommending ten weeks of weekly public meetings on the County’s Strategic Plan.  CAO’s office will work with all departments and the Board to design a format that solicits greater involvement. The proposed schedule and format will be brought to the Board in September.  It is intended that starting in early October, weekly evening 
meetings (two in every Supervisorial District) be held that discuss the County's Mission,
Vision and Values and create the Strategic Plan Focus areas needed to guide the longterm
work. Online resources will also be provided and staff will be asked repeatedly for
their feedback through a series of forums (staff meetings, special meetings and other
forms of feedback).
The work to develop a prioritized list, a culling of those issues, and the Board's review
and approval of the Plan will take several months. This Plan will become a long-term
guide for future budget and policy issues and should reflect only those most critical
items.
Future Budget Process
It is recommended the County budget cycle be completely aligned with the fiscal year of
July 1st to June 30th. Most local governments have moved to this schedule to ensure
adoption of a final Board approved Budget by July 1st. As part of this budget calendar,
CAO is also recommending quarterly Budget updates to be presented at Board meetings.
These updates would add to the Midyear Budget Session. It is also recommended the
Midyear Budget Session be a time to establish budget policies and development
parameters.
Conclusion
The Recommended Budget is balanced, starts to rebuild reserves, funds crucial services
and addresses long-term liabilities. It is a first step towards moving the County from
being reactive to a proactive strategically focused, higher performing organization. We
look forward to the Board and public discussion.
We want to thank the departments, their fiscal staffs and the hard working men and
women of the entire County team which have helped shape this Recommended Budget
for your consideration. Thank you to our employees who bring the Budget to life and for
their unwavering public service to the residents and visitors of Mono County. It is their
commitment which ensures the foundation of thriving community.