Recommended Actions:
1. Conduct public budget hearing,
2. Deliberate and reach consensus on budget and policy items,
3. Consider and potentially adopt resolution R16- A Resolution of the Mono County
Board of Supervisors Adopting the Final Mono County Budget for Fiscal Year 2016-2017,
4. Consider approving a transfer of any excess, unanticipated revenues into the Economic
Stabilization Fund,
5. Consider and potentially adopt the County Position Allocation list, and
6. Provide any desired direction to staff.
Fiscal Impact:
CAO Recommended budget includes $69,469,039 in expenditures, $65,372,966 in revenues and
relies on $4,096,073 in carryover fund balance. The General Fund component includes
$37,655,427 in expenditures, $34,539,971 in revenue and relies on $3,115,456 in carryover fund
balance. General Fund policy items of $1 ,279,251 have been removed from the CAO
Recommended Budget.
Department Requested budget includes $70,548,290 in expenditures, $65,372,966 in revenues
and relies on $5,175,324 in carryover fund balance. The General Fund component includes
$38,734,678 in expenditures, $34,539,971 in revenues and relies on $4,194,707 in carryover fund
balance. All policy items were included in the Department Requested Budget. There is not
sufficient projected carryover fund balance to adopt this version of the budget.
Discussion:
We are pleased to present Mono County's CAO Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2016-2017
to your Board and the public. Since your Board's budget workshop on August 11th, general fund
revenues were adjusted upward by $142,000 which was done to better align our revenue
estimates with actual prior year results of operations. Additionally, departments graciously agreed to forfeit savings from unfilled positions for all or a portion of the 2016-1 7 fiscal year to
generate an additional $541,830 in budget savings. General Fund carryover available for
spending conservatively totals $4 million. Upon completion of the closing process, spendable
fund balance will exceed this amount.
The accrual period ended on August 31st and over the next 3 0 days, staff will have a good idea of
what the excess fund balance will be. At that time, staff will return to your Board and propose
transferring those funds to the Economic Stabilization Fund to be appropriated at a future time.
While this fund is designed to preserve critical services during times when revenues are
insufficient to support operations, this fund can also provide funding for department
reorganizations, salary adjustments resulting from the comprehensive salary survey, unfunded
capital projects or other unmet needs.
The attached budget is organized in two reports: general fund and non-general fund. Proposed
budgets comparing Department Requested amounts with those recommended by the CAO is
summarized in the chart below.
The Fiscal Year 2016-2017 CAO Recommended Budget is sufficient to:
• Continue providing core services and programs.
• Restore MCPEA salaries after two years of furloughs, include MCPEA 2 percent cost of
living adjustment scheduled for January 1, 2017 and restore step increases.
• Partially fund the gap caused by a reduction in Highway User Tax for roads and provide
minimal funding for road maintenance and repairs. This year's CAO Recommended
Budget includes a general fund contribution to Roads of $850,000 which includes
additional funding for road maintenance and repairs of $200,000.
• Continue funding the County Emergency Medical Services without decreasing service
levels.
• Maintain Mono County's commitment to the Senior Services Program
• Meet Mono County's administrative policy to budget 1 percent of general fund
expenditures for contingencies.
• Transfer $256,909 to General Fund Reserves meeting the policy minimum if the policy
item is adopted.
• Move up to $541,830 of salary savings into an economic stabilization fund for future
personnel actions and/or other unfunded projects.
It is also important to recognize that this budget leaves many County needs unmet, and others
only partially fulfilled. Therefore, we acknowledge that this budget does not:
• Fund the jail construction project beyond the initial funding commitment of $203,000.
It is unknown at this time what the County's local investment will be in the project or
when the full amount of the County's commitment needs to be appropriated.
• Provide funding to fully satisfy CARB Compliance. This budget uses carryover funding to
purchase the two vehicles budgeted last year but delayed until this fiscal year.
• Restore County Reserves beyond the policy minimum.
• Set aside funding for South County Facility solutions.
• Set aside funding for the radio network replacement. Capital expenditures of $307,692
were included, but this is insufficient to complete the replacement of the radio
network.
• Funding to replace phone systems with VoIP is not included. Only a token start-up
amount of $25,000 is requested as a policy item.
• Include a long-term solution for the Bridgeport Clinic and/or Inmate Medical Services.
The Bridgeport Clinic was funded at last year's amount. The budget for Inmate Medical
Services was increased by a modest $26,500.
• Future fiscal impact resulting from negotiations with bargaining units as MOU's expire.
General Fund CAO Recommended Budget:
The Department Requested budget for the General Fund is not legally balanced. There is
insufficient carryover to support the entire amount of the resulting deficit of $4,096,073. General
Fund Departments collectively have requested spending that exceeds available resources by
$194,707. Therefore, the Department Requested Budget cannot legally be adopted as presented.
It is important to note that after the Board's Budget Workshop, additional collaboration between
the CAO, Finance and General Fund Departments took place. It was agreed to table the
remaining restructure requests until a later date when the details of each departments' restructure
can be fully coordinated with Human Resources. The fiscal impact of tabling the restructure
requests is an expenditure decrease of approximately $90,000 and the departments impacted
include Information Technology, District Attorney and Public Works. Department restructures
that have already been approved and/or either do not impact or decrease general fund
contribution are included in the CAO Recommended budget. Those departments include the
Assessor, Community Development, Probation and the Sheriff.
The CAO Recommended Budget includes salary and benefit savings of $451,830 resulting from
vacant positions we anticipate will be unfilled for all or some portion of this next fiscal year.
Previously, all vacant positions were budgeted at each position's annual cost plus the highest
level of benefits. Between delayed reorganizations and salary savings a total savings of $541 ,830
was achieved and is available to provide seed money for an economic stabilization fund.
Consistent with prior years, the CAO Recommended Budget does not include any policy items.
A schedule of requested policy items is included for Board consideration. At this time, the
maximum funding available for General Fund related policy items is $884,544.
Government Code Section 29007 requires the adopted budget to include a schedule listing
staffing for each budget unit along with the salary rate or range for each position and the total
allocated positions approved by the Board. The position allocation list is included here for
consideration by the Board. A summary of significant changes will be provided by staff during
the Board's meeting. It is important to remember that in addition to a change in the Personnel
Allocation List, changes in personnel must go through a Human Resources process.
Submitting a balanced County budget cannot be accomplished without the support, cooperation
and understanding of all County departments and certainly not without the untiring and dedicated
work of the CAO and Finance Department staff. Stephanie Butters deserves special recognition
because without her, none of us could complete our department budgets. Her patience, guidance
and accuracy are critical to our success. Preparing the budget is a long and sometimes difficult
process where many tough decisions must be made, and we sincerely appreciate every
department's willingness to cooperate and make sacrifices in the best interest of the County as a
whole. We offer our sincerest thanks to all of you.
