I am pleased to present the Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for your consideration
during budget hearings on June 1, 2016. The County of Monterey continues its commitment to
maintaining long-term structural balance while preserving services and investing in critical County
infrastructure. Since FY 2011-12 the County has strengthened its financial position ensuring the
County's long-term financial security. Your Board has made these investments while being
responsive to emerging needs within the community, and increasing contributions to partnering
organizations working for the betterment of Monterey County.
The recommended spending plan for FY 2016-17 includes expenditures for all funds, departments
and programs of $1.4 billion, an increase of $146.7 million from the current year adopted budget.
Almost a third of the increase in appropriations is attributed to increased labor costs, including
increases in employee health insurance rates and increases to the County's retirement contribution
rates, as well as the addition of 169.2 positions to County payrolls since the adoption of the current
year budget. The largest increase in staffing is in Natividad Medical Center, with a recommended
increase of 84.5 positions. Having served close to 1,400 trauma patients in its first year, the increase
in positions permits the hospital to meet the increased demand in its Level II Trauma Center and
expanding family practice residency program. The Health Department has also been increasing its
staffing levels, adding 52.3 positions to better serve the needs of the community resulting from
implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and the newly insured under Covered California.
Recommended appropriations for the General Fund total $634.5 million, representing growth of
$32.0 million over the current year adopted budget, financed by $622.2 million in revenue and $12.3
million in use of fund balance for capital projects and other one-time planned needs. Discretionary
"non-program" revenues are estimated at $206.2 million, representing an increase of $13.5 million
over the current year budget. This growth is attributed to higher property tax revenues, an increase in
transient occupancy tax (TOT) monies, and additional vehicle license fee revenues.
Recommended General Fund appropriations increase by $32.0 million over the current year adopted
budget. Much of this increase reflects the underlying cost of providing baseline service levels. Over
the last three budget cycles General Fund cost drivers - including pay raises authorized under current
bargaining agreements, retirement rate increases, increases in health insurance rates, and upgrade
costs for the County's enterprise resource planning (ERP) system have consumed the growth in

revenue. Departments that operate on a cost reimbursement basis can pass along some of these costs
to the Federal and State government. Other departments rely on augmentations of County
contributions to meet increased costs. Over the last few budget cycles, these departments have
endeavored to "do more with less" by eliminating vacant positions and cutting discretionary
spending to keep their budgets balanced. Through this process, departments have seen erosion of
their operational flexibility to withstand further cost increases without compromising service and
staffing levels. As a result of these cost pressures, many departments requested increases in County
contributions to offset service level impacts.
In order to balance initial baseline budgets for next fiscal year, in initial submittals to the Budget
Office, departments proposed cuts of 156.4 positions, including the loss of 83.0 vacancies and 73.4
filled positions. Criminal justice departments and the Resource Management Agency (RMA)
proposed the largest reductions in positions. While criminal justice departments proposed these
reduced positions due to rising cost pressures, RMA's proposed position reduction was largely a
result of increases in expenditures in the Road Fund due to recent winter storm events. These
expenditures coupled with the substantial decrease in the County's Highway Users Tax (HUTA)
revenue resulted in the depletion of Road Fund reserves which the department had previously
anticipated would carry over to FY 2016-17 to be used to offset operating costs.
To avoid these proposed countywide position reductions and mitigate potential operational impacts,
departments submitted augmentation requests to the Budget Office totaling $39.8 million in
appropriations, supported by $9.6 million in program revenue and $30.3 million in requested
General Fund Contributions - far exceeding available resources. In developing the Recommended
Budget, the County Administrative Office targeted available funding toward restoration of at-risk
filled positions to preserve the County's service levels, particularly in public safety departments. The
Recommended Budget restores 83.3 General Fund positions, including 49.3 filled positions and 34.0
vacancies. The Recommended Budget also includes 72.5 new positions of which 62.0 are for the
Health Department to support the expansion of primary care and behavioral health services and
funded by program revenue. Significant augmentations funded by General Fund Contributions
include:
• An increase of $5.9 million to the Sheriffs Office to restore all 17.0 of its at-risk filled
positions and to restore 24.0 vacancies in the patrol and jail operations and $1.7 million to
continue funding the replacement of patrol cars.
• An increase of $2.6 million in support of other County public safety programs, including:
$2.0 million to Probation to restore 20.0 filled positions at risk of layoffs due to cost
pressures; $347,974 to the Public Defender for restoring one position and two vacant
positions and fund replacement of computers; and an increase of $246,978 to the District
Attorney to restore funding for operational expenses such as extraordinary trial related
expenditures. Other non-public safety augmentations include: an increase of $294,587 to
Social Services for the expansion of homeless services in Monterey County; an increase of
$350,475 to the County Administrative Office to restore one filled Emergency Planner
position, fund contributions to the Monterey Peninsula Regional Water Authority, and fund
the OpenGov contract; and an increase of $202,764 to the Assessor-County Clerk Recorder
to restore one Appraiser II position.

Other key elements of the recommended General Fund budget include:
• Maintains a strategic reserve of $70.3 million ($56.1 million for the General Fund and $14.2
million for Natividad Medical Center).
• Appropriates $6.2 million for operational contingencies, in compliance with the Board's
policy for a contingency appropriation equal to one percent of estimated General Fund
revenue.
• Increases the County's contributions of transient occupancy tax revenue to the Monterey
County Convention and Visitors' Bureau (MCCVB), Arts Council, and Film Commission by
$142,753.
• Provides a $95,495 increase in County contributions for support of fire agencies and
emergency communications agencies.
Due to the limited discretionary funding available this year and the substantial amount of requests
for additional general funds, a number of requests are not funded in the Recommended Budget.
Those requests include a reduction in filled positions in the following departments: eight positions in
the Parks Department's resort operations due to a continued decline in revenue, one position in
County Counsel, and five positions in RMA due to the sustained decline in gas tax revenue. Also
not included in the Recommended Budget are future wage increases. In 2013, your Board approved
three year agreements with most bargaining units. Those agreements expire at the end of this fiscal
year (June 30, 2016). In considering future agreements, careful thought must be given to the
County's fiscal capacity to sustain additional operating costs, particularly in light of the significant
increases in employee benefit costs, without further impacting departmental staffing levels and
service goals.
In light of the challenges faced by departments, this Recommended Budget document represents a
continuing collaborative effort by staff and department heads. Your Board's strategic initiatives and
financial policies provide the cornerstone for this financial plan toward achieving your Board's
goals and objectives. Your Board's Budget Committee provides consistent leadership, and engages
your entire Board in fiscal oversight that maintains the County's financial stability and positive
credit ratings. In support of this fiscal management, department heads and their finance managers
provide the foundation of the system. These departmental finance teams continue to mitigate
challenging budgetary obstacles and the fluctuating pressures of State-County realignments. We are
pleased to submit this Recommended Budget to your Board for consideration as the plan for
financing your Board's strategic priorities.
On behalf of the Administrative Office and the Department Head Team I thank your Board of
Supervisors for continued leadership, and stewardship of the County's long-term fiscal and
operational integrity.