I am pleased to present the Reconunended Budget for Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13. As submitted, the
FY 2012-13 Reconunended Budget is balanced and reflects healthy improvement over the prior year
Adopted Budget. Budgetary balance in FY 2012-13 meets not only "fiscal balance" legal
requirements, but achieves "structural balance" as well. As planned by your Board, reconunended
ongoing expenditure requirements are now supported by estimated ongoing revenues, ending the
County's long-term reliance on the use of one-time revenues for ongoing costs.
Your Board is scheduled to consider recommendations in-depth during Budget Hearings
conunencing on June 6, 2012. Reconunended financing uses for all functional areas, including the
General Fund, Natividad Medical Center (NMC), Water Resources Agency, and Special Districts
total $942.0 million, increasing by $6.1 million (0.7%) over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. The
reconunended total includes $1.0 million to establish and fund a General Fund revenue stabilization
assignment for Public Safety Sales Tax (PSST - Prop 172) revenues. Financing uses are offset by
$41.8 million in prior year fund balances, $5.5 million from cancellation of prior year designations
and $894.7 million in recommended revenues for all funds, increasing by $5.6 million (0.6%).
Reconunended financing uses for the General Fund total $560.5 million, increasing by $26.1 million
(4.9%) over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget. General Fund financing sources include $5.5 million
in cancellation of prior year designations and encumbrances and estimated revenues of $555.0
million, increasing by $32.1 million (6.1 %).
The FY 2012-13 Reconunended Budget includes funding for 4,507.4 full-time equivalent (FTE)
positions, increasing by 200.6 positions or 4.7% across all County functions. The General Fund
includes 3,315 FTE, an increase of 199.6 or 6.4% over the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget.
The FY 2012-13 Reconunended Budget maintains the General Fund Strategic Reserve at the FY
2011-12 budgeted amount, totaling $52.2 million. In the event that any unbudgeted fund balance is
available as determined through the final audited year-end FY 2011-12, identified funding will, as a
first priority, increase the Strategic Reserve by up to $3.3 million for FY 2012-13 to comply with
the Board adopted policy establishing a reserve in an amount not to exceed I 0% of General Fund
estimated revenues.
As with local govermnents across the nation, Monterey County's capacity to provide services
continues to be influenced by the economy. The optimism of a current upswing in economic
conditions remains tempered by a historically slow and inconsistent recovery. The recovery
conditions are far more pronounced after this Great Recession compared to earlier recessions due to
a number of factors. First, property values and home sales, while finally trending upward, are not
anticipated to return to previous levels for some time. Revenue from properly taxes, critical lo
funding delivery of services to the community, remains well below pre-recession totals. Second, the
jobless rate remains high. Improvement has been erratic as employers struggle to recover from prior
losses and approach growth planning with caution. Following the declining unemployment rate in
the first two months of 2012, California's rate moved back up to 11 %. The rate for Monterey
County is more challenged, dropping from 15.3% in February to 14.7% in March 2012 compared to
16.3% one year earlier. More recent setbacks include closure of Capital One's operations in Salinas
with job losses estimated at 850. Conditions such as these contribute to a temperamental economic
recovery, with ancillary impacts to local sales tax revenue as consumer confidence fluctuates.
Your Board's recently updated Strategic Initiatives and Key Objectives provide critical guidance to
the CAO's recommendations for distribution of general discretionary funds. However, your Board's
flexibility to fund County required functions and to supplement essential programs and services is
substantially diminished by declines in the County's discretionary funds since 2007. The FY 2012-
13 Recommended Budget reflects guarded optimism that key revenues are beginning to recover,
with assumption that previously high rates of revenue growth is unlikely in the near term. The
County's ability to meet new or expanding programs through discretionary contributions from the
General Fund (GFC) decreased in FY 2012-13. The recommended distribution of discretionary
revenue to offset departmental expenditures in FY 2012-13 was generally determined based on
percentage allocation levels in the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget, representing your Board's
established priorities.
Monterey County's ability to adequately deliver local govermnental services depends on its
workforce. Our County employees are our most critical resource for delivering core services to the
community. Expenditure reductions in response to revenue declines in recent fiscal years have
impacted County staffing levels. With expenditure reductions, County departments and the CAO's
office worked to maximize opportunities for highly leveraged programs with secure funding sources
as a strategy to mitigate impacts to the County's workforce. The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget
maintains these strategies. FY 2012-13 recommended staffing levels include positions restored
through employee concessions in FY 2011-12. Negotiated agreements with employee groups
provide for employees to share in the employee portion of PERS retirement costs. These employee
contributions are key in the County's ability to retain FY 2011-12 staffing levels and preserve
essential services to the community in FY 2012-13. The Recommended Budget includes 4,507.4
positions, increasing by 200.6 positions (4.7%) since adoption of the budget for FY 2011-12. Of this
increase, 1 77.4 positions ( 4.1%) were added in FY 2011-12 as a result of negotiated restorations and
modifications related to new revenue.
The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget document represents a collaborative effort by staff and
Department Heads with ongoing guidance from your Board of Supervisors. The development of
budget recommendations was guided by your Board's Strategic Initiatives and Financial Guidelines
aligning available resources with Board-established priorities. Your Board's Budget Committee

provided consistent leadership, and actively engaged your full Board in maintaining fiscal integrity
throughout the budget year. Department Heads responded to evolving and dynamic budgetary
conditions, balancing department-specific mandates and commitments against the broader resources
of the County as a whole.
The County Administrative Office, on behalf of County departments and your Board of Supervisors
is particularly grateful for the enormous contribution of all Monterey County employees through
agreements approved after adoption of the FY 20 11-12 Budget. This partnership shares the cost
savings of employee retirement toward saving jobs and services for the community and exemplifies
the true spirit of public service.
Along with the preceding recognitions, I would like to acknowledge the ongoing efforts of the
County's Budget and Analysis team, particularly through what has seemed the budget season that
never ended. Gratitude is extended to the Enterprise Resource (ERP) programmers and technical
experts, all departmental finance staff, and the County's Human Resources staff members serving
individual departments and the newly established Human Resources Department. The balancing act
embodied in budget development is tedious, redundant, and at times fraught with changes, setbacks,
emotion and fatigue. Nonetheless, year-after-year, the collective efforts of these professionals,
through the guidance and support of departmental leadership, converge into the myriad of
recommendations that serve as your Board's approved fiscal and operational guide for the year
ahead.
In closing, I again thank your Board of Supervisors for your collective vision, sound leadership and
continuing commitment to the long-term fiscal and operational integrity of Monterey County.