I am pleased to present the Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 Recommended Budget for your consideration
during budget hearings on June 2, 2015. The County of Monterey continues its path toward longterm
financial structural balance following the economic downturn of the Great Recession. As a
result of your Board's conservative budget practices and fiscal policies, the County endured the
recession without major service reductions. Departments embraced a culture of financial discipline
in ensuing years, forfeiting levels of pre-recession budget flexibility and in FY 2011-12 the County
restored structural balance in its finances. For the last three consecutive years, the County has
maintained this balance. Yet, despite modest gains in revenue, the increasing impacts of cost drivers
absorb discretionary revenue forcing departments once again to make difficult choices in order to
balance their budgets. In this context, departments prepared their budget requests for FY 2015-16.
The recommended spending plan for FY 2015-16 includes expenditures for all funds, departments
and programs of $1.2 billion, an increase of $126.5 million from the current year adopted budget. A
third of the increase in appropriations is attributed to increased labor costs and the addition of 194
positions to County payrolls since the adoption of the current year budget. The largest increase in
staffing is in the Health Department, where there is a recommended increase of 110.2 positions. The
Health Department has been expanding capacity in its behavioral health program and health clinics
to serve the increasing number of clients enrolled into Medi-Cal managed care under the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) and those newly insured under Covered California. The recommended Health
Department budget includes overall growth of $56.2 million, with $21.6 million reflecting Staterequired
changes in accounting for realignment monies. In addition, Natividad Medical Center added
76.3 positions to meet the expected demand in its new Level II trauma center and expanding family
practice residency program.
Recommended appropriations for the General Fund total $601.5 million, representing a growth of
7.9% over the current year adopted budget, financed by $583.6 million in revenue and $17.9 million
in use of fund balance for capital projects and other one-time planned needs. Non-program revenues,
the County's only true source of discretionary revenues, are estimated to total $192.8 million,
representing an increase of $18.6 million over the current year budget. This growth is attributed to
higher property tax revenues, an increase in transient occupancy tax (TOT) monies, and additional
vehicle license fee revenues. However, after accounting for AB 85 (Chapter 24, Statutes of 2013)
which redirects a portion of vehicle license fee revenue to public health programs, non-program

revenues available for allocation by the Board grew only $15.0 million over the current year adopted
budget.
The recommended General Fund budget has increased appropriations by $4 7.4 million over the
current year adopted budget. Much of this increase reflects increases in the underlying cost of
providing baseline service levels. Major General Fund cost drivers - including pay raises authorized
under current MOUs, PERS retirement rate increases, increases in critical information technology
infrastructure replacement, and the upgrade of the County's enterprise resource planning (ERP)
system consumed growth in revenue constraining departments' capacity to maintain existing levels
of operations. Taken together, they will have added an estimated $29.8 million in General Fund
expenditures over a three-year period ending next fiscal year. Although many departments have
program revenues, those revenues are not enough to mitigate increases in operating costs. Thus,
many departments requested increases in non-program revenue to offset impacts to their operations.
Overall, the growth of non-program revenue falls short of the growth in expenditures, growing an
estimated $27.5 million during that same time period.
Before augmentation, during the budget process to balance baseline budgets, departments cut
discretionary spending and reduced staffing levels, first cutting vacant positions and then, as a last
resort, deleting filled positions. Unfortunately, many departments had already cut vacant positions in
prior budget cycles, eroding their ability to weather additional cost pressures. To balance their
budget, departmental baseline budgets included a countywide reduction of 128.5 positions, including
the loss of 63.5 vacancies and 65.0 filled positions. Approximately 68% of these position reductions
originate in criminal justice departments that endured a disproportionate share of cost increases.
To avoid these position reductions and mitigate potential operational impacts, departments submitted
augmentation requests totaling $43.5 million in appropriations (52% more than the last budget
cycle), supported by $6.3 million in program revenue and $37.2 million in requested General Fund
Contributions - far exceeding available resources. In developing the Recommended Budget, the
County Administrative Office targeted funding toward restoration of most of the at-risk filled
positions to preserve the County's service levels with priority given to requests that leverage
additional program revenue or grants and support the County's most critical needs. The
Recommended Budget restores 78 General Fund positions, including 59 filled positions and 19
vacancies. The Budget also includes 81.8 new positions of which 68.75 are in the Health Department
mostly supporting the expansion of behavioral health and clinic services and funded entirely by
program revenue. The significant augmentations of General Fund Contributions include:
• An increase of $6.1 million to the Sheriffs Office to restore 23 filled positions at risk of
layoffs and 12 vacancies in the County jail, restoring a vacant management analyst for
contracts management, and appropriating $510,000 for first year costs to replace high
mileage patrol vehicles.
• An additional $3.9 million in support of other County public safety programs, including: $1.6
million to Probation to restore 20 filled positions at risk of layoffs and the addition of one
new position funded entirely by AB I 09 public safety realignment monies; $1.3 million to
the Public Defender to restore 4 vacancies at-risk due to increases in operating costs and to
supplement funding for alternate defense contract and panel attorneys and trial-related
expenses; $890,038 to the District Attorney to restore 8 filled positions at-risk of layoff due

to increases in operating costs; and $92,098 to Emergency Communications to add 8 new
positions to improve dispatch response times.
Other key elements of the recommended General Fund budget include:
• Maintains a strategic reserve in the General Fund in compliance with your Board's budget
strategic reserve policy.
• Appropriates $5.7 million for operational contingencies, in compliance with the Board's
policy for a contingency reserve equal to one percent of estimated General Fund revenue.
• Appropriates $5.8 million for the construction of the new juvenile hall and $3.2 million for
the jail expansion.
• Provides an increase of $5.7 million for the expansion of County health clinics to meet the
increase in demand for primary care services.
• Increases the County's contributions of transient occupancy tax revenue to the Monterey
County Convention and Visitors' Bureau (MCCVB), Arts Council, and Film Commission by
$116,091.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget does not include requested augmentations by the Parks
Department. The Parks Department requested $4.3 million in General Fund monies for capital
improvements and to retain 12 positions, including six filled positions, as a result of a continued
decline in revenues due to lower water levels. In light of the County's fiscal constraints, funding
these requests would require commensurate reductions to other program areas. In addition, the
Recommended Budget includes a countywide reduction of 44.5 vacancies.
This Recommended Budget document represents a continuing collaborative effort by staff and
department heads under your Board's guidance. The development of budget recommendations is
framed by your Board's strategic initiatives and financial policies and aligns limited available
resources with Board-established priorities. Throughout the budget year, your Board's Budget
Committee continues to provide consistent leadership, and engages your entire Board in maintaining
fiscal integrity. Department heads and their finance teams continue to respond to dynamic budgetary
conditions and a constant flux of State-County realignments, while balancing department-specific
mandates against the broader resources of the County. Our goal in preparing the budget is to be
transparent and frame recommendations consistent with your Board's long-term priorities, while
being fiscally responsible to the constituents we serve.
In closing, the County Administrative Office, on behalf of County departments and your Board
expresses gratitude for the enormous contributions of Monterey County employees for their
dedication and public service to the diverse constituents of our community, and thanks your Board
of Supervisors for its' collective vision, and fiscal leadership of Monterey County.