Specific Program Highlights:
This section provides highlights of the base budgets and recommended
augmentations for the County budget programs
and departments. Due to increases in costs which continue
to outpace growth in sources, some Departments have proposed
reductions which are included in the current year recommended
budget. Departments have worked diligently to
manage their budgets to consistently maintain programs
and minimize impacts on services.
Public Protection
District Attorney
The District Attorney submitted $8.9 million in proposed
reductions with a maximum potential of 74 positions to be
reduced. The recommended restoration of $6.7 million and
all positions is required to support core staffing for effective
prosecution services. The remaining $2.2 million will be
derived from vacant position savings. In addition, three
Welfare Fraud Investigator positions are being added to the
budget, offset by revenue from the Social Services Agency,
for In-Home Supportive Services fraud investigations.
Probation
Probation submitted $1.9 million in proposed reductions
with a maximum impact of 20 position reductions. Full restoration
of the funding and positions is recommended for
approval.
Public Defender
Public Defender submitted $6.4 million in proposed reductions
with a maximum potential impact on 58 positions.
Full restoration of the funding and positions is recommended.
Contingent upon Board approval of implementation of
Laura’s Law, an additional $475 thousand and four new positions
are recommended to support the program.
Sheriff-Coroner
Due to increases in expenditures and County funding limitations,
the Sheriff-Coroner submitted $32 million in proposed
reductions with a potential maximum impact on 164
positions. All positions and $22 million in funding are recommended
for restoration. The Sheriff-Coroner and County
Executive Office will work closely throughout the fiscal year
to manage the $10 million funding gap to ensure no impacts
on public safety or staffing.
Community Services
OC Community Resources
OC Community Resources is requesting, and the CEO recommends,
an additional $4.2 million to develop and operate
two year-round emergency shelters. This recommendation
is consistent with the County’s ten-year plan to end homelessness.
Social Services Agency
The recommended budget includes a request of $6.9 million
for the General Relief program, which is not recommended
at this time. Caseloads will be monitored throughout the fiscal
year to determine if a mid-year adjustment for funding is
required.
Infrastructure and Environmental Resources
OC Waste & Recycling (OCWR)
The recommended budget includes the ability to borrow up
to $3 million from OCWR to fund costs associated with the
James A. Musick jail expansion. All borrowed funds will be
repaid within three years and upon receipt of reimbursement
from the State.
General Government
Assessor
The recommended base budget for the Assessor includes a
$6.2 million reduction in appropriations to meet the Net
County Cost limit of which $4.4 million is recommended for
restoration. CEO Budget will work with the Assessor to
develop an action plan for living within the restoration
amount without negatively impacting the Assessment Rolls.
Debt
24 County of Orange
FY 2014-2015 Recommended Budget
Auditor-Controller
The Auditor-Controller is requesting restoration of $964
thousand including funding for nine vacant positions.
Funding of $482 thousand is recommended for restoration,
which will allow the department to fill approximately half of
the vacant positions. Funding of the remaining amount will
be re-evaluated during the County’s 2014 Strategic Financial
Planning process in preparation for development of the FY
2015-16 Budget.
County Counsel
Contingent upon Board approval of implementation of
Laura’s Law, an additional $193 thousand and one new position
are recommended to support the program.
An additional $1 million is recommended for the cost of outside
legal services.
Registrar of Voters
One-time service level expansion of $5.5 million is recommended
for the June 2014 Primary Election.
Treasurer-Tax Collector
The recommended base budget includes an $849 thousand
reduction in appropriations to meet the Net County Cost
limit. Restoration of $424 thousand is recommended.
Funding of the remaining amount will be re-evaluated during
the County’s 2014 Strategic Financial Planning process in
preparation for development of the FY 2015-16 Budget.
Debt
The adopted budget funds all debt obligation payments.
Budgets displayed in Program VI include amounts for
annual payments on the County’s refunded debt financing of
the Juvenile Justice Center, Manchester parking facilities,
and debt financing of infrastructure improvements in the
County’s Assessment Districts, and Community Facilities
Districts. Although the County’s former 1996 and 1997 Pension
Obligation Bonds were economically defeased, this budget
reflects the payments made by the trustee from escrow.
This program also includes the debt associated with the
County’s Teeter program. Debt related to the specific operations
of John Wayne Airport is included in Program III
where the operational budgets for those operations are also
found. Based on the County’s Strategic Financial Plan and at
current funding levels, the County is able to fulfill these debt
obligations and sustain current and future services and
operations.
Cash Flow Management
The County did not issue Tax and Revenue Anticipation
Notes (TRANs) in FY 2013-14 and will continue to monitor
cash flow needs in FY 2014-15.
The County issued short term taxable Pension Obligation
Bonds to prepay, at a discount, a portion of the County’s
2014-15 pension obligation. The bonds were issued on January
14, 2014 in the amount of $325 million at rates ranging
from 0.65% to 0.83%.