The County Executive Office is pleased to present the Board of Supervisors with the FY
2015?16 Recommended Budget. The Recommended Budget continues to reflect Orange
County’s disciplined approach to fiscal management and is consistent with the County’s
Strategic Financial Planning process.
Over the last several years and continuing into FY 2015?16, the County has focused on
stabilizing the budget, building reserves, and funding infrastructure needs that were
deferred during the Great Recession. The FY 2015?16 Budget is structurally balanced with
no use of reserves for ongoing operating costs.
Highlights of the FY 2015?16 Recommended Budget
? Balanced budget including 3% growth ($18M) in Net County Cost for General Fund
departments
? Total County base budget is $5.8 billion, of which $3.2 billion is the General Fund budget
? General Purpose Revenues are $723.1 million, $17.4 million more than the current yearend
estimate of $705.7 million due to inclusion of prior year fund balance for the $15
million payment to the State ? the second of five required payments, inclusion of $15.9
million fund balance previously set aside for planned capital expenditures, and an
increase in property tax revenue, offset by removal of one?time Teeter funding
? Revenue assumptions are consistent with economists’ forecasts and reflect moderate
levels of growth including 4% growth in property tax revenues over the current yearend
estimated revenue
? Public Safety Sales Tax revenue increase of 3% ($9M) over the current year?end estimated
revenue; total FY 2015?16 budget is $309.5 million (80% Sheriff ? $247.6M; and 20%
District Attorney ? $61.9M)
? The Statewide allocation of AB109 revenue is up resulting in a $5.2 million combined
increase in base and growth revenue for Orange County; $6.8 million in additional onetime
funding is provided by the State in FY 2015?16 for costs associated with transition
and stabilization
? General Fund reserve balance is estimated to increase by $37.3 million by June 30, 2016
after $15 million payment to State, use of $15.9 million in fund balance for one?time
capital expenditures, automatic booking of an estimated $55.2 million in FY 2014?15 fund
balance to reserves at year?end per Board policy, and a $13 million budgeted increase to
reserves
When compared to the FY 2014?15 adopted budget, the FY 2015?16 budget reflects an
increase of $340 million (6%) and a decrease of 65 positions. The budget increase is primarily
associated with appropriation of anticipated bond proceeds for the Central Utility Facility
project, appropriations for transfer of funds from OC Waste & Recycling for temporary
borrowing associated with the La Pata Avenue, Musick Jail Expansion and Property Tax
System projects, and appropriations for increases in other various programs and projects.
The decrease in positions is due primarily to department proposed position reductions
required to meet NCC limits. All proposed position reductions are recommended for
restoration. Board approval of the CEO’s position recommendations will result in a net two
position reduction from the current FY 2014?15 position count (as of FY 2014?15 Second
Quarter Budget Report) of 18,150 to 18,148.
Highlight of Key Revenues: Property tax revenue, which accounts for 88.5% of total
General Purpose Revenue, is anticipated to increase by $40.8 million or 6.8% in FY 2015?16
compared to the FY 2014?15 adopted budget. Property tax revenue is projected to grow 4%
($20.2M) from the FY 2014?15 year?end estimated revenue amount. Overall, total General
Purpose Revenues are anticipated to increase by 7.6% or $51.1 million; however, $15 million
is associated with the planned use of prior year fund balance for the second of five one?time
payments to the State and $15.9 million is a planned use of fund balance for one?time capital
expenditures.
Public Safety Sales Tax revenue, budgeted at $297 million in FY 2014?15, is projected to
come in slightly higher than budget at $300 million. For FY 2015?16, the County projects an
increase of 3.0% over the current year projection resulting in a proposed budget of $309
million. Even with the projected growth, Public Safety Sales Tax revenue for FY 2015?16 is
not sufficient to cover the increased cost of doing business in the Sheriff and District
Attorney departments. Allocation of Public Safety Sales Tax revenue is 80% to Sheriff and
20% to District Attorney.
Net County Cost: The discretionary portion of the budget, known as Net County Cost
(NCC), for FY 2015?16 is $723.1 million or 12.5% of the County’s $5.8 billion budget, of which
$35.9 million is one?time funding sources specific to FY 2015?16 for the one?time payment to
the State and planned capital expenditures. The FY 2015?16 Budget provides General Fund
departments with a 3% NCC increase, which, for some departments, is insufficient to offset
the growing cost of doing business.
Augmentation Highlights: While the FY 2015?16 budget reflects increases in General
Purpose Revenue, some County departments continue to face expenditure growth that has
outpaced growth in revenues. As a result, restore augmentation requests for FY 2015?16 total
$43.5 million in NCC with $32.3 million recommended for funding. Of the $32.3
recommended restorations, $22 million is proposed for funding on an ongoing basis in an
effort to stabilize department budgets. In addition to the restore requests, departments have
identified over $32 million in NCC expand requests above and beyond base budget
requirements.

Detail of the Public Protection restore augmentations is provided below. Although full
restoration is not provided for the District Attorney, $5.6 million is recommended for
restoration on an ongoing basis to help stabilize the department’s budget. The remaining
$200K is recommended for one?time expenditures. The District Attorney and CEO will
work closely during the year to ensure no impacts on public safety. Full restoration is not
recommended at this time for the Sheriff’s Department pending actual known jail
population and associated overtime costs.

The $6.9 million restoration request in Community Services is related to the Social Services
Agency’s General Relief program (residual relief program for those not eligible for any other
form of aid). The CEO recommends deferring consideration of this request until mid?year
when actual caseloads and costs are known.
General Government restore augmentations are related to requests from the Assessor
($475K), Auditor?Controller ($337K), County Executive Office ($662K), Human Resources
($390K), Treasurer?Tax Collector ($949K) and Internal Audit ($130K). Full restoration is
recommended with the exception of Auditor?Controller, Treasurer?Tax Collector and
Internal Audit. Restoration of $309K of the $337K is recommended for the Auditor?
Controller, $799K of the $949K is recommended for the Treasurer?Tax Collector, and

consideration of the Internal Audit request is recommended for deferral pending the
Auditor Oversight Committee’s review of the County’s multiple audit functions for possible
consolidation.
Expand Augmentations
Funding for several Public Protection expand augmentation requests is recommended
including $2.2 million and two positions for the Sheriff’s CCTV (jail video system) project,
one position and $112K for the OC Crime Lab Crime Scene Investigation unit, $800K for
Multi?Factor Authentication Equipment required to comply with the FBI’s Criminal Justice
Information Services policy, and one position and $97K to comply with Homeland Security
Presidential directives for hazard/incident management response.
A total of $6.7 million in funding in Community Services is recommended to provide for
the potential acquisition, rehabilitation and/or construction of two year?round emergency
shelters consistent with the County’s 10?year plan to end homelessness. Included in the base
budget is $3.6 million for ongoing operating costs recommended to be redirected for this
purpose, as well as use of $3.1 million in FY 2014?15 unspent monies originally budgeted for
shelter ongoing operating costs.
Detail of the General Government expand augmentations is provided below.

Funding of $6.5 million is recommended for the CAPS+ upgrade project, a strategic priority
in the 2014 Strategic Financial Plan. NCC of $227K to fund three positions in CEO is being
shifted from OC Public Works (OCPW) – funds not previously transferred for the
centralization of Real Estate services, but available due to cost?saving measures
implemented by OCPW. An additional $3 million is recommended for County Counsel to
cover anticipated outside legal counsel services costs, and $4.5 million is required for onetime
election related costs.
Finally, $4.1 million is recommended in the Capital Improvements budget: $1.4 million
related to the Lowe agreement for development of the El Toro property, $2.1 million to begin
work on Probation’s multipurpose rehabilitation center, and $550K for required repairs to
the Joplin Youth Center wastewater pond.

Risks: The FY 2015?16 budget was conservatively developed and includes revenue growth
factors consistent with economic forecasts for the County and State. Although the County’s
economy is showing signs of improvement, concern remains especially related to two of the
County’s primary funding sources – property tax and sales tax revenues, including Prop 172
Half?Cent Public Safety Sales Tax revenue. While Prop 172 revenues have experienced
growth since the recessionary period, it has been difficult to rebuild the Excess Public Safety
Sales Tax Reserve Fund 14J back to the nearly $100 million balance that existed pre?Great
Recession. This has increased the Sheriff’s and District Attorney’s reliance on the General
Fund.
The County anticipates moderate growth in General Purpose Revenues in FY 2015?16;
however, if actual trends remain consistent with the County’s 2014 Strategic Financial Plan,
it is anticipated that the growth in future years’ General Purpose Revenues will not be
enough to offset costs which are anticipated to grow at a higher rate. While the FY 2015?16
Recommended Budget is balanced without the use of reserves for ongoing operating costs,
future increases in the cost of doing business that surpass revenue growth could make it
difficult to sustain any growth in service levels. Thus, while funding is provided in the FY
2015?16 Budget for increased one?time costs such as for capital projects, any allocation of
new revenue for ongoing expanded levels of service is limited.
The County continues to meet with various labor groups. Impacts of any newly approved
agreements will be reconciled during the year through the quarterly budget report process
if costs cannot be absorbed using existing resources.
State Budget: On January 9, 2015, the Governor’s FY 2015?16 proposed budget was released.
Department budgets reflect aspects of the State’s budget known at the time of County
budget submittal on March 2, 2015. The Governor’s May Revise budget is scheduled for
release on May 14, 2015. Any necessary changes to the County budget as a result of the May
Revise will be made during the FY 2015?16 First Quarter Budget Report. The County is
optimistic that the State will follow through on its commitment to reimburse counties for
SB90 mandate reimbursements should the May Revise revenue projections reflect available
funding.
General Fund Reserves: As an organization committed to conservative financial
management, the County must carefully balance the use of reserves to support core services
while maintaining the ability to respond to critical countywide needs. The County has
maintained a prudent level of General Fund reserves with minimal use during the Great
Recession.

The General Fund reserve balance is estimated to increase by $37.3 million by June 30, 2016
after the $15 million payment to the State, use of $15.9 million in fund balance for one?time
capital expenditures, automatic booking of an estimated $55.2 million in FY 2014?15 fund
balance to reserves at year?end per Board policy, and a $13 million budgeted increase to
reserves. While the reserve balance is projected to increase by June 30, 2016, this estimate
does not take into account unforeseen significant expenditures that could require a draw
from reserves during the fiscal year. In addition, over the following three years the balance
will be reduced by $130 million to make the last three VLFAA?related payments to the State.
The County also has plans for use of some of the existing and future fund balance in reserves
for projects such as the Sheriff’s jail video system (CCTV) and the Registrar of Voter’s new
election system. Finally, the County will be challenged to cover the cost of strategic priorities
identified by departments in the 2014 Strategic Financial Plan such as funding for the 800
MHz Countywide Coordinated Public Safety Communications System, development of the
property tax system, development of the El Toro property, acquisition and operation of one
or more year?round emergency shelters, and the Civic Center Master Plan.
It is important that over the next few years, the County replenish its reserves as the
payments to the State are made and as funds are drawn down to cover the cost of the
planned expenditures. The current Board policy requiring all year?end fund balance to
automatically roll into reserves will facilitate this.
The maintenance of, and growth in, reserve balances demonstrates the County’s continued
commitment to living within our means. Maintaining healthy reserve balances is necessary
to support adequate General Fund cash flow throughout the year, to provide a measure of
security against unanticipated impacts or events, and to sustain the County’s current credit
ratings. Due to the increase in General Fund cash balances, the County does not plan to
issue Tax and Revenue Anticipation Notes (TRANS) in FY 2015?16.
Conclusion: In spite of ongoing budget challenges, the County remains well positioned to
manage the continued impacts of a slowly growing economy, and will continue to
effectively address the needs of County residents. The Board of Supervisors has
demonstrated a commitment to conservatively managing the budget and making
adjustments as needed to address changes in revenue or operations. The leadership
provided by the Board of Supervisors and the efforts of our elected and appointed
department heads is appreciated.
The County Executive Office looks forward to presenting the FY 2015?16 Recommended
Budget to the Board of Supervisors during the Public Budget Hearings scheduled for June
9, 2015.