Introduction
The County Executive Officer presents Placer County's Proposed Budget for Fiscal Year 2016-
17 for the Board of Supervisor's review and consideration. This document provides the
County's legal authority to spend, and is the culmination of a comprehensive countywide effort
to develop a budget that recognizes future obligations, protects the County from potential
foreseeable Federal and State impacts, and maintains critical services for our communities.
Executive Summary
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is balanced at $782,431,749 and continues to provide core
services to our constituents and meet our obligations to the Placer County community. In
addition, the Proposed Budget uses realistic and probable revenue estimates, and maintains
appropriate reserves and contingencies. The Proposed Budget is our spending plan
commencing July 1, 2016, subject to adjustment for receipt of unanticipated revenues and any
changes to expenditure priorities driven by the Board in time for the Final Budget to be adopted
in September 2016. The following table summarizes net budget and staffing changes yearover-
year for each fund type:
The economy continues its modest improvement from the impacts of the "Great Recession."
The Proposed Budget is prepared using conservative assumptions and estimates given
continued economic uncertainties. Property Tax, the County's largest discretionary revenue
source, continues to increase as property values continue upward trends. Sales taxes, transient occupancy "hotel' taxes, and other revenue sources tied to the economy also continue to
improve; however, other revenues, such as gasoline taxes, have declined considerably. Due to
the continued foresight of the Board and the ongoing commitment of departments to deliver the
most cost effective services, Placer County remains fiscally strong. Moving forward into FY
2016-17, the County has effectively positioned itself to provide _quality, sustainable, and
responsive service, for long-term investment strategies such as economic development and
infrastructure, and paying down unfunded health care and pension liabilities.
Recent Accomplishments and Ongoing FY 2016-17 Efforts:
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget comes as I complete my fourth year as County Executive
Officer. I continue to be proud of the dedication to excellence that the Board and employees
exemplify on a daily basis to fulfill the needs of our community and residents. The following
highlights the accomplishments on major ongoing priorities with work efforts that will continue
into FY 2016-17, including further defining funding considerations where not already noted as
included in the Proposed Budget. Greater detail for each of these areas is found within the
Spotlight on Critical Issues section .
./ Focus on Development: With increasing economic momentum, County efforts are well
underway to capitalize on garnering the greatest return on public and private investment.
With the Sunset Area Plan, Tahoe Area Plan and Placer County Government Center
Plan underway, the County is actively partnering, based on the Board's vision, to provide
opportunities to facilitate job sector growth and an educated workforce. These efforts
will enable Placer County to achieve continued marketability, fiscal growth, and a high
quality of life for the next 20 to 30 years .
./ Completion of the Criminal Justice Master Plan: In coordination with the Superior Court
and the Community Corrections Partnership, the Criminal Justice Policy Committee
concluded its planning process and provided recommendations to be implemented over
the next several years as funding is available. In FY 2016-17, implementation includes
expanding the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility campus by opening 180 beds and
adding a booking station ($2.3 million), opening an arraignment court, planning for
construction of an Acute Mental Health annex ($2.1 million county contribution),
transitioning to South Placer, and further exploration of a Crime Lab and new Coroner's
Facility .
./ Reacting to Housing Shortfall: Extensive analysis on homelessness in Placer County
has resulted in progress towards bridging the service gap for this population. Finding
longer-term solutions to replace temporary shelter activities are underway, companioned
with focused system of care resources, emphasis on public safety, and a countywide
coordination effort ($1.2 million). Additionally, land development activities in western
Page 2
. Placer County are opportunities to address solutions to the overall workforce housing
shortfall for our communities. Current efforts in eastern Placer County to understand the
significance of a lack of affordable workforce housing will serve to inform thinking about
broader housing needs and strategies in the coming year.
./ Assurance of Environmental Sustainability: Through the Placer County Conservation
Plan (PCCP), the County has taken a proactive role in identifying where development
should preferably occur, while at the same time preserving important natural and
agricultural resources. The PCCP is now in the final preparation stage '($925,000) and
will provide one common conservation strategy for regulatory coverage over the next 50
years. Work continues into FY 2016-17 on the Tahoe Basin Area Plan and Sunset Area
Plan; both vitally important to the future prosperity of these regions. To be considered at
Final Budget is the continuance of a one-time general fund contribution of $1 million for
Open Space property acquisition .
./ Focus on Organizational Fiscal Sustainability: Long-term success of any organization
requires a concentrated focus on maintaining fiscal health with a long-term orientation
supported by a multi-year budget model, alignment of all costs to services, performing
budget-to-actual variance analysis, funding reserves and contingencies at policy levels,
and using one-time revenue sources for one-time expenditures. These established
methods have provided a solid foundation for maintaining service levels, as well as
progressing with urgent efforts directed toward the Library ($275,000) and Fire systems
sustainability ($514,720 system-wide) .
./ Approach to Funding Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liabilities: Recognizing the need for
continued fiscal vigilance in addressing long-term financial obligations of the County, the
Budget and Financial Policies were updated last year to incorporate a "plan" to fully fund
the Other Post Employee Benefits (OPEB) unfunded liability within a reduced 15-year
time period. Efforts to address .CalPERS retirement plan unfunded liabilities in a similar
manner is underway with a solution planned for FY 2016-17 .
./ Transition to Priority Based Budgeting: Priority-Based Budgeting provides a
comprehensive approach to the entire organization: identifying each service we offer, its
cost, and, ultimately, allocating resources based on community input and feedback to
support Board priorities or goals. FY 2016-17 marks a milestone year as program
"service" costs are identified countywide for the first time. As we move towards
measuring each service's "compelling public value," the budget process will include the
results of greater analysis, reporting tools, and engagement with the community.
County Executive Office Initiatives
Identified in 2012 as priorities for the organization, these remain just as highly relevant today:
./ Economic Development: The County continues efforts at partnering with local and
regional partners to promote business investment and job growth .
./ Priority Based Budgeting: A phased implementation approach focusing on increasing
public engagement and fiscal transparency relative to funding priorities and service
results .
./ Employee Engagement: Excellent and innovative service delivery relies upon employees
who are motivated and connected with the residents and communities we proudly serve.
Approach to the FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget
The Proposed Budget is developed based on the guidance, participation, and leadership of the
Board. Through the efforts of the departments to present emerging critical issues at a Board
Workshop on Priorities held on January 26, 2016, feedback received on staff presentations at
the Mid-Year Fiscal Update held on March 22, 2016, and clear direction on critical issues at the
Board's Challenges and Choices Workshop, held on May 3, 2016, the Proposed Budget
delivers sound and responsive budgetary recommendations within available resources.
The Proposed Budget continues to build upon each year's more targeted focus on
communication to county residents and businesses. Updates to the Spotlight on Critical Issues,
the Budget Overview chapter, and the countywide Priority Based Budgeting initiative are
incorporated into the Proposed Budget document.
Conclusion
The staff and I appreciate the steady leadership of the Board and the genuine cooperation of all
our departments, and look forward to working with the Board as we complete the FY 2016-17
Final Budget for Board consideration in September.