The following recommendations from my office reflect difficult choices brought on by our
collective desire to maintain critical service levels and move toward the Board's stated goal of
long-term fiscal sustainability. I anticipate extensive discussion ab0ut specific
recommendations, and a number of adjustments prior to final adoption. On June 20, I will
recommend that the Board approve this tentative budget to put in place basic appropriation
authority by July 1, as required by law, and commence budget hearings to take testimony from
departments and the public. I will recommend scheduling approval of recommended budget
adjustments for July 26, and adoption of the budget once FY 15/16 year-end fund balances are
known.
In presenting this budget, I thought it would be helpful to recall recent history, lay out our
approach to assembling the budget, identify alternatives to the recommendations, discuss the
strategy for achieving structural balance, and describe our expectations for the upcoming
hearings.
The Great Recession of 2008 hit Riverside County harder than most public agencies throughout
the state. In the first full year of impact, discretionary revenue declined by $52 million, due
largely to the dramatic collapse of the real estate market. The county took drastic measures to
curtail spending, including furloughs and cuts to service levels countywide. Discretionary
revenue declines continued until 2011, at which time we saw a low point of $613 million, a
decline of 22 percent from the peak in 2008.
In 2012, actual and expected growth in discretionary revenues was deemed sufficient to
negotiate pay increases with our employee groups in exchange for securing much needed
pension reform, which is currently saving the County $100 million annually. Following that, in
2013 we committed to a plan for rebuilding public safety operations with increased patrol
resources and additional jail capacity. Beginning in FY 12/13, we were fortunate to fund
reserves above our policy targets and maintain that going forward; and FY 12/13 through FY
14/15 were balanced without the use of reserves.

It is worth noting that with these spending commitments most county departments saw little or
no increase to their allocation from discretionary revenues. Consequently, public protection
rose from $451 million, or 74 percent of the discretionary budget, in FY 12/13 to $609.6 million,
or 75 percent, this year. In addition, the county is building the East County Detention Center
and paying the debt service of $21 million. Of the total increase in discretionary spending of
. $200 million, from the low point in 2011 public protection rose by $158.5 million. Other than
receiving one-time funding for special projects, general government departments have not been
provided with increased funding for the last seven years. Ongoing discretionary revenues, on
the other hand, have only increased by $177 million. Finally, this past year, the significant
projected costs of inmate health care were quantified, forcing us to recast the existing plan for
the return to structural balance.
Our basic approach to the FY 16/17 budget presented during the midyear report was to roll over
departmental net cost allocations of discretionary funding, with limited additions. During the
third quarter budget report, we presented a preliminary list totaling over $131. 3 million in
requests. The budget I am recommending includes $34. 9 million of that total, based upon my
office's assessment balancing the Board's priorities and desire to maintain a baseline level of
reserves. Assuming no further changes to the budget, we project closing FY 16/17 with
approximately $146 million in discretionary reserves. Accordingly, many worthy requests are
not recommended. The Board will have the opportunity to consider those policy issues during
budget hearings.
The primary alternatives for the Board are to preserve a higher level of reserves by spending
less in aggregate, or to fund additional departmental requests by shifting existing funding
between departments. The recommended spending plan as presented already draws reserves
down well below the current policy threshold (Board Policy B-30), so a further draw would be
problematic. Rather than drawing as deeply upon reserves, we could cut general government.
However, that most likely would entail significant service cuts, which the proposed budget seeks
to avoid. Board Policy B-30 does provide for reserves to fall below the established minimums,
with the caveat that a replenishment plan should be presented and approved by the Board.
Adhering to a multi-year budget plan will be consistent with that policy. Our assumptions in this
plan are that expenditures will remain static for the next several years and additional revenues
will be used to rebuild reserves.
Cutting general government to achieve sufficient savings in aggregate would dramatically
reduce services countywide, which we are attempting to avoid. My staff continues looking
closely at estimated revenues and refining our projections. Any additional revenues identified
will be available to maintain reserves or to address Board priorities.
As mentioned above, our current multi-year forecast shows a path to structural balance over the
next several years. The key will be to cap and hold overall discretionary spending at current
levels. Most departments have been able to maintain service levels with flat discretionary
funding, in large part because of improved business processes. We have made a substantial
effort in our public health and public protection departments to achieve efficiencies and better
outcomes. That effort must continue and expand to touch every department.

The budget hearing schedule will begin at 8:30 a.m. on Monday June 20 and continue the next
afternoon. As currently scheduled, it includes 19 county departments, which in terms of the
number of employees and total budget comprise the bulk of the county payroll and
appropriations. I have provided those departments with a standard presentation format to help
them move through concise presentations and allow your Board sufficient time for deliberation.
My office has also arranged hearing time the afternoon of Tuesday, June 28, if the Board
requires additional testimony or time to deliberate. I will take the Board's direction at the close
of budget hearings and return Tuesday, July 26, with the recommended budget adjustments
necessary to implement that direction. Given the policy implications in drawing upon
discretionary general fund reserves, I recommend deferring formal budget adoption until yearend
fund balances are better known.
IT IS THEREFORE RECOMMENDED that the Board of Supervisors:
1) Approve the attached FY 16/17 recommended budget to be effective for the fiscal year
beginning July 1, 2016, including all appropriations and estimated revenues, increases and
decreases of obligated fund balance, Resolution No. 440-9036 modifying position levels as
indicated in Schedule 20, and requests for fixed assets in Schedules 21 and 22, and
requests for vehicles in Schedule 23 contained therein;
2) Immediately thereafter, open budget hearings to take testimony from departments and the
public;
3) Schedule approval of recommended adjustments to the recommended budget on July 26;
and,
4) Tentatively schedule adoption of the final budget for late September 2016.