During the past four (4) fiscal years, the County of San Benito faced reductions in
revenues, budgets, public services, and workforce. Fiscal Year (FY) 2011?12 ended
with 435 full time employees (FTE) and FY 2012?13 dipped to an FTE low of 371.
This has impacted a majority of General Fund departments, several of which have
reduced staffing to inadequate levels, thus jeopardizing the completion of many
critical tasks and obligations (e.g., late submittal of CAFR). For example, the Auditor
is operating without an accountant and Administration is challenged by the
retirement of five (5) out of eight (8) key employees. These critical positions were
only backfilled with part time and temporary help and are still vacant. The Sheriff’s
department reduced staff, impacting overall safety and requiring a substantial
increase of overtime in order to function. Departments operating with minimal
staff and reduced office hours are barely meeting obligations within required
deadlines. The lack of resources to perform the necessary duties and services puts
the County in a vulnerable and weak position.

The County continues to deal with escalating financial obligations/contributions to
Other Post?Employment Benefits (OPEB), Public Employee Retirement System
(PERS) and health insurance which comprise up to 32% of the salaries and benefits
portion of the budget. In an effort to bridge the revenue shortfall and increasing
costs, the County took temporary measures in FY 2009?10 with the institution of
furloughs. An analysis of the financial effects of furloughs has proven that vacation
liability has increased substantially and office hours have decreased, raising the ire
of the very citizens the County is serving. Salary step freezes were instituted in FY
2010?11 as a further means to bridge the fiscal issues facing the County. However,
that has greatly impacted employee morale, as is witnessed by a higher than usual
employee turnover rate. The County is losing valuable staff to other employers, and
early retirements. The perception is that employees are not considered to be
worthy assets.
Today the County employs 371 FTEs. This is nearly the lowest staffing level in the
last two (2) decades. With increased demands from the state and federal
governments to meet mandated obligations, the County must remedy and address
where the issues lie. The County has an obligation to provide general county
services to its citizens, in the areas of fiscal accountability, safety, property
assessment, and taxes. In order to achieve these services, the County must provide
the appropriate staffing levels through the use of part?time and full?time
employees in the areas of general services and safety.
The Recommended FY 2013?14 Budget addresses the issues highlighted. As Interim
CAO, I propose the cessation of furloughs which will allow a return to regular office
hours as well as help reduce the County’s vacation liability of $2.2 million. I further
propose to re?instate salary step increases for all eligible employees, which will help
reduce employee turnover, as well as the costs associated with new hire training.

With regards to achieving sustainability for future years, it is imperative that the
County address the greatest impacts of its budget: Health insurance, PERS
contribution, and the OPEB liability. The salary or benefits savings reported in the
budget are a result of anticipated employee concessions and are subject to the
collective bargaining process where applicable.
It is recommended that the addition of 9.6 FTEs be approved within the General
Fund including accounting, technical, and safety positions, along with other various
miscellaneous adjustments to current FTEs. Four (4) FTEs have been added to the
Health and Human Services Agency, complementing the six (6) additional FTEs
approved during FY 2012?13, for a total of ten (10) new positions. These positions
have been added as a result of new Medi?Cal programs which the County is
required to administer for its residents per various state mandates and are not a
General Fund cost.
Due to a decline in the housing market, the County’s Property Tax revenue has
been negatively impacted over the past four (4) years, suffering an approximate
decline of seventeen percent (17%) during this time period. However according to
recent headlines as of April 2013, home prices increased over last year (nationwide
and statewide), while business and construction continue a conservative recovery,
thus increasing consumer confidence and bolstering the economy. It is doubtful
that the 2006?2008 levels will be reached any time soon, but projections indicate
an upward trend. The County however, still faces daunting challenges complicated
by enormous health care costs and retirement liabilities. Hence the County needs
to be cautious moving forward which is why the overall Recommended Budget is
basically status quo from the services and supplies perspective. The addition of key
positions addresses the weak areas that were a result from the prior years’ severe
budget cuts.

The Recommended Budget has been built based upon the following assumptions:
? Cessation of County's furlough program
? Re?instatement of salary step increases
? Analysis of health insurance, PERS, OPEB, and subsequent long?term
solutions
? Increase of key accounting, technical, and safety personnel
? $1.6 million reimbursement by the Health and Human Services Agency Fund
for overpayment of prior years’ General Fund contributions
? $1 million projected rollover from FY 2012?13
In conclusion, it is my pleasure to present to your Board herein, a balanced budget
with a level of relief by adding specific FTEs. In addition to this furloughs will be
discontinued, thus adding more staff time, approximately 18,000 hours. This
translates to more service hours to the local community, residents, and internal
county staff. There are signs of economic relief at the state and local levels. The
County must tread with caution and address current issues, so that it can once
again attain a healthy financial future for its citizens and employees.