It is my privilege to present for your review and direction the Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year 2016-
2017. While the economic environment has improved from the bleak years of the Great Recession, the
Board is still compelled to make difficult choices in order to align financial resources with desired program
and .service objectives. Many of ovr past budgetary decisions have required significant participotion from
our County workforce, and I wish to recognize our employees for their willingness to collaborate in order t o
help overcome the fiscal challenges which w e have faced over the several years.
Your County employees continue to provide high quality public programs and services, despite past
workforce reductions, staff-turnover and other difficulties. The challe nges that we face are s ignificant,
however, I am confident that the Board's thoughtful direction, and the efforts of our managers and
employees, will allow us to confront the coming year with positive momentum towards the new
opportunities that are before us while continuing to provide outstanding public service to our residents and
communities.
At this time, we can look back and revie w some of the accomplishments over the last year. Over the last
few years, the County of San Benito (SBC) has embarked on a "Journey to Excellence" which we shall
continue this year. Part of the journey has required foundational work in creating a technical division,
strengthening fundamental infrastructure, and addressing our biggest financial issue by means of a countywide
health care reform.
last fiscal year, the County reinforced its commitment to excellence by installing technology
advancements. The County accomplished the extraordinary, by installing a new Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) system integrating legacy systems into the new Coun ty platform. Such a feat should not go
unnoticed as to the sacrifice taken by staff and leaders to accomplish this goal. Over the years much in the
way of finances were done by hand. The budgeting, accounting, and management of finances were mostly
performed in a decentralized financial fashion with many sub-systems or excel performed manually, where
separate systems were not connected, causing great stress due to the significant room for error. The
Journey over the last few years, and in particular this last year, has moved SBC to new heights. Today,

important finandal data is now housed in a centralized database where changes can be made directly to
the database providing better efficiencies and accuracies. Additionally, budgets are now created in the ERP
system providing similar reduction in errors. Finally, the new ERP system allows for synchronized reporting
and automation, offers efficiencies, and higher performance in local government with a sense of assurance.
In addition to the ERP, the public now has the ability to view agendas online sooner than in years past,
which provides more time to review and prepare for comments at Board of Supervisors' meetings. In
addition to this, agendas, minutes, resolutions, ordinances, are available for all to see at their leisure on
line. There is no longer a need to wait days (or weeks) for a records request; Instead one can sign into the
laserfiche Weblink located on the County's website and search for the documents individually. As with
anything, excellence Is driven by always closing the gap, fine tuning the systems we have, and striving to be
more effocient and more transparent to all.
The County remains involved and commotted to the community we serve, from voting. recreation,
inspections, child support, foster care and disaster preparedness. The County is keen to uphold the public's
trust of being stewards of the public's business, and adequate funding is without a doubt an important
factor.
With the growing need to address homelessness. the County moved forward in obtaining funding for
homelessness and spent the better part of the year actively working towards acquiring a homeless service
center to help our local residents that are destitute and on the street. The vision for the year is to work
closely with neighboring businesses and residents to make the service center a model for the State of
California.
There have been a tremendous amount of projects and services that are being revamped. Providing proper
tools for the public is paramount in our current technology age. As time moves on, the County can no
longer be stagnant in advancing. The County realizes the need to keep up with the times, and continue to
infuse energy and funds to improve technology to filcilitate the services provided to the public.
On the fiscal front, this year, San Benito County updated its reserve policy, established a rainy day reserve
fund, and established an IRC section 125 irrevocable trust for pension. The later provides a two-fold benefit
as we will be pre-funding pension (prefunding our Calpers unfunded net pension liability), which allows the
county the ability to commit $3 million to a rainy fund through the PARs Irrevocable trust, which can be
drawn to fund pension obligations in the future if necessary.
Property values in the County have greatly improved since the great recession, returning to their historic
positive growth rate. Fortunately, over the last 35 years, San Benito County has experienced 12 years
{34%) of double digit growth in assessed valuation. During the recessionary times from 1992 to 1997, the 6
year growth average was over 5.5%. During the Great Recession period (2008·2012), the 5 year average
showed a yearly average decline of -3.7%. This fortuitously has reversed itself, and new growth exists on
the horizon with Santana Ranch, Pulte (Del Web) and PV2 projects. Certain projects will result in one time
money being infused into the County reserves as a result of development agreements, and all projects will
create on-going revenue for County operations into the future. With all future residential projects, true
fiscal neutrality is required to be preserved to ensure the best possible future for San Benito County. To
ensure the quality of local county government operations, fiscal neutrality in all future developments is a
priority to address in this fiscal year's activities.

On the operational front, the County's work this last year resulted in several significant achievements. The
County was successful in entering into new labor agreements with all the bargaining units, which allowed
further refinement in health care reform improving the County's fiscal stability. The County's health care
obligations are now reduced when a retiree reaches the age of 65 and health care contributions now
preserved at a fixed dollar amount. Such reforms have reduced the County's unfunded OPEB liability from
approximately $15.6 million in 2013 to $3.8 million, as well as reducing the County's annual required
contributions payments from $1,786,995 in 2014to approximately $875,000 at the present time.
The County further consolidated the Emergency Medical Services Department with the Office of Emergency
Services, and would like to finalize the formation of the Resource Management Agency within the next
year.
Through the joint efforts of the County, advocacy of SEIU, and the legislature the County, Cities and special
districts realized a combined $3.8 million relief from ERAF, which resulted in the County, cities and local
special districts being released from that obligation.
The County faces a very exciting year in 16-17. Some o f the key goals include:
• Create on-line permitting system
• Create pavement management system, to ensure the preservation and improvement of County
roads
• Update capital impact fees
• Finalize new master tax agreement and policies which insure the fiscal neutrality of all
development
• Continue to further the Regional Park project
• Continue the discussion and planning necessary for a new technology, education and library facility
• Continue forward with County Jail improvements
• Ensure County is able to recruit and retain its quality employees
I am excited and proud to share the County's achievements from last fiscal year and goals for fiscal year
16/17 in the pages ahead. This budget highlights the County's "Journey to Excellence•, and shares the goal
of how the County of ??'ltlBl nito is becoming a leader in local government to better support and serve the community.