Several years ago, two things happened that touched all our lives. The first
event was, of course, the recession that began in 2008. Much has already been
said about this topic and fortunately, we are starting to see signs of recovery -
albeit slow and at times uneven - as we begin to put this event behind us. The second
thing that occurred, however, has not been as widely discussed and that is
that the pace of change in our world began accelerating exponentially. This dynamic - while not receiving
as much attention as the recession - has been every bit as challenging and shows no signs of abating.
In fact, the pace of change underway now in our world continues to accelerate. Fueled by
technology advances, we are quickly changing and reshaping all aspects of our lives - from how we live
and work to how we share information and communicate - in many ways fundamentally changing the
public's expectations of and relationship to their government.
Therefore, if I had to sum up this year's Proposed Operational Plan for Fiscal Years 2012-14 in only
two words, those words would be "Embracing Change." The County of San Diego will spend the next
two years rising to the challenges that change presents, embracing the opportunities it offers and continuously
examining how we can change as an organization to better provide the services the public
needs and expects. Within this document, which guides how public funds will be spent over the next
two years, you will see many references to changes in the way we do business.
A number of important programmatic and spending changes are the result of decisions made at the
State level, with legislation enacted in Sacramento requiring us to significantly change how we provide
many public safety and health programs. Implementation of Assembly Bill (AB) 118, Local Revenue
Fund 2011 shifted the State's financial responsibility for various services to Counties, with funding coming
from a dedicated portion of sales tax, and the implementation of AB 109, Public Safety Realignment
(2011), expanded County responsibility for the management of criminal offenders. These bills - along
with the State's decision to eliminate redevelopment - are requiring Counties to profoundly change not
just how we provide services but what services we can or, in some cases, must provide.
In addition to adjusting to new roles and responsibilities in the areas of health, public safety and
redevelopment, we're also taking advantage of opportunities to improve how and where we serve the
public. Departments throughout the organization are using our Government Without Walls (GWOW)
initiative, deploying new technology tools to expand employees' mobility, allowing them to spend
more productive time in the community and with customers.
We're changing the way we design our services, too, by continually looking for more opportunities
to streamline operations - such as the Red Tape Reduction Task Force - and by addressing public needs
in innovative, comprehensive ways, as illustrated by our unique "Live Well San Diego!" health and
wellness initiative.We're changing the facilities we use to serve the public- continuing progress on the new, space- and
energy-efficient County Operations Center in Kearny Mesa, and moving forward to turn underutilized
parking lots at the historic, waterfront County Administration Center into a multi-purpose park that will
serve current and future generations of San Diegans and welcome visitors to our region. We're moving
forward to provide much-needed public safety facilities in the region such as the replacement of the Las
Colinas Women's Detention Facility and the new Rancho San Diego Sheriff station.
And last but not least, we're changing how we communicate with the public we serve, by creating
the County News Center to expand the services and information the public can find online and through
social media.
Indeed, change is a constant that's threaded throughout every County department in this Operational
Plan.
One thing, though, that will not change is our commitment to fiscal discipline. We continue to live
within our means and to strive to maintain the County's strong credit ratings. The proposed Fiscal Years
2012-14 Operational Plan continues our commitment to structural balance and prudent reserves with a
total of $4.77 billion proposed for Fiscal Year 2012-13. This is 1.9% lower than the Fiscal Year 2011-12
budget, even though this proposed budget contains a total of 15,958 staff years - 271 more than were
budgeted in Fiscal Year 2011-12. These positions are being added to provide additional staff to support
the County's family resource centers, to address the County's public safety realignment responsibilities,
staffing for the new women's detention facility, sworn supervisory staff for the Sheriff's patrol stations,
and additional staff to assist with the timely resolution of residential and commercial assessment
appeals.
In the years ahead, we will preserve essential public safety services, continue the multi-year investment
in the County's capital infrastructure to provide needed facilities for the region and expand our
investment in health and wellness programs by leveraging new resources to improve the Community
Nutrition Education Program, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, the and the Low Income
Health Program. As we have done in past years, we'll focus on emergency preparedness and fire protection;
protect public health; promote healthier communities and living habits; conduct the November
Presidential election; maintain a strong, vibrant public library system; expand and protect park and
open space resources and continue to promote sustainability and conservation.
We will do this by working with the Board of Supervisors to ensure that County government in San
Diego remains fiscally sound, operationally strong and able to meet the core needs of County residents
within available revenues. We will continue to closely monitor changing economic conditions and the
uncertainties surrounding key State revenue sources, working with other California counties to protect
local revenues and interests as the State works to redefine State/County roles, responsibilities and revenues.
And we will continue to use the County's General Management System (GMS) to carry out the
Board's priorities, using our GMS management disciplines and commitment to innovation, continuous
improve-ment, excellence and customer service to respond as efficiently as possible to increasing caseloads
and other demands for service.

For the County of San Diego, our greatest asset is our ability to combine the expertise and dedication
of our employees, the pragmatic, seasoned leadership of the Board of Supervisors and our commitment
to a culture that embraces change. With these organizational strengths, I am confident that we
will meet the challenges of the future.
I invite you to read more about the County's accomplishments, objectives and programmatic
changes in the individual group and department sections that begin on page 113.