As residents lucky enough to call San Diego County home, we know our region overflows with natural and manmade
treasures. Just as obvious are the energetic and diverse people and organizations underpinning the
region’s success. With our commitment to organizational excellence, continuous improvement and stewardship
of public resources, County government is an important part of the region’s success. But, we know, only a
part.
Most things we do as a local government have more power when they’re part of a Collective Impact. Collective
impact happens when we engage communities in problem-solving and setting priorities. Collective impact
comes from partnering with the region’s 18 cities, other agencies and community organizations to achieve the
results taxpayers expect. And collective impact is a result of optimizing our internal resources to tackle complex
issues on multiple fronts to achieve our vision of Building Better Health, Living Safely, and Thriving.
This year, collectively, we will boldly focus on changing the lives of San Diegans with some of the greatest individual
difficulties: people with serious mental illnesses who are chronically homeless. Multiple County departments,
cities, housing commissions and nonprofits will work together to expand intensive services and housing
to help these vulnerable people find lasting stability.
We will continue a collective focus on helping all youth achieve their potential and reducing the number of youth in the juvenile justice system
by expanding partnerships with community organizations and law enforcement to increase youth access to diversion programs and Alternatives
to Detention. We will expand mental health services to help justice-involved youth change their lives. New screenings and services
will be added to identify and help the often hidden and deeply traumatized young victims of human trafficking.
The County’s collective partnership with CAL FIRE and local fire agencies continues apace. Residents in rural areas will experience even better
fire and emergency medical services, as we add paramedic firefighter service throughout the backcountry and activate a third firefighting
helicopter.
This year, we join our technology partners to further expand our portfolio of mobile apps and social media to make information more accessible
to the residents we serve, including our Spanish speakers. We will increase information for making emergency preparations, monitoring
beach water quality, accessing zoning and property information, scanning real time road conditions, reporting missing and found animals, virtually
visiting the library, just to name a few.
While technology is an ever-important way to serve and engage residents, delivering modern services and infrastructure will always be a hallmark
of our County. In an ambitious three-year effort, we’ll resurface roads throughout the region, in population centers and along travel
routes from Otay to Palomar Mountain. The new Alpine library is nearly done, and new libraries in Imperial Beach and Borrego Springs are
under way. We’ll break ground on a new state-of the-art Sheriff’s crime lab, while we continue to work with regional partners to upgrade the
Regional Communications System.
Whether it’s through new infrastructure or leasing a small storefront, we are focused on making sure our services are located where they’re
needed most. The new North Inland Live Well Center in Escondido that serves as a single stop for health and social services for residents in
the region has been a successful model for delivering public services. Based on community input and data analysis, we will replicate that
model elsewhere in the county to bring health, justice and public services close to home to improve community access and engagement.
The County’s fiscal discipline and systemic financial planning and monitoring are at the root of everything we do. Our AAA credit ratings, our
sensible reserves, and our practice of paying cash when possible instead of incurring interest-bearing debt are the foundation of our ability to
match services to community needs. The Fiscal Year 2016-17 CAO Recommended Operational Plan totals $5.35 billion, a decrease of 1.2%
over the prior fiscal year, and includes 17,378.00 staff years.
I encourage you to look inside the Operational Plan to learn about our four Strategic Initiatives: Healthy Families, Safe Communities, Sustainable
Environments, and Operational Excellence, and to our Enterprise-wide Goals. This framework is our strategy for staying in sync, setting targets
that matter, and ensuring we are part of a Collective Impact to achieve our bold vision of health, safety, and thriving for all San Diegans.