It is with great pride that I present the Proposed Budget
for the City and County of San Francisco for Fiscal Years
2013-14 and 2014-15. This year’s budget reflects a lot of
hard work between city government and the people we
serve. We’ve met in every district of the City, worked with
our elected city family, and with hundreds of community
leaders and providers who help us deliver services to the
people of San Francisco. It’s because of this consensus
approach that I am proud to propose a responsible and
balanced two-year budget that reflects the core values that
we share in San Francisco - values of fiscal responsibility,
social responsibility and investing in our City’s future.
When we began this year’s budget, we began like
many years before: trying to reduce significant budget
shortfalls. In late 2012 when I issued my budget
instructions to department heads, our projected General
Fund deficit was $129.1 million for Fiscal Year (FY)
2013-14 and $263.2 million for FY 2014-15. Although
these deficits posed a challenge, they were lower than the
deficits I faced in my first two years in office because we
have pursued policies to control costs, grow our economy,
create jobs and stabilize our fiscal health. This year I
am proposing a budget that protects our social safety
net, increases public safety, and invests in our City’s
infrastructure at unprecedented levels. It is also a budget
that significantly grows our City’s reserves.
The past few years have not been easy. We’ve made tough,
but necessary choices on everything from escalating
pension and health care costs to reforming our unfair,
job-punishing business tax. We’ve also added a healthy
dose of fiscal discipline with two-year budgeting, five-year
financial planning, and a Ten-Year Capital Plan to get us
to this point.
These tough choices have paid off. I am delivering this
budget as San Francisco’s economy is recovering, growing,
and moving in the right direction. San Franciscans
are getting back to work: our unemployment rate has
dropped from 9.6 percent in January 2011 to 5.4 percent
last month. Our credit rating has been upgraded by bond
rating agencies in the last year, making our tax dollars
go further when we deliver capital projects and giving
our city even more investor confidence. And, by the end
of this two-year budget, the City’s reserves will be at 4
percent of the total General Fund budget - an important
element of our City’s overall fiscal health.
Investing in Community Safety
It is essential that we live in a safe city; this budget
includes funding to make San Francisco an even safer
city. We developed a six-year Police and Fire Staffing
Plan to train the next generation of San Francisco first
responders. Over the next two years, San Francisco will
hire 300 new, sworn police officers with 6 new academy
classes. And, we will add 120 firefighters with 3 new fire
academy classes.
Being a safe City also means investing in a social safety
net to ensure support for our most vulnerable residents.
One thing we agreed on early was that in a time of state
and federal cuts, protecting our social safety net is more
important than ever. I have rejected all proposed year
one mental health and substance abuse reductions from
the Public Health Department and I have restored $4
million in federal cuts to programs serving people living
with HIV & AIDS. On our streets, there are still too many
individuals and families without a place to call home.
That’s why we are extending a dedicated emergency
family shelter to provide year-round services, adding 25

more units of family supportive housing, and supporting
a new approach to housing transitional age youth, which
connects these young people to work. We will also
continue our efforts to be a healthier City. The Affordable
Care Act will extend health insurance to 35,000 San
Franciscans, and I have tasked our Department of Public
Health and the Human Services Agency to implement the
Affordable Care Act.
Investing in San Francisco’s Infrastructure
and Economy
This budget includes $445.2 million in capital
investments which will support approximately 4,000
construction and related industry jobs over the next two
years. My proposed budget also includes historic levels
of General Fund support for smart capital investments:
$71.8 million in year one and $105.3 million in year two,
which represents funding at 92 percent of the Capital
Plan recommended levels. My budget will fully fund
the City’s street repaving program to improve streets
and sidewalks, and continue construction and planning
on critical projects such as the Water and Sewer System
Improvement Programs, our new General Hospital, the
Bayview Opera House, improvements to MUNI, and—
thanks to the $195 million dollar voter-approved parks
bond—we will invest in our parks and open spaces.
It is extremely important to me that as a government we
set our innovative citizens up for success. Job growth
in San Francisco is outpacing the rest of the state and
nation; with 35 construction cranes across our skyline,
you can visibly see public and private construction jobs
being created - in fact 223,000 jobs will be created over
the next ten years! I believe that small businesses are
the heart and soul of our economy. My proposed budget
includes funding for an online Business Portal to cut
through bureaucratic red tape and make starting and
operating a business in San Francisco easier. My budget
also continues my Invest in Neighborhoods Initiative
that is creating customized plans in 25 neighborhood
commercial districts, and providing a Job Squad that
brings City Hall to our neighborhood businesses. Further,
because San Francisco is truly a global city, over the
next two years we will continue to build on the success
of ChinaSF and expand our outreach to Latin American
and Asian markets - not just attract businesses to locate
here, but to introduce SF Made products to these growing
markets.
I am especially proud of our City for coming together to
ensure the success of our citizens around the Housing
Trust Fund. Last year, together with the support of the
voters, we passed a $1.5 billion stream of funding over
the next 30 years for affordable housing and assistance
for first-time home buyers. Over the next two years we
have budgeted $42.8 million for new affordable housing
developments; funds to help first time home owners
and first responders with down payment assistance, and
funds to preserve and stabilize existing housing. Every
public dollar for new affordable housing developments
is leveraged with two private dollars All of these
investments are needed to protect the housing stock in
our City and make sure San Francisco can be affordable,
and we are doing it smartly, with some of the strongest
tenant protections in place.
While the worst of the economic crisis may be behind
us, we cannot deviate from our commitment to fiscal
responsibility and reform. We will continue to invest
in our neighborhoods, in our infrastructure, and, most
importantly, in our people.
The City Charter requires the Mayor to submit a
balanced budget proposal on June 1. However, I view
this submission as a first step in a process. I am proud of
what we’ve accomplished in this budget submission, and
I look forward to continuing to work with the Board of
Supervisors to develop the best budget possible for the
City and County of San Francisco.