Dear Residents of San Francisco,
I am proud to present to you my proposed budget for
the City and County of San Francisco for Fiscal Years
2015-16 and 2016-17. This year, I am pleased to say that
for the first time, I oversaw a budget which was balanced
by increasing revenues, allowing us to make smart and
strategic investments and increase services for the
public.
These good economic times represent a significant
opportunity for us to continue our work together to
make sure that San Francisco is a safe and livable city,
a caring and educated city, and a city that confronts
our affordability challenges head on. City government
has an important role to play in making the lives of all
people better.
Since I took office in 2011, I have worked to make sure
that as we emerged from the Great Recession, San
Francisco used its prosperity to tackle its most pressing
challenges. That’s why our City has led the nation in
developing the Housing Trust Fund, increasing the
minimum wage, re-envisioning the Housing Authority,
and making Muni free for low-income seniors, youth,
and people with disabilities. This budget continues those
efforts.
Addressing Affordability
Addressing our affordability challenges continues to
be my top priority. That is why the budget includes
increased services for seniors and persons with
disabilities, implementation of an increased minimum
wage, free Muni for income-qualified youth, seniors,
and disabled persons, investments in workforce
development, and a cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) for
non-profit organizations that contract with the City to
provide services.
Housing continues to be the most vexing of our
affordability challenges—which is why we must
confront this challenge together. My budget includes
new funding for the Housing Trust Fund, contemplates
final action by the State of California allowing San
Francisco to meet its redevelopment commitments
more quickly, and invests in eviction prevention and
neighborhood stabilization.
Service Increases to Make San
Francisco Safer and More Livable
Reliable, quality public service is an important aspect of
how San Franciscans feel about living in our great city.
Over the next year, San Franciscans will benefit from a 10
percent Muni service increase, which will help to address
crowding and reliability. Building on the progress we
made with the Streets and Road Resurfacing Bond, this
two-year budget fully funds our city’s street repaving
program, which will allow us to repave more than 1,400
blocks over the next two years. Services at Public Works
and Recreation and Parks will be expanded to keep our
streets cleaner, maintain our city’s trees, and promote
public safety throughout our parks.
This budget also continues to fund our six-year public
safety hiring plan to train the next generation of public
safety personnel. Over the next two years, San Francisco
will hire 400 new police officers, 198 firefighters,
55 paramedics, and 36 9-1-1 dispatchers to enhance
community safety.

Investing in Our Social Safety Net
We are also investing in systems of care that support
the most vulnerable San Franciscans. This budget
includes significant new resources dedicated to opening
a new San Francisco General Hospital, adding 500 new
units of supportive housing for people who are exiting
homelessness through our innovative Navigation Center,
and millions in new funds to support seniors and people
with disabilities.
My budget includes $690 million of City funds to
support San Francisco’s public schools, Preschool for All
programs, and provide more summer and afterschool
programs to clear out the waiting lists. We are making
sure our children are educated and ready to succeed—by
working together through our bold new effort to improve
outcomes for all San Francisco’s children and families
with the Our Children, Our Families Council.
Long-Term Financial Sustainability
My proposed budget balances the need for increased
and enhanced services for City residents with the need
to ensure long-term financial stability and invest in our
infrastructure.
In the coming year, we will fully fund the Capital Plan’s
recommended level in the first year of the budget, and
invest an unprecedented $253.4 million in General Fund
support for smart, responsible capital investments
based on the recommendations of our City’s Ten-Year
Capital Plan.
In addition to making strategic one-time investments,
this budget continues to grow the City’s reserves to
offset the impact if an economic downturn does occur.
By the end of June 2017, the City will have $297.4 million
across its General Reserve, Budget Stabilization Reserve,
and Rainy Day Reserve. These reserves function as the
City’s savings account, protecting us from economic
uncertainty and helping us continue to strengthen our
credit rating.
The City Charter requires the Mayor to submit a
balanced budget proposal on June 1. However, I view this
submission as a first step in a process. I am proud of what
we have accomplished in this budget submission, and
I look forward to continuing to work with the Board of
Supervisors to develop the best budget possible for the
City and County of San Francisco.
Sincerely,