As we approach a new fiscal year, it gives our organization a time to
reflect and plan for next year and beyond. San Joaquin County has a lot to
be proud of in our thoughtfulness and fiscal prudence which is the basis
of the County's annual spending plan and balancing the needs of the
community. San Joaquin County has led well, delivered and expanded
services during a time when general purpose revenues were not growing
to the level of increased operating costs. We have seen success as a result
of the collaboration among departments, with other governmental
agencies, nonprofits, and with the understanding from the public. The
quote from John Quincy Adams is fitting for the County in all that we are
entrusted to accomplish every day and what lies ahead.
"If your actions inspire others to dream more, learn more,
do more and become more, you are a leader. "
The Proposed Budget takes into consideration the slow recovery of our
local economy. It is /lot structurally-balanced and requires the use of
$11.8 million in one-time funds to balance. This amount is $5.3 million
less than the Final Budget for 2013-14. It is important to note the Reserve
for Contingencies is recommended at 2% of the operating budget or
$26.0 million, an increase $7.1 million' over last fiscal year.
An area of great concern to the health and welfare of our community is
how San Joaquin County continues to plan for the increase and demands
on the County's criminal justice system. Recognizing the anticipated
increases in law enforcement staffing in the City of Stockton, the few
supplemental requests that are being recommended are focused on

responding to the impacts to the County's criminal justice system. Even
though there were a number of important, unfunded supplemental requests
totaling $3.5 million, the County recognizes the lasting effects the community
has already experienced as a result of Public Safety Realignment
(AB 109) and how critical our criminal justice system responds to the
changing environment and the different ways we need to be prepared to
treat this population, focusing on reducing recidivism.
The County's budget growth is primarily in health and human services. Of
the 5,913 recommended positions, 139 are being added in health and
human services which are due to increases in caseload and new initiatives.
These programs are primarily funded from State and federal resources.
An area of focus for this year, along with future years is the County's
ongoing updating of assumptions for long-range financial forecasting. It is
critical to the financial health of the County to anticipate the spending plan
for the future. One of the County's largest increases in operational costs
remains retirement expenses. Approximately 50% of the Proposed Budget
is for salary and employee benefits. The County has consistently paid its
annual cost of retirement. This expense is projected to continue to increase
in the future. As a result of the new tier implementation on January 1,2013,
the value of the reduced costs will benefit the County at a greater level once
a larger number of employees are hired under the new tier. Currently, the
County has five labor agreements that have either expired or will expire at
the end of June 2014. These labor agreements impact 744 positions and the
County is currently negotiating with these units for successor agreements.
The potential costs resulting from these negotiations are not known and
therefore, are not included in the Proposed Budget. The County must have
the ability to react when necessary as was exemplified in how artfully Head
Start was handled and led by the County during 2013-14.
The goal remains to continue to lead the County in the delivery of services
that are effective and efficient in those core areas that meet the needs of the
community in a sustainable fiscal manner.
Financial Overview
The appropriation in the proposed 2014-15 budget totals $1.35 billion. This
represents an increase of$23.0 million from the 2013-14 budget. For the
second consecutive year since the Great Recession, the assessed valuation
of properties in San Joaquin County is expected to increase modestly at
5%. Revenues from both local and Statewide sales tax continue to improve,
however, at a slower pace than the last three years.
The 2014-15 budget eliminates the one-time labor concession savings but
includes ongoing savings resulting from cost sharing of employee benefits
reached with 90% of the County's workforce. The budget also provides for
increases in wages and benefits stipulated in the existing labor agreements.
County of San Joaquin 2014-15 Budget Message
In addition, the budget includes significant federal and State funding for
law and justice activities, transportation projects, and health and human
services programs. Although the local economy is recovering, it is recovering
at a slower pace, therefore, a significant amount of the General Fund
year-end balance will still need to be used to balance the 2014-15 budget.
As a political subdivision of the State, the County's role is to deliver the
services mandated by the State and federal governments. Consequently, the
Board of Supervisors does not determine which government functions the
County performs. Health, welfare, criminal justice, elections, recording of
documents, weights and measures, and agricultural enforcement are some
examples of these State-prescribed and County-administered functions.
Many of these programs mandate performance standards and require
County funding participation from our local revenue base.
The graphic effect of mandated programs is illustrated in the pie chart
which follows. It is based on the 2013-14 Approved County Budget
totaling $1.33 billion. The graph highlights several key points:
>- Revenue-specific programs account for $1.08 billion, or 81.8%, of
the County's budget. These areas cannot be adjusted without losing
offsetting revenues.
>- Only $241.7 million, or 18.2%, of the County budget is funded by
General Purpose Revenue, including available General Fund and
Contingency Fund balances of$34.5 million.
>- Mandated matches, maintenance-of-effort requirements for
Public Safety programs, and contractual debt services totaling
$68.5 million, or 5.2% of the County budget funded by General
Purpose Revenue, cannot be reduced.
>- $173.2 million, or 13.0%, of the budget is available to absorb any
general federal/State budget cuts and local cost increases. However,
even the areas subject to possible cuts are virtually all mandated and
controlled by law and State regulations, where the Board of Supervisors
has some discretion over the level of services.
>- Public Safety programs consume $77.7 million, or 44.9%, of the
areas subject to possible cuts. When combined with the maintenanceof-
effort requirements, a total of$122.7 million, or 50.8%, of the
County's General Purpose Revenue is allocated to Public Safety
programs.
>- The Property Tax and Fiscal Systems, Health Services, Public
Health, Children's Shelter, General Assistance, and Elections comprise
$40.7 million, or 23.5%, of the areas subject to possible cuts.
>- Many of the non-Public Safety Program areas provide direct support
or revenues to Public Safety programs (Administration/Support and
Property Tax and Fiscal Systems).

On May 13,2014, the Governor released his 2014-15 May Revision to
his January budget proposal. The revised budget totals $107.8 billion,
and reflects a net increase of $2.4 billion in State revenues offset by
higher costs under Proposition 98 (1998 K-14 Education), higher
revised cost estimates for programs, and new proposals. Major components
of the Governor's proposed budget include:
>- Paying down debt and reducing long-term liabiiities:
The Governor's proposed budget includes reducing the
"Wall of Debt" by over $11 billion in 2014-15 and fully
eliminating it by 2017-18. The May Revision includes
$100 million to repay a portion of the existing $900
million in mandate reimbursement claims owed to local
governments since 2004, of which nearly 75% is owed to
counties. San Joaquin County's share is estimated at
$742,000 for 2014-15.
The May Revision includes an increase of$430 million in
State retirement contribution in 2014-15 for the California
Public Employees' Retirement System; as well as the
Governor's plan to fully-fund the California State
Teachers' Retirement System in 30 years with the State's
contribution increasing by $59 million in 2014-15. (Plan
Payment Structure: Districts - 70%; State - 20%; and
Teachers - 10%.)
>- Rainy Day Fund: The Governor's May Revision sets aside 3%
of revenues in 2014-15 as required by Proposition 58. Half of
the funds, approximately $1.6 billion, will be utilized to make a
supplemental payment to payoff the Economic Recovery
Bonds, and the other half will be saved in the Rainy Day Fund.
- Background: Proposition 58 was approved by voters in
2004 to address the boom and bust budget cycle California
had experienced in the 1990's and early 2000's. The
Proposition requires a 3% transfer into a reserve until the
balance in the account reaches $8 billion or 5% of General
Fund revenues, whichever is greater. According to the
California Budget Project, since the passage of Propos ition
58 (2004), the transfer into the rainy day fund has
been suspended every year.
Pending Rainy Day Ballot Measure and Legislation:
Assembly Constitutional Amendment 4 (ACA 4) is
designed to tighten the reserve requirements to assist the

State in avoiding future budget shortfalls. ACA 4 was originally
slated to appear before voters in November 2012, however,
it was postponed two years by the Legislature.
Prior to the release of the May Revision, Legislative leadership
and the Governor reached an agreement on amendments to the
Rainy Day Fund, and on May 15th, the Legislature passed the
amendments (ACA lx2), which replaces the pending ACA 4.
Upon voter approval in November 2014, this amendment
(ACA lx2) would take effect in 2015-16. Key components
included in ACA lx2 are:
• Requires deposits into the Rainy Day Fund whenever
capital gains revenues rise to more than 8% of State General
Fund tax revenues, and requires that 1.5% of annual State
General Fund be set aside each year.
• Sets the maximum size of the Rainy Day Fund at 10% of
State revenues.
• Requires half of each year's deposits for the next 15 years
to be used for supplemental payments to the Wall of Debt or
other long-term liabilities. After that time, at least half of
each year's deposit would be saved, with the remainder
used for supplemental debt payments or savings.
• Authorizes the withdrawing of funds only for a disaster or if
spending remains at or below the highest level of spending
from the past three years. The maximum amount that could
be withdrawn in the first year of a recession would be
limited to half of the fund's balance.
• Requires in the Constitution that the State provide a multiyear
budget forecast to help better manage the State's longterm
finances.
• Creates a Proposition 98 reserve, whereby spikes in funding
would be saved for future years. This reserve would make
no changes to the Proposition 98 calculations, and it would
not begin to operate until the existing maintenance factor is
fully paid off.
>- Affordable Care Act (ACA) - In January 2014, the Governor
estimated a two-year General Fund cost increase of $1.2 billion over
two years (2013-14 and 2014-15). The Governor's May Revision
estimates an additional $1.2 billion increase in costs, for a total of
$2.4 billion for two years. These increases are primarily due to caseload
increases in the mandatory and the optional Medi-Cal expansions
related to the implementation of the ACA or federal health care
reform. While costs related to the optional Medi-Cal expansion are
paid by the federal government for the next few years, approximately
County of San Joaquin 2014-15 Budget Message
800,000 individuals will receive Medi-Cal benefits under the current
mandatory 50-50 State-federal cost-sharing arrangement. The twoyear
increase also includes costs related to CalWORKs case load
increases, In-Home Supportive Services caseload increases, as well
as other ACA-related impacts, including a $20 million increase in the
CalFresh program.
Major ACA provisions affecting Medi-Cal and other State and local
government programs/services went into effect on January 1,2014.
Given the significant uncertainty surrounding the fiscal impacts of
the ACA when the Governor prepared his January budget proposal, it
is not surprising that the May Revision makes significant adjustments
that reflect the first few months of available data. The ACA is
still in its initial phases of implementation and estimates of its impact
on State- and county-provided services remain subject to significant
uncertainty.
> Emergency Drought: In February 2014, the Legislature enacted
urgency drought relieflegislation which provided $687.4 million in
2013-14 for various activities related to responding to the current
drought in California. The Governor's May Revision proposes an
additional $142 million to continue and to expand upon those
activities in 2014-15. The proposed funding would support a range of
activities in seven State departments (Forestry and Fire Protection,
Fish and Wildlife, Water Resources, Social Services, Office of
Emergency Services, State Water Resources Control Board, and
General Services). Nearly half of the funding, $66 million, would be
available to the Department of Forestry and Fire Protection to
expand fire suppression and prevention activities, including funding
for additional firefighters for what is expected to be an extended fire
season. The proposal also includes $39 million for the Department of
Fish and Wildlife to monitor impacts of the drought on fish populations,
as well as to improve fish and wildlife habitat throughout the
State. It also includes $18 million for the Department of Water
Resources (DWR) for various emergency water supply activities. (In
addition to the total above, the May Revision proposes to redirect
$28 million of previously appropriated bond funds to install temporary
barriers to prevent salt water from intruding into the Sacramento-
San Joaquin Delta. It also includes provisional language that
would allow the Director of Finance to augment DWR's General
Fund budget up to $19.3 million to operate, maintain, and remove
those barriers.)
> Public Safety Realignment (AB 109): The Governor's May Revision
reflects a $13.5 million decrease in AB 109 growth funds for
two years (2013-14 and 2014-15). Utilizing the 2013-14 formula for
growth funds, San Joaquin County received 1.34% of the Statewide
allocation. Based on that scenario which is subject to change, the 

County would experience a decrease of $288,100 in AB 109 funding,
for the two-year period.
~ Court Ordered Prison Population Cap: On February 10,2014,
the State was granted a two-year extension to meet the cap by
February 28, 2016. In granting the extension, the court established
benchmarks, requiring the State to meet 143% of design capacity by
June 30, 2014 and 141.5% by February 28, 2015, and increased
credit earnings for non-violent, non-sexual second strikers, increasing
credits from 20% to 33.3%. Under 2011 Realignment, inmates
with non-violent and non-serious offenses are released onto Post
Release Community Supervision (PRCS) under the jurisdiction of
counties. The Statewide PRCS average daily population impact is
estimated to be 216 in 2013-14 and 819 in 2014-15. The May Revision
includes $11.3 million to be allocated to county probation
departments for the short-term increase of offenders on PRCS. The
May Revision also augments the amount available in the Recidivism
Reduction fund by $9.9 million, increasing the total amount available
in the fund to $91 million in 2014-15. The Governor's Proposed
Budget also includes $49 million for local re-entry programs targeting
the mental health population who are within six to twelve months
of release.
~ Infrastructure Financing Districts (IFDs): The Governor's
Budget proposal includes legislation which would expand the tax
increment financing tools for IFDs, providing for a broader array of
uses than are authorized under current law.
~ Groundwater Management: The Governor's Budget includes
legislation and proposes $2.9 million for the Department of Water
Resources to collect and update groundwater data and information,
as well as $1.9 million for the State Water Resources Control Board
to act as a backstop when local or regional agencies are unable or
unwilling to sustainably manage groundwater basins. The Governor's
May Revision proposes significant increases, including $2.5
million in 2014-15 to support local groundwater management efforts.
The Governor's Budget highlights a number of major risks that threaten
the State's fiscal stability, including overhanging debt totaling $26.2 billion
at the end of2013-14, growing long-term liabilities totaling $337.5 billion
as of May 2014, lingering uncertainties regarding the costs of ACA, and
the volatility of capital gains (capital gains provide 9.8% of General Fund
tax revenues in 2014-15).
The Legislature is mandated by law to approve a budget by a simple
majority vote by June 15th. Once the budget is approved by the Legislature,
it goes to the Governor for his signature. The budget goes into effect
upon the Governor's approval of the budget bill. By law, the new budget
must be enacted on July 1s1. It is reasonable to expect that a budget will be
County of San Joaquin 2014-15 Budget Message
Appropriations
presented to the Governor and signed into law in time to meet this Constitutional
deadline.
Financial Analysis
The 2014-15 Proposed County Budget (excluding Special Districts) totals
$1.35 billion, which represents an increase of$23.0 million from the
2013-14 Approved Budget. These appropriations are primarily based on
the current State/County funding relationship. In the event State funding is
less than the anticipated amounts as a result of the final State Budget, a
commensurate reduction in local expenditures will be necessary.
Budget totals for Special Districts governed by the Board of Supervisors
have been added to the County budget figures to show the total scope of the
Board of Supervisors' responsibility. The grand total of all budget
elements, including Special Districts, is $1.38 billion.

Notable changes in the 2014-15 appropriations include the following:
~ A net increase of $16.4 million for negotiated employee salary and
benefits adjustments. This includes projected savings from the implementation
of the Public Employees' Pension Reform Act of2013 and
health insurance premiums, partially offset by increases in retirement
contributions and salary increases implemented midyear 2013-14 as
well as those scheduled for 2014-15.
~ General Government is decreased by $6.7 million, primarily reflecting
decreases of$3.7 million in Tobacco Settlement funds for capital 

uses; $1.2 million in debt payments; $1.1 million reduction in staff in
the offices of the Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk and Treasurer-
Tax Collector; and $564,000 due to the completion of several automation/
modernization projects for the Recorder's operations.
~ Capital Maintenance is increased by $1.2 million largely due to an
additional appropriation of $3.3 million for the Capital Improvement
Program, primarily funded by the Capital Outlay Fund balance, and
increases in staffing and allocated insurance costs. Partially offsetting
these increases is the deletion of one-time Tobacco Settlement
funds of $2.6 million for capital projects.
~ Environmental Protection is decreased by $1.3 million. This change
is primarily due to a reduction in Homeland Security grant program
expenses of $1.9 million; partially offset by negotiated salary and
benefits adjustments and additional staff allocated to the Community
Development Department.
~ Law and Justice is increased by $12.6 million, primarily consisting
of $6.8 million in negotiated salary and benefits adjustments, a net
staffing cost increase of $1.9 million, increases in allocated
insurance costs of $1. 8 million, an increase in funding for Pretrial
Service~ of $878,000, and additional funding for Jail shift briefings
of $595,000.
~ Roads imd Facilities programs are decreased by $26.3 million,
largely attributable to a reduction of$17.6 million in the community
infrastructure program primarily reflecting an accounting change
(unspent budget appropriations are encumbered rather than re-budgeted
to more accurately reflect annual revenues). Also contributing
to the decrease are reductions of $8.8 million in construction and
road maintenance projects; $652,000 in allocated insurance costs;
$370,000 in Tobacco Settlement funds for Delta and water-related
activities; and the deletion of $2.6 million for a solar carport project
included in the 2013-14 budget. Partially offsetting these decreases
are $1.4 million in capital donation to Fleet Services for heavy equipment
purchases; an additional $936,000 for Airport improvement
projects; and $645,000 in negotiated salary and benefits adjustments.
~ Health Services programs are increased by $17.7 million, primarily
reflecting increases of $5.4 million in negotiated salary and benefits
adjustments; $4.6 million in additional staff and related costs; $3.9
million in community provider contracts and inpatient hospital costs
related for Mental Health Services Act programs; $2.2 million in
Mental Health Pharmacy drug costs; $3.3 million in Hospital medical
supplies and maintenance costs; and an additional $1.4 million
for landfill improvement projects. Partially offsetting these costs is a
decrease of $3.4 million in Hospital equipment acquisition. 

Human Services programs are increased by $18.5 million. Major
changes include a net increase of $11.7 million in staffing, contracted
services, and other operating costs related to Medi-Cal Expansion
and implementation of the Affordable Care Act; $1.6 million in
restored Head Start allocation impacted by federal sequestration;
$1.6 million for In-Home Supportive Services program costs;
$895,000 for Foster Care caseload growth and cost-of-living
adjustment; $660,000 in Summer Youth Employment and Training
Program; and $2.1 million in negotiated salary and benefits adjustments.
These increases are partially offset by a reduction of $773,000
in Workforce Investment Act funding for employment training
serVIces.
~ Education is increased by $420,000 primarily reflecting projected
available funds for library services.
~ Parks and Recreation is decreased by $205,000 largely due to a
reduction in allocated insurance costs.
~ Reserve for Contingencies is increased by $7.1 million reflecting the
recommended reserve level of $26.0 million for 2014-15.
The relative sizes of the 2014-15 appropriations by function are shown 

Overall, available revenues are expected to increase by $23.0 million, or
1.7% from the 2013-14 budget level. Notable changes in 2014-15 available
funds are as follows:
~ Aid from Other Governmental Agencies is projected to increase by
$8.8 million. This consists primarily of increases of $17.0 million in
federal and State reimbursements for public assistance administration
and programs; $1.6 million in federal funding for Head Start program;
$22.5 million in State supplemental funding related to Medi-
Cal Expansion; $1.4 million in State funds for Mental Health Services
programs; $2.1 million in Proposition 172 State sales tax for
public safety departments reflecting a 4.5% growth from 2013-14
estimated actual; $1.1 million in SB 678 funding to support reductions
in adult recidivism; and $1.1 million in Federal Aviation
Administration grants for Airport improvement projects.
Partially offsetting these increases are reductions in federal and State
funds of $14.5 million in State realignment revenues for health programs
due to the implementation of the ACA; $16.1 million in
waiver-related reimbursement and Disproportionate Share Hospital
funding for San Joaquin General Hospital (SJGH); $1.9 million
decrease in Homeland Security Grant funds; $1.1 million decrease in
federal funding for at-risk youths; $3.8 million in federal and State
funds for road construction projects; $2.6 million in State realignment
revenues for social services programs, and $773,000 for
employment and training programs for dislocated workers. It also
includes a $1.1 million decrease in funding for Local Community
Corrections, partially offset by $860,000 in one-time growth funds.
~ Charges for Services are increased by $24.1 million. Major changes
include increases of $15.2 million in patient revenues at SJGH;
County of San Joaquin 2014-15 Budget Message
$8.5 million in mental health service charges; $1.1 million in
reimbursement for Lathrop Police Services; and $1.6 million in election
services reimbursement from cities and special districts. Partially
offsetting these increases are reductions of $1.3 million in
reimbursement for collections services for the Superior Court;
$671,000 in development impact mitigation fees; and $354,000 in
recording fees.
;,. Revenues derived from Current Property Taxes are projected to
increase $11.8 million. The recommended budget assumes a 5%
growth in assessed valuation of the current secured and supplemental
tax rolls.
;,. The $11.7 million decrease in Operating Transfers In reflects reductions
of$2.0 million General Fund support to SJGH; $3.7 million in
Tobacco Settlement Funds; $5.0 million in transfers from designated
trust funds for capital improvement projects; $699,000 in reimbursements
from the Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk automation funds;
and the deletion of $40 1,000 in funds redirected from Capital Outlay
to the General Fund.
;,. Sales Taxes are up by $3.7 million primarily reflecting an increase in
Measure K sales tax allocation for transportation projects.
;,. Other Taxes/Revenues are increased by $2.1 million. This change
primarily consists of increases of $574,000 in license/pem1it fees
related to development activities and $325,900 in unclaimed outlawed
warrant funds. It also includes $600,000 as a result ofthe State
reinstating child support collection payments to counties midyear
2013-14.
;,. Revenues from Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties are projected to
increase by $648,000 largely attributable to penalties and costs
levied on delinquent property taxes.
;,. Available year-end Fund Balances are estimated at $75.0 million, a
decrease of $16.4 million from 2013-14. This primarily consists of
reductions of $5.0 million in General Fund; $4.5 million in Road
Fund; $5.1 million in Road Districts; and $16.9 million in Community
Infrastructure Fund largely due to an accounting change.
Offsetting these reductions are increases of $7.1 million in Reserve
for Contingencies balance; $5.5 million in Capital Outlay Fund; and
$1.9 million in Local Community Corrections Fund.

The County budget presentation is developed to show the "Net County
Cost" for each departmental budget. Net County Cost is computed by
subtracting program-generated revenue, offsetting grants, or cost-sharing
by other levels of government from the appropriation requirements for each
budget. The remaining Net County Cost is funded by General Purpose
Revenue.
The recommended 2014-15 Net County Cost for the various program areas,
compared to prior year Approved amounts, is shown below:

The most significant changes in Net County Cost are:
>- General Government has decreased $1.2 million. This is primarily
attributable to a reduction of $1.0 million in debt payment, and an
increase of $1.6 million in reimbursements from cities and special
districts for 2014 election costs. Partially offsetting these reductions
are increases of $451 ,000 in Cost Allocation Plan adjustments,
$350,000 in election costs, $300,000 in sales tax audit fees, and
$273,00 in allocated insurance costs.
>- Capital Maintenance has decreased $2.6 million. This consists
primarily of decreased Tobacco Settlement Funds allocation of $2.6
million for the Hospital Expansion/Health Care Facilities Project and
ongoing maintenance of County facilities, and the deletion of
$500,000 General Fund support for the Capital Improvement Program
included in the 2013-14 budget. Partially offsetting these
decreases is an additional position for General Services to enhance
ground maintenance services at the detention facilities, and increases
in Cost Allocation Plan adjustments and allocated insurance costs
totaling $212,000.
>- Environmental Protection has increased $445,000 mainly due to
negotiated salary and benefits adjustments.
>- Law and Justice shows an increase of $6.1 million. Significant
changes for programs funded with General Purpose Revenue include
$5.5 million in salary and benefits adjustments, addition of a net $2.2
million in new full-time and part-time positions, $1.5 million in allocated
insurance costs; offset by an increase in Proposition 172 revenue
of $2.1 million, and $1.2 million in reimbursement from grants
and various dedicated revenue sources.
>- Roads and Facilities has decreased $235,000. The proposed budget
includes an additional $135,000 General Fund support to the Airport
which is offset by a reduction of $370,000 in Tobacco Settlement
funds for Delta and water-related activities.
>- Health Services has decreased $1.8 million reflecting a decreased
General Fund contribution of $2.0 million to SJGH.
>- Human Services has increased $2.6 million largely reflecting a
$2.6 million decrease in State realignment revenues for social
serVIces programs.
>- Parks and Recreation programs have decreased $277,000 primarily
attributable to a reduction in allocated insurance costs.
>- Reserve for Contingencies has increased by $7.1 million to $26.0
million. This represents approximately 2% of the proposed budget.
As shown in the table above, Current Property Taxes and Sales Taxes are
the two main sources of the County's General Purpose Revenue. Combined,
they represent over 90% of the total ongoing General Purpose Revenue,
excluding Fund Balance and Transfer from Capital Fund. These
revenue sources are extremely sensitive to the economic upswings and
downturns.
The County's assessed property valuation started declining in 2008-09
following the collapse of the housing market. The decline continued over
the next four years and annual property tax revenue dropped by $40.0
million, or 20%, between 2007-08 and 2012-13. San Joaquin County
finally experienced the economic recovery happening throughout the
Nation. For the second consecutive year since the Great Recession, the
assessed valuation is expected to increase by 5% in the budget year. While
this is a positive trend, it will likely take many years to rebuild the property
tax revenue base back to the 2007-08 level.

The Great Recession had also negatively impacted sales tax receipts for
several years. The decline also affected the State sales taxes dedicated to
public safety (Proposition 172) and social services (also known as 1991
Realignment) programs. Unlike the property tax revenue trend, sales tax
receipts were stabilized sooner and continue to improve and are projected
to increase to $97.4 million in 2014-15.
The following chart depicts the Sales Taxes, including the County's
General Purpose Revenue, Proposition 172, and Realignment-Social
Services, for 2007-08 to 2014-15.

Although at a lesser degree compared to the last five years, the proposed
budget continues to be balanced with one-time budget solutions that will
not be sustainable for future years' budgets. The use of these one-time
funds, totaling $11.8 million, allows the County to maintain most General
Fund-supported programs at the current level and provide additional
resources to the offices of the Sheriff, District Attorney, and Public
Defender for increased workload associated with anticipated future growth
in City of Stockton's law enforcement staffing and existing demands on the
County's criminal justice system. The one-time funding is approximately
$5.3 million, or 31%, less than 2013-14.

The County workforce is comprised of employees who hold permanently
allocated positions and those who work in temporary, extra-help, and
contract capacities. The following table illustrates the recommended
changes in overall staffing for 2014-15:

Several points should be noted:
~ There is an overall increase of 137.1 full-time equivalent (FTE)
positions. This still represents a net loss of271.1 FTE positions from
2007-08.

194 new full-time allocated positions are recommended:
118 positions for Human Services Agency to address caseload
growth in public assistance programs primarily for the implementation
of the ACA; costs are fully funded by federal and
State allocations
31 positions for Behavioral Health Services primarily to implement
the additional components of the Mental Health Services
Act programs/activities funded by Proposition 63 revenues,
and System Redesign and Expansion
23 positions for SJGH to support the implementation of the
expanded health care coverage initiatives and trauma center
operations; costs are fully funded by federal, State, and patient
revenues
5 positions for Probation to perform research and data analysis
as well as increased workload
3 positions for Public Health Services to address administrative
and clinic workload demand
2 positions for District Attorney and 1 position for Public
Defender in anticipation of increased workload and demands
on the criminal justice system resulting from law enforcement
staffing increases
2 positions for Public Works
1 position for Correctional Health Services to address AB 109
program workload
1 position for Emergency Medical Services to support fiscal
review and administration of federal and State grants
1 position for Community Development to support increased
development activities; costs are fully funded by permit!
inspection fees
1 position for Stockton Metropolitan Airport to enhance
ground maintenance
5 positions for administration/support services departments to
address workload demand
~ 76 full-time allocated positions are recommended for deletion; of
which 71 are vacant and 5 are filled positions. Departments have
worked cooperatively with the County Administrator's Office to
re-evaluate positions that have been vacant for more than 12 months.
As a result, 71 vacant positions are recommended for deletion.

7 positions for the Treasurer-Tax Collector due to the Court's
termination of collections services from the County; 4 of the 7
positions are filled
6 positions for the Child Support Services due to cost increases
combined with flat federal/State funding; J of the 6positions is
filled
14 positions for Human Services Agency
9 positions for Employment and Economic Development
- 8 positions for Behavioral Health Services
- 8 positions for Probation due to decrease in federal reimbursement
for at-risk youth programs
6 court services positions for Sheriff-Coroner- Public Administrator
6 positions for San Joaquin General Hospital
6 positions for Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk due to decline
in recording fees
- 5 positions for Public Works
- 1 position for Neighborhood Preservation
Budget Highlights
San Joaquin County has 16 represented bargaining units which comprises
of approximately 96% of the County's workforce. Contracts for five of the
County's represented bargaining units either expired or are set to expire on
June 30, 2014; these units represent 13% of the County's workforce. The
County is in active negotiations with these units for successor contracts.
Impacts from these negotiations are unknown at this time, therefore, no
funds have been included in the recommended departmental budgets.
As of May 1,2014, there were 5,795 full-time allocated positions, of which
528, or 9.1%, were vacant positions. Of the 528 vacant positions, 263 were
actively under recruitment.
As previously noted, the 2014-15 budget proposes to delete 76 allocated
full-time positions, of which 5 are filled. The budget also adds 194 new
positions. If these changes are approved, this will bring the full-time
allocated positions to 5,913 and the number of vacant positions to 651.
Approximately 80% of the vacancies will be in the following County
departments whose operations are primarily funded by federal, State, or
service charges:

Human Services Agency - 264
~ San Joaquin General Hospital - 100
~ Behavioral Health - 91
~ Probation - 40
~ Public Works - 25
In March 2014, the Superior Court advised it would cease using County
departments to provide certain services:
~ Effective July 1, 2014, the Treasurer-Tax Collector's Revenue and
Recovery Division (RRD) will no longer be used to collect court
fines and penalties. Accordingly, the 2014-15 recommended budget
reflects a revenue reduction of $1.2 million as a result of this service
termination. In order to offset the decrease in revenue, RRD will be
eliminating seven positions, of which four are filled, in addition to
reducing operating expenses.
~ The Information Systems Division (ISD) will cease providing
support and maintenance to the Court for the Criminal Justice Information
System and the Automated Minor Offense System, effective
April 1, 2015. The Court anticipates migrating to a new Case
Management System by April 2015. ISD will be developing the
needed interfaces to exchange data between the Court's new system
and the various systems used by County law and justice departments.
~ The Court also requested Communications support provided by ISD
to be terminated as soon as the transition can be accomplished.
Consistent with past practice, County staff will continue to work with the
Court in an effort to minimize impacts resulting from the Court's decision
to terminate services. Any County services provided to the Court will be
agreed to in advance so full reimbursement occurs.
In September 2013, the Board authorized staff to implement various criminal
justice strategies, including revisions to the pretrial process, initiation
of a feasibility review for a Community Corrections Center, and submittal
of a State grant application to replace jail beds at the Honor Farm.
Eleven new positions were added to the Probation Pretrial Services budget
midyear 2013-14 to help implement the Pretrial Assessment and Monitoring
Program. This program will incorporate a validated assessment tool to
assist in determining whether offenders should be released or detained
pending their court appearance, and also a monitoring component to provide
services to offenders based on risk to re-offend and the likelihood to
appear in court. The program is intended to provide better utilization of Jail
capacity by reserving space for high-risk individuals or for those offenders
less likely to appear in court. Program implementation is anticipated in
2014-15.
County of San Joaquin 2014-15 Budget

Conceptually, the San Joaquin Community Corrections Center would provide
re-entry assistance during the last 30-90 days of an inmate's sentence.
Modeled after facilities operated in Washington County, Oregon, and also
in San Diego and Ventura Counties, services could include mental health!
substance abuse, medical screening, vocational training, education, and
other programs to assist inmates with the transition back to society and
ultimately reduce the rate of recidivism. Feasibility study proposals were
received from consultants, with selection and funding recommendations
presented to the Community Corrections Partnership in May 2014. The
item is expected to be scheduled for consideration by the Board in July
2014. Once the contract is in place, the consultant is to complete the feasibility
study within 120 days with recommendations to the Board for further
action.
Unfortunately, the County's recent SB 1022 funding application to the
State for replacement of Honor Farm barracks was not successful; however,
the Governor's 2014-15 State budget includes an additional $500 million
for SB 1022-type facilities. If the Governor's proposal is approved, County
staff will mobilize in anticipation of preparing a funding proposal for State
consideration. In the meantime, the recommended 2014-15 County budget
includes $1.0 million in project funding to double-bunk housing units in
order to increase Jail capacity by 248 beds. Also, the Sheriff's Office and
General Services are currently in the process of making security improvements
at the Jail and Honor Farm facilities. These include installing jail
security mesh over the recreation yard and fence around the Honor Farm.
The Stockton Police Department is scheduled to add 120 new officers in
the next few years as a result of the passage of a recent sales tax measure.
The recommended 2014-15 budget includes additions to District Attorney
and Public Defender staffing to address caseloads associated with this
anticipated growth in law enforcement staffing. It is important as the
economy slowly recovers and other agencies increase law enforcement,
San Joaquin County cannot lose sight of the impacts on the entire criminal
justice system.
Since the passage of the 2009 Comprehensive Water Package, the County
has maintained active participation in advocating on the Board's adopted
position regarding the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. The State's draft
Bay Delta Conservation Plan (BDCP) process continues to promote construction
of two tunnels buried 150 feet beneath the Delta diverting a total
of9,000 cubic feet per second from the Delta to the Central Valley and
Southern California, and the conversion of over 100,000 acres of agriculturalland
to habitat as its preferred alternative. On July 24, 2012, the Board
of Supervisors adopted a resolution opposing the BDCP in its current form
and a set of principles prerequisite to County support.
The BDCP document and its Draft Environmental Impact Report/Environmental
Impact Statement (EIR/EIS) were released for public review on

December 9, 2013. Interested parties were given 120 days to review the
document and provide comments. The public comment period was subsequently
extended for 60 days to June 13,2014. County staff are preparing
comments on the BDCP EIRJEIS for submittal by the deadline. There are
likely additional documents associated with the BDCP that will require
staff to generate County responses in the coming year. It is critical to preserve
the County's ability to influence the project and/or pursue legal
remedies in the future, along with the ability to communicate the County's
position of opposition of the BDCP through engagement with coalitions
and media/outreach opportunities. Depending on the Board's directive,
additional resources beyond those provided in the recommended budget
may be required.
The San Joaquin General Hospital (SJGH) budget totals $250.2 million and
includes the addition of 17 positions to support Trauma, Outpatient Clinic,
and Medical Guarded Unit volume growth. On an accrual basis, SJGH
anticipates a net income from operations of $646,000 before the General
Fund contribution. The proposed budget recommends a General Fund contribution
of $9.6 million to support SJGH's capital expenditures and debt
payment. This is $2.0 million less than 2013-14. Assuming nothing out of
the ordinary occurs in operation, SJGH could end June 30, 2015 with a net
income of $10.3 million ..
>- Federally Qualified Health Centers-Look A Like (FQHC-LAL) -
In January 2014, SJGH and Health Care Services Agency submitted
the FQHC-LAL application to the Department of Health Resources
and Services Administration (HRSA). In March 2014, HRSA conducted
a site review and SJGH passed 18 of the 19 categories. The
remaining category has been rectified and SJGH is awaiting HRSA
final approval. Once the six primary care clinics are designated, the
reimbursement rate is anticipated to increase from $50 per visit to
$210 per visit generating an additional revenue of approximately
$9.0 million annually. The 2014-15 budget does not include the
enhanced FQHC-LAL revenues pending federal approval.
>- 1991 Health Realignment Take-Back - 1991 Health Realignment
funding was designed to provide counties local funding to care for
the indigent. In recognition that counties would realize a financial
savings due to the implementation ofthe Affordable Care Act and the
majority of those indigent now being covered through Medi-Cal
Expansion, the 2013-14 State Budget included a mechanism to take
back a portion of Realignment funds through AB 85. For 2014-15,
the State determined that approximately $3.3 million in Realignment
funding will be diverted from SJGH during the fiscal year. A true-up
will be made 18 months after the fiscal year end. The 2014-15 SJGH
budget includes the State diversion of$3.3 million and the remaining
$15.4 million will be classified as a liability due to the State.

Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool (DSRIP) - DSRIP is a
component of the New Waiver and provides a significant source of
funds to public hospitals, including SJGH, from November 2010
through October 2015. Over that time period, SJGH can potentially
receive a total of $93.8 million if certain milestones are met as it
relates to improvements in service delivery and quality of patient
care. For 2010-11 through 2012-13, SJGH received a total of$45.0
million and the full $19.4 million is expected in 2013-14. The
2014-15 recommended budget includes the full $14.6 million in
available DSRIP funding.
In 2015-16, DSRIP funding will be reduced to $5.1 million, reflecting
the end of the program in October 2015. The State and California
Association of Public Hospitals are negotiating a proposal for a new
DSRIP program, but any agreement reached would have to be
approved by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. If an
alternative program is not obtained, SJGH would have to significantly
reduce its operating budget in 2015-16.
The Mental Health Services (MHS) budget totals $110.2 million and
includes the addition of 23 positions primarily to support Mental Health
Services Act and System Redesign and Expansion programs.
>- Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) - Proposition 63, MHSA, was
passed by the electorate in November 2004. The overall purpose is to
reduce the long-term adverse impact on individuals, families, and
State and local budgets as a result of untreated serious mental illness.
The recommended budget includes $29.4 million ofMHSA funds,
which represents 30.8% of the MHS budget.
>- System Redesign & Expansion (SRE) - The SRE was implemented
for two key reasons: 1) increase opportunities to bill Medi-Cal; and, .
2) expand the menu of services available in the adult outpatient
system to reduce the incidences of, and reliance on, involuntary treatment
in the adult Psychiatric Health Facility (PHF).
Prior to SRE, the PHF unit was a 40-bed facility, which was not eligible
for Medi-Cal reimbursement due to its size. The unit was split
into a 16-bed PHF unit and a locked 12-bed Crisis Stabilization Unit
so that both units could be eligible for Medi-Cal reimbursement. In
February 2013, another component of the SRE, a 6-bed Crisis Residential
Treatment (Jeremy House), was added to the continuum. In
April 2014, MHS contracted with Crestwood Solano for four additional
psychiatric beds. Staff will continue to evaluate the feasibility
of contracting with SJGH for additional psychiatric beds.
The Human Services Agency's (HSA) Administration budget totals $150.2
million and includes an additional 101.1 FTEs. This represents a net 

increase of 346 positions since 2010-11 to address caseload growth in
public assistance programs as well as the implementation of the ACA and
Medi-Cal Expansion, which has substantially increased the number of
individuals eligible for Medi-Cal. In September 2013, HSA opened a call
center designed to meet the ACA service delivery goals. During the first six
months of open enrollment through March 2014, the call center received
over 4,400 calls. HSA anticipates the number of potentially eligible for the
Medi-Cal Expansion program to be as many as 70,000 individuals, more
than twice the initial estimate. Currently, HSA is evaluating the need for
additional office space to meet operational demands in 2014-15.
In January/February 2014, the Board approved several actions to stabilize
the Head Start Child Development Council, Inc. (HSCDC), a nonprofit
corporation who serves as the delegated agency of the County's Head Start
program. These actions included: 1) allocated $900,000 from the County
General Fund to the HSCDC, 2) established an interim management team,
and 3) took a position in support of the County Office of Education's
re-competition application as a future Head Start grantee. At this time, the
federal Department of Health and Human Services/Administration for
Children and Families has not released the re-competition instructions/
guidelines. Therefore, the proposed budget assumes that the County will
continue to serve-as the grantee and provide interim management to
HSCDC through 2014-15; however, no additional County financial assistance
to HSCDC is anticipated.
The County Park System consists of20 parks, including two regional parks
and one of them with a zoo. These parks are supported by $2.1 million from
the County's General Purpose Revenue. They are also subsidized by revenue
from trust accounts established for their maintenance and operations.
The 2014-15 recommended budget includes transfers of$838,000 from
Parks Trust Funds for ongoing operations. In an effort to reduce the reliance
on the County's General Purpose Revenue and trust funds, additional
revenue enhancements are proposed and are programmed in the 2014-15
budget. These include implementing RV camping at Stillman Magee Park,
adding parking fees at the Regional Sports Complex, implementing a
discount program for low usage times at regional parks and the Zoo, and
increasing marketing of parks and. zoo rentals, program, and events. Parks
staff will continue to explore cost containment and revenue enhancement
measures, including the Proposition 218 process for fee increases, for
Board consideration.
Through an agreement between the County and the City of Stockton, the
City operates the City/County Library System which serves the cities of
Escalon, Lathrop, Manteca, Ripon, Stockton, and Tracy as well as the
unincorporated areas of the County. The County's funding base for library
services is comprised primarily of property taxes. The overall increase in 

home prices and declining foreclosures resulted in a 4% increase in the
County's property tax collections for Library services.
In the fourth quarter of 20 13-14, the Mountain House and the Lathrop
branches moved into new locations, resulting in a tripling of size for the
Lathrop branch, and decreasing expenditures on rent for the Mountain
House branch. The proposed weekly hours for the County branches,
including hours funded by both the County and the respective municipalities
are listed in the table below:

The City/County Library System is staffed by the City of Stockton's
employees. The City plans to close all branches, including County
branches, the following 12 holidays:
~ July 4, 2014
~ September 1, 2014
~ October 13,2014
~ November 11,27, and 28, 2014
~ December 25,2014
~ January 1 and 19,2015
~ February 9 and 16,2015
~ May 25, 2015
The proposed 2014-15 Public Improvement program totals $12.4 million
and includes the following capital improvement and deferred maintenance
projects:
~ Facility Reuse: Structural upgrades for the Human Services Agency,
address facilities compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act,
and project planning and development for existing facilities.
~ Mathews Road Complex: Replacement of carpet, windows, heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning units; and other improvements
at the Sheriffs Operations Center and Juvenile Hall. Also included is
the conversion of single beds into bunk beds in various housing units
at the Jail creating 248 new beds.

Hazelton Avenue Complex: Replacement of boiler and balancing of
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning units for Public Works,
Community Development, and Environmental Health departments.
~ Facility Planning: Hospital expansion plans to replace SJGH's Old
Towers Building and other health-related facilities, and a new
morgue replacement facility.
~ Community Development Block Grant: Gianone Park drainage
improvements, Ardell Avenue sidewalks improvements, and Woodbridge
Street and storm drainage improvements.
~ Other Projects: Hydronic heating extension at Micke Grove Zoo,
conduct a Parks Paving Master Plan, prepare a South County Park
Master Plan, and conduct a Countywide Strategic Energy Plan.
Fifty-six requested projects totaling $26.7 million are not funded in the
proposed budget.
Eighty-two vehicles have been identified for replacement and purchase in
2014-15 at an estimated cost of $3.4 million, which will be funded from
the Fleet Services' Vehicle Replacement Reserve. These vehicles are allocated
to Fleet Services as part of the County's fleet and have reached their
optimal service life. In addition, 10 new vehicles, totaling $415,000, are
recommended for the Health Care Services Agency, Probation Department,
and the Sheriff's Office.

Prior to finalizing the list of replacement vehicles, Fleet Services will
evaluate the conditions and usefulness of vehicles turned in by departments
in 2014-15, which may result in fewer purchases.
Eleven community-based organizations submitted requests for County
contributions totaling $1.2 million. Due to limited available resources, the
proposed 2014-15 budget includes County support and contributions to the
following community-based organizations that provide community
services or promote economic development within San Joaquin County:

The County also continues to support the revitalization of downtown
Stockton through continued upgrades of County facilities and allowing use
of the County-owned Hunter Street Parking Garage for downtown events.
Several departments, especially the Sheriff, District Attorney, and Probation,
have numerous grants totaling millions of dollars. This creates a
dilemma for the County. On one hand, one of the County's overarching
fiscal strategies is to leverage non-County funding resources to meet community
needs. On the other hand, there is a downside to reliance on grants,
especially in the grant-dependent criminal justice system. There is cause
for concern for two reasons:
}- State and federal grant funding tends to be offered on a year-to-year
basis and in some cases, local agencies are required to continue funding
beyond the grant period. Accordingly, it cannot be considered a
stable source of ongoing revenue. Indeed, economic fluctuations can
and have resulted in grant reduction and/or termination as measures
to curb spending. Should State or federal grant levels change, local
program reductions would be the likely consequence.
}- Grant-funded programs, especially in the public safety area, often fail
to recognize that the addition of resources in one area sometimes
upsets the delicate resource balance of the overall system. This
results in local funding demands to maintain system balance. Grant 

funded programs usually involve staffing and an evolving
constituency that will resist staffing and service reductions. It is,
therefore, essential that we continue to monitor the effects of grant
program resources to minimize adverse impacts when reduction and
termination occurs.
County departments are expected to manage their reliance on grant funds
and to adhere to the County's Grant Funding Policy Guidelines. Specifically,
the Policy requires that departments to seek replacement funding
from non-County sources or to eliminate/phase-out programs when grant
funding is reduced or eliminated. The 2014-15 budget include requests
from the Sheriff and the District Attorney to backfill the decreases in grant
funding and revenue loss.
~ The federal COPS Hiring Program grant provided $4.6 million to
fund 14 Deputy Sheriff positions for three years and requires the
County to retain those positions for an additional year once the grant
funding ends. The proposed budget includes $323,189 in the
Sheriff's Patrol budget to backfill the grant reduction for 2014-15.
~ The District Attorney requested $132,619 to backfill the loss of the
Violence Against Women Act grant and real estate fee revenue that
did not materialize. Pursuant to the Grant Funding Policy Guidelines,
no General Fund backfill is recommended in the 2014-15 budget.
In many public service areas, the State has distinguished between general
public services and special public services. Examples of general public
services would be the jail, welfare, and certain health programs. Examples
of special (or user beneficial) public services would be those related to
property development, conducting a business, or animal ownership. The
distinction between these types of services is who benefits (general public
or private party) or whose activity imposes the cost for assuring the
public's welfare. General public services are funded from general revenues
(i.e., sales and property taxes). Special public services are funded by
special revenues (i.e., user fees, license fees, and penalty assessments).
County government is prohibited from charging more than actual costs for
the service provided. However, failure to increase special revenue rates to
keep pace with increased costs deprives the County of resources required
to cover general service costs. Such shortages can be resolved by several
techniques:
~ Reducing special service delivery costs.
~ Reducing special service delivery levels.
~ Increasing special service revenue consistent with cost (user fees).
~ Reducing general service levels to subsidize inadequately funded
special public services.

During the Final Budget Hearing, some fee increases will be recommended
to keep pace with costs and avoid shifting the costs of special services to
the general taxpayer. Departments with proposed fee adjustments for
2014-15 include: Airport, Clerk of the Board/County Counsel, Environmental
Health, Parks and Recreation, Probation, Sheriff-Coroner-Public
Administrator, and Solid Waste.
General Reserve & Contingencies
The General Reserve is a cash resource for financing during the dry period
between the beginning of the fiscal year and the receipt of property taxes in
December and April. Additionally, it acts as a contingency for the County
in extreme emergencies. For 2014-15, it is recommended that the General
Reserve be maintained at the current level of $10.0 million.
The Reserve for Contingencies covers day-to-day unforeseen budgetary
needs and has been used by your Board sparingly in the past. In conformation
with the Board's reserve policy (R-I0-525), the Reserve for
Contingencies is recommended to be set at $26.0 million in 2014-15 which
represents approximately 2% of the proposed budget. This is an increase of
$7.1 million from the 2013-14 budgeted level and provides a hedge against
adverse federal and State budget impacts, and use as interim funding to
address local emergencies/disasters and unforeseen expenses.
Fund Balance Management
In governmental budgeting language, Fund Balance is the excess of assets
and estimated revenues of a fund over its liabilities, reserves, and appropriations.
The portion of this balance that is free and unencumbered for
financing the next year's budget is called Available Fund Balance.
Management of Fund Balance shortages is a critical factor in stabilizing
County finances and is carefully evaluated by rating agencies when the
County seeks debt financing. To assure prudent overall budget management,
the Board adopted guidelines for departmental budget change requests that
occur after budget adoption. Budget change guidelines are as follows:
~ Requests are to be minimized;
~ Requests are to be revenue offset; and
~ Non revenue-offset requests are to be limited to emergencies or to the
support of critical Board priorities.
The consequence of not adhering to such guidelines is to risk proliferation
of budget change requests to authorize staffing and programming increases
during the year from one-time departmental budget savings. Frequently, 

this results in ongoing full-year costs the following fiscal year without
revenue support, which means cuts elsewhere are needed to keep the
budget balanced. Such budget change requests during the year are counterproductive
because such incrementalism erodes the Board's funding flexibility
outside of the comprehensive annual budget review process when all
program priorities are reviewed together.
As noted earlier in this budget message, the downturn of the economy has
negatively impacted the County's revenue sources in recent years. A
significant amount of funds have been redirected from the Reserve for
Contingencies and the Capital Improvement Program to help bridge the
budget gaps in the last five years. Recognizing the unsustainability of these
one-time funds and the need to rebuild the County's Capital Improvement
Program, the Board established the funding guidelines designating the
General Fund year-end fund balances as one-time resources for one-time
uses (B-1O-965). However, due to the severity of this year's funding shortfall,
the proposed budget recommends suspending the policy and includes
$11.0 million in the projected year-end fund balance for operations. This
represents 100% of the projected year-end fund balance.
Supplemental Requests
Department Heads and community-based organizations submitted requests
for supplemental funding totaling $5.7 million, of which $2.2 million are
included in the recommended budget leaving a residual unfunded amount
of$3.5 million. Fifty-six capital projects at a preliminary estimated cost of
$26.7 million are also not funded. The 2014-15 Proposed Budget continues
to be balanced with one-time funds totaling $11.8 million. The State
budget continues to pose a significant risk to the County's financial health,
specifically with the unknown full impacts from the implementation of
Health Realignment and the Affordable Care Act. In an effort to adhere to
the Board-established fiscal policies, some departmental wants and needs
are not addressed.
As a result of the funding recommendations which comprise the 2014-15
Proposed County Budget, the Board may hear requests by departments,
special interest groups, community-based organizations, and the general
public to add funding during the budget hearing. In providing policy
guidance on desired budget adjustments, the Board will provide direction
as to which areas of the County budget should be reduced to offset any
added costs. Supplemental requests, both funded and unfunded, are outlined
in Attachment A and detailed in individual budget narratives.

Our office has identified several significant individual budget unit
recommendations for Board review during the Final Budget Hearing.
When particular functional areas are scheduled for discussion, the Board
may wish to examine other areas as well. Department Heads and members
of the public will have an opportunity to comment. Additionally, some
community-based organizations may desire to make presentations.
Unfunded supplemental budget requests will also be presented.
The impacts of State Budget actions are unknown at this time. It may be
necessary to return to the Board to re-open budget considerations after the
2014-15 Final Budget is adopted, should additional funding become
available or should major funding/program reductions be imposed based
upon the adopted State Budget.
Appreciation
There were insufficient resources to address all requests for funding and to
maintain the County services or operations. Accordingly, some departments
are expected to explain their concerns about service levels, and
facility and technology needs, and make appeals for supplemental funding
during the Final Budget Hearing. Despite these concerns, County
Administrator's staff has received excellent cooperation and is appreciative
of the support and assistance from Department Heads and their staff.
Appreciation is particularly extended to the Auditor-Controller's Office,
Information Systems Division, and Purchasing and Support Services for
the production of the document. Finally, the County Administrator's staff is
recognized for the hard work, professional evaluation, and long hours they
contributed to the preparation of the document.
Recommendations
It is recommended that your Board:
1. Approve the proposed County and Special Districts budgets for
2014-15. This action does not constitute final approval of any of the
proposals prior to the Final Budget Hearing. It does, however,
provide the document that will be presented to your Board for the
Final Budget Hearing and give Department Heads and the public
information from which other requests or recommendations can be
made.
County

Set Tuesday, June 24, 2014, at 1:30 p.m. as the time to begin the
Final Budget Hearing on the adoption of the County and Special
Districts budgets and authorize the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
to publish the required hearing notice