Honorable Board of Supervisors,
I am pleased to present the FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget to your Board and the community.
The budget reflects the County’s disciplined approach to fiscal management and is consistent
with our goal to provide a Safe, Healthy, Livable, Prosperous and Well-Governed Community.
The County of San Luis Obispo is committed to providing services with integrity, collaboration,
professionalism, accountability and responsiveness. The budget document is produced in a
manner that reflects these organizational values by attempting to strike an appropriate balance
between financial detail and discussion of ‘big picture’ issues. The intent is that the document
will inform meaningful discussion about resource allocation decisions among the public, your
Board and staff. Your Board will review the budget in detail at public budget hearings,
scheduled for June 13th-15th, during which time you may add, delete, or modify the proposal as
you deem appropriate.
Approach to FY 2016-17 Budget Development
The process for developing the budget began in the fall of 2015, when staff presented the FY
2016-17 financial forecast and the Board reviewed its Priorities and Budget Goals and Policies
for the year. This budget proposal is consistent with Board direction provided via identified
priorities, Budget Goals and Policies, Budget Balancing Strategies and Approaches, and
complies with all aspects of the State Budget Act (Government Code §29000). Community
input provided through participation in open meetings, public involvement on the County’s
many advisory boards and commissions, and as conveyed in reports that are intended to
measure community needs, is also a significant factor in budget development. The ‘General
Budget Information’ section of this document provides a comprehensive overview of the
County’s budget development and management process.
Despite the fact that the recent recession is behind us, we remain mindful of the work that was
required to get to this point, and are very cognizant of the level of effort that will be necessary
in order to maintain our financial position. Moving forward, we are committed to employing the
same strategies that helped us during years of budget difficulty, to guide us forward in a
manner that invests in the programs and services we provide while sustaining our fiscal health.
County of San Luis Obispo Fiscal Year 2016-17 Proposed Budget
Proposed Budget Message
A-2
The County’s disciplined approach to budgeting and financial management has been
recognized by bond rating agencies; in April of 2016, Fitch Ratings reaffirmed the County’s
AAA implied general obligation bond rating. This was due in part, to our strong financial
performance due to conservative budgeting and planning. In addition, it is worth noting that
the County’s Budget Goals and Policies and Budget Balancing Strategies and Approaches
contributed to the County recently receiving its fifth consecutive Distinguished Budget
Presentation Award from the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) for the FY
2015-16 Budget document. The GFOA award program is the only national awards program in
governmental budgeting and recognizes budget documents of the highest quality.
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget represents conservative growth compared to the current
year. It is important to note that growth in the budget should not be viewed as “adding back” to
those programs and services that were previously reduced. Community needs are
continuously changing and County operations must be flexible enough to respond to those
changing needs. The proposed budget reflects a focus on ensuring that the County is able to
meet current needs in FY 2016-17 and into the future.
Factors Impacting the FY 2016-17 Budget
As noted above, there are many factors which impact budget development—not the least of
which are the current trends and issues that the County is facing. The most notable are:
? The current drought, which is affecting all areas of California, but is particularly severe
in San Luis Obispo County. The increased severity in our area is due to a reliance on
groundwater in many areas of the County, as well as the fact that the agricultural
industry is a major contributor to our local economy.
? The decline in various State revenues which fund transportation infrastructure locally.
Both Highway Users Tax (also known as fuel tax) and Transportation Development Act
revenues are projected to continue to decline into FY 2016-17 due to declining gasoline
sales and prices.
? The final steps of the dissolution of the General Services Department, which has
resulted in the creation of the new Central Services Department, and Public Works
assuming responsibility for custodial services, utility services and the management of
the County’s capital and maintenance projects. The transfer of responsibility for capital
and maintenance projects provides the opportunity to better evaluate how projects are
managed, and this will continue to be a focus into FY 2016-17.
? The implementation of Assisted Outpatient Treatment (Laura’s Law) which will provide
court-ordered outpatient treatment for severally mentally ill individuals who have
committed, or are at risk of committing acts of violence against themselves or others
due to untreated mental illness.
? The implementation of AB 403- Continuum of Care Reform to improve foster care
outcomes by moving children out of group homes. The requirements of this statute will
require the Department of Social Services and Probation Department to partner with the
Behavioral Health Department to find an alternative means for providing treatment to
children who were previously provided care in group homes.
? The continued implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA),
which has changed the County’s role in providing health services to indigent residents.
The ACA has resulted in considerable savings to the County, as Medi-Cal eligibility has

greatly expanded and now provides health coverage to individuals previously covered
through County programs.
? The completion and impending start of several major capital projects, including:
o The Juvenile Hall expansion, which is expected to be complete in July 2016. The
budget includes expense to increase staff at the Juvenile Hall when it becomes
operational.
o The Women’s Jail which is expected to be complete in April 2017.
o The development of a new airport terminal at the San Luis Obispo County
Regional Airport.
o The replacement of the County’s animal shelter.
o The development of a co-located dispatch center for the Sheriff-Coroner and Fire
departments.
In addition to these local issues, the impact that the State’s budget has on us locally cannot be
understated. The Governor’s FY 2016-17 proposed budget totals $122.6 billion in General
Fund expenditures. Though the State’s budget continues to improve, some risks remain.
Over 30% of the County’s revenue comes from the State; as a result, the State’s financial
position continues to be one of the biggest influencers upon our budget locally. Proposition 30,
which was approved by voters in 2012 to raise sales and the personal income tax is set to
expire in the current year and 2018, respectively. In addition, the State continues to deal with
the impacts of budgetary debt and significant liabilities related to State retiree benefits and
infrastructure, which have been accumulated in prior years.
The Governor’s Proposed Budget represents fiscal constraint by limiting on-going
commitments, and making investments to help the State prepare for the next economic
downturn. Noteworthy factors at the State level that are likely to have an impact on the
County’s budget include:
? As the State enters its fifth year of drought, the Governor’s budget includes $323.1
million of one-time funding to continue drought response efforts that protect water
supplies, conserve water and provide emergency response. At this time, it is unclear
how this funding will be allocated.
? It is expected that State highways and local roads will continue to deteriorate in FY
2016-17 without an infusion of new funding. Highway User Tax revenues are expected
to decrease by more than 25% in two years, and county shares of this revenue have
decreased by an even greater amount. While the State budget does not include a
comprehensive approach to transportation funding, there is hope that a special session
conference committee will be able to reach consensus on a transportation package.
The Governor has reintroduced the 2015 Transportation Funding and Reform Package
which includes spending an additional $3.6 billion annually for 10 years on maintenance
and rehabilitation of state and local transportation system and investments in transit.
Funding is to be split evenly between state and local transportation priorities, with a
focus on transportation infrastructure maintenance and preservation.
? Medi-Cal enrollments are continuing to increase, due to the ongoing implementation of
the Affordable Care Act. Locally, our Department of Social Services’ Medi-Cal
caseload has increased by 142% since FY 2012-13. The Governor’s budget includes
an additional $169 million in the current year and FY 2016-17 for County Medi-Cal
County of San Luis Obispo Fiscal Year 2016-17 Proposed Budget
Proposed Budget Message
A-4
administration costs. Based on State allocation factors, staff estimates that the County
will receive $1.2 million in additional Medi-Cal administration funding.
? Last year, AB 403 was passed as a comprehensive reform effort to improve foster care
outcomes by moving away from the use of group homes. Beginning in January of 2017,
youth currently placed in group homes must be brought back to their county of origin
and the appropriate foster care and mental health care needs be in place to
accommodate them. The Governor’s budget includes $94.9 million to aid in efforts to
implement AB 403. While none of this funding has been specifically earmarked for
counties, conversations are underway at the State level to assure that counties are able
to implement AB 403 reforms.
? Finally, the Governor’s budget proposes to appropriate $3.1 billion in Cap and Trade
revenue in FY 2016-17. At this point, it is unclear how the majority of the $3.1 billion will
be allocated. However, the proposed allocation includes $150 million statewide for
forestry and wildfire management, including the removal of diseased and dead trees.
Cal Fire has indicated that these funds will potentially be available to help mitigate the
risk of wildfire on both private and public lands.
FY 2016-17 Budget Summary
The proposed budget authorizes a total spending level of $574 million, with the General Fund
budget proposed at $487.2 million. The overall budget represents an increase of under 1%
compared to the current year. This growth is due to a strengthening housing market,
increased development activity, as well as increased sales tax, property tax and Transient
Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue, all of which are reflective of an improving economy.
The table to the right
provides an overview of
authorized funding levels
by individual fund. Each
fund serves a distinct
purpose, as outlined in
the ‘General Budget
Information’ section of
this document. Changes
in funding levels are
explained throughout the
document.
Similar to prior years, the
proposed budget for FY
2016-17 represents a
balance between the
County’s three identified
spending areas, which
include:
1. financial security
2. programs and services

3. employee salaries and benefits
Increases in each of these areas are as follows:
Financial Security
In FY 2015-16, the County was able to fully restore the General Fund contingency level
to the historical target of 5% of the General Fund budget. In FY 2016-17, it is
recommended that General Fund contingencies remain at the full 5%, included in the
operating budget. In addition to contingencies, the County’s level of reserves are an
indicator of financial security. Reserve levels represent the funding that the County has
set aside for a variety of purposes and are not included in the budget. The County’s
target is to maintain a ratio of reserves and contingencies to the General Fund budget of
at least 20%. In the current year, this ratio is projected to be 28%, and in FY 2016-17, it
is recommended that a total of $7.6 million of General Fund be allocated to the following
reserves:
? $2.0 million to the General Reserve to be accessible in the event of a financial
downturn or natural disaster;
? $2.0 million to the Capital Improvement Project Reserve to fund future capital
projects;
? $2.0 million to the Building Replacement Reserve to fund the necessary
replacement of County facilities in the future;
? $1 million to the Automation Replacement Reserve to fund future automation
projects; and
? $631,393 to the Organizational Development Reserve to fund countywide
training initiatives.
Programs and Services
Based on a thorough evaluation of need and expected results, the proposed budget
includes augmentations of $10.7 million ($5.8 million of General Fund) to various
programs and services. These augmentations increase staffing levels by 59.25 Full-
Time Equivalent (FTE) positions, which will enable the County to provide a higher level
of service in many areas. The most significant increases are to the land based, public
safety, and health and human services functional areas. Specific augmentations and
their intended results are described in the ‘Departmental Budgets by Functional Area’
section of this document.
In addition to the above, the proposed budget increases Roads funding with a one-time
General Fund allocation of $3.4 million to augment the pavement management
program. The additional funds will bring the total General Fund contribution to Roads to
$11.5 million in FY 2016-17. This represents one of the County’s largest annual General
Fund contributions to the Roads budget, and is considerably higher than the amount of
General Fund that comparable counties contribute to their pavement management
programs.
The budget also provides full funding for all capital projects ($1.5 million), maintenance
projects ($6.3 million), and automation projects that are planned to begin in FY 2016-17.
County of San Luis Obispo Fiscal Year 2016-17 Proposed Budget
Proposed Budget Message
A-6
Salaries and Benefits
The proposed budget reflects salary increases that were granted to County employees
in FY 2014-15, after holding wages flat for most employees for five years. Although
these wage increases represent increased costs to the County, it is important to note
that the County continues to implement a ‘three-point plan’ to control labor expenses
which eliminated formulaic wage increases, shares the cost of pension cost increases
50/50 with employees, and implemented pension reform, which created second and
third tier pension plans.
Detailed information about budget changes can be found in the narrative information provided
for each fund center in the ‘Departmental Budgets by Functional Area’ section of this
document. The detailed information for each fund center includes a departmental narrative as
well as a County Administrative Office (CAO) narrative. The departmental narrative provides
an overview of departmental programs and services and key issues facing each department.
The CAO narrative provides context to the proposed budget numbers. The approach in the
CAO narratives is to convey what is changing from one year to the next and the corresponding
impacts to programs and service levels.
The following table provides a summary of the amount of General Fund dollars allocated to
departments (not expenditures). The chart does not include the Non-Departmental Revenue
fund center nor other fund centers that do not provide programs and services.

The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget
recommends 2,701.25 Full-Time
Equivalent (FTE) permanent and limited
term positions. This represents a net
increase of 39.00 FTE as compared to
current allocations and a net increase of
63.00 FTE compared to FY 2015-16
adopted levels. A net of 24.00 FTE were
added mid-year in FY 2015-16. Mid-year
changes were due to departmental
reorganizations, the addition of limited
term positions due to the availability for
grant funding, and various programmatic
changes.
The table to the right provides a
summary of Position Allocation net
changes by department, compared to
current staffing levels. Position additions
are generally related to recommended
augmentations to various programs and
services, and net deletions are generally
related to the elimination of limited term
staff, due to the expiration of grant
funding, completion of one-time projects,
or minor reorganizations due to changing
needs 

All County departments are grouped together by functional areas, which categorize the types
of services that departments provide. Following is a summary of major changes within each
functional area. Not all departments are identified in this summary. Detailed information for
each department can be found in the ‘Departmental Budgets by Functional Area’ section of this
document.

Agricultural Commissioner
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $371,035 or 16%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase includes the recommended
addition of 1.00 FTE Weights and Measures Inspector to ensure the department is able to
provide increased consumer protection through the Quality Control program while maintaining
mandated inspection frequency in other Weights and Measures program areas.
Planning and Building
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $1.7 million or
29% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is largely due to
recommended budget augmentations to fund the development of the Avila Beach Community
Plan and the development of a Sea Level Rise Analysis. The increase also includes the
recommended addition of 1.00 FTE Secretary to support the department’s Policy and Program
section, and 1.00 FTE Senior Planner to support the implementation of the EnergyWise Plan.
Public Works- Internal Service Fund
As an Internal Service Fund, the department operates on revenue generated through charges
for services. The recommended budget of $39.3 million represents an increase of $4.6 million
or 14% compared to FY 2015-16 estimated amounts. Salaries and benefits are increasing by
$3,387,738 or 14%, when compared to FY 2015-16. The increase is due largely to the
recommended addition of 20.00 FTE. 14.00 FTE positions in various classifications are
recommended to be transferred from Fund Center 113- Facilities Management, as a part of the
General Services Department dissolution and reorganization. In addition, it is recommended
that 6.00 FTE positions be added to increase the department’s capacity to manage major
capital projects, improve the quality of project delivery, provide safety oversight and training of
field operations, and provide technical support for watershed management.
Public Works- Roads
The recommended level of General Fund support of $11.5 million represents an increase of
$407,305 or 4% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The $11.5 million of General
Fund support includes a one-time allocation to the pavement management program in the
amount of $3.4 million for road maintenance. The department estimates that due to reductions
in State funding, the recommended level of total pavement management funding will result in a
decrease to the Pavement Condition Index (PCI), from 64 to 62 by the end of FY 2016-17.

Child Support Services
No General Fund support is recommended, as the department operates on revenue from State
and Federal sources. The recommended budget represents a decrease of $95,590 or 2%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The decrease is due to the recommended
elimination of 1.00 FTE Supervising Legal Clerk and 0.75 FTE Family Support Officer. The
County’s Child Support Services was the ranked as the number one performing county in the
State during the 2015 federal fiscal year.
County Fire
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $627,645 or 4%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is due in part to an increase in the
County’s contract with Cal Fire, due to anticipated State collective bargaining increases and
adjustment to the contract rate for benefits and administration costs. Recommended budget
augmentations to increase winter staffing at the Cambria fire station and increase IT support
make up the remainder of the increase.
Emergency Services
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $100,598 or 70%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is largely due to the recommended
addition of $75,000 to be available only in the event of an emergency. A recommended budget
augmentation to add 0.50 FTE Emergency Services Coordinator is partially offset by
decreased funding for temporary help and makes up the remainder of the increase.
Probation
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $504,788 or 5%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is largely due to the addition of
$670,689 of General Fund expense, including the recommended addition of 7.00 FTE
positons, related to the establishment of an in-custody treatment program in the Juvenile Hall
for youth that would otherwise be placed in group homes. The net countywide impact to the
General Fund is actually zero however, as expense for this new program was previously
budgeted in the Department of Social Services to offset the County’s share of group home
expenses for Probation wards.
Public Defender
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $681,408 or 13%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. New expense totaling $267,000 is
recommended to be added to provide additional resources to the primary public defender firm
and the first conflict public defender firm, due in part to the increase in staff hours driven by the
Superior Court’s recent calendar reorganization and the creation of an early disposition court in
2014. Approximately $280,000 is also added to reflect that it has become necessary each year 

to add expense mid-year to cover unanticipated expense for complex, multi-defendant or
capital cases represented by Court appointed attorneys.
Sheriff-Coroner
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $2.6 million or 6%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is largely due to prevailing wage
adjustments approved by the Board in FY 2014-15, as well as recommended augmentations
for FY 2016-17 which increase the department’s staffing levels by a total of 5.00 FTE.
Recommended augmentations include the addition of 1.00 FTE Senior Sheriff’s Deputy to
serve as a cold case detective; 2.00 FTE Sheriff’s Deputies to serve as Community Action
Team officers who will focus on homelessness; 1.00 FTE Forensic Specialist to address
caseload growth; 2.00 FTE Sheriff’s Deputies to serve on the Gang Task Force; 1.00 FTE
Software Engineer to support the department’s information technology needs; 1.00 FTE
Program Manager to provide construction and maintenance vocational and soft skills training
to inmates at the County Jail; and funding for project management time to initiate a project to
replace the Sheriff’s Jail Management System.
The recommended addition of 1.00 FTE Software Engineer will be made to the Fund Center
114- Information Technology Position Allocation List. In addition, 2.00 FTE existing positions
are recommended to be transferred from the Sheriff’s Position Allocation List to Information
Technology’s Position Allocation List.

Health Agency
In addition to those fund centers noted above, Animal Services is also a division of the Health
Agency, but is included in the Public Protection functional area. The budget information that
follows excludes the Animal Services budget.
The recommended level of General Fund support for the Health Agency represents an
increase of $3.8 million or 23% compared to the FY 2015-16 budget. The increase includes the
recommended net addition of 16.75 FTE positions to the Agency’s various programs.
Behavioral Health
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $2.0 million
or 21% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. This increase includes the
recommended addition of 8.00 FTE positions including staffing to implement new
programs such as the Assisted Outpatient Treatment (Laura’s Law) program and
outpatient competency restoration, which will allow eligible individuals found
incompetent to stand trial to receive competency restoration services in an outpatient
setting. New positions will also provide expanded support to existing programs such as 

the expansion of case management services and Intensive Care Coordination (ICC) to
children and youth. The increase in General Fund support will also provide additional
bed days in facilities where persons with mental illness are diagnosed, treated, and
cared for.
Law Enforcement Medical Care
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $543,614
or 26% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is largely due to
increasing expense for medical services in the County Jail, which is only partially offset
by increasing revenue. Personnel costs are recommended to increase, driven by the
need to ensure adequate medical services in the Jail. New or increasing expenses
related to this include: a compensation increase for nurses and related medical
classifications to aide with recruitment and retention; the recommended addition of 0.50
FTE Correctional Nurse Supervisor to help ensure adequate nurse availability and
sufficient oversight; an increase in call back and standby expense to help ensure
schedule coverage in the Jail; and expense increases for contract services due to the
need for more Jail clinic physician time, anticipated increases in dialysis services, and
hospital inpatient days based on current usage.
Public Health
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $1.3 million
or 24% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is largely due to the
recommended addition of 9.25 FTE, combined with an increase in compensation for
medical personnel to aide with recruitment and retention issues. Recommended
augmentations include the addition of 1.00 FTE Accounting Technician to assist with
billing in Public Health’s Family Services Division; 0.25 FTE Public Health Nurse to
expand prevention work on perinatal substance use in pregnancy; 1.00 FTE
Administrative Services Officer to help meet the human resource management needs of
the Health Agency; 1.00 FTE Program Manager to lead a Planning, Evaluation and
Policy Unit for the Health Agency; 1.00 FTE Department Automation Specialist to
augment IT support for the Health Agency; 3.00 FTE Public Health Nurses to increase
capacity to avert poor birth outcomes among high-risk families; and 1.00 FTE Health
Education Specialist to develop a fall prevention program for seniors.
Social Services
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $1.7 million or
26% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The budget for Social Services sets
General Fund support at the minimum contribution to leverage State and Federal programs
that require matching funds from the County. The department’s budget is seeing significant
growth compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget due largely to a 12% overall increase in
public assistance caseloads over the last year, expanded responsibilities in the In Home
Supportive Services (IHSS) program, and implementation of Assembly Bill (AB) 403,
Continuum of Care Reform. AB 403 focuses on moving children placed in group homes into
home settings. 

Many of the fund centers in this functional area rely on user charges to support their
operations. As the economy has improved, the revenue generated by these fund centers has
increased, which has generally improved the financial condition for the Airports, Library, and
Parks and Recreation.
Parks and Recreation
Parks and Recreation is a Special Revenue Fund and is largely supported by user fees. The
recommended General Fund contribution remains flat with FY 2015-16, at $3.6 million. The
department’s total revenues and expenditures are recommended to decrease by $93,694 or
less than 1% compared to FY 2015-16 adopted levels. The budget recommends the addition
of an Assistant Director position to assist the department in improving the quality of its services
and achieve national accreditation from the Commission for Accreditation of Parks and
Recreation Agencies. The Assistant Director is a new position which must be created. As a
result, the budget includes funding for the position, but the position has not yet been added to
the Position Allocation List for FY 2016-17.
Golf
The Golf budget is an Enterprise Fund and as such is supported by revenues generated
through user fees. Revenue in the FY 2016-17 budget is estimated at $2.2 million and expense
is estimated at $2.7 million. The result is a projected deficit of $467,231 for FY 2016-17. The
department anticipates having an estimated $453,071 in cash balance available to help absorb
the deficit; however, barring any major shift in finances, Golf will likely require additional
outside funding to cover the gap. This deficit is due to declining rounds of golf played at Dairy
Creek Golf Course, the result of a lack of water for irrigation. Play at County golf courses is the
main factor in determining the fiscal health of the Golf budget. The Parks and Recreation
Department is currently analyzing its options and will be bringing recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors before the end of FY 2015-16.
Library
The recommended General Fund contribution represents an increase of $32,869 or 5%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is due to the recommended
addition of 0.50 FTE Library Assistant to support the proposed Templeton library to be
operated out of the existing Templeton Community Services District Parks and Recreation
Department. The recommended budget also includes $425,000 from Library Fund reserves to
fund the Radio Frequency Identification/Automated Materials Handling/Materials Self-Check
and Security Project. The project will increase service levels by repurposing staff, allow for
quicker checkouts, and greater circulation of materials.

Administrative Office
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $107,834 or 5%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase is largely due to the recommended
addition of 2.00 FTE Division Managers and elimination of 1.00 FTE Principal Administrative
Analyst and 1.00 FTE Secretary- Confidential. The change will allow the Office to focus more
on Board priorities, increase departmental oversight, increase focus on legislative activity, and
will more closely align the department's management structure with other departments of
similar size within the County.
Assessor
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $432,749 or 4%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase includes the recommended
addition of 1.00 FTE Limited Term Geographic Information Systems Analyst position to support
the Geographic Information Systems parcel conversion project. In addition, the budget
includes the recommended elimination of 4.50 FTE limited term positions allocated for the
Property Tax System Modernization Project (PTSMP), which will conclude by the end of FY
2015-16. All of the limited term positions were funded through the project and the elimination of
the positions does not result in a decrease to General Fund support.
Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector- Public Administrator
The Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector-Public Administrator is a consolidated
department; however, the budgets for the two former independent departments remain
separate.
The recommended level of General Fund support for the consolidated department represents
an increase of $354,018 or 6% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase
includes the recommended addition of 1.00 FTE Limited Term Auditor-Analyst to train on the
duties of the Property Tax division of the Office, in anticipation of the retirement of the current
property tax manager. In addition, the budget includes the recommended elimination of 2.00
FTE limited term positions allocated for the Property Tax System Modernization Project
(PTSMP), which will conclude by the end of FY 2015-16. The limited term positions were
funded through the project and the elimination of the positions does not result in a decrease to
General Fund support. 

Central Services
Central Services is a newly established department responsible for purchasing, real property,
central mail, and fleet services. The first three components are managed in the new Fund
Center 116, which received a transfer of the current fiscal year’s remaining budget from Fund
Center 113 (formerly General Services) at the end of the second quarter of FY 2015-16. This
transfer reflected the remaining budget for the divisions which comprise the new Central
Services Department, leaving the budget for custodial, maintenance, and architectural services
in Fund Center 113 (now Facilities Management).
Facilities Management
Due to the General Services Department dissolution and reorganization, Fund Center 113-
Facilities Management is now a fund center within the Public Works Department. Fund Center
116- Central Services was created mid-year (October 20, 2015) to contain all of the nonfacilities
related functions of General Services. Due to this transfer of functions and budget, the
majority of the significant changes in revenue and expense for both this fund center and for
Central Services are related to this organizational shift. 17.50 FTE positions were transferred
mid-year in FY 2015-16 from this fund center to Central Services. The FY 2016-17 budget
recommends that 14.00 FTE positions that perform administrative, architectural, and utility
coordination services be transferred to FC 405- Public Works. In addition, staffing
augmentations of 3.00 FTE within Facilities Management are recommended in order to
increase service levels. The recommended augmentations include 2.00 FTE Custodians to
assist in the cleaning of County facilities; 1.00 FTE Facility Maintenance Mechanic to address
corrective and preventative maintenance.
Information Technology
The recommended level of General Fund support represents an increase of $110,844 or 1%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. The increase includes the recommended
addition of 1.00 FTE Senior Network Engineer to function as the Countywide Information
Security Program Manager, 1.00 FTE Software Engineer to support the Enterprise Financial
System, and 1.00 FTE Systems Administrator to support the County website. The budget also
includes the recommended elimination of 2.00 FTE Computer Systems Technician positions
due to the mainframe decommissioning. The mainframe decommissioning is projected to save
approximately $400,000 a year through the elimination of mainframe hardware and software
operating costs.
In addition, the recommended budget includes the addition of 1.00 FTE Systems
Administrator, 1.00 FTE Senior Software Engineer, and 1.00 FTE Software Engineer to the
Information Technology Position Allocation List to support the Sheriff and 1.00 FTE
Department Automation Specialist to support County Fire. The 1.00 FTE Systems
Administrator and the 1.00 FTE Senior Software Engineer positions were moved from the
Sheriff’s Position Allocation List and are not a result of newly recommended positions in FY
2016-17.
Overview of Financing/Revenues
The Financing Functional Area in the ‘Departmental Budgets by Functional Area’ section of
this document provides a discussion of revenue sources, as well as additions to the County’s
various reserves and designations. Below is a high-level overview of some of the County’s
major revenue sources: 

State and Federal Revenue
State and Federal revenue is recommended at $243.4 million and represents 46% of
the County’s total financing. This is an increase of just under $4 million or 2% compared
to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget. State and Federal revenue is the single largest
County revenue source. The majority of these revenues are used to support statutory
programs, such as health and human services, and some criminal justice programs.
Generally speaking, these funds are restricted in use and are not available for
discretionary purposes.
Taxes
Property taxes, sales taxes, transient occupancy tax, and other tax revenue are
recommended at $184.5 million and represent 35% of the County’s total financing. This
is an increase of just over $13.5 million or 8% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted
budget.
Other Revenues and Financing Sources
Other revenues and financing are recommended at approximately $58.3 million and
represent 11% of the County’s total financing. This is a decrease of $4 million or 6%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget.
Licenses/Permit Fees/Charges for Services
Licenses, permits fees, and charges for services are recommended at approximately
$40.2 million and represent 8% of the County’s total financing. This is an increase of
$1.5 million or 4% compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget.
Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties
Fines, forfeitures and penalties are recommended at $5.1 million and represent just
under 1% of the County’s total financing. This amount is decreasing by $62,950 or 1%
compared to the FY 2015-16 adopted budget.
Interest Earnings
Interest earnings are recommended at $2.3 million and represent less than 1% of the
County’s total financing. This amount is increasing by $365,971 or 19% compared to
the FY 2015-16 adopted budget.
Fund Balance Available (FBA) and Use of Reserves
FBA and the use of reserves represent the last two significant funding sources for the
total County budget. Use of FBA is recommended at $36.8 million (for all County funds,
not just the General Fund), and use of reserves is recommended at $3.5 million.
Conclusion and Acknowledgements
Cautious and thoughtful fiscal management has placed us on solid ground. The focus moving
forward will be to maintain the County’s strong financial position by continuing to take a
strategic and disciplined approach to budgeting. The investments in the FY 2016-17 Proposed
Budget are a direct result of the many policies and plans that have been created and
implemented over the years. Elected officials and staff at all levels of the organization have
contributed to the County’s current financial position and will need to continue to work together 

into the future to assure that we are able to continue to provide a high level of service to the
community.
The production of this proposed budget is a year-round process, which involves ongoing
budget administration, financial forecasting, strategic planning, and the identification of
priorities and the establishment of sound budget practices and policies. Staff in all departments
participate in this on-going process in order to develop a budget that is clear, complete and
accurate. They deserve credit for the significant work that goes into developing this budget
document.
Finally, I want to recognize and express gratitude to the Board of Supervisors for their
continued leadership and insightful guidance provided in establishing policies and identifying
spending priorities for the allocation of County resources.
I look forward to this next year as we are able to work together in our pursuit of a Safe,
Healthy, Livable, Prosperous, and Well-Governed Community.