I am pleased to present the FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget to your Board and the community.
The budget reflects the County’s disciplined approach to fiscal management and is consistent
with our goal to provide a Safe, Healthy, Livable, Prosperous and Well-Governed Community.
The budget is one of the most important documents that the County produces each year. As a
financial plan, operations guide, policy document and communication device, the proposed
budget is intended to communicate and implement Board policy related to County operations.
Consistent with prior years, the format and content of the document is driven by an effort to
strike an appropriate balance between financial detail, and discussion of ‘big picture’ issues.
The intent is that the document will inform meaningful discussion about resource allocation
decisions. Your Board will review the budget in detail at public budget hearings, scheduled for
June 8th-10th, during which time you may add, delete, or modify the proposal as you deem
appropriate.
Approach to FY 2015-16 Budget Development
The process for developing the budget began in the Fall of 2014, when staff presented the FY
2015-16 financial forecast and the Board reviewed its Priorities and Budget Goals and Policies
for the year. This budget proposal is consistent with Board direction provided via identified
priorities, Budget Goals and Policies, Budget Balancing Strategies and Approaches, and
complies with all aspects of the State Budget Act (Government Code §29000). Community
input provided through participation in open meetings, public involvement on the County’s
many advisory boards and commissions, and as conveyed in reports that are intended to
measure community needs, is also a significant factor in budget development. The ‘General
Budget Information’ section of this document provides a comprehensive overview of the
County’s budget development and management process.
The FY 2015-16 budget represents a significant milestone for the County. FY 2014-15
represented the final year of a multi-year strategy to bring the budget into structural balance,
and FY 2015-16 will be the first year that the County is able to return to fully funding its
contingencies, while making significant investments in the many programs and services that
we provide to the community.
The recent recession was the longest in the United States since World War II and represented
the most significant economic downturn since the Great Depression. The Board and staff
Budget Message
A-2
worked together to meet the challenges of the recent economic downturn by making difficult,
but necessary, decisions to ensure the County’s financial stability. Because of the disciplined
approach used, we are able to move forward with confidence that we are on sound financial
ground.
Despite improvement in the County’s budget, we are very mindful of the work that it took to get
to this point. Over the course of the downturn, the County incrementally and methodically
reduced its budget by over $80 million. The proposed budget reflects a balanced approach to
addressing spending priorities while remaining sustainable in the long term. However, growth
in the budget should not be viewed as “adding back” to those programs and services that were
reduced. County operations have changed over the past seven years in response to policy
changes at the State and Federal levels, as well as changing community needs. The
proposed budget reflects a focus on ensuring that the County is able to meet current needs in
FY 2015-16 and into the future.
Factors Impacting the FY 2015-16 Budget
As noted above, there are many factors which impact budget development—not the least of
which are the current trends and issues that the County is facing. The most notable are:
? The current drought, which is affecting all areas of California, but is particularly severe
in San Luis Obispo County. The increased severity in our area is due to a reliance on
groundwater in many areas of the County, as well as the fact that the agricultural
industry is a major contributor to our local economy. It is estimated that several
hundred agricultural jobs have been lost as a result of drought conditions. In addition,
overall local crop values in 2014 decreased by nearly 2% compared to the prior year.
? The continued implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA),
which has changed the County’s role in providing health services to indigent residents.
The ACA has resulted in considerable savings to the County, as Medi-Cal eligibility has
greatly expanded and now provides health coverage to individuals previously covered
through County programs.
? The decline in State Gas Tax revenue to fund road infrastructure maintenance, due to
declining gasoline prices.
? The completion of the two large-scale, solar projects in the Carrizo Plains, which
contributed to increased sales tax revenues the last several years. Sales tax revenue
from these projects will not continue into FY 2015-16. In anticipation of this, solar plant
sales tax receipts have been treated as a one-time revenue source, so this decrease
will not impact the operating budget.
? The completion and impending start of several major capital projects, including:
o The women’s jail expansion, which is expected to be complete mid-year in FY
2015-16. The budget includes expense to increase staffing levels at the jail
when it becomes operational.
o The potential development of a new airport terminal at the San Luis Obispo
County Regional Airport.
o The replacement of the County’s animal shelter.
o The development of a co-located dispatch center for the Sheriff-Coroner and Fire
departments.

In addition to these local issues, the impact that the State’s budget has on us locally cannot be
understated. The Governor’s FY 2015-16 proposed budget totals $158.8 billion, which
represents a 1% increase compared to the current year. Though the State’s budget continues
to improve, some risks remain. Proposition 30, which was approved by voters in 2012 to raise
sales and the personal income tax is set to expire in 2016 and 2018, respectively. State
revenues from Proposition 30 are projected to be $8 billion in State FY 2015-16. In addition,
the State continues to struggle with budgetary debt and significant liabilities that have been
accumulated in prior years. The most notable is $72 billion in unfunded liability for retirement
benefits for State employees.
The Governor’s FY 2015-16 budget proposal includes investments in education, health and
human services, and corrections and rehabilitation. Beyond those, noteworthy factors at the
State level that are likely to have an impact on the County’s budget include:
? FY 2015-16 will mark the first year of distributions from the 2014 Water Bond
(Proposition 1) which was approved by voters in 2014. A total of $532 million will be
made available statewide for projects that are intended to increase water supplies,
protect and restore watersheds, improve water quality and increase flood protection.
? AB 109 Public Safety Realignment will continue into FY 2015-16, with a continued focus
on treatment as a means to reduce crime levels. Similar to prior years, a significant
emphasis is placed on outcomes which demonstrate reduced crime levels year over
year.
? As noted above, the decline in State Gas Tax revenue will place pressure on local
governments’ ability to fund road maintenance projects.
? The Governor’s proposal includes a total of $533 million to reimburse local governments
for pre-2004 mandate expenses which were not previously funded. The County’s share
of this will be approximately $3.4 million.
? As noted above, implementation of ACA will continue to be a major focus. Allocations
made to counties in the current year are expected to continue into FY 2015-16, which
means that the County will continue to not have any share of costs related to ACA
administration.
? Finally, cap and trade distributions resulting from the Global Warming Solutions Act of
2006 which established a goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions statewide to 1990
levels by 2020, will continue. As a result, the County may receive allocations to assist
in the planning and development of infrastructure aimed at reducing the amount of time
that people spend in their cars.
FY 2015-16 Budget Summary
The proposed budget authorizes a total spending level of $564.3 million, with the General
Fund budget proposed at $464.6 million. The overall budget represents an increase of just
under 4% compared to the current year. This growth is due to a strengthening housing
market, increased development activity, as well as increased sales tax, property tax and
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue, all of which are reflective of an improving economy.
Continued implementation of the ACA also contributes to the increase in the overall budget
(though this is funded with State and Federal allocations, at no cost to the County).
Budget Message
A-4
The table to the right
provides an overview of
authorized funding levels
by individual fund. Each
fund serves a distinct
purpose, as outlined in
the ‘General Budget
Information’ section of
this document. Changes
in funding levels are
explained throughout the
document.
The proposed budget for
FY 2015-16 represents a
balance between the
County’s three identified
spending priorities, which
include:
1. financial security
2. programs and services
3. employee salaries and benefits
Increases in each of these areas are as follows:
Financial Security
During the downturn, the County drew from its reserves and reduced contingencies as a
short-term budget balancing solution. Notable recommendations for FY 2015-16
include full restoration of General Fund contingencies from 4.5%, to the historical target
of 5%; limiting the use of reserves to special circumstances, such as the need to use
Roads reserves to mitigate the impact of the decline in State Gas Tax revenues; and
several one-time allocations to reserves, including:
? $3.5 million to the Capital Improvement Project Reserve to fund future capital
projects;
? $3.5 million to the Building Replacement Reserve to fund the necessary
replacement of County facilities in the future;
? $1 million to the Automation Replacement Reserve to fund future automation
projects; and
? $1 million to the designation to assist in paying down a portion of the County’s
Pension Obligation Bond debt.
Programs and Services
Based on a thorough evaluation of need and expected results, the proposed budget
includes augmentations of $12.2 million ($4.1 million of General Fund) to various
programs and services. These augmentations increase staffing levels by 77.25 Full-
Time Equivalent (FTE) positions, which will enable the County to provide a higher level
of service in many areas. The most significant increases are to public safety and health
and human services. Specific augmentations and their intended results are described
in the ‘Departmental Budgets by Functional Area’ section of this document.
In addition to the above, the proposed budget increases Roads funding with a one-time
General Fund allocation of $3 million and an ongoing General Fund increase of 10% 

(approximately $740,555) to increase funding to the pavement management program.
The additional funds will bring the total General Fund contributions to $11.1 million in FY
2015-16.
The budget also provides full funding for all capital projects ($3.7 million), maintenance
projects ($3.7 million), and automation projects that are planned to begin in FY 2015-16.
Salaries and Benefits
The proposed budget reflects salary increases that were granted to County employees
in the current year, after holding wages flat for most employees for five years. Although
these wage increases represent a significant cost to the County, it is important to note
that the County’s approach to managing salary and benefit expense is much more
strategic than it had been prior to the recession. Several years ago, the County
implemented a ‘three-point plan’ to control labor expenses by eliminating formulaic
wages increases, sharing the cost of pension cost increases 50/50 with employees, and
implementing pension reform, which created second and third tier pension plans.
Detailed information about budget changes can be found in the narrative information provided
for each fund center in the ‘Departmental Budgets by Functional Area’ section of this
document. The detailed information for each fund center includes a departmental narrative as
well as a County Administrative Office (CAO) narrative. The departmental narrative provides
an overview of departmental programs and services and key issues facing each department.
The CAO narrative provides context to the proposed budget numbers. The approach in the
CAO narratives is to convey what is changing from one year to the next and the corresponding
impacts to programs and service levels.

The following table provides a summary of the amount of General Fund dollars allocated to
departments (not expenditures). The chart does not include the Non-Departmental Revenue
fund center nor other fund centers that do not provide programs and services.

The proposed FY 2015-16 budget recommends 2,633.50 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)
permanent and limited term positions. This represents a net increase of 54.25 positions as
compared to current allocations and a
net increase of 78.75 FTE compared to
FY 2014-15 adopted levels. A net of
24.50 FTE were added mid-year in FY
2014-15. Mid-year changes were due to
minor departmental reorganizations, the
addition of limited term positions due to
the availability for grant funding, and
various programmatic changes.
The table to the right provides a
summary of Position Allocation net
changes by department, compared to
current staffing levels. Position additions
are generally related to recommended
augmentations to various programs and
services, and net deletions are generally
related to the elimination of limited term
staff, due to the expiration of grant
funding or minor reorganizations due to
changing needs.
All County departments are grouped together by functional areas, which categorize the types
of services that individual departments provide. Following is a summary of major changes
within each functional area. Not all departments are identified in this summary. Detailed
information for each department can be found in the ‘Departmental Budgets by Functional
Area’ section of this document.

Agricultural Commissioner
The proposed level of General Fund support is increasing by $115,797 or 5% compared to the
FY 2014-15 adopted budget. The increase includes the proposed addition of an Agricultural
Inspector/Biologist position to the department’s Position Allocation List (PAL) which will
partially restore efforts dedicated to the Pesticide Use Enforcement (PUE) program and the
Invasive Weed Management program closer to historic levels.

The proposed level of General Fund support is increasing by $34,626 or less than 1%
compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. The increase includes the proposed addition of
a Planner position to the department’s PAL to expand services at the department’s North
County Service Center. Although not reflected in the level of General Fund support, the
department’s overall budget is increasing due to the planned replacement of the department’s
permit tracking system (Tidemark) in FY 2015-16, which will include the addition of 6.00 FTE
limited term positions to help address the department’s workload associated with the system
replacement.
Public Works Internal Service Fund
The proposed budget of $34.3 million is an increase of $614,093 or approximately 2%
compared to FY 2014-15 estimated amounts. The increase is largely due to the proposed
addition of 9.00 FTE positions to the department’s PAL to support Roads and the new Los
Osos Wastewater System. The proposed staffing increase for Roads (3.00 FTE) will help to
reduce a backlog of maintenance work orders, and support new Federal/State mandates for
the monitoring of sign reflectivity and vehicle miles traveled. The proposed staffing increase
for the Los Osos Wastewater System (6.00 FTE) are required to operate the Los Osos
Wastewater System when it comes on-line during the latter half of FY 2015-16.
Roads
The proposed budget includes General Fund contributions in the amount of $11.1 million,
which represents a 32% increase compared FY 2014-15 adopted amounts. This increase is
driven by an ongoing 10% ($740,555) contribution and one-time allocation of $3 million to the
pavement management program to improve road conditions. The department estimates that
total pavement management program funding will improve the Pavement Condition Index
(PCI) from 61 to 62 by the end of FY 2015-16.
Los Osos Wastewater System
The proposed budget includes the addition of a new Enterprise Fund for the operation and
maintenance of the Los Osos Wastewater System. Revenues are generated from users of the
system; therefore, a bridge loan will be required in order to cover cash flow needs until the
system is fully operational. Revenues and expenses are budgeted at $1.2 million in FY 2015-
16.

Animal Services
The proposed level of General Fund support is increasing by $102,724 or 14% compared to
the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. The increase includes the proposed addition of an
Administrative Services Officer position to serve as a Volunteer Coordinator to strengthen the
volunteer position at the shelter. The position is being added due to an evaluation of Animal
Services provided by the Humane Society of the United States in 2008 which recommended
adding a Volunteer Coordinator position. The position was not added at that time due to
financial constraints brought on by the recession.

Child Support Services
The proposed budget of $4.6 million is an increase of less than 1% compared to FY 2014-15
adopted amounts. No General Fund support is proposed, due to the fact that the department
operates on revenue from State and Federal sources. The County’s Child Support Services
Department was the ranked as the number one performing county in the State during the 2014
Fiscal Year.
County Fire
The proposed General Fund support is increasing $746,057 or 5% compared to the FY 2014-
15 adopted budget. The increase in General Fund support is largely due to an increase in the
County’s contract with CAL FIRE, of which the General Fund portion is increasing $1.3 million
or 11% due to State collective bargaining decisions and CalPERS benefit rate increases.
District Attorney
The proposed level of General Fund support is increasing by $362,224 or 4% compared to the
FY 2014-15 adopted budget. This increase is due to a combination of revenue decreases and
expenditure increases. Revenue is declining due mainly to shrinking availability of settlement
revenues which are declining approximately $400,000 which is mostly offset by an increase in
State Prop 172 revenue, the ? cent sales tax for public safety. Expenditures increases include
the addition of 1.50 FTE to the department’s PAL. These new positions are intended to ensure
compliance with the California Office of Emergency Services and Victims Crime Act fund
guidelines, provide prompt intervention and support with crime victims after a crime occurs,
and assist with property crime caseload.
Probation
The proposed level of General Fund support is increasing by $778,079 or 8% compared to the
FY 2014-15 adopted budget. The increase is due to a combination of revenue decreases and
expenditure increases. Revenue is declining due to changes in State and Federal claiming
rules. Expenditures are increasing due to a minor reorganization in the department’s
administrative section, as well as in the Juvenile Hall. The proposed budget includes the
addition of an Assistant Chief Probation Officer
Public Defender
The proposed level of General Fund support is increasing by $261,602 or 5% compared to the
FY 2014-15 adopted budget. This increase is primarily driven by an additional $200,000 that is
budgeted in FY 2015-16 in recognition of the fact that it has become commonplace to add
expense during the budget year to cover unanticipated expense for complex, multi-defendant
or capital cases represented by court appointed attorneys.
Sheriff-Coroner
The proposed level of General Fund support is increasing by $272,173 or less than 1%
compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. However, after adjusting for short term expense
for staffing in California Valley during construction of two large-scale solar projects that have
now been completed, and which were offset by funding sources outside this fund center in FY
2014-15, the Sheriff-Coroner’s net increase in General Fund support is greater than it appears
in the budget, increasing $928,173 or 2%.
The increase in General Fund support is due in part to proposed augmentations which
increase the department’s PAL by 8.00 FTE. The proposed position additions include staffing
for the new Women’s Jail which will be operational in FY 2015-16, increased capacity in the 

Health Agency
In addition to those fund centers noted above, Animal Services is also a division of the Health
Agency, but is included in the Public Protection functional group. The overall budget
information that follows excludes the Animal Services budget.
The proposed level of General Fund support for the Health Agency is increasing by $2.4
million or 16% compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. The increase includes the
proposed net addition of 18.75 FTE to the Agency’s PAL. Highlights of the significant changes
affecting the General Fund support for the Health Agency fund centers are provided below.
Behavioral Health
General Fund support is proposed to increase approximately $2.2 million or 29%
compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. This increase includes the net addition of
13.00 FTE. Most of these new positions are recommended to improve the response
time and/or expand services for youth and adults suffering from mental health,
substance use and/or co-occurring disorders in an effort to reduce wait time for clients
in order to improve outcomes and reduce the impact these conditions have on their
lives. The expansion of Medi-Cal under the ACA has increased demand for Behavioral
Health services and the added resources will help the department better meet that
demand. In addition, positions are being added to improve documentation services
provided in order to increase Medi-Cal reimbursement for eligible services.
Law Enforcement Medical Care
General Fund support is proposed to increase $550,995 or 36% compared to the FY
2014-15 adopted budget. The increase includes a net addition of 3.75 FTE to the
department’s PAL. These additional positions will provide additional nursing staff at the
jail to ensure 24/7 coverage by nursing staff to improve the quality and timeliness of
medical assessment and care of inmates at the County Jail.
Medically-Indigent Services Program
General Fund support is proposed to decrease approximately $1.2 million or 70%
compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. This decrease is due to a significant
reduction in the number of indigent clients expected to receive access to medical care
under this program. FY 2014-15 marked the first fiscal year in which the County
provided indigent medical care to the remaining individuals that do not qualify for Medi-
Cal and meet the requirements for a waiver from the individual mandate for health care
coverage under the ACA. Proposed funding levels for FY 2015-16 reflect decreased
caseload in this program due to the implementation of the ACA.

General Fund support is proposed to increase $854,929 or 19% compared to the FY
2014-15 adopted budget. The increase includes the addition of 4.00 FTE to the
department’s PAL to support a variety of needs and initiatives. Augmentations to this
budget include: funding to prepare an Environmental Impact Report for a permanent
Biosolids Ordinance; the purchase and implementation of a public health electronic
health record for use in the Jail, clinics and other public health programs; the addition of
a Deputy Health Officer to strengthen medical oversight and department management;
the addition of a position to oversee the effort to achieve Public Health Accreditation for
the department; and expense for the addition of a Software Engineer in Information
Technology to improve automation systems used by the Health Agency and ensure
compliance with security regulations.
Social Services
The proposed level of General Fund support for Social Services is decreasing by $5,428 or
less than 1% compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. The proposed budget for Social
Services sets General Fund support at the minimum contribution to leverage State and Federal
programs that require matching funds from the County. Despite the decrease to General Fund
support, the department’s budget is seeing significant growth compared to the FY 2014-15
adopted budget, due largely to expanded responsibilities in the Child Welfare Services (CWS)
and In-Home Support Services (IHSS) programs, increased caseload in the Medi-Cal program,
and implementation of the new CalWORKs Housing Supports program (HSP) which are
largely funded with allocations from State and Federal sources.
The proposed budget includes the net addition of 6.00 FTE to the department’s PAL. The new
positions will support a variety of programs, including: ensuring that families considered as
Foster Parents are simultaneously qualified as potential Adoptive Parents; and addressing
workload associated with caseload growth in the various programs that the department
provides.

The proposed General Fund support increasing by $56,798 or 12% compared to the FY 2014-
15 adopted budget. The increase includes the addition of 0.50 FTE to the department’s PAL.
The additional staff will enable the Master Food Preserve program, nutrition education
programs at elementary school sites, and the family centered physical activity programs to
expand.
Library
The proposed General Fund contribution is increasing by $26,544 or 4% compared to the FY
2014-15 adopted amount. The increase is due to the addition of 1.50 FTE to the department’s
PALs. The increased staffing supports increased hours of operation in most of the Library’s 15
branches, expanding the number of open hours per week by a total of 66 hours across the
Library system.

Assessor
The proposed General Fund support is increasing by $352,841 or 4% compared to the FY
2014-15 adopted budget. This increase includes the addition of 1.00 FTE to the department’s
PAL in order to address increased workload concerns. It is estimated that $333,606 in
additional property tax revenue will be added to the roll due to the department’s ability to
address outstanding workload with the addition of this position.
Auditor-Controller Treasurer-Tax Collector Public Administrator
The Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector-Public Administrator is a consolidated
department; however, the budgets for the two former, independent departments remain
separate.
The proposed General Fund support is increasing by $99,241 or 2% compared to the FY
2014-15 adopted budget. The budget includes the elimination of 2.00 FTE from the
department’s PAL, as a result of efficiencies gained through the creation of this consolidated
department in FY 2013-14.

General Services
In FY 2014-15, the former General Services Agency was dissolved into four independent
separate departments: General Services, Information Technology, Airports, and Parks and
Recreation. As indicated at the time when the dissolution of the Agency was considered, the
dissolution has remained relatively cost neutral between the four departments. The General
Fund support increase in this budget is not due to the dissolution.
The proposed General Fund support is increasing by $639,988 or 10% compared to the FY
2014-15 adopted budget. This increase includes the addition of 1.00 FTE Facilities
Maintenance Mechanic to the department’s PAL in order to provide facility maintenance for the
new Women’s Jail which will become operational in FY 2015-16. In addition, the lease costs
that the department pays on behalf of the Department of Social Services (DSS) are increasing
by approximately $440,000 due to DSS acquiring additional office space in FY 2014-15 in
order to support an increase in staff due to implementation of the ACA. 

Information Technology
The proposed General Fund support is increasing by $78,165 or less than 1% compared to the
FY 2014-15 adopted budget. The increase includes the addition of funding for a Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) Analyst. This position is not proposed to be added to the
department’s PAL in the budget, due to the fact that the classification had not been created at
the time of budget development. In addition, the proposed budget includes the addition of 1.00
FTE Software Engineer to the department’s PAL in order to provide support to the Health
Agency.
Human Resources
The proposed General Fund support is increasing by $492,618 or 21% compared to the FY
2014-15 adopted budget. This increase includes expense for new automation systems that
the department implemented in FY 2014-15. These automation systems include NEOGOV (a
new online job application, on-boarding and performance management system) as well as the
CEB Talent Measurement system. The proposed budget also includes the addition of 1.00
FTE to the department’s PAL to support the increase in employee recruitment and selection
workload that the department faces due to increased staffing levels among County
departments.
Overview of Financing/Revenues
The Financing Functional Area in the ‘Departmental Budgets by Functional Area’ section of
this document provides a discussion of revenue sources, as well as additions to the County’s
various reserves and designations. Below is a high-level overview of some of the County’s
major revenue sources:
State and Federal Revenue
State and Federal revenue is proposed at approximately $239.4 million and represents
43% of the County’s total financing. This is an increase of $3 million or less than 1%
compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget. State and Federal revenue is the single
largest County revenue source. The majority of these revenues are used to support
statutory programs, such as health and human services, and some criminal justice
programs. Generally speaking, these funds are restricted in use and are not available
for discretionary purposes.
Taxes
Property taxes, sales taxes, transient occupancy tax, and other tax revenue are
proposed at approximately $171 million and represents 30% of the County’s total
financing. This is an increase of $13.8 million or 9% compared to the FY 2014-15
adopted budget.
Other Revenues and Financing Sources
Other revenues and financing are proposed at approximately $64.2 million and
represent 11% of the County’s total financing. This is an increase of $1.5 million or 2%
compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget.
Licenses/Permit Fees/Charges for Services
Licenses, permits fees, and charges for services are proposed at approximately $38.6
million and represent 7% of the County’s total financing. This is an increase of
$538,790 or 1% compared to the FY 2014-15 adopted budget.
Budget Message
A-14
Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties
Fines, forfeitures and penalties are proposed at approximately $5.1 million and
represent 1% of the County’s total financing. This amount is essentially flat with the FY
2014-15 adopted budget.
Interest Earnings
Interest earnings are proposed at approximately $1.9 million and represent less than
1% of the County’s total financing. This amount is increasing by $83,211 compared to
the FY 2014-15 adopted budget.
Fund Balance Available (FBA) and Use of Reserves
Fund Balance Available (FBA) and the use of reserves represent the last two significant
funding sources for the total County budget. Use of FBA is proposed at $36.6 million
(for all County funds, not just the General Fund) and represents approximately 6% of
the County’s total financing. Use of reserves is proposed at $7.4 million and represents
just over 1% of the County’s total financing.
Conclusion and Acknowledgements
After several years of having to make difficult but necessary choices in order to achieve
structural balance, it is rewarding to be able to propose a budget that is fiscally sound and
funds augmentations to the programs and services that are so valuable to the community. The
improvement in the budget is a direct result of the many policies and plans that have been
created and implemented as well as the many sacrifices made by all during the economic
downturn. Careful planning for the future remains critical to the sustainability of the County’s
pursuit of providing a high level of service into the future.
The production of this proposed budget and document is a year-round process, which involves
ongoing budget administration, financial forecasting, strategic planning, and the identification
of priorities and the establishment of sound budget policy. Staff in all departments participate
in this on-going process in order to develop a budget that is clear, complete and accurate.
They deserve credit for the significant work that goes into developing this budget document.
Finally, I want to recognize and express gratitude to the Board of Supervisors for the
leadership and insightful guidance provided in establishing policies and identifying spending
priorities for the County’s resource allocation decisions.
I look forward to this next year as we are truly able to move forward in pursuit of our vision of a
Safe, Healthy, Livable, Prosperous, and Well-Governed Community.