For the second consecutive year, a strong local
economy will allow Santa Clara County to continue
rebuilding many of our service delivery networks
and the administrative infrastructure that supports
it. While this outcome is welcome, we offer this
recommended budget with a note of caution. As
the County moves to create a predictable and
reasonable expenditure trajectory through the
negotiation of five year labor contracts, we are
concerned about whether the growth in our discretionary
revenues will keep pace with this defined
increase in the cost of a unit of service. The pace of
revenue and expenditure growth will have to be
carefully monitored over the next four years since
the dynamic pace of change in our program areas is
unlikely to slow.
As a result, every recommendation to add
resources is being considered in this context. We
recognize that the demand for essential County
services continues to rise and we have done our
best to balance demand and sustainability in developing
a financial plan that meets as many needs as
possible while retaining the strong financial foundation
this County is known for.
As we go to print, we estimate available ongoing
general fund resources to be $41.1 million. We
continue to enjoy a strong real estate market that
will deliver substantial property tax growth. Job
growth is also advancing at an accelerating rate, as
the south bay continues to lead the state in this key
area. Both of these circumstances provide for a
level of flexibility to allow us to address many needs
across the County, although far less than was
requested.
The FY 2016 Recommended budget has three key
themes:
¦ Continue to rebuild and strengthen the
County's administrative infrastructure to
support the service delivery networks that are
central to the County's mission.
¦ Address needs within the County's Jail system
that are the result of statutory changes at the
state level and the aging of our jail facilities that
require immediate attention.
¦ Focusing resources and organizational energy
to address the problems of homelessness and
affordable housing.
Rebuilding the County's Administrative
Infrastructure
For the second consecutive year we are
recommending additional resources for
administrative support services as a critical step in
stabilizing and improving County operations. It is
important to remember that Santa Clara County
experienced 10 consecutive years of debilitating
deficits (FY 2003 through FY 2012) where we were
forced to close funding gaps of over $1.8 billion.
Through that dark period we were forced to
decimate our administrative systems in order to
protect as many direct services as possible. Over the past few years the true impact of reducing our
support services infrastructure has become clearer.
An increase in the number of errors, more turnover
due to staff burnout, and clear examples of
situations where reducing administrative staff has
had a significant impact on the County
organization:
¦ Errors and backlogs in tax collection services
¦ Long delays in filling positions that impact our
service levels
¦ Single points of failure in the support of
important technology systems
¦ Inadequate management oversight that have
led to problems in many departments
throughout the County.
These general examples are the reasons why we
believe it is so critical to increase our investment in
our administrative support services. They are critical
to the efficient and effective delivery of
essential County services.
Information Services
It should be clear to anyone that is following the
evolution of County services that we are becoming
increasingly dependent on information technology
as the backbone to the way we do business in Santa
Clara County. We might not always be in the
forefront but we are making significant progress in
the area of automating our services. In addition, the
public is demanding more service via mobile
applications that require constant development
and support. With this in mind, this budget is
recommending an allocation of over $7 million in
ongoing funds to support a combination of newly
implemented systems and those that are in
development. In addition, this budget recommends
$27 million in one-time funds to replace or develop
new systems and improve the technology our
employees use to serve the residents of Santa Clara
County
Over the past three years the following systems
have been developed or are in development:
EPIC/Healthlink: This is a critical system that
includes the electronic health record and a wide
variety of billing and record development capabilities.
This system is still in the process of being
rolled out and in FY 2016, the first of two stages to
implement services in Custody Health is being
recommended.
Office 365: this suite of Microsoft products is a
Countywide system that provides additional tools
for employees and standardizes our use of email, a
critical form of communication in today's world. To
provide the additional features available within
Office 365 that will improve efficiency and effectiveness,
additional support is required.
Ariba/SAP: The Ariba system will allow us to implement
e-procurement and modernize the way we
procure goods and services. This system is being
implemented as we speak, will offer significant
improvements in procurement processes, and will
provide improved information for review by the
administration and the Board.
CJIC Replacement (Public Safety and Justice System
Program- PSJSP): The major system recommendation
in this year's budget is the replacement of CJIC.
The Criminal Justice Information Control system is
the current backbone of the criminal justice system
in Santa Clara County. This is the last legacy system
in the County that relies on antiquated code
(COBOL) to operate and must be replaced. Our
partners in this project, the Santa Clara Superior
Court, have already embarked on developing their
own system and we are faced with developing
interfaces with their new system in order to keep
the criminal justice system operating over the next
18 months. The plan is to create an information
exchange or hub to replace CJIC and add modules
that will allow information to be utilized by all
users of the criminal justice system. This project
will have a total cost of approximately $100 million
over four to five years and will add a Jail Management
system and a Referral Tracking system
among others. In the current year we are recommending
$16.9 million in one-time resources to buy
hardware and begin software development and $3.1 million in ongoing resources that will support
the staff resources needed for the initial development
and maintenance phases of the project.
We cannot emphasize enough the importance of
investing in our technology infrastructure, not only
in the acquisition and development of new systems
but in the staff resources that are critical to the
daily operation and maintenance of these systems.
While many of us are happy to turn on our
computer or application and use them to complete
our daily tasks, the complexity behind the screen
must be recognized and supported or else we run
the risk of system failures and the consequences
that will bring.
Employee Services Agency (ESA)
A second area of focus is in the area of recruitment
and hiring. ESA experienced significant reductions
during the most recent downturn. The Human
Resources, Labor Relations and Office of Equal
Opportunity division lost 32 positions between
FY 2003 and FY 2011, going from 128 to 96
authorized positions. This loss represents a
reduction of 25% of their total FTE’s over that time
frame. The result of these lost resources was a
dramatic slowing in the hiring and classification
processes. The merit system is a cumbersome
system to begin with but with reduced resources, it
is not surprising to learn that the cycle times to hire
most positions increased significantly.
While we have some flexibility, now is the time to
add staff back to ESA to generate improvement in
the personnel process cycle time. Increasing staff
resources in ESA can generate results as the
following tables show:
With the six additional staff approved by the Board
in FY 2015, ESA has been able to reduce the cycle
time by approximately 22%, reducing the days from
request to fill to first day on the job by 20 days. In
this budget we are recommending the addition of
eight positions to the recruiting and classification
functions. At this juncture, ESA projects that an
additional 10% to 15% improvement in cycle time
can be expected. The organization will continue to
work on streamlining processes and applying best
practices to further improve this critical function.
From our point of view, this is a crucial investment
in our administrative infrastructure and one that
will improve overall County services.
Investing in our Correctional System
At this point in time we are facing a series of
important decisions regarding the County's
Correctional system. The nature of the County Jail
is changing due to the implementation of Public
Safety Realignment (AB 109). The State has shifted
significant responsibility to the County to supervise
more individuals released from the State system
and house additional inmates that would normally
have been sent to state prison. This has increased
the length of stay for inmates in our facilities and
we now have a more sophisticated inmate
population. At the same time, the aging of the
general population is also occurring within the
inmate population. A greater percentage of
inmates are suffering from physical, mental health
and substance abuse ailments. All together these
factors are increasing the demands on the staff and
facilities in our jail system.
Not unlike ESA, the Sheriff 's Office and the Department
of Correction were significantly impacted by
the reductions required during the great recession.
Over the past three years, however, we have been focused on how best to manage the changes
outlined above. After almost 4 years of experience
with realignment, we have outlined a four-prong
plan to address the needs in the system as we see
them today.
This plan will require the allocation of significant
operational and capital resources to improve our
ability to appropriately manage the inmates that
are in our care. The most significant effort that is
underway is the development of our application to
the State for funding to build a new jail facility in
the Civic Center complex. The building is intended
to replace Main Jail South (MJS), a 1950s vintage
facility that has a staff intensive design and is very
costly to maintain. This budget assumes the hard
match requirement of $8 million assuming a
maximum state grant of $80 million. The new
building will be designed to provide additional
classrooms, improved health facilities and the most
efficient operational design possible to limit staff
costs.
The second prong of the plan is the hardening of
four pods, or 192 beds, in Main Jail North (MJN). A
problem that has evolved over the past decade is
the lack of high security cells in our system. This
project, with a current year capital cost of $11.8
million and a partial year operating cost of $2.7
million, will address that problem and create more
appropriate classification options for DOC staff.
The third prong of the plan addresses capacity in
both our mental health and physical health components
of the jail system. The first action is the
modification of pod 8C in MJN to create more
capacity for inmates with mental health needs.
With the changing nature of the inmate population
this is an action that will both resolve current
demand and meet future demand, resulting in a
safer system for both inmates and staff. The capital
cost for this project was addressed at Mid-Year but
the operational cost for DOC and Custody health
staff in FY 2016 will be approximately $2.5 million.
The fourth prong will be the renovation of the M-1
infirmary facility at Elmwood. This will address the
issue of increasing demand for physical health beds
and provide an alternative at Elmwood that will
balance the demand for infirmary beds between
Elmwood and the Civic Center Jail complex. This
project has a capital cost of $3 million but operating
costs will not be required until FY 2017 since
the renovation of this facility will take over a year to
complete.
Total investments in the Sheriff 's Office and the
Department of Correction included in the FY 2016
Recommended Budget will exceed $6 million on an
ongoing basis with an additional $3.3 million in
one-time operational expenses for equipment and
overtime. In addition, the capital investment being
recommended for the Correctional system is $22.8
million. This is a significant allocation to this area
of County government but one that we believe
cannot be delayed any longer.
Affordable Housing and Homelessness
The third featured area of this budget is our
continued effort to deal with the affordable
housing crisis and homelessness. Our
recommendations build on the allocation of
significant resources initiated at mid-year to make
progress in tackling this very difficult problem.
At Mid-Year the Board allocated $12 million to
complete the financing for the Senter Road affordable
housing project, accelerating the creation of
164 units for residents with extremely low incomes
including the homeless. In addition, the Board
approved the creation of a pre-development
funding pool with a $5 million contribution that is
to be matched by the Housing Trust of Silicon Valley. This is intended to kick start the creation of
new affordable housing projects. The Board also
approved the creation of a $600,000 grant to stabilize
shelter providers throughout the County.
In this Recommended Budget we are continuing to
make strategic investments in the area of affordable
housing and homelessness. A very exciting
development is the upcoming launch of our homelessness
pay for success project. On July 1, 2015
Abode Services will begin utilizing 102 available
units to house chronic homeless individuals from
our community. These individuals will receive
services intended to stabilize their situations. The
County will make success payments that will not
exceed $2 million per year if individuals are housed
for 12 consecutive months. Santa Clara County
will be the first jurisdiction within California to
launch a pay for success project. The funding to
make these payments will come from unallocated
Measure A funds.
The County will also continue to support emergency
and transitional housing alternatives with
allocations of $1.2 million to support the Countywide
cold weather shelter program and a one-time
allocation of $1.5 million reserve to further explore
transitional housing options discussed with the
Board in March. These options could include year
round utilization of shelter beds, safe-parking
programs and micro-housing opportunities.
Finally, we are also adding resources to the Office of
Supportive Housing, as their level of activity has
increased substantially over the past year. We are
recommending this Office be transitioned to the
Office of the County Executive, and report directly
to the Chief Operating Officer who is spearheading
our efforts in the affordable housing/homelessness
arena. This will recognize the priority we are
putting into these efforts.
In the Office of Supportive Housing, new staff
resources will be responsible for developing
housing strategies for special populations and
increasing our case management capacity as we
add additional affordable units to our inventory.
We are excited by the progress being made in this
area, and recognize there is a window of opportunity
moving forward. Many jurisdictions are
aligned in their desire to collaborate and find ways
to work together to address the very difficult
problem of affordable housing and homelessness.
There is much work to do but we are pleased to be
able to recommend these resources to support the
excellent work being done.
Other Highlights
The level of flexibility that we have in FY 2016 also
allows us to address a variety of other important
needs across the County:
Social Services Agency: Included in this budget is
the addition of 12 Social Worker I positions and
eight Social Worker II/III positions to continue to
rebuild our service levels in this department. We
are also able to recommend the addition of three
positions in the Adult Protective Services program
and two positions in the Public Administrator/
Guardian to address the needs of seniors.
Facilities and Fleet: Included in this budget are
additional resources to support preventative maintenance
and the increased cost of utilities.
Registrar of Voters: Included in this budget is
$2.5 million in one-time funds to implement electronic
poll books and to enhance our precinct
operation call center to provide additional tools
and resources to support the efficient processing of
ballots.
Mental Health: Included in this budget are additional
staff resources to bolster the integration of
the Mental Health and Drug and Alcohol Departments
into the Behavioral Health Department. In
addition, staff is added to enhance contract
management, quality assurance and utilization
management.
This budget does not recommend significant
changes at Valley Medical Center as the majority of
these adjustments were implemented at Mid-Year.
At the current time our focus continues to be building capacity to accommodate the increasing
enrollment due to Medi-Cal expansion. The
FY 2015 budget assumed an increase of 21,500 lives
and the actual number is estimated to be closer to
48,000. The other obvious issue is what happens to
the Daughter of Charity hospitals in Santa Clara
County. We are making a good faith effort to
acquire these facilities because it makes sense for
us in the long run to operate these facilities. The
acquisition of O’Conner would eliminate the need
for us to build a second bed building at a much
higher cost. In addition, the possibility of a forprofit
entity operating these hospitals could redirect
Medi-Cal clients toward VMC and overwhelm
our system. We have retained some flexibility in the
VMC enterprise fund in order to account for the
cost of operating O'Connor and St. Louise if we are
able to acquire them.
A Continuing Commitment to our Physical
Infrastructure
As with ongoing resources, the County has
increased flexibility due to an FY 2015 fund balance
projection estimated to be $220 million.
Approximately $34 million of the additional fund
balance is due to the County receiving “excess
ERAF” funds in the current year. Since 1992,
counties, cities, and certain special districts have
been forced to shift a portion of their property tax
shares to the Educational Revenue Augmentation
fund (ERAF). In Santa Clara County, approximately
75% of ERAF is carved from the County's own
property tax share. Total ERAF for Santa Clara
County in FY 2015 was $514 million, of which the
County contributed $390 million.
Per the State Revenue and Taxation code, once
there is enough money in ERAF to fulfill all of its
obligations, the remainder is to be returned to the
taxing entities who contributed into it. Only a
handful of counties are in “excess ERAF” status.
Santa Clara County has moved into this status
primarily because of robust property tax growth
that has exceeded the state's established contribution
to school districts. However, it is not expected
that Santa Clara County will retain “excess ERAF”
status over time because implementation of the
new local control funding formula for school
districts will substantially increase the State's
contributions to schools.
Even considering these increased resources, the
capital needs submitted by departments far exceed
the funding that is available. We are happy to be
able to recommend over $52.9 million in capital
projects for the Board's consideration. The largest
allocation, $20 million, will be for the tenant
improvements associated with the creation of an
Outpatient Surgery Center at 2450 South Bascom
Avenue. This facility will provide greater access and
convenience for clients who need these types of
service. The three jail system related projects
mentioned above will require an investment of
$22.6 million.
The third major area of investment in our physical
infrastructure is the funding of major maintenance
projects. Over the past few years we have allocated
$5 million annually for this purpose. In the past
year Facilities and Fleet have identified several
Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC)
projects that require repair or replacement. For this
reason, we are increasing our allocation to $6
million and plan to rollover and re-budget an additional
$1.5 million from unspent resources from
prior years. This enhanced allocation is a step in
the right direction, but does not begin to address
the backlog that developed during the recession,
when we were unable to allocate sufficient
resources to major maintenance requirements. At
the same time Table 1 reflects the commitment we
have made since the recovery began around 2012
to increase funding for capital projects and major
maintenance.
Technology Investments
In the area of technology we have also allocated
significant resources consistent with our
recognition of the importance of information
services to our organization. In this budget we are
recommending $27.0 million for technology
projects.
The largest project in this group will be replacement
of the Criminal Justice Information Control
system that has been discussed previously. The
FY 2016 one-time cost is $16.9 million, but this is
only a portion of the multi-year effort. Over the
course of three years, the entire project is projected
to cost approximately $85 million in one-time
development and equipment costs, and $9.9
million in ongoing costs to support and maintain
the system by the time it is fully implemented.
The suite of products available once the implementation
is complete will include:
¦ Sheriff Records Management System
¦ Jail Management System
¦ Adult Probation, PreTrial Services and Drug
Testing
¦ Juvenile Probation
¦ Referral Tracking - Resource Re-entry Program
Modernization and technology infrastructure for
non-criminal justice systems in several critical
areas including:
¦ e-Signatures
¦ Tax Collector Automation System (TCAS)
System Functional Enhancements
¦ Custody Health Implementation of
EPIC/Healthlink
¦ ISD Data Center Network Upgrade
¦ County Document and Evidence Exchange
System
¦ Nortel Phone System Replacement -
Parks/Charcot/CCOM - County Communications
Department
Reserves
Consistent with our core value of maintaining a
strong financial foundation, this budget retains the
Contingency Reserve at 5 percent of General Fund
revenues, net of pass-throughs, or $123 million.
Our recommendations for other reserves include
$1.05million for Future Space/Lease Costs as we
recognize that we have little or no existing space to
address the increase in the staff resources being
recommended in this budget. This reserve will be
budgeted in the Property Management Division of
Facilities and Fleet to address needs as they are
identified and resolved.
In the Special Programs and Reserves budget unit
we have established three additional reserves. One
that addresses Community Based Organization
cost of living adjustments and is consistent with
past practice. We have also reserved $2.5 million to
address the new requirement for providing health
insurance and sick leave for newly qualified parttime
and temporary employees consistent with the
Affordable Care Act.
We have also budgeted $2 million in a Reserve for
Economic Uncertainty to address unanticipated
issues that arise through the course of the year or
actions taken at the state and/or federal level that
impact us negatively.
We have also created an unallocated reserve
$1.9million to account for the growth in Measure A
resources that is available at the Board's discretion.
Risks and Threats to the County Budget
The strong local and statewide economy has
provided a period of relative stability for Santa
Clara County. At the same time we know that
business cycles occur in a very regular fashion and
the pain of the last downturn remains a lasting
memory.
As was mentioned previously, there are several
aspects of our cost structure that are being “locked
in” as future obligations. The implementation of
five-year labor contracts, the approval of an ordinance
locking in the required funding of retiree
health, and the projected costs of pensions over the
next several years provides the need to stand back
and consider how these obligations will impact our
ability to maintain current service levels. In the
short term, we are looking at a minimum of 5%
growth in the cost of a unit of service. This will
translate into an increase of $100 million annually
for the County's general fund. The question is will
discretionary revenue growth be able to keep pace?
How will health care financing at the State and
Federal levels evolve over the next few years? Will
the Medi-Cal Waiver be renewed and how will that
impact Valley Medical Center?
While a variety of risks are inherent in looking to
the future, the bottom line boils down to the
balance between committed expenditures and
available revenues. Only time will tell how we are
able to match the two.
Conclusion
I am pleased this year to present a budget that
continues to make progress in addressing both our
administrative and physical infrastructure while
also adding resources to strengthen our service
delivery across many disciplines. This period of
stability is very welcome, but we continue to stress
the need to recognize that we were mired in a very
difficult recession only five years ago. It is for these
reasons that we are moving prudently during these
times of “unusual” flexibility.
It is important to remember the actions taken by
many jurisdictions in the late 1990s to increase
pension benefits while they were funded in excess
of 100% of liabilities. The next 10 years saw
dramatic changes and impacts that are still with us
today. We have to be thoughtful and deliberate
about expanding programs or implementing
changes that could end up costing the County
millions in the future. We recognize that cycles
come and go, so our goal is to forward a budget
that is balanced both on paper and balanced in its
approach to rebuilding our service delivery
networks, without expanding too broadly into
areas we may not be able to sustain.
One of the areas of that requires discussion is the
evaluation of the recommendations that are being
put forward today. Questions have been raised
about the results that can be expected by adding
resources to ESA or ISD, for example. We welcome
the discussion of measuring results to determine if
the allocations recommended here are generating
the desired results. We have included some data
from ESA earlier in this message that shows that
the addition of staff has resulted in reduced cycle
times for filling positions. This is a good example of
how we should evaluate resource allocation decisions
after the fact. This is our intent as we ramp up
the Central Contracts unit approved at mid-year.
As we prepare to face the challenges that the next
fiscal year will bring, we are fortunate to have the
flexibility to provide the organization with an
improved set of tools to get the job done. We are
moving forward to rebuild our service delivery
systems in Social Services and have added the
resources to prepare for necessary access for the
growing number of patients seeking service at
Valley Medical Center. We are also attacking the
problems presented by a changing and aging Jail
system. Finally, we are positioned to make real
progress in addressing the issues associated with
homelessness and increasing the number of affordable
housing units. While we need to continue to
stress caution, we have great hopes for what can be
accomplished in the year ahead.
We cannot achieve our aims without the commitment
and hard work of our dedicated County
employees and partners in Community-based
Organizations. I would like to thank them for the
work they do every day to provide assistance or
service to our clients, whether sought out by the
customer or delivered in a County facility. Our
employees' enthusiasm for service and loyalty is
much appreciated. The next section of this document
includes a report on the Learning
Organization Program, which is focused on the
importance of employee engagement and the
delivery of exceptional customer service. These
program offerings provide tools and methods for
employees to increase their level of participation in
work process improvements, and for all levels of
employees to consider how their jobs fit into the
larger County system.
