The Recommended Fiscal Year (FY) 2015-16 County of Santa Barbara Operating Plan is submitted for your
consideration, possible amendment and eventual adoption. This Operating Plan, which includes a balanced
Recommended Budget, is the result of a thorough development process involving participation from all
departments and adherence to budget policies, development schedule and the General Fund allocation
methodology approved by the Board of Supervisors over the past several months.
In compliance with California Government Code (Section 29062) and Santa Barbara County Code (Chapter 2,
Article X, Section 2-71 k), I am submitting to you the recommended operating and capital budgets for FY 2015-16
and have determined that the budget development process is compatible with approved County policies and
long-range plans through the thorough evaluation of departmental requests for expenditures, revenues and
fund balance.
I welcome and encourage our community members to participate in the discussions and decisions that affect the
County’s spending priorities. In addition to Budget Workshops held in April, public hearings on the
Recommended Fiscal Year 2015-16 Operating Plan are scheduled for June 8, 2015 and will continue if necessary,
through Friday June 19, 2015, with specific hearings scheduled for Monday, June 8 and Wednesday, June 10, 2015
and only if needed Friday, June 12, 2015. The public budget hearings will be conducted at the County
Administration Building’s Fourth Floor Hearing Room located at 105 E. Anapamu Street in Santa Barbara and will
be able to receive remote testimony from the Board Hearing Room, Joseph Centeno Betteravia Government
Center, 511 East Lakeside Parkway in Santa Maria.
I want to thank the Board of Supervisors for successfully guiding the organization over the past year. I also want
to thank our department directors and their staff for assisting in the budget process. In particular, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Auditor-Controller’s Office and the County Executive Office staff for their
efforts in preparing this document and making improvements. Lastly, I want to express my gratitude to our
employees for their dedication in serving our community and commitment to a financially sound and vibrant
organization.
In the coming year, the County organization continues to rebuild itself to better serve our community, while
still living in the shadows of the Great Recession which had resulted in six years of budget shortfalls and
reductions in service and staff. The current year (FY 2014-15) marked the first time since the recession that the
County’s immediate outlook was positive and stabilizing, primarily due to growing property values,
stabilization of pension costs, and an improved State and Federal fiscal environment.
This next year, the County’s financial position continues to improve. With this improvement, the activities
comprising the FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 Recommended Operational Plan (Plan), which includes the
Recommended Budget, continue to move the organization on a stable path with foundational investments
that will benefit the County now and in the future. Some of these investments include fulfilling existing
commitments which will reduce our flexibility for other significant expansions in the near term. We also
continue to face challenges and funding needs that we cannot fully address in one year. Still, the
Recommended Budget includes initiatives that move us forward and fulfill the following objectives:
? As we experience moderate revenue growth, rebuild the organization and our financial reserves
? Create efficiencies through process improvements, technology, and innovation to better serve the public
? Minimize service reductions and impacts to the public
? Create a thriving and engaged workforce
? Adapt and strategically plan for the future
? Advance the Board’s highest priorities and fulfill prior commitments
The FY 2015-17 Recommended Operational Plan continues rebuilding the organization to improve service to
the public and strengthens our reserves. The Strategic Reserve in the General Fund is recommended to be
fully funded ($29.8 million or 8% of operating revenues), and a revised plan for addressing retiree health
liabilities will be developed in the next year. The County’s contribution toward employee pensions has
stabilized, and the unfunded liability is expected to be amortized and paid off by FY 2028-29, assuming
investment returns meet expectations.
The Recommended Budget includes proposed increases in staff and services (from non-General Fund sources).
These proposals will allow the following expanded services:
? Fire Department will restore the Fire Crew, to assist with fuel reduction efforts, and add other fire
prevention, firefighting, and training positions.
? Public Health Department will increase clinic hours at the Santa Barbara Health Care Center to meet the
needs of clients, newly-insured through the Affordable Care Act.
? Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services Department is using State and Federal funding to provide more
services for clients in crisis and increase outpatient services.
? Anticipating additional State funding, the Treasurer-Tax Collector, who administers Veterans Services, can
increase Veterans Services staff to assist in filing more benefit claims on behalf of our local veterans.
General Services will reduce the risk of security threats to our information technology infrastructure,
charged to the technology internal service fund, and improve accounting and clerical support to Fleet
Operations, charged to the fleet internal service fund.
? Social Services Department will be using Federal and State funding to assist CalWORKS/Welfare to Work
families in crisis and provide administrative support to address new mandates associated with changes to
the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act.
The Recommended Budget also includes ongoing funding to stabilize services in departments (County Counsel,
Planning & Development, Community Services, and Clerk-Recorder-Assessor) with long-standing, structural
imbalances to ensure continuity of services and to avoid layoffs.
The CEO is also recommending enhancing services in select areas using available, discretionary General Fund
revenue. (See table – CEO Recommended Budget Expansions.)
Departments continue to be efficient through process improvements, technology, and innovation to better
serve the public. A sampling of the improvements include the following:
? Social Services will be implementing additional telephone technology to improve the customer experience
for an estimated 150,000 annual calls to the Benefit Center, which will allow automated call backs and
provide estimated wait times to callers on hold.
? Adapting to lower levels of juvenile crime and a reduction in the population at the Los Prietos Boys Camp,
the Probation Department is reducing staff at the Camp and also eliminating a Probation Officer position
assigned to supervise AB 109 caseloads, due to anticipated reductions in AB 109 offenders.
? Child Support Services continues its “virtual files” project, for which it won a State award for best
technology project, which allows attorneys to make “paperless” court appearances with an encrypted
laptop.
? The District Attorney and Public Defender each will be initiating new case management systems to more
efficiently and effectively manage workload that will integrate with the courts system; they also continue
to both recruit interns and volunteer attorneys to assist with cases and gain experience.
? Public Health will be implementing new technology in the Public Health Laboratory for expanded
automation efficiencies.
? Agriculture, Weights and Measures continues to assist, and advocate for, customers to utilize online tools
to report pesticide use and inspection data information, which saves the department staff time in
inputting reports themselves.
? Community Services will be streamlining its reservation cancellation process to enhance customer service
and continues to reduce energy and water use at parks through lighting retrofits and converting to
waterless urinals.
? Public Works will be implementing business systems that automate financial operations and include the
use of credit cards.
Recommended Service Level Reductions necessary to balance select departments’ budgets minimize impacts
to the public. Service Level Reductions are proposed in the budgets for the Sheriff, Probation, Child Support,
and Community Services.
? The Sheriff is proposing to eliminate housing of longer-term inmates at the Santa Maria Branch Jail (and
have them transferred to the Main Jail in South County); this would entail transfer of two Custody
Deputies from the Santa Maria Branch Jail to the Main Jail to reduce overtime costs at the Main Jail.
? Probation is reducing a vacant position for the narcotics enforcement team due to loss of grant funding.
? Child Support Services is reducing positions through attrition as retirements occur to meet increased
expenses but fixed State funding.
Due to a portion of FY 2014-15 Shelter Funding being appropriated as one-time funding, there is not
adequate ongoing funding in the FY 2015-16 base budget to support the prior contribution level at three
homeless shelters. This funding had been ongoing, but was reduced and backfilled with one-time funding
as a result of budget cuts after the recession. As part of the CEO’s Recommended Expansions, this funding
would be restored to the previous, Board-authorized level, with ongoing funding.
While not Service Level Reductions pursuant to our budgeting policy, other issues in the coming year will be
affecting two departments and the public, which are partially addressed in the CEO’s Recommended
Expansions:
? Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services does not face a reduction of its ongoing, Board-approved service
level (adopted FY 2014-15 budget); however, service demand for inpatient beds far exceeds budgeted
levels. The department is requesting $2.3 million in FY 2015-16 to meeting current year usage of short and
long-term bends including Institutions of Mental Disease (IMD) beds. The department is also requesting
$1.0 million to purchase additional in-county, contracted board and care beds to increase the availability of
necessary, step-down beds.
? The statewide loss of gas tax creates a reduction to Public Works of funding used for corrective
maintenance and operation support related to roads. The loss is $2.9 million in the coming year. While the
department has fund balance to assist next year, this is not sustainable and would deplete the fund.
Efforts continue to create a thriving and engaged workforce in the coming year. Human Resources launched
the Employee Voice survey in FY 2014-15 and will be implementing actions in FY 2015-16 in response to the
survey’s findings to improve employee engagement and retention. Departments are also focusing on workforce planning and knowledge transfer, given that about one-quarter of our employees are likely to retire
in the next three to five years. With the improvement of the economy, and increase in positions (most funded
by Federal and State revenues), Human Resources has been challenged in meeting this increase in demand for
recruitments and other demands associated with new positions. The CEO’s Recommended Expansions
address this need.
The organization continues to adapt to a changing environment and strategically plan for the future. In FY
2015-16 and beyond, some departments will be engaging in strategic planning for their organizations as they
adjust to new State and Federal mandates, increasing demands, employee turnover, but also new
opportunities. The County Executive Office will be evaluating strategic planning models to assist the
organization align the Board’s priorities, department goals and our fiscal forecast with a multi-year process.
The Board has also asked for other tools, such as information on General Fund allocations compared to our
comparable counties, to assist in evaluating how we align our spending and priorities.
The Recommended Budget advances the Board’s priorities and fulfills existing funding commitments.
In the coming year, several significant initiatives are underway that advance the Board’s priorities. A few
examples include the following:
? Systems change and improvements in Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services continues to improve
client service and systems of delivery and provide a more balanced system of care and new facilities. The
department is also witnessing increased inpatient demand and costs, requiring significant resources. The
CEO’s Recommended Expansions address some of these increased costs and expansion requests.
? Sustainability efforts continue through several departmental efforts. Planning and Development will be
bringing forward the Climate Action Plan. The Resource Recovery Project at Tajiguas Landfill to provide a
sustainable alternative to burying the community’s solid waste is continuing, with a Joint Powers
Agreement (JPA) intended to be formed in the coming year.
? Water issues and drought response activities continue to be addressed by several departments. Public
Works will be bringing forward a water supply study and will be addressing requirements of the
Sustainable Groundwater Management Act.
? Major capital projects continue during the FY 2015-17 Plan, such as the Cuyama Pool reconstruction, with an
anticipated completion date in late 2016 or early 2017; other projects, including the Northern Branch Jail
(NBJ) and Goleta Beach, are discussed further in this section and in detail within Section E.
? The evaluation of our Animal Services division of the Public Health Department is being finalized and will
likely result in funding needs. The CEO Recommendations address part of this need.
? As in past years, community requests will be great for many important needs. Staff will provide funding
options to the Board on increased funding for libraries. We cannot fund all requests, given our resources;
however, some unallocated discretionary revenue is available for the Board’s allocation.
Existing commitments will be fulfilled in the next year:
? The Fire Tax Shift, which shifts ¼ of General Fund discretionary revenue each year to the Fire District until
the District attains the equivalent of 17.0% of total property taxes, is in effect and has allowed the Fire
Department to enhance and expand critical services. The original plan assumed the full 17.0% would be
achieved in FY 2021-22; currently, taxes are on track to achieve this one year earlier.
? Maintenance funding will increase pursuant to the “18% funding policy” by $1.2 million. The Board
approved a plan to allocate 18% of unallocated, discretionary General Fund revenue each year, allowing it to incrementally grow over time. It is estimated to reach $21.0 million annually by FY 2022-23. This is in
addition to $2.8 million of discretionary General Fund revenue that is already allocated to maintenance,
pursuant to another Board policy. The County’s maintenance need for roads, buildings, and park
structures continue to be a significant challenge, and staff continues to effectively prioritize the use of
these funds. In the coming year, staff will be evaluating issuance of debt to accelerate funding for some
projects where applicable.
? The operations funding plan for the Northern Branch Jail is in effect, with a projected year-end fund
balance of $7.9 million as of June 2015, which includes an ongoing allocation of $4.6 million. For FY 2015-16
the ongoing allocation increases to $6.1 million, with a fund balance of $13.7 million as of June 2016.
? Employee agreements are being satisfied. The Recommended Budget for FY 2015-16 includes increases for
employee salary and benefits, pursuant to negotiated labor agreements approved to date and expected
costs.
The FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 Operational Plan continues to represent financially prudent choices while
addressing critical needs, mitigating risks, and delivering on the Board’s highest priorities. We are in better
financial shape than in the most recent years and continue to face funding challenges and greater
expectations, requiring diligence in managing expectation and prioritizing the most critical needs. As we look
to FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17, the County remains optimistic but realistic about what we can achieve and
dedicated to providing high-quality services through an engaged and accountable workforce.
The Plan was prepared in accordance with the Board’s adopted Budget and General Fund Allocation Policies
with consideration of the Board’s six goals adopted on April 21, 1998, and revised on November 21, 2006. These
adopted organizational goals help to unify, focus, and align the wide variety of services provided by the County
of Santa Barbara and identifies how the organization should operate. The goals are:
? Goal 1: EFFICIENT AND RESPONSIVE GOVERNMENT: An efficient professionally managed government
able to anticipate and to effectively respond to the needs of the community;
? Goal 2: HEALTH AND SAFETY: Safe and healthy communities in which to live, work, and visit;
? Goal 3: ECONOMIC VITALITY: A community that is economically vital & sustainable;
? Goal 4: QUALITY OF LIFE: A high quality of life for all residents;
? Goal 5: CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT: A County government that is accessible, open, and citizen-friendly; and
? Goal 6: FAMILIES AND CHILDREN: A community that fosters the safety and well-being of families and
children.
The CEO Recommended Operational Plan for Fiscal Years 2015-16 and 2016-17 presents a balanced budget, with
FY 2015-16 Operating Revenues of $965.6 million and Operating Expenditures of $965.1 million resulting in an
operating surplus of $0.5 million. The Recommended Operating Revenues exceed Recommended Operating
Expenditures and is demonstrating a solid foundation for the future. Improving revenues, up $49.2 million
(5.3%), and measured expenditure growth, $44.2 million (4.7%), have helped to develop a balanced
Recommended Budget.
Total Operating Revenues and Total Operating Expenditures are projected to have a small positive variance of
$0.5 million in FY 2015-16, but are projected to improve to a positive $15.0 million in the FY 2016-17 Proposed
Budget. The improving Net Operating Impact will be a result of growing revenues and stabilizing costs,
predominantly employee benefits.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Staffing levels will increase by 31.5 Full Time Equivalents (FTEs) from 4,243.3 in
the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget, to 4274.8 FTEs in the FY 2015-16 Plan. The majority of the increases are funded
by Federal and State dollars in the Health & Human Services Functional Departments (an increase of 23.5 FTE)
as there is continued expansion to support the requirements of the Affordable Care Act, and the System
Change Effort within Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services. A 10 year history of Countywide FTE’s can be
found in Section C.The All Funds Operating Revenue total of $965.6 million reflects an increase of $49.3 million or 5.4% from the FY
2014-15 Adopted Budget.
Revenues by Category - Significant Areas of Revenue Change
Revenues from Taxes are projected to increase by $16.9 million or 6.4% from FY 2014-15 Adopted for total
Recommended revenue of $278.5 million; and as a percent of all revenues is 28.8%. The primary drivers of the
increase are Property Taxes from Secured, In-Lieu of Vehicle License Fee (VLF), and Sales Tax. Secured
Property Taxes are projected to increase by $8.8 million or 5.3% and is the largest source of the tax category.
The growth reflects continued valuation increases in the assessed value of local real estate that has been
occurring for the last few years. In-Lieu of VLF is projected to increase by 5.8% or $2.7 million and Sales Tax
should increase by $1.5 million or 20.9% from the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget.
Intergovernmental revenues, which are comprised of State, Federal and other governmental sources, are
anticipated to experience the largest growth. Intergovernmental sources are projected to increase by $24.8
million or 7.1% to $371.5 million. The increase is mainly in State Revenue, specifically from the Board of State
and Community Corrections (BSCC) Conditional Award for the Northern Branch Jail. The project’s one-time
funding is anticipated to be $19.6 million in FY 2015-16 and $49.2 million in FY 2016-17.
Charges for Services are expected to grow $11.4 million or 4.9% over FY 2014-15 Adopted. The growth is spread
across many different sources. Charges for Services include revenue such as, but not limited to, Medi-Cal and
Medicare, Cost Allocation Services, State Federally Qualified Health Centers (FGHC), and Development Fees.
Fines, Forfeitures, and Penalties are projected to decrease by $900 thousand or -10.0% from FY 2014-15
Adopted. The main reason for the decrease is a reduction in Penalties related to Property Taxes. This trend is
usual as the real estate market improves and property values increase.
Miscellaneous Revenue is comprised of numerous sources that do not fall into a specific category. It is
estimated that Miscellaneous Revenues will decrease by $2.9 million or -6.2% in FY 2015-16. The main drivers are
a reduction in one time revenues in the prior year, including Insurance Proceeds & Recovery payments and a
reduction in Grant/Audit/Other Settlements.
Revenues by Fund
Countywide revenues can also be viewed by fund. The majority of revenues are derived in the General Fund
and Special Revenue Funds. The General Fund is the chief operating fund of the County and Special Revenue
Funds are typically used when revenues are provided for a specific purpose, such as gasoline tax for road
maintenance or specific funding for food stamp programs. A description of Government Funds can be found
in Section F, Annual Budgetary Processes, Policies and Fund Structure.
The table below displays the Recommended Revenues for FY 2015-16 by major funds, the largest of which is the
General Fund. The General Fund can be further broken down into Discretionary General Revenues and Other
Revenues.
The Fiscal Year 2015-16 Recommended All Funds Operating Revenues are $965.6 million. Of these total
revenues, the locally elected Board of Supervisors has some discretion over the allocation of about 24.0% or
$229.9 million. This latter revenue figure, predominately from local taxes, is called local discretionary revenue.
The table below summarizes the General Fund discretionary revenues available in FY 2015-16 and compares
them with prior fiscal periods. Property taxes, sales taxes, and Transient Occupancy Taxes (TOT) are the three
major local sources of revenue generated from the performance of the local economy. Significant property
taxes (including secured, unsecured, In-Lieu of Vehicle License Fees, and property transfer taxes) make up
81.6% of total discretionary revenues or 83.9% if RDA proceeds are included.
In the Recommended Fiscal Year 2015-16 budget, local discretionary revenues increased $12.1 million from the
Fiscal Year 2014-15 adopted revenues, for a total of $229.9 million. This increase is most notably from property
taxes, sales tax, and Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT). Cost Allocation Services are also an important revenue
source, but these funds fluctuate considerably from year to year and are being considered one-time to the
extent they are projected to decrease in the following year ($800,000 decrease projected in FY 2016-17).
The main drivers of the revenue changes depicted above are as follows:
Property Tax Growth
The local economy has continued to grow with positive indicators for the next fiscal year. Property values are
a key component of the economy, and as such there is expected to be continued growth in property tax
revenue. Property taxes are the largest source of funds for the County’s budget. The FY 2015-16 budget
estimates that there will be a 3.9% ($7.1 million) growth over FY 2014-15 Adopted amounts. The FY 2016-17
Proposed Budget is expected to have a 4.2% ($7.9 million) growth over the Recommended year. The
cumulative projected growth for the Recommended and Proposed years is $18.1 million or 10.2% since FY 2013-
14.
Dissolved Redevelopment Agencies (RDA)
The County General Fund will receive $5.4 million in FY 2015-16 and $5.6 million in FY 2016-17 from ongoing
Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Funds that distribute RDA dissolution proceeds from the seven dissolved
redevelopment agencies in the County. These ongoing revenues are ultimately expected to grow to
approximately $9.0 million dollars in annual taxes for the County’s General Fund, once all outstanding RDA
debt obligations of the dissolved agencies are paid.
Local Sales Tax
Local or retail sales tax represents the local portion of the retail sales tax collected by the State from sales
generated within the unincorporated areas of the County. Retail sales tax is an economically sensitive revenue
source that is used to support the general operations of the County.
Sales taxes are expected to have a significant growth in FY 2015-16 over FY 2014-15 Adopted. Sales taxes
represent 3.8% of total discretionary revenues with growth of $1.5 million (20.9%) for the Recommended
Budget. The growth will continue into the FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget, increasing $1.7M (18.8%) over the
Recommended Budget. Included in the growth in Sales Tax for FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 is the mid-year
restoration of the sales taxes rate from 0.75% to 1.00% as the Triple Flip program comes to an end. The Triple Flip was a complex series of revenue exchanges to repay $15 billion in state deficit financing bonds or economic
recovery bonds (ERBs) from the 2004 Proposition 57. The method reimbursed cities and counties with
property tax proceeds “In-Lieu of Local Sales Tax” to compensate for the sales tax revenue being redirected to
the State to pay off the ERBs. This increase will be offset in FY 2016-17 by a reduction of In-Lieu of Local Sales
Tax revenue as this is where the proceeds of the Triple Flip were recorded.
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
This source of revenue is highly dependent on tourism and the quantity of lodging in the unincorporated
County. TOT is taxed at a 10% rate in the unincorporated areas and is related to consumer spending and
tourism that should continue to increase if the economy continues to grow and remains stable. Thus, TOT is
estimated to increase by $1.4 million (8.2%) in FY 2015-16 over FY 2014-15, and another 3.6% or $300 thousand in
FY 2016-17.
Payments In-Lieu of Tax (PILT)
PILT are Federal payments to local governments that help offset losses in property taxes due to non-taxable
Federal lands within their boundaries. The Federal Budget during FY 2013-14 did not originally have any PILT
funding and was not included in the County’s adopted budget. By year-end, the funding was appropriated and
thus included in the FY 2013-14 Actual numbers. Due to the uncertainty of PILT funding, it is again not included
in the FY 2015-16 Recommended or the FY 2016-17 Proposed budgets. Nevertheless, the County is advocating
for full PILT funding through its Legislative Advocates.
All Other Revenues
This category is made up of Franchise Fees, Interest Income, State, and Federal Payments. These revenues will
remain relatively flat for FY 2015-16 Recommended, but will decrease in the Proposed Budget as In-Lieu of Local
Sales Tax is expected to decrease by $2.5 million with an offsetting increase in Local Sales Tax as mentioned
above. In-Lieu of Local Sales Tax represents the Property Taxes given to the County in-lieu of the 0.25% Sales
Tax that was given up as part of the “Triple Flip” as discussed above. The decrease is the result of the ending
of the program and the restoration of 1.00% County Sales Tax rate.
Significant Property Taxes depicted in Figure 7 include but are not limited to secured and unsecured property
taxes, property taxes in-lieu of vehicle license fees, and fines and penalties.
The County’s Recommended FY 2015-16 operating expenditures are $965.1 million, a $44.2 million (4.8%)
increase over the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget of $920.9 million. The rate of expenditure increase is down from
the 9.8% that occurred in FY 2014-15, with the majority of the projected increase ($25.3 million) in Contractual
and Special Services. Of the $25.3 million increase in Contractual and Special Services, $21.4 million is due to
budgeted capital expenditures for the North County Jail. The table below identifies significant categories of
these expenditures.
Recommended salaries of $330.0 million represent a 3.9% increase over FY 2014-15, mostly comprised of a
projected increase in the cost per employee of 2.5% and the impact of adding 32 new employees (0.8% increase)
which will be added throughout FY 2015-16. The blended impact of these factors results in the majority of the
3.9% increase.
Figure 9A illustrates the trend in County staff and historic salary costs. Note that salaries were relatively flat
from FY 2008-09 ($278.3 million) to FY 2012-13 ($273.1 million).
The annual County pension contribution is budgeted to increase by $1.1 million to $121.8 million (0.9%) in the
Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-16 and modestly decrease in FY 2016-17. Like most other public
entities, pension costs have been one of the fastest growing cost elements in recent years but have now
stabilized at the County, as seen below in the Retirement Contribution by Year graph.
Employer contribution rates are set by the independent Santa Barbara County Employee’s Retirement System
(SBCERS) Board and paid by the County. The rate of growth in pension contributions accelerated between FY
2009-10 and FY 2014-15 due to investment losses that needed to be absorbed into the ongoing rates.
Smoothing formulas have enabled the rates to increase incrementally during these periods. At the same time,
the projected rate of return included in the actuarial assumptions was reduced from 8.16% to 7.75% for FY 2011-
12 and from 7.75% to 7.50% for FY 2014-15. The overall contribution rates have now stabilized and are projected
to modestly decrease in the coming years (see table below) assuming the planned rate of return is achieved
and employee wages grow at moderate rates.
Other Post-Employment Benefits (Retiree Health Care Costs)
The Santa Barbara County Employees’ Retirement System (SBCERS) administers a cost sharing multiple-employer
defined benefit post-employment healthcare plan, which the County participates in. This Other Post-Employment
Benefit (OPEB) Plan provides medical benefits to eligible retired County employees and their eligible dependents.
The County determines the contribution rate to the Retirement System to fund the retiree healthcare program.
The County had adopted an employer contribution rate of 3.0% of covered payroll which was intended to cover
annual premium costs paid by the plan, also known as the “Pay as you Go” method.
While providing near-term budgetary relief, the policy trade-offs of funding on a “Pay as you Go” basis create the
following significant fiscal issues:
? The County is required to disclose and ultimately recognize a liability for the unfunded portion of the
retiree medical program in its financial statements.
? The County is not being reimbursed for the full cost of administering State and federally funded programs.
? The County has not been able to take advantage of more favorable actuarial assumptions and longer term
interest rates that would lower the expense of the program over time.
In FY 2013-14, OPEB funding was increased by 25 basis points to 3.25% of covered payroll and a Budget Policy was
established to recommend an increased contribution of 25 basis points each year in order to gradually increase
funding and reduce the liability. This has been implemented and the recommended contribution rate for FY 2015-
16 will increase to 3.75% or about $12.0 million. A new actuarial study was completed in February 2015 and the
revised unfunded liability is projected to be $175.3 million, which is a modest increase from the previous 2012
study of $173.9 million. The Auditor and CEO are working with SBCERS and their actuary to develop and evaluate
various funding options with a goal to adopt a revised funding plan which will eliminate the unfunded liability
within a targeted timeframe.
Employee Healthcare Costs - Fastest Growing Cost in Salaries & Benefits Category:
The County’s Health insurance costs are budgeted to increase by $5.3 million to $35.8 million (17.2%) in the
Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-16, with continued increases projected for the FY 2016-17 period.
This represents the largest percentage increase in the Salaries and Benefits category of expenditures.
In general, health insurance premiums continue to rise throughout the State. The increases are due in part to
new regulatory requirements that increased the eligibility age of children to twenty-six for health coverage
through their parent’s plan, as well as the requirement for the health plan to cover specific types of care, such
as preventative care at no cost.
The County’s health plan’s loss ratio has improved in recent years and now stands at a five-year average of
96.7% (loss experience slightly below premiums). Although this is an improvement from prior years, it is still
10% above the risk pool’s loss ratio of 86.7%. Because the County’s loss ratio is above the risk pool’s loss ratio,
the County received an increase of 15.3%, of which 13.9% is based on claims experience and 1.4% is a result of
Affordable Care Act (ACA) related fees and costs. This was the primary contributor to the increased calendar
year 2015 renewal rate of 15.3%. The specific reasons for the County’s increased costs are:
? Significant number and cost of large medical claims (>$200,000). The average pool cost of large
claims compared to total medical costs paid is 77%, while SB County is 84%.
? Average age of SB County employee on health insurance is 52 years of age vs. the pool average of 49.
? Inpatient costs for SB County are $0.375 per dollar spent vs. $0.335 for the pool.
The County’s Recommended FY 2015-16 expenditures can also be viewed by Functional area. The increases
described by category above, occur primarily in the functions of Public Safety, Health & Human Services, and
Community Resources & Public Facilities. General Government & Support Services illustrates a large increase
due to the anticipated first year of construction of the North County Jail. The main drivers of the increase in
these functions are summarized below by department. Significant changes are explained more fully in Section
D of this book.
No significant changes in the Departments that are grouped in the Policy & Executive Functional Group.
Public Safety
Fire: The FY 2015-16 Budget increases by $3.0 million (5.2%) to $60.4 million from the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget
of $57.4 million due to increases in negotiated labor agreements and other services and supplies. The increases
are more than offset by increases in revenue from property taxes, including the County Property Tax Shift to
Fire.
Sheriff: The FY 2015-16 budget increases by $1.9 million (1.5%) to $124.6 million from the FY 2014-15 Adopted
budget of $122.7 million due to an increase in budgeted Overtime expenses to more accurately reflect actual
anticipated overtime staffing.
Health & Human Services Function
ADMHS: The FY 2015-16 budget decreases by $1.9 million (-1.8%) to $99.5 million from the FY 2014-15 Adopted
budget of $101.3 million due to anticipated salary savings as the Departments’ “System Change” effort will not
be fully implemented for the entire fiscal year.
Public Health: The FY 2015-16 budget increases by $4.0 million (5.1%) to $81.4 million from the FY 2014-15
Adopted Budget of $77.4 million due primarily to increased staffing increases and an increase in pharmaceutical
expenditures.
Social Services: The FY 2015-16 budget increases by $6.0 million (3.6%) to $172.3 million from the FY 2014-15
Adopted budget of $166.3 million primarily due to negotiated labor increases as well as consulting and
management fees.
Community Resources & Public Assistance Function
Public Works: The FY 2015-16 budget increases by $6.3 million (6.1%) to $108.3 million from the FY 2014-15
Adopted Budget of $102.0 million mostly due to the Tajiguas Landfill phased post closure project.
General Government & Support Services
As previously mentioned, the increases in this functional group are derived from construction beginning on the
Northern Branch Jail Project.
General County Programs
General County Programs is made up of programs and projects that are not directly associated with one
specific department. There are not significant budgetary changes between FY 2014-15 Adopted and FY 2015-16
Recommended.
This five year forecast is intended to provide additional information that may be helpful in weighing the
financial consequences of current year decisions and understanding commitments that have already been
made. The Discretionary General Fund Forecast focuses on Discretionary Revenues, General Fund Allocations
or Contributions (GFC’s), and additions to Committed Fund Balances; all of which are described below.
Discretionary Revenues
Discretionary Revenues are those revenues which the locally elected Board of Supervisors has some discretion
over their ultimate allocation and represent about 24.0% of Countywide revenues or $229.6 million in the
Recommended FY 2015-16 budget. These revenues, predominantly from local taxes, are called local
discretionary revenue.
The major source of discretionary revenue is taxes on property and property transactions. The growth rate
assumed for property and other taxes is 4.0% (before the Fire Tax Shift) and is comparable to current property
tax estimates reflecting changes to assessed property values, recent inflationary trends and other market
factors. Other revenues include Sales Tax, Transient Occupancy Tax, and cost allocation recovery from non-
General Fund entities. Projected local discretionary revenues are displayed in the graph below as the bottom
area of the chart. This discretionary revenue is $214.8 million in FY 2013-14, $218.9 million in FY 2014-15, $229.6
million in FY 2015-16 and so on. Above the revenue area is an area shaded in black horizontal lines that
represents the amount of discretionary revenues that have been “shifted” to the Fire District per the Fire Tax
Shift, described below. These are the two elements of discretionary revenues displayed in the graph below.
Discretionary expenditures are those costs not fixed in amount by legal obligation prior to adoption of the
annual budget by the Board of Supervisors. The forecast in Figure 16 is comprised of four main categories and
are displayed as stacked bars on the graph:
1. General Fund Allocations or Contributions to all departments (shown as base GFC in graph).
2. Incremental Changes to Salaries and Benefits funded with discretionary revenues (i.e. requiring
additional General Fund allocations, shown as S&B on the graph), and
3. Board identified funding priorities. These priorities are funded by increases to the Committed Fund
balance accounts, shown with separate stacked bars on the graph below and will be discussed in more
detail. These include:
? Fire Tax Shift
? North Branch Jail Operations Funding
? Maintenance Funding Plan (18 % of unallocated discretionary revenues)
4. Unallocated discretionary revenues are those remaining funds available for funding Board priorities or
other necessary matters.
General Fund Allocations or Contributions (GFCs)
General Fund Contributions (shown as “Base GFC” on the graph) are the most significant revenue source for
General Fund departments in the delivery of services to the community. Other funds are allocated GFC based
on Federal and State maintenance of effort requirements or payments for specific purposes, such as local
match for transportation funding in the Roads Fund. Projected General Fund Contributions in Fiscal Years 2017-
18 forward, assume the prior year’s allocation plus incremental changes to salaries and benefits (S&B).
Salary and Benefit Changes
Salary and Employee Benefit changes include anticipated personnel related expenditures. They are primarily
determined based on negotiated Memoranda of Understanding (MOU), health insurance, and retirement
benefit cost projections, and mandated costs such as Social Security contributions. Additionally, the County is
currently funding certain Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) related to providing medical coverage to
retirees.
Generally, salaries for FY 2015-16 and 2016-17 are based on detailed positions by department (salary model),
existing wages, and any scheduled wage increases per MOU with the various bargaining units or anticipated
increases for unrepresented employees.
These wage increases will continue to come into effect in FY 2015-16. Salary cost estimates for FY 2015-16 and
FY 2016-17 of this forecast incorporate current terms of negotiated MOU and anticipated increases for
unrepresented employees whose wages are not governed by MOU. The chart below lists the expiration dates
of MOUs by Employee Organization. Negotiations are in progress for those groups whose MOUs have expired.
Committed fund balances are used to set aside General Funds for Board priorities, such as deferred
maintenance, Northern Branch Jail operations funding, building of the strategic reserve, or other funding
requirements that arise over time.
The graph below displays the Five Year Forecast of discretionary revenues, General Fund Contributions, and
the various increases to committed fund balances.
In 2012, the Board of Supervisors approved a plan to transfer property tax revenue from the General Fund to
the Fire District. In FY 2012-13, the Fire District received an average of 11% of the property tax collected within
the District’s boundaries. The tax transfer plan established a gradual phase-in of the transfer by assigning 25%
of the County’s growth in property tax revenue each year to the Fire District until the District was receiving 17%
of the property taxes within its boundaries. It is currently estimated that a 17% Fire District participation level
will be achieved in FY 2020-21 with an assumed growth rate of 4% per year and accelerates to FY 2018-19 if a 6%
growth rate is assumed. See table below.
The Northern Branch Jail Project is located near the city of Santa Maria, California; when completed, the facility
will provide capacity to hold 376 individuals, of which 32 beds are reserved in a separate housing unit for
individuals with medical and mental health challenges. The entire jail complex is composed of several buildings
estimated to be approximately 139,000 square feet for inmate housing and ancillary support functions. The
facility will be built on a ten-acre portion of a 50-acre County-owned property located at Black and Betteravia
Roads.
On January 15, 2013, the Board of Supervisors approved a Project Construction and Delivery Agreement with
the State of California that stipulated the terms of an $80 million award of funds towards the construction of a
new Northern Branch jail near the City of Santa Maria. The cost of the jail is currently anticipated to be $96
million. When fully completed and staffed, the last projected annual operating cost estimate for this facility
was $15.9 million (net of existing costs of $5.1 million that will be transferred). The Sheriff’s department and
the CEO’s office are currently reviewing the projected operating costs to assess if these figures require
revision. The construction project is estimated to be completed in May 2018.
This project draws on funding from the SB1022 Adult Local Criminal Justice Facilities Construction Financing
Program to construct the Sheriff's Treatment and Rehabilitation (STAR) complex. The project will add 228
beds to the previously approved 376-bed detention facility at the Northern Branch Jail. The proposed
expansion includes (2) 64-bed pods designated for treatment and programming and (2) 50-bed units to be
used for transitional programming housing. The expansion will also include office space for the Sheriff’s
Alternative Sentencing Bureau. The proposed expansion will add approximately 52,208 square feet to the
previously approved portion of the Northern Branch Jail. The projected annual operating costs are estimated
to be $2.1 million (net of existing costs of $4.3 million that will be transferred). These projected operating costs
are also being reviewed.
The combined annual costs to operate the new 602 bed jail were last projected to be approximately $18 million
when they open. In order to establish such a significant annual General Fund allocation, the Board of
Supervisors adopted a Budget Policy in FY 2011-12 to establish an incrementally increasing annual General Fund
Contribution to this jail operating fund (Funding Plan).
Since adoption of the Funding Plan, the Sheriff’s staff has accelerated the estimated transition plan (hiring
schedule) to ensure that staff is hired and well-trained in time for the opening of the jail. This acceleration of
staff hiring may result in additional one-time costs not anticipated in the existing Funding Plan. Further, the
existing Funding Plan was based on anticipated increased net operating costs of $17.3 million, which is $0.7
million less than the most recent estimate of $18.0 million. Operating cost estimates are currently being
reviewed by CEO staff and will be revised as necessary. If operating or transitional cost estimates are affirmed
and increased, a revised Funding Plan will be prepared and presented to the Board that increases the ongoing
General Fund Contribution in the plan to address these costs. The schedule of the existing operational Funding
Plan is shown below.
The County of Santa Barbara’s deferred maintenance has grown over time while funding has remained
relatively static. In June 2014, the Board directed staff to implement a maintenance funding plan that would
increase ongoing General Fund Contributions (GFC) for maintenance projects by allocating 18% of unallocated
Discretionary General Revenues towards maintenance projects. It is envisioned that the ongoing funding will
build over time as a new layer of additional GFC is added annually.
In October 2014, the Board approved the Maintenance Funding Plan as part of the FY 2015-16 Budget
Development Policies and forecasts $24.7 million in accumulated new funding during the 5 year period ending
FY 2019-20 (excluding the estimated $2.0 million per year of one-time funding). These projections were based
on projected property tax increases of 4% per year (before the 25% Fire District Tax shift). As described in the
Policy, these funds will be calculated annually and allocated to departments based on current needs.
The currently estimated deferred maintenance projects are estimated to amount to:
? Public Works $252.2 million (Pavement, Hardscape, Bridges, Drainage, and Traffic Devices),
? General Services $45.5 million (observed per Jorgensen Report)
? Parks $26.8 million (per Jorgensen Report)
A summary of projects and recommended appropriations for Capital Expenditures can be found in Section E of
this document. The following is a summary of the County’s Five Year Capital Improvement Program (CIP).
The CIP is a compilation of projects intended to implement various plans including community plans, facilities
plans, and the County Comprehensive (General) Plan. Projects in the CIP quantify current and future capital
needs. Accordingly, it includes projects for new and improved roads and bridges, County buildings and clinics,
parks, and other facilities. Because the CIP includes estimates of all capital needs, it provides the basis for
setting priorities, reviewing schedules, developing funding policy for proposed improvements, monitoring and
evaluating the progress of capital projects, and informing the public of projected capital improvements and
unfunded needs.
Projects included in the CIP are non-recurring, have a long service life, are generally over $100,000, and will
usually be underway (or should be underway, but are partially or entirely unfunded) during fiscal year 2015-16
through fiscal year 2019-20. Although the CIP covers a five year planning period, it is updated annually to
reflect ongoing changes as new projects are added, existing projects are modified, and completed projects are
removed from the program document.
The CIP does not appropriate funds; rather, it serves as a budgeting tool, proposing Capital Budget
appropriations to be recommended for adoption within the County’s FY 2015-2017 CEO Recommended
Operational Plan. Final appropriations for projects are included in the respective departmental budgets and
have been submitted in the Recommended FY 2015-16 and the Proposed FY 2016-17 budgets in this document
to be acted upon by the Board of Supervisors during the June 2015 Budget Hearings.
The Fiscal Year 2015-2020 CIP contains 171 capital projects and 24 maintenance projects. This includes 22
projects that are new this year. Of this total, 86 projects are fully funded, 30 are partially funded, and 55 are
currently unfunded. A funded project is one that has identified specific funding, including ongoing/existing
sources to fully implement the project. A partially funded project has funding to accomplish various portions
of the project but lacks sufficient funding to fully complete the project. An unfunded project is one that has
been identified in the CIP as a need but has no funding secured to implement the program.
Significant projects are detailed in Section E of this book and are summarized below:
? Cachuma Live Oak Camp and Marina Cafe
Total cost of the project: $1.6 million
? Main Jail Sewer Line & Kitchen Replacement
Total cost of the project: $2.1 million
? Santa Barbara Historic Courthouse Clocktower
Elevator
Total cost of the project: $1.1 million.
? Tajiguas Landfill Liner phase 3B
Total cost of the project: $6.2 million
? Lompoc Children’s Clinic
Total cost of the project: $0.2 million
? Community Services Department Office
Renovation
Total cost of the project: $0.8 million
Fiscal Year 2015-2017 Significant Funded Project Highlights
The proposed CIP continues to address the significant public infrastructure needs identified in various
strategies and long-range plans adopted by the County, including funding for the proposed new North County
Jail, the maintenance and repair of public buildings, and the transportation infrastructure system maintenance.
Significant projects planned for FY 2015-16 are:
? Northern Branch County Jail AB-900
? Northern Branch Jail - STAR Complex SB-1022
? Goleta Beach
? Fire Station 21 Rebuild – Cuyama
? Jalama Beach Affordable Overnight Accommodations
? Lower Mission Creek Flood Control Project
? Roadway Improvements – Clark Avenue at Highway 101

