The Recommended Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 County of Santa Barbara Operating Plan is submitted for your
consideration, possible amendment and eventual adoption. This Operating Plan, which includes a balanced
Recommended Budget, is the result of a thorough development process involving participation from all
departments and adherence to budget policies, development schedule and the General Fund allocation
methodology approved by the Board of Supervisors over the past several months.
In compliance with California Government Code (Section 29062) and Santa Barbara County Code (Chapter 2,
Article X, Section 2-71 k), I am submitting to you the recommended operating and capital budgets for FY 2014-15
and have determined that the budget development process is compatible with approved County policies and
long-range plans through the thorough evaluation of departmental requests for expenditures, revenues and
fund balance.
I welcome the public to participate in the discussions and decisions that affect the County’s spending priorities.
Public hearings on the Recommended Fiscal Year 2014-15 Operating Plan are scheduled for June 9, 2014 and will
continue if necessary, through Friday June 20, 2014, with specific hearings scheduled for Monday, June 9, 2014
and only if needed Wednesday, June 11, 2014. The public budget hearings will be conducted at the County
Administration Building’s Fourth Floor Hearing Room located at 105 E. Anapamu Street in Santa Barbara and will
be able to receive remote testimony from the Board Hearing Room, Joseph Centeno Betteravia Government
Center, 511 East Lakeside Parkway in Santa Maria.
I want to thank the Board of Supervisors for your leadership and support, as well as all County employees for
their collaboration, service to the public and dedication to our organization. In particular, I would like to express
my appreciation to the Auditor-Controller’s Office and the County Executive Office staff for their efforts in
preparing this document and ongoing commitment to a financially sound and vibrant organization.
The coming fiscal year marks the first time since the recession that the County of Santa Barbara’s immediate
fiscal outlook is positive and improving. Over the last several years, your Board, with assistance from our
workforce and community, navigated the County towards greater stability through an unprecedented
economic recession resulting in budget shortfalls, an uncertain Federal and State fiscal climate, and significant
organizational change. The CEO Recommended Operational Plan for Fiscal Years (FY) 2014-15 and 2015-16
(Plan), which includes the Recommended Budget, continues to move the organization on a path of stability
and recovery, delivering on core services and maintaining the Board’s commitment to public safety, the wellbeing
of families and children, and healthy and livable communities.
As the economy recovers, the County is in a better position than in prior years but still faces difficult choices.
After six years of reductions, eliminating over 580 positions, and approximately $60 million of ongoing
expenditures, County departments have continued to provide core services and meet mandates but express
that they are not at optimal levels. For some departments, structural budget issues continue, with ongoing
expenditures exceeding available ongoing revenues, either requiring use of one-time funds for critical needs,
resulting in deficits when funds are depleted, or requiring service level reductions, although these reductions
are fewer than in previous years. Departments continue to evaluate their processes and demand for services
to produce efficiencies, be innovative in their approaches, and create savings where possible.
As our fiscal situation stabilizes, expectations will need to be managed and tempered so that the County can
continue financially prudent choices and focus on priorities. In the upcoming year, the County will continue to
take steps to address critical infrastructure and maintenance needs; further transform mental health services
for the community; ensure public safety by reestablishing the fire fuels crew program and continuing progress
on the Northern Branch Jail; rebuild our reserves; and reenergize the organization to better innovate, manage
and mitigate risk, serve our communities, and prepare for the future. Achieving structural balance in the future
will ensure the County prepares for and adapts to unanticipated issues, such as the possibility of enduring
drought, natural disasters, reductions to State or Federal funding, or emerging community needs or changes.
As we look to FY 2014-15 and FY 15-16, the County remains cautiously optimistic, continuing its commitment to
high-quality service to the public, financial stability, and an engaged and accountable workforce.
The CEO Recommended Operational Plan for Fiscal Years 2014-15 and 2015-16 presents a balanced budget, with
FY 2014-15 Operating Expenditures of $903.2 million and Operating Revenues of $905.0 million resulting in an
operating surplus of $1.8 million. This is the first year since FY 2009-10 that overall Recommended Operating
Revenues exceed Recommended Operating Expenditures and points to an improving financial position.
Balance was achieved through improving revenues, up $53.8 million (6.2%), combined with controlled
expenditure growth of $41.1 million (4.8%).
The budget is balanced with less use of one-time funds for ongoing operations than in the past; however, many
departments are nearing the end of available financial reserves that have been used in recent years. The gap
between Total Operating Revenues and Total Operating Expenditures is projected to improve to a positive
$11.2 million in the FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget, as other costs, primarily employee benefits, stabilize and
revenues improve. Additionally, capital expenditures of $40.9 million are funded by Other Financing Sources
and/or use of Fund Balance (Figure 1).
Staffing levels are proposed to increase by 115.3 Full Time Equivalents (FTEs) from 4,003.9 in the FY 2013-14
Adopted Budget, to 4,119.2 FTEs in the FY 2014-15 Plan. The increase in FTE’s are to support requirements of
the Affordable Care Act, with increases of 65.3 FTE’s in Social Services and 56.9 FTE’s in Alcohol, Drug and
Mental Health Services. A 10 year history of Countywide FTE’s can be found in Section C.
The Plan was prepared in accordance with the Board’s adopted budget and General Fund allocation policies
with consideration of the Board’s focus on maintaining public safety, protecting children and families, and
supporting sustainable communities.
Significant Countywide trends and issues were considered and are reflected in the Plan; they are highlighted
below:
Slowly Improving Revenue Trend and Expenditure Growth
Overall revenues are improving but at a modest pace of 6.2%. The County’s largest discretionary revenue
source, property taxes, is projected to increase from 2.3% growth to 3.5% growth in FY 2018-19. This is relatively
modest compared to the rates experienced in the early 2000s yet significantly higher than the increases
experienced in the last four years during the recession.
The County is also proposing an increase in its Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) on the November 2014 ballot,
which would raise the rate from 10% to 12.5%. If approved by voters, the increase would become effective
January 2015.
Operating Expenditures are growing at a modest pace of 4.8%, slower than revenue growth. However, after
six years of reductions, eliminating over 580 positions and $60 million in ongoing expenditures, service levels
have been restrained, and some level of restoration will need to occur in some areas. In short, while the
revenue picture is improving and outpacing expenditure growth, the County will need to be cautious and
temper expectations in the near future.
Retirement Funding Stabilizing (see Figure 19)
Since the Great Recession, increases in pension costs have exceeded the growth in County revenues and this
has been the main cause of recent budget gaps. The increases in pension contributions in FY 2014-15 and FY
2015-16 are projected to level off. Although contribution rates are stabilizing, the County’s unfunded pension
liability was $818 million as of June 30, 2013. The unfunded liability is currently being amortized over a 17 year
timeframe. See further detail of issue on B-24.
Debt Obligations
The County’s debt obligations are comprised of short-term debt for cash flow financing, and long-term
obligations including:
? Certificates of Participation and Capital bonds for financing capital assets,
? leases for equipment and minor capital projects,
? pension liabilities,
? other post-employment benefit (OPEB) obligations,
? liabilities related to self-insurance claims,
? compensated absences liabilities, and
? landfill closure and post closure liabilities.
We describe the funding status of these liabilities in our Debt Management and Obligations section of this
book on pages D299-D312. The County has no General Obligation Bonds outstanding and has never issued
Pension Obligation Bonds.
The County has long-term budgetary plans in place to fund all the short-term and long-term obligations of the
County within current and on-going resources. The County maintains a Standard & Poor’s SP-1+ rating for shortterm notes and both a Standard & Poor’s AA+ and a Moody’s A1 for its long-term certificates of participation.
These are among the highest ratings for counties in California. Overall, the County has low debt levels when
compared to other counties in California.
Effects of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) Implementation
The FY 14-15 Plan reflects expansions in Social Services (65.3 FTEs) and Alcohol Drug and Mental Health Services
(ADMHS) (19.0 FTEs) due to expanded funding related to the Affordable Care Act (ACA) implementation. Social
Services’ operating revenues have significantly increased over the past two years (+$21.5 million, 16%) primarily
related to eligibility and enrollment activities for the ACA. Implementation was accomplished in the past year,
and initial member enrollments in Public Health and in Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services are exceeding
initial expectations in FY 2013-14. ACA implementation has resulted in expanded funding and services in
Behavioral Health at Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services. However, the revenue picture for Public Health
remains uncertain. The Department has responded to the reduction in 1991 Realignment funding through
aggressive outreach to potential Medi-Cal clients and cost containment. While FY 2014-15 appears stable, fiscal
challenges remain for the next several years.
Service Transformation of Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services
The provision of behavioral health services through the Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services department
(ADMHS) has been one of the more significant challenges of the County in recent times. In 2013, the County
and community stakeholders embarked on a transformation of its programs, processes, staffing, protocols and
culture in an effort to provide evidence-based, customer/family oriented services. Improvement in the ADMHS
budget is closely tied to additional funding provided by the Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) and increased
Medi-Cal eligibility and Federal reimbursement rates related to the ACA. Additionally, the department has
recently been successful in obtaining grants valued at approximately $11.0 million. The system overhaul will
reconfigure and improve customer service and ultimately add 72 employees for the establishment of crisis
facilities, outpatient clinic transformation, and forensic services.
Maintenance Needs for County Roads, Buildings and Parks
As with many public agencies, the County has not been able to fund maintenance for roads and buildings at
optimal levels in the past and particularly during the recession, resulting in a deferred maintenance backlog.
Regional, State, and Federal funding, once relied on for road maintenance, has also been reduced in the recent
past. The backlog of deferred maintenance for roads is $114.0 million and $83.6 million for County buildings
and parks.
The FY14-15 Recommended Budget includes proposed spending from the General Fund and special revenue
funds for deferred road maintenance of $3.6 million, corrective road maintenance of $10.4 million and $14.0
million for facility maintenance (including parks). In addition, $2 million more in General Fund for roads is
recommended and/or allocated in FY 2014-15 ($1.1 million as a CEO-recommended expansion and $910,000
previously allocated from General Fund Contingency to be spent in 2014-15). Further, the County was able to
obtain a Federal grant of $3.7 million for road resurfacing to better access Federal lands. Finally, an additional
$1.4 million for facility and park maintenance is included as a CEO-recommended expansion.
To begin addressing this long-term need regarding County facilities, the Board commissioned an assessment to
detail the condition and maintenance needs of County buildings. The Facility Condition Assessment will be
finalized this spring and be the basis for developing a long-term implementation and funding plan. The
implementation plan, or Asset Management Plan, scheduled for completion in the third quarter of the 2014 calendar year, will consider disposal or mothballing County facilities that are, or near, functional obsolescence
and recommend strategies to address priority areas. Preliminary funding options were presented to the Board
in April and included phased-in approaches utilizing projected, unallocated revenue over a 10-year time period.
Further discussion on the long-term funding plan will occur in concert with development of the Asset
Management Plan. See further detail of this issue in the Deferred and Renewal Maintenance area of this
section.
Should Measure M on the June 2014 ballot be approved by voters, staff will return to the Board of Supervisors
in late summer and early fall for decisions on accelerated funding strategies, including reducing existing
programs to redirect greater revenue toward maintenance.
Northern Branch Jail Operations Funding
The Northern Branch Jail, scheduled for operations in 2018, is currently in design and on track. The combined
annual costs to operate the new Northern Branch Jail (AB-900 and SB-1022) are projected to be approximately
$17.3 million. To fund the operations of the project, the Board of Supervisors adopted a Budget Policy in FY
2011-12 to establish an incrementally increasing annual General Fund Contribution that would be earmarked for
jail operations. The funding plan has been followed to date and this budget continues the plan’s required
allocation. Further discussion of this issue is explained later in this section.
Workforce Planning to Anticipate Our Future
The County is in a unique time regarding its workforce, given the likelihood of retirements in the near future. In
the next three to five years, 24% of non-safety and 25% of safety employees are likely to retire. Those
percentages increase to 48% for general and 37% for safety employees who are eligible to retire. At the same
time, as the economy recovers and more public agencies and private sector companies begin rehiring, the
County faces competition for its existing and future workforce. As a result, starting next year the organization
will evaluate how to best retain and attract employees, while ensuring the organization has the right skills and
jobs to meet our future business needs. Human Resources in concert with departments and a cross-section of
employees, will begin a workforce planning effort in FY 2014-15 to evaluate how the County can “get and retain
the right people, with the right skills, in the right jobs, at the right time.”
Service Level Reductions
Service Level Reductions are fewer this year than in recent years. The Budget Development and General Fund
Allocation Policies adopted by the Board were closely followed during the development of the FY 2014-16
Recommended Operational Plan. Policy-based budgeting provides an increased level of transparency for the
public and consistency throughout the organization. The policy requires that: each department’s General
Fund Contribution (GFC) be the prior year adopted contribution, reduced by one-time allocations; departments
must use all non-General Fund revenues before GFC amounts are allocated; and in general, base GFC are
increased proportional to the impact of approved wage and employee benefit adjustments not otherwise
funded.
Any other expenditure increases must be funded by non-General Fund revenues, department fund balance or
redirection of other program revenue. If these can’t be achieved, reductions are proposed. Application of
Board-approved budget policies resulted in some departments proposing Service Level Reductions (SLRs) to
balance their budgets, which were presented to the Board at the April budget workshops.
 These SLRs are summarized in Figure 2. To balance their budgets, these departments propose reducing service
levels by $1.7 million which includes an impact to 11.2 full time equivalent (FTE) positions. In the preparation of
the FY 2014-15 Plan, emphasis was placed on addressing departmental structural balance by developing plans
for their ultimate resolution. Restoration of any ongoing service level reductions with one-time General Fund
dollars will further widen the funding gap for the 2015-16 fiscal year. Restoration for some of these reductions
is possible with unassigned General Fund discretionary revenue that remained after GFC funds were distributed
to departments. These are shown in greater detail in Figure 2.
Departments have also proposed efficiency changes, which are reductions that are not expected to result in
significant service level impacts. These changes are often the result of reduced demand for a particular
service, or greater efficiency changes in a department’s operations. As such, restoration of these reductions
are not proposed.
After the departmental General Fund Allocations were made, unallocated General Fund discretionary
“ongoing” and “one-time revenue” remained. These funds are available for appropriation in the FY 2014-15
Plan.
At the March 2014 Budget Working Session, the CEO presented a list of criteria for evaluating expansion
requests: 1) avoids cost or reduces risk ; 2) generates revenue; 3) provides an investment in the future; 4)
makes progress on key initiatives; and 5) is significant but can be prioritized next year.
The CEO recommendations are based on these criteria and evaluation of the departments’ requests for
restoration or expansion; Board discussion at the March and April workshops; and consideration of overall
Board priorities, County-adopted goals and organizational needs. These recommendations are submitted with
the Recommended Operating Plan for the Board’s consideration, amendment, and adoption.
A list of the CEO Recommended expansions and restorations is shown in the following Table (Figure 4).
Revenues from Taxes are projected to increase by $16.3 million or 6.7% from FY 2013-14 Adopted for total
Recommended revenue of $261.0 million;, and as a percent of all revenues is 28.8%. The primary drivers of the
increase are Property Taxes from Secured, In-Lieu of Vehicle License Fee (VLF) and Current Supplemental Taxes. Secured Property Taxes are projected to increase by $8.1 million or 4.1% and is the largest source of the
tax category. The growth reflects an improvement in the local real estate market. In-Lieu of VLF is projected
to increase by 5.5% or $2.4 million and Current Supplemental Taxes should increase by $944 thousand or 35.6%
from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget.
Intergovernmental revenue is composed of State, Federal and other governmental sources.
Intergovernmental sources are projected to increase by $11.6 million or 3.5% to $342.4 million. The increase is
mainly in State and Federal grants, specifically in Medi-Cal administration, an increase of $5.7 million over the
prior fiscal year.
Charges for Services are anticipated to experience the largest growth, $25.3 million or 12.8% over FY 2013-14
Adopted. Total Medi-Cal related revenues account for $7.4 million of the growth and $31.7 million of the $223.7
million Recommended Budget in this category. State Federally Qualified Health Centers (FGHC) represent an
increase of $3.4 million or 19.9% and Sanitation Services are increasing by $3.3 million or 12.7%.
Revenues by Fund
Countywide revenues can also be viewed by fund. The majority of revenues are derived in the General Fund
and Special Revenue Funds. The General Fund is the chief operating fund of the County and Special Revenue
Funds are typically used when revenues are provided for a specific purpose, such as gasoline tax for road
maintenance or specific funding for food stamp programs. A description of Government Funds can be found
in Section F, Annual Budgetary Processes, Policies and Fund Structure.
The table below displays the Recommended Revenues for FY 2014-15 by major funds, the largest of which is the
General Fund. The General Fund can be further broken down into Discretionary General Revenues and Other
Revenues.
The Fiscal Year 2014-15 Recommended All Funds Operating Revenues are $905.0 million. Of these total
revenues, the locally elected Board of Supervisors has some discretion over the allocation of about 24% or
$217.6 million. This latter revenue figure, predominately from local taxes, is called local discretionary revenue.
The table below summarizes the General Fund discretionary revenues available in FY 2014-15 and compares
them with prior fiscal periods. Property taxes, retail sales taxes, and Transient Occupancy Taxes (TOT) are the
three major local sources of revenue generated from the performance of the local economy. Significant
property taxes (including secured, unsecured, In-Lieu of Vehicle License Fees, and property transfer taxes)
make up 82.6% of total discretionary revenues or 84.8% if RDA proceeds are included.
In the Recommended Fiscal Year 2014-15 budget, local discretionary revenues increased $5.1 million from the
Fiscal Year 2013-14 estimated revenues, for a total of $217.6 million. This increase is most notably from property
taxes, sales tax, and TOT. Cost Allocation Services are also an important revenue source, but these funds
fluctuate considerably from year to year and are being considered one-time.
Substantial growth in property taxes is expected and is an important indicator of the local economy. It is
anticipated that the housing market and home values will continue to rise. Property taxes are the largest
source of funds for the County’s budget. The FY 2013-14 budget is estimated to close with a 4.3% ($7.3 million)
growth over FY 2012-13. The FY 2014-15 Recommended and FY 2015-16 Proposed budgets are expected to have
a 2.3% ($4.0 million) and 3.2% ($5.7 million) growth, respectively, over the prior year. The cumulative growth is
$17.0 million or 10.0% since FY 2012-13. Additional detail of significant property tax components are shown in
Figure 9, below.
Dissolved Redevelopment Agencies (RDA)
The County General Fund will receive $4.8 million in FY 2013-14 and $4.9 million in FY 2014-15 from ongoing
Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Funds that distribute RDA dissolution proceeds from the seven dissolved
redevelopment agencies in the County. These ongoing revenues are ultimately expected to grow to
approximately $9.0 million dollars in annual taxes for the County’s General Fund, once all outstanding RDA
debt obligations of the dissolved agencies are paid.
Local Sales Tax
Local or retail sales tax represents the local portion of the retail sales tax collected by the State from sales
generated within the unincorporated areas of the County. Retail sales tax is an economically sensitive revenue
source that is used to support the general operations of the County.
Sales taxes represent 3.4% of total discretionary revenues and are currently estimated to have a small increase
of $0.1 million (1.4%) in FY 2013-14 over FY 2012-13. However, these revenues are expected to rise in FY 2014-15
by $0.3 million over the Estimated and the same increase in the Proposed over the Recommended budget
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
This source of revenue is highly dependent on tourism and the quantity of lodging in the unincorporated
County. TOT, much like Sales Tax, is only estimated to increase by $0.1 million (1.4%) in FY 2013-14 over FY 2012-
13. A strong economy typically has meaningful consumer spending and large amounts of tourism that should
bolster TOT revenue as there is continued economic expansion. Thus, FY 2014-15 anticipates 4.4% growth and
an additional 4.0% in FY 2015-16. The County will be placing a measure on the November 2014 ballot asking
voters to approve an increase in the TOT rate from 10% to 12.5%. If passed by voters, the measure would bring
an estimated $1.85 million annually in revenue, which is not included in the FY 2014-15 and 2015-16 Operating
Plans.
Payments In-Lieu of Tax (PILT)
PILT are Federal payments to local governments that help offset losses in property taxes due to non-taxable
Federal lands within their boundaries. In FY 2013-14, these funds weren’t included in the Federal budget and
therefore were not included in the County’s Adopted budget. We have recently learned that approximately
$1.7 million will be received in FY 2013-14 and this has been added to the Estimated amount in the Figure 8 table.
Based on the recent funding uncertainty, PILT has not been included in the CEO Recommended Operational
Plan for Fiscal Years 2014-15 and 2015-16.
All Other Revenues
This category is made up of Franchise Fees, Interest Income, State and Federal Payments. These revenues will
remain relatively flat for the next two fiscal years.
Significant Property Taxes include secured and unsecured property taxes, property taxes in-lieu of vehicle
license fees, fines and penalties, and other elements as shown in Figure 9.
Secured Property Taxes
Secured property taxes are generated from local and State assessed property values. The tax is generated
annually by multiplying the assessed values of these properties by a tax rate of 1.0%, subject to certain limits.
Factors that influence the assessed values include the inflation rate of real properties, changes in ownership,
improvements/additions to property, and temporary declines in market value.
Secured property taxes are the largest element of Discretionary Revenues and generally represent a majority
of total Discretionary Revenues. The Recommended FY 2014-15 Budget for secured property tax revenue is
based on a 2.6% increase or $2.9 million from the FY 2013-14 estimate. The growth rate will continue to increase
with 3.0% growth in FY 2015-16.
All secured property tax figures displayed are net of the Fire District Tax Transfer. In 2012, the Board approved
a plan to assign 25% of the County’s annual growth in property tax to the Fire District until the District was
receiving 17% of the property taxes within its boundaries.
Property Tax In-Lieu of Motor Vehicle License Fees (VLF)
Prior to FY 2004-05, the County received a share of vehicle license fee revenues collected Statewide based on a
population formula. Beginning with FY 2004-05, the State, as part of a complicated revenue reduction and
refunding plan, has replaced (swapped) this source with property taxes. A portion of the property tax
revenues that are taken from local governments to fund schools are returned to cities and counties in lieu of
vehicle license fees. From the FY 2004-05 base, now adjusted, revenue growth is based on property tax
growth. VLF taxes are expected to increase by $1.6M or 3.6% in FY 2014-15 and another $1.9M in FY 2015-16.
Unsecured and Unitary Property Taxes
Unsecured property taxes are generated from locally assessed property values. Property that is considered
unsecured includes business fixtures, business personal property, boats, and aircrafts. A Unitary tax roll
contains properties such as railroads and utilities crossing the County and is valued by the State Board of
Equalization. Both of these sources will stay relatively flat for the Recommended and Proposed budgets.
Both Unsecured and Unitary taxes have remained stable and are projected to have minimal growth in the
Recommended and Proposed budgets.
Property Transfer Taxes
Property Transfer Tax is a tax charged to buyers when a property is transferred or sold. Transfer revenues
accruing to the County are based upon the assessed value of properties sold and a tax rate of $0.55 per $500 of
that assessed value. This tax has historically been a leading indicator of future increases or decreases in
Supplemental and Secured Property Taxes. Projections indicate that transfer taxes will increase by 6.9% in FY
2014-15 and 8.0% in FY 2015-16.
Supplemental Property Taxes
The supplemental assessment roll contains a listing of all property that has undergone a change in ownership
or experienced new construction. The amount of each supplemental assessment is the difference between
the property’s new base year value, determined as of the date of change in ownership or completion of new
construction, and the existing taxable value. This tax source generally rises as property sales accelerate and
sales prices increase. In periods of decreasing sales activity and/or decreasing sales prices, supplemental taxes
tend to fall. Supplemental taxes are expected to jump to $3.1 million for a growth of 93.8% ($1.5 million) in
current FY 2013-14 estimates over the FY 2012-13 Actual. This amount will remain relatively consistent with $2.9
million in FY 2014-15 and $3.3 million in FY 2015-16.
Operating Expenditures: All Funds
Significant Changes from FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget
The County’s Recommended FY 2014-15 operating expenditures are $903.4 million, a $41.1 million (4.8%)
increase over the FY 2013-14 Adopted budget of $862.0 million. The rate of expenditure increase is down from
the 6.7% that occurred between FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14. The table below identifies significant categories of
these expenditures.
After several years of staffing reductions and wage concessions, salaries are budgeted to increase $13.5 million
or 4.5% in the Recommended Fiscal Year 2014-15 Budget and $3.2 million or 1.0% in FY 2015-16. The 4.5% increase
in FY 2014-15 reflects the impact of modest wage increases and the full impact of adding 243 staff since FY 2012-
13. The increased staffing levels are primarily in Social Services and Mental Health.
Figure 11 illustrates the trend in County staff and historic salary costs. Note that salaries were relatively flat
from FY 2008-09 ($278.3 million) to FY 2012-13 ($273.1 million).
The annual County pension contribution is budgeted to increase by $3.5 million to $119.7 million or 3.0% in the
Recommended Fiscal Year 2014-15 budget and $1.1 million or 0.9% in FY 2015-16. Employer contribution rates are
set by the independent Santa Barbara County Employee’s Retirement System (SBCERS) Board and paid by the
County. The rate of growth in pension contributions accelerated between FY 2009-10 and FY 2014-15 due to
investment losses that needed to be absorbed into the ongoing rates. Smoothing formulas have enabled the
rates to increase incrementally during these periods. At the same time, the projected rate of return included in
the actuarial assumptions was reduced from 8.16% to 7.75% for FY 2011-12 and from 7.75% to 7.50% for FY 2014-15.
The overall contribution rates have now stabilized and are projected to modestly decrease in the coming years
(see Five Year Forecast) assuming employee wages grow at moderate rates.
SBCERS also introduced a closed, 17-year amortization period of the unfunded liability. The County’s unfunded
liability is $818 million as of June 30, 2013. See page 25 for a discussion of projected pension costs.
Health insurance amounts assume that the County’s obligation to pay 100% of the lowest cost premium
continues. Healthcare costs have continued to increase but at a lower than anticipated rate. The FY 2014-15
Budget reflects a $2.5 million increase or 9%, to a total of $30.2 million. In calendar year 2014, the increase was
4.5%, significantly less than the projected 15%; however, the 2015 rates are not yet known and may be negatively
impacted by the Affordable Care Act (ACA).
All Funds Operating Expenditures by Functional Area
Significant Changes from FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget
The County’s Recommended FY 2014-15 expenditures can also be viewed by Functional area. The increases
described by category above, occur primarily in the functions of Health and Human Services, Community
Resources & Public Facilities and Public Safety. The main drivers of the increase in these functions are
summarized below by department. Significant changes are explained more fully in Section D of this book.
Health & Human Services Function
ADMHS: The FY 2014-15 budget increases by $14.0 million (17.9%) to $92.2 million from the FY 2013-14 Adopted
budget of $78.2 million due to the Departments’ “System Change” effort and increased revenues related to
ACA.
Social Services: The FY 2014-15 budget increases by $11.9 million (7.8%) to $165.1 million from the FY 2013-14
Adopted budget of $153.1 million due to increased staffing as a result of the increase in caseload activity due to
the ACA.
Public Health: The FY 2014-15 budget decreases by $3.6 million (-4.5%) to $76.9 million from the FY 2013-14
Adopted budget of $80.5 million due to efficiencies and reductions in the Medically Indigent Adult (MIA) and
Utilization Review programs as a result of the State of California's implementation of the ACA.
Community Resources & Public Assistance Function
Public Works: The FY 2014-15 budget increases by $6.5 million (6.9%) to $100.7 million from the FY 2013-14
Adopted budget of $94.2 million due to capital projects within Flood Control and Resource Recovery & Waste
Management, which are funded by Proposition 84 - the 2006 Safe Water Drinking Act grant and sanitation
charges for services.
Planning & Development: The FY 2014-15 budget increases by $2.9 million (19.3%) to $17.9 million from the FY
2013-14 Adopted budget of $15.0 million due to increased permitting activity and reimbursable contracts for
environmental review and permitting studies. The increase in building activity is a positive economic indicator.
The Department’s budget includes more planners to keep up with the demand.
Community Services: The FY 2014-15 budget decreases by $2.8 million (-11.5%) to $21.5 million from the FY 2013-
14 adopted budget of $24.3 million due to onetime financing providing for the Pescadero Lofts RDA funded
project completed in FY 2013-14
Public Safety
Sheriff: The FY 2014-15 budget increases by $2.2 million (1.8%) to $122.6 million from the FY 2013-14 Adopted
budget of $120.4 million due to an increase in Workers’ Compensation premiums, on-site medical services
contract, and outside medical services for inmates.
Fire: The FY 2014-15 budget increases by $1.9 million (3.5%) to $56.0 million from the FY 2013-14 Adopted budget
of $54.1 million due to increases in property tax revenue.
Policy & Executive
County Executive Office: The FY 2014-15 budget increases by $3.0 million (7.6%) to $42.4 million from the FY
2013-14 Adopted budget of $39.4 million due primarily to increases in the Risk Management fund for insurance
premiums, up $1.5 million and cost allocation charges of $1.3 million.
Requests from departments for additional appropriations, called expansions, are accumulated throughout the
budget process and will be presented to the Board for consideration during the Budget Hearings. As of this
report, the departmental expansion requests total to $37.8 million. These requests include $15.6 million related
to deferred or renewal maintenance funding.
Five year forecasts of discretionary General Fund revenues and their uses are typically provided twice a year; at
the start of the budget process in the Fiscal Outlook Report and here with the recommended budget. This
forecast is intended to provide additional information that may be helpful in weighing the financial
consequences of current year decisions. In keeping with prior forecasts, the revenue side projections focus on
changes in discretionary General Fund revenues. Discretionary revenue is derived from local taxes, especially
taxes on property and property transactions. On the expenditure side, the forecast projects changes in total
salary and employee benefit costs, and then calculates that proportion of total salaries and employee benefits
funded with discretionary General Fund revenues. The expenditure forecast also projects significant non-salary
costs with two different forecast futures.
The Figure 15 graph displays that a balanced budget is achieved in FY 2014-15 as revenues, primarily property
taxes, recover and expenses have moderated as a result of stabilizing retirement costs described later in this
section. Thereafter, the “surplus” widens as the rate of projected revenue growth exceeds the rate of
expenditure growth. The Five-Year Forecast assumes an inflation adjusted, status quo budget where staffing,
contracted services, and supplies remain at existing levels. As we move into structural balance, it will provide
the opportunity to solve existing and upcoming fiscal issues such as: maintenance funding, deteriorating road
infrastructure, incremental funding of the new jail operating costs, and other Countywide issues identified in
this document.
There have been 12 straight quarters of positive growth in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and
unemployment is now at 6.8% at the national level. In the County, the unemployment rate in March 2014 was
6.7% and economic growth appears to be improving. After several years of decline, the housing market has
stabilized and now appears to be in recovery. The recent 2012 Santa Barbara County Agriculture Production
Report identified $1.3 billion in products grown in Santa Barbara, a $96.6 million (8.1%) increase over the past
year, and tourism is projected to continue to improve.
The County’s actual and projected discretionary revenues predict year over year growth from $206.4 million in
FY 2012-13 (excluding one-time RDA proceeds of $6.0 million) to $243.3 million in FY 2017-18. The annual growth
rates range from 2.2% to 3.4% for the five years ending FY 2018-19. Tables of Actual, Estimated and Projected
revenues supporting the Five-Year Forecast and their percentage change from year to year are shown above.
Significant property tax accounts, the County’s largest discretionary revenue source, are projected to increase
from 2.3% in FY 2014-15 to 3.5% in FY 2018-19. While relatively modest, the projected growth rates are
significantly higher than the 0.4% to 1.4% increase in the Assessed Property Values for the four year period
ending FY 2012-13. Cost Allocation Service revenues tend to fluctuate from year to year as they are based on
estimates and later adjusted to actuals. RDA, Sales Taxes, and TOT are expected to stabilize and grow
modestly in the coming years. Funding for Payments In-Lieu of Taxes (PILT) has been uncertain and are
therefore, not projected out into the future.
Discretionary expenses are those costs not fixed in amount by legal obligation prior to adoption of the annual
budget by the Board of Supervisors. The forecast in Figure 17 is comprised of three categories:
1. General Fund Allocations to all departments,
2. Incremental Changes to Salaries and Benefits (i.e. requiring additional General Fund allocations), and
3. Incremental Changes to Other Items, such as committing funds for the new jail operations or
increased funding for deferred maintenance costs.
The Five-year Expenditure Projections in the following table (Figure 17) include actual and projected figures.
Actual amounts are included for FY 2012-13; FY 2013-14 figures reflect current departmental year end estimates;
FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16 amounts are the CEO Recommended and Proposed Budgets and the FY 2016-17
through FY 2018-19 amounts (to the right of the vertical line) are CEO projected figures.
Discretionary Revenues are those revenues which the locally elected Board of Supervisors has some discretion
over their ultimate allocation and represent about 24% of Countywide revenues or $217.6 million. These
revenues, predominately from local taxes, are called local discretionary revenue.
General Fund Allocations
General Fund allocations are the most significant revenue source for General Fund departments in the delivery
of services to the community. Other Funds are allocated based on Federal and State maintenance of effort
requirements or payments for specific purposes, such as local match for transportation funding in the Roads
Fund. Projected General Fund allocations in Fiscal Years 2016-17 forward, assume the prior year’s allocation
plus incremental ongoing changes as described in the middle and lower section of the above table.
Committed Fund Balance
Committed fund balance is used to set aside General Funds for deferred maintenance, Northern Branch Jail
operations funding, building of the strategic reserve, or other funding requirements that arise over time.
Salary and Benefit Changes
The middle section of Figure 17 above details the major categories of Salary and Employee Benefit changes
which include anticipated personnel related expenditures. They are primarily determined based on negotiated
Memoranda of Understanding (MOU), health insurance and retirement benefit cost projections, and mandated
costs such as Social Security contributions. Additionally, the County is currently funding certain Other Post-
Employment Benefits (OPEB) related to providing medical coverage to retirees.
Generally, salaries for FY 2014-15 and 2015-16 are based on detailed positions by department (salary model),
existing wages, and any scheduled wage increases per MOU with the various bargaining units or anticipated
increases for unrepresented employees. These wage increases will continue to come into effect in FY 2014-15 as
concessions expired during FY 2013-14. Salary cost estimates for FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16 of this forecast
incorporate current terms of negotiated MOU and anticipated increases for unrepresented employees whose
wages are not governed by MOU. The chart below lists the expiration dates of MOUs by Employee
Organization. Negotiations are in progress for those groups whose MOUs have expired.
Executive and unrepresented management salaries were increased by 3.0% in July of 2013 after being subject to
a wage freeze since January 2008. In the Fire Department, safety executive and management classifications
except for the Fire Chief, also became eligible for various types of incentive pay for attaining certain postsecondary
degrees and/or certain relevant professional certifications.
The following wage increases are scheduled during FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16:
? Fire Fighters Local 2046 is scheduled to receive two previously deferred general wage increases: a 4%
increase at the beginning of FY 2014-15 and a 4.5% increase at the beginning of FY 2015-16.
? The Engineers and Technicians Association, SEIU Local 620, and SEIU Local 721 are scheduled to
receive a 1% general wage increase at the beginning of FY 2014-15 and a 1% general wage increase at the
beginning of FY 2015-16. Confidential unrepresented non-management employees are also scheduled
to receive these wage increases.
? The Civil Attorneys Association is scheduled to receive a 1% general wage increase in December 2014
and a 1% general wage increase in December 2015. These increases will also apply to unrepresented
attorneys. In addition to these general wage increases, certain Countywide attorney classifications
will receive wage adjustments of 2% at the beginning of FY 2014-15 and 2.5% at the beginning of FY
2015-16.
Retirement - Pension Costs
As previously described in this report, the increase in pension costs over the past several years have far
outpaced the growth in revenues and has been the largest driver of recent budget gaps. The increases in
pension contributions in FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16 are projected to level off to 3.0% and 0.9% respectively and
are in part, attributable to increased staffing. Contributions used in the above Projected Years reflect slowly
declining contribution rates as prior losses are fully absorbed and an increasing number of PEPRA employees
will reduce the overall blended rate.
Although contribution rates are stabilizing, the County’s unfunded pension liability was $818 million as of June
30, 2013. The unfunded liability is currently being amortized over a 17 year timeframe and assuming SBCERS
actuarial assumptions, the contribution rate will reduce to a level of approximately 11% in 2030. The change in
employer and employee member retirement contribution rates is shown below and was used in our
projections.
Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB)
In September 2008, the County and the SBCERS adopted an Internal Revenue Code Section 401(h) account
that provides for Other Post-Employment Benefits. The County currently assumes a portion of the costs of
retiree medical coverage that is dependent upon years of service. The contribution represents a level of
funding that, if paid on an ongoing basis, is projected to cover normal cost each year and amortize any
unfunded actuarial liabilities over a period of fifteen years.
OPEB costs have been recorded and funded on a pay as you go method resulting in an unfunded liability of
$173.9 million, as of 6/30/2012. In the FY 2013-14, the funding level was increased by approximately 8.3% (0.25%
of covered payroll) to increase the funding and reduce the unfunded costs. The FY 2014-15 Recommended
budget and future projections continue this plan of increasing the funding by 0.25% of covered payroll each
year.
Healthcare Costs
Health insurance costs are assumed to increase 9.0% in FY 2014-15, 8.0% in FY 2015-16, and reduce to calendar
year 2014 levels of approximately 5% thereafter.
In FY 2013-14, Employee Retention was added as a new Budget Development Policy and has evolved into
Workforce Planning as we look ahead to FY 2014-15. The goal is to attract, retain, and train the right people,
with the right skills, in the right jobs, and at the right time. Issues considered as we begin Workforce Planning
are:
? Five years of economic downturn – starting to stabilize
? The past five years budget challenges resulted in:
o Reductions in workforce
o Elimination/reduction of services
o Increased workloads for many
o Several years of concessions (furloughs, merit freezes, pay decreases, etc.)
o Several years without pay/benefit increases
? FY 2013-2014 – modest, financially responsible pay increases for many employees
Additionally, the County needs to prepare for a larger level of staff turnover in the coming years and ensure the
appropriate training, development, and recruitment of new leaders. The graphs below demonstrate the
makeup of County employees and the likely retirements in the coming 5 years.
AB-900
The Northern Branch Jail Project is located near the city of Santa Maria, California; when completed, the facility
will provide capacity to hold 376 individuals, of which 32 beds are reserved in a separate housing unit for
individuals with medical and mental health challenges. The entire jail complex is composed of several buildings
estimated to be approximately 139,000 square feet for inmate housing and ancillary support functions. The
facility will be built on a ten-acre portion of a 50-acre County-owned property located at Black and Betteravia
Roads.
On January 15, 2013, the Board of Supervisors approved a Project Construction and Delivery Agreement with
the State of California that stipulated the terms of an $80 million award of funds towards the construction.
The cost of the jail is currently anticipated to be $96 million. When fully completed and staffed, the projected
annual operating costs are estimated to be $15.9 million (net of existing costs that will be transferred). The
project is estimated to be completed in May 2018.
STAR Complex SB-1022
This project draws on funding from the SB1022 Adult Local Criminal Justice Facilities Construction Financing
Program to construct the Sheriff's Treatment and Rehabilitation (STAR) complex. The project will add 228
beds to the previously approved 376-bed detention facility at the Northern Branch Jail. The proposed
expansion includes (2) 64-bed pods designated for treatment and programming and (2) 50-bed units to be
used for transitional programming housing. The expansion will also include office space for the Sheriff’s
Alternative Sentencing Bureau. The proposed expansion will add approximately 52,208 square feet to the
previously approved portion of the Northern Branch Jail. The projected annual operating costs are estimated
to be $1.4 million (net of existing costs of $3.6 million that will be transferred).
The combined annual costs to operate the new 602 bed jail are projected to be approximately $17.3 million
when it opens. In order to establish such a significant annual General Fund allocation, the Board of Supervisors
adopted a Budget Policy in FY 2011-12 to establish an incrementally increasing annual General Fund Contribution
to fund jail operations.
Since adoption of the funding plan, the estimated transition plan has accelerated to ensure that staff is hired
and trained well in time for the opening of the jail. This acceleration of staff hiring will result in increased costs
of $1.8 million resulting in more funding needed in FY 2021-22 than the existing plan provides. Operating cost
estimates for the STAR facility may change after the design development is completed, thus these adjustments
to the funding plan will be revisited and brought to the Board for approval after the design work is complete.
The schedule of the existing operational funding plan, without the proposed changes due to the accelerated
transition plan, is shown below. A new plan will be provided to the Board for approval at a later date.
The County, like many other public entities, has seen an increase in deferred maintenance of buildings, parks,
and roads (“County Assets”). Inventories of facilities, deferred maintenance, and condition assessments of
County Assets are maintained by departments with varying degrees of precision and complexity. A majority of
County Assets are managed by Public Works (roads), General Services (buildings), and Community Services
Department (parks).
The Public Works department has a robust system to evaluate the inventory and condition of County
maintained roads. Monitoring the Pavement Condition Index (PCI) is an existing practice within Public Works
and the PCI is annually reported to the Board. As shown in Figure 25, a lower PCI reading indicates a worse
condition of pavement and a higher value indicates a better condition. The current PCI of the County’s
Transportation Infrastructure System is 60. To maintain the current condition would require $12 million
annually. On average, the Department currently spends between $3.0 and $3.5 million on pavement
preservation, leaving a funding gap of approximately $9 million.
General Services and the Community Services Department have not had a thorough inventory of assets in
some time and it was recommended that an expert in this area be utilized to assist in evaluating these assets.
In June 2013, your Board directed staff to hire a consultant to conduct an assessment of County buildings and
parks and to develop an asset management plan. In October 2013, Roy Jorgenson Associates (Consultant) was
awarded the contract for a Facility Condition Assessment (Phase I) and the Development of an Asset
Management Plan (Phase II).
At this time, Phase I of the Consultant’s report has not yet been completed; however, preliminary information
has been obtained. The County buildings and parks information that follows is based upon this preliminary
information.
A Facility Condition Index or FCI is a measure for determining the overall condition of an asset or group of
assets. It is calculated by dividing the amount of deferred maintenance into the Current Replacement Value
(CRV) and indicates the percentage of the CRV in need of repair. Deferred maintenance is required
maintenance, repair or capital replacement not accomplished in a budget cycle. A lower FCI reading indicates
a better condition of assets and a higher value indicates a worse condition as follows:
? 0-2% = Excellent
? 2-4% = Very Good
? 4-6% = Good
? 6-10% = Fair
? 10% or Greater = Poor
The preliminary estimate of deferred maintenance for Santa Barbara County buildings and parks evaluated is
$83.6 million and the total current replacement value is $964.9 million, resulting in an FCI of 8.7%. This falls
within the fair condition based on the scale above. The FCI specifically for buildings maintained by General
Services is 5.5% and falls within the good condition.
Annual maintenance is comprised of three elements:
? Operating expenses
? Project expenses
? Capital expenses
The combination of these three elements is referred to as annual renewal funding. Funding necessary to
maintain the existing asset condition will vary depending on several factors including the nature and use of the
specific assets. Industry guidelines to maintain current condition levels suggest annual renewal funding from
2% - 4% of the CRV. Not all County assets were evaluated during this assessment; however, the consultant
estimates the total CRV of all County buildings and parks at $1.1 billion. Using the 2% - 4% funding guidelines
results in annual renewal maintenance funding of $22 - $44 million per year. The required renewal funding and
the Current Estimated County Renewal Spending, results in a funding gap of between $8.0 million at 2% to $30
million at 4%.
Next Steps
The FY 2014-15 Recommended budget includes proposed spending from the General Fund and special revenue
funds for deferred road maintenance of $3.6 million, corrective road maintenance of $10.4 million and $14.0
million for facility maintenance (including parks). In addition, $2 million more in General Fund for roads is
recommended and/or allocated in FY 2014-15 ($1.1 million as a CEO-recommended expansion and $910,000
previously allocated from General Fund Contingency to be spent in 2014-15). Further, the County was able to
obtain a Federal grant of $3.7 million for road resurfacing to better access Federal lands. Finally, an additional
$1.4 million for facility and park maintenance is included as a CEO-recommended expansion.
As the County’s revenues improve, increased funding of these assets will be planned. Phase II of the
Consultant’s report, Development of an Asset Management Plan, is expected in the third quarter of calendar
year 2014 and when combined with the Facility Condition Assessment will provide the strategy for managing
facilities costs by balancing lifecycle requirements with available funds.
A summary of projects and recommended appropriations for Capital Expenditures can be found in Section E of
this document. The following is a summary of the County’s Five Year Capital Improvement Program (CIP).
The CIP is a compilation of projects intended to implement various plans including community plans, facilities
plans, and the County Comprehensive (General) Plan. Projects in the CIP quantify current and future capital
needs. Accordingly, it includes projects for new and improved roads and bridges, County buildings and clinics,
parks, and other facilities. Because the CIP includes estimates of all capital needs, it provides the basis for
setting priorities, reviewing schedules, developing funding policy for proposed improvements, monitoring and
evaluating the progress of capital projects, and informing the public of projected capital improvements and
unfunded needs.
Projects included in the CIP are non-recurring, have a long service life, are generally over $100,000, and will
usually be underway (or should be underway, but are partially or entirely unfunded) during fiscal year 2014-15
through fiscal year 2018-19. Although the CIP covers a five year planning period, it is updated annually to
reflect on-going changes as new projects are added, existing projects are modified, and completed projects are
removed from the program document.
The CIP does not appropriate funds; rather, it serves as a budgeting tool, proposing Capital Budget
appropriations to be recommended for adoption within the County’s FY 2014-2016 CEO Recommended
Operational Plan. Final appropriations for projects are included in the respective departmental budgets and
have been submitted in the Recommended FY 2014-15 and the Proposed FY 2015-16 budgets in this document
to be acted upon by the Board of Supervisors during the June 2014 Budget Hearings.
The fiscal year 2014-2019 CIP contains 167 projects, including 24 projects that are new this year. Of this total, 88
projects are fully funded, 27 are partially funded, and 52 are currently unfunded. A funded project is one that
has identified specific funding to implement the program. An unfunded project is one that has been identified
in the CIP as a need but has no funding secured to implement the program.
Presentation of the CIP is by function and department. This structure is consistent with the Operating Budget
organization. The Figure 27 chart shows the FY 2014-2019 CIP by department total including both
funded/partially funded and unfunded projects.
Significant projects are detailed in Section E of this book and are summarized below:
? San Jose Creek Improvements
Total County cost of the project: $5.8 million
? Electronic Health Records
Total County cost of the project: $5.4 million
? Santa Maria Levee Reinforcement
Total County cost of the project: $4.8 million.
? New Cuyama Family Resource Center & Library
Total County cost of the project: $1.0 million
? Hollister Avenue Overhead Bridge
Total County cost of the project: $2.1 million
? County Data Network Modernization &Refresh
Total County cost of the project: $1.7 million
Fiscal Year 2014-2016 Significant Funded Project Highlights
The proposed CIP continues to address the significant public infrastructure needs identified in various
strategies and long-range plans adopted by the County, including funding for the proposed new North County
Jail, the maintenance and repair of public buildings, and the transportation infrastructure system maintenance.
Significant projects planned for FY 2014-15 are:
? Northern Branch County Jail AB-900
? Northern Branch Jail - STAR Complex SB-1022
? Cachuma Lake Recreation Enhancements & Infrastructure Upgrades
? Lower Mission Creek Flood Control Project
