Fiscal Year 2016 has been a year of both great
promise and great challenges for the County. The
Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year 2017, starting
July 1, asks the Board to continue to invest in
essential programs as in previous years, as well as
to appropriate resources needed to close a variety
of gaps in service, whether those gaps are related to
meeting urgent needs in the jail, or the chronic
needs of maintaining County facilities. The total
County budget as recommended is $6.1 billion, of
which $3.2 billion is in the General Fund.
Not since Fiscal Year 1998 through Fiscal Year 2002
has the County experienced five successive years of
growth in both revenues and expenditures. Due to
the positive economic position of the County,
service areas across the board are recommended
for augmentations in Fiscal Year 2017, from the
leasing of a new voting system for the Registrar of
Voters, to addressing the needs of clients with
chronic mental illness. Though we have been
restoring resources in many service areas since
Fiscal Year 2014, the overall growth of the County,
along with the increasingly complex nature of
client needs, requires that we continue to infuse
funds into our direct service departments, as well
as to continue to invest in foundational support
functions that permit our operating departments
to perform well.
As in Fiscal Year 2016, my recommendations
continue to focus on the following three areas:
¦ improving our correctional facilities and
programs,
¦ providing support for the homeless, and
creating affordable housing,
¦ building back both the human capital and
physical aspects of the County's infrastructure.
The current base budget already includes resources
approved by the Board of Supervisors this year for
the Custody Health pilot program of $16.6 million,
as well as $2.2 million for ADA and other inmate -
related services. $7.2 million is included in the base
budget to implement recommendations of the
Housing Task Force. The Recommended Budget
continues to invest in these critical service areas.
During Fiscal Year 2016, we have made progress in
the financial performance of Santa Clara Valley
Medical Center (SCVMC), reducing the subsidy in
the base budget by $38.4 million, not including the
Fiscal Year 2017 recommendations. Due to
improvements in patient flow, combined with
expanded funding of the Affordable Care Act, in the
current year alone, we are redirecting $75 million in
SCVMC subsidy funds toward our one-time needs,
which contributes to the $403 million in one-time
sources available to us for Fiscal Year 2017. A
contributing factor to this improved performance
is the continuing refinement of the electronic
medical record data in HealthLink, creating a
means by which teams of staff dedicated to
improvements monitor metrics that show them
real-time results of operational changes.
Where we can fund technology and staff to make
similar differences in other service areas, we should
do so while we have the opportunity. We need to be
aware that after five years of positive economic
improvement, the rate of improvement is
beginning to slow somewhat. The current pace of
economic progress will not continue unabated,
and yet we believe that our local economy will
continue to outperform the national economy due
to the large number of information-based and
digitally-oriented companies doing business here.
Nonetheless, it will be important to monitor our
revenues carefully, as well as infuse our ambitious
agenda with the oversight required to bring our
plans to fruition and fund programs and services
that are sustainable over time.
As is the case each year, the “big three” ongoing
sources of revenues are Property tax, State revenue
and Federal revenue. These sources of funds
remain critical to the provision of both
discretionary and mandated services in the
County. Discretionary revenue, at $1.1 billion,
represents 38% of the total General Fund revenues
of $2.8 billion, with roughly 62% of County revenue
covering the cost of mandated services. Without
the $51 million in funds provided for by Measure A,
the County could face a shortfall in the case of an
economic downturn. Measure A details are
described later in this document.
Investing in our Correctional System
As noted above, significant investments in our
Correctional system have been taking place since
the advent of AB 109. The influence and
requirements of AB 109, the changes in the jail
population, and the receipt of a State grant to build
a new jail facility provided significant reasons to
focus on this area. Little did we know that even
greater challenges would present themselves
during the course of Fiscal Year 2016 that further
highlighted the gaps in service within the jail
system as a whole.
The custodial environment has borne the brunt of
the County's slow rebuilding process. The Sheriff's
Office, the Department of Correction, and Custody
Health Services were all significantly impacted by
the reductions required during the great recession.
Newly recommended staff and program
improvements represent $7.5 million of the $63
million of ongoing General Fund budget
recommendations. This set of recommendations
strikes a balance between providing critical
resources to the operating departments and
encouraging changes in work processes and
culture that are not solely dependent on resources
alone.
Custody Health Services Recommendations My
recommendations in the area of Custody Health
Services are to continue the enhancements
approved by the Board of Supervisors in
December 2015 to add additional staff to provide
behavioral health services, including mental health
clinicians, substance use treatment clinicians, and
custody staff to improve the process by which
treatment is provided for this population of
inmates throughout the Jail system.
New recommendations totaling $512,625 will
augment dental services, provide for night shift
mental health staffing, and increase funds available
to provide psychiatry services via the Traditions
contract. $3.4 million in salary savings from
Behavioral Health teams funded in Fiscal Year 2016
are the source of funds for this contract. In
addition, one-time funding of $1.6 million is
recommended to continue implementation of the
HealthLink electronic medical record (EMR) to
bring Custody Health's EMR in line with the
HealthLink system elsewhere in the HHS system.
This project is slated for completion in May 2017.
Office of the Sheriff and the Department of
Corrections My recommendations for the Office of
the Sheriff and the Department of Corrections
(DOC) for Fiscal Year 2017 are intended to build on
efforts already taking place to immediately
improve services to those with mental health and
substance abuse issues. A section related
specifically to the Correctional System follows this
message. The Board has already approved a
$17million ongoing investment in services for inmates, and I am recommending additional
augmentations to improve both the DOC
operation, as well as the physical infrastructure.
Office of the Sheriff Operations The addition of six
positions is recommended to address the most
critical service needs. These are listed in the table
below:
DOC Operations In addition to recommending the
establishment of an ongoing reserve of $2.5 million
for jail reform and oversight to follow up on the
recommendations related to expert consultants
and the Blue Ribbon Commission, I am also
recommending adding 35 positions to address the
most critical service needs, as shown in the table
below:
Correctional System Physical Infrastructure During
Fiscal Year 2016, the Board approved $5.2 million in
ongoing funds, and $22.6 million in one-time funds,
for correctional facility improvements. Due to
delays in the original projects, as well as
re-evaluation of the most critical needs, such as
those related to ADA, I recommend augmenting
the original funding by an additional $35.1 million.
These one-time funds will fund four critical
projects, listed in the table below. I am also
recommending the establishment of $18 million in
General Fund reserves for projects at the jail that
require additional analysis before setting up project
specifics.
In order to prepare for the new jail facility, I am
recommending staff in DOC, Facilities and Fleet,
and in the Office of the County Executive work
together as part of a Jail Transition Team. The table
below shows the one-time projects related to the
correctional system.
Affordable Housing and Homelessness
The County continues to take the lead in
coordinating numerous projects designed to
address the high cost of housing, and reducing the
level of homelessness in the County. The base
budget contains $7.2 million to implement a wide variety of recommendations of the Housing Task
Force, and I am recommending an additional $10
million in funds for three major initiatives related
to housing and homelessness.
¦ $3 million to create a fund to develop and
provide services for 300 new units of permanent
supportive housing for the chronically
homeless,
¦ $2 million to fund Rapid Rehousing (RRH),
focusing on housing for homeless veterans, for
homeless children that are part of the County's
School-linked Services program, and for
survivors of intimate partner violence and/or
human trafficking,
¦ $3 million in one-time funds for the Hamlin
Court North County Temporary Cold Weather
Shelter Program. These funds provide
construction funding to conduct tenant
improvements at this location, and,
¦ Just under $2 million to add one staff person
and funds to create a variety of transitional
housing options in the County. These options
could include emergency shelter, outreach
services, transitional housing beds, and basic
needs funds. These programs are itemized in
the section on the Office of the County
Executive.
In Fiscal Year 2017, the funding for the Office of
Supportive Housing will be moved out of the
Behavioral Health budget to the Office of the
County Executive's budget, allowing for all of the
non-mental health services components to be
managed out of one office. This is a net zero cost
action.
Rebuilding the County's Administrative
Infrastructure
For the third consecutive year, we are
recommending additional resources for
administrative support services as a critical step in
stabilizing and improving County operations. The
County has added 389 positions since July 1, 2015,
and an additional 312.3 positions are
recommended for Fiscal Year 2017. These 700
positions are equal to the 700 positions added
between July 1, 2014 and July 1, 2015, creating
challenges in all of the administrative support areas
of the County.
As direct services have been rebuilt, the supports
necessary to foster service provision, such as
hiring, technology, procurement and facilities have
not kept pace. There are currently backlogs in
hiring, procurement, and project completion, as
well as cramped office spaces and pent up demand
for technology. For this reason, I am
recommending that resources be added in all of the
foundational administrative support departments.
Employee Services Agency (ESA)
In the two previous fiscal years, staff have been
added to ESA to reduce the cycle time of the
average hire, but not at a rate that allows the
Department to keep up with requisitions to hire
and create new positions. The same holds true
with the burgeoning number of retirees who are
managed by the Employee Benefits Division of
ESA. The organization has begun working on
process improvements, primarily the process by
which reclassification and recruitment activities
are managed. In Fiscal Year 2017, additional
processes will be evaluated for revision so that the
Department will be more efficient. New procedures
involving collaboration with operating
departments on applicant review have already
begun.
I am recommending a total of 13.4 FTE to address a
variety of functions that are under-staffed: the
Temporary Return to Work program in Workers'
Compensation, services to beneficiaries and
oversight of Medicare Part B and Affordable Care
Act requirements, training in Labor Relations, the
Equal Opportunity Division, and Learning and
Employee Development, analysts to work on
benefit rates and insurance premiums, and support
for nursing recruitment efforts.
Technology to assist ESA to better serve customers
includes online training resources and training
room upgrades. If the County is to be the employer
of choice in the County, it must be prepared to
serve its employees through training in both
foundational aspects, such as Sexual Harassment
Prevention, as well as enhancing online training to
make it easier for all employees to take advantage
of training offerings.
Information Services Department (ISD)
It is becoming increasingly clear that service
delivery today is significantly dependent on
technology to provide even basic service to the
client or customer. Whether via an electronic
medical record, an online payment, or an esignature,
for example, both the County's external
and internal customers demand increasingly
sophisticated technology to facilitate service
provision. Furthermore, customers expect multiple
modes, with privacy and security assured. The
County's ISD has grown over the last few years,
after being reduced over the course of the years
2002 through 2012. The service model that ISD is
operating under encourages enterprise services
across the board to be managed by ISD, and
applications to be managed by either operating
departments or ISD, depending on the complexity
of the software and hardware.
Much of the enterprise had been managed in a
more decentralized fashion over the years, leading
to uneven service levels, lack of security, and
licensing infringements. The focus this year is to
shore up oversight of software licensing, optimize
Microsoft Office 365 Countywide, improve our
security posture, enable e-signature and
workstation energy management, manage
contracts more effectively, improve hiring
procedures, and provide more comprehensive
project management, all while adding an
additional $57.7 million in technology projects and
fixed asset improvements to the County's portfolio.
The largest share of this recommended allocation
is $40.4 million for the Public Safety and Justice
Systems Program (PSJSP), going into its second
year of development.
A total of 17 new positions are recommended, at a
cost of $2.2 million, of which four are converted
from unclassified to classified positions for
Microsoft Office 365. This is a modest
recommendation given the wide variety of
demands being made of our technical experts. The
modesty of this recommendation is due in part to
the need to make sure that we are able to fill our
ISD positions and that the staff have a place to sit.
In Fiscal Year 2017, attention will be put toward
improving the hiring process for technical
positions, as well as creating additional space for
staff.
Technology Projects In addition to the existing
group of technology projects that are underway, an
additional 27 new projects are recommended
totaling $57.7 million. The PSJSP, which will replace
the current Criminal Justice Information Control
(CJIC) system, will be in the second year of an
estimated 3-4 year planned development, during
which six additional elements will be added:
Countywide data exchanges, an Adult and Juvenile
Probation case management system, a jail
management system, a document and evidence
exchange system, a mainframe re-hosting solution,
a records management system for the Office of the
Sheriff, as well as program administration for these
elements.
The 27 technology projects cross all lines of
business, as shown on the table below. It is very
important for County departments that contribute
to the success of technology projects, such as ESA
and Procurement, be coordinated so that the
planned projects have the staff and RFP-related
resources to launch within the fiscal year in which
the projects are budgeted.
Procurement
Procurement of goods and services is among the
backbone services of the County. The number of
requested procurements, many of which are for
information technology, exceed the resources
available to provide the specialized assistance
required. Current active projects, such as the PSJSP
project, are in need of numerous project-related
procurements for specialized expertise and
equipment. Without the addition of staff in this
area, numerous current projects are at risk of
significant delay. I am recommending the addition
of 5.0 FTE Classified IT Strategic Procurement
Specialist positions and 3.0 FTE Unclassified
Strategic Procurement Specialist positions, and a
one-time allocation of $500,000 in professional and
specialized services to support the Centralized
Contracting Division. In addition, I ammodernizing the Procurement website, in
conjunction with the new Ariba procurement
software roll out.
Facilities and Fleet Department
The Facilities and Fleet Department is another
backbone department for the County. After many
years of decreased funding, and minimal additions
in the last three years, it is essential that the County
provide adequate resources for the Department to
respond to critical facility maintenance and
improvement needs. I am recommending an
additional 18 positions at an ongoing cost of $1.8
million, and an additional $1.4 million in building
operations augmentations to improve the
Department's ability to maintain County facilities.
Staff additions in Facilities and Fleet are
recommended for multiple functions, such as
maintenance management, janitorial services,
building inspection, lease oversight, planning,
construction and mechanical. The pending capital
portfolio, along with projects currently underway,
could be jeopardized if we do not have adequate
staff to oversee current and new projects. The
Administration needs to ensure that we have the
resources to manage critical projects, especially
with an estimated $138.6 million and more in
potential projects recommended for Fiscal
Year 2017.
Availability of One-time Funds
With an unprecedented level of one-time funds
available, now is the optimal time to make
improvements in our facilities. As noted above,
there are an estimated $403.4 million in one-time
funds available for Fiscal Year 2016-2017, as shown
on the table below. Because the need for capital
improvements is so great, several sources of funds
have been garnered from capital-related sources,
such as the previous reserve not yet used for
Emergency Department improvements, as well as
FAF accounts which are not committed. The
reduction in the SCVMC subsidy due to improved
performance in Fiscal 2016 presents an unusual
opportunity that allows us to re-invest General
Fund dollars for one-time needs in Fiscal Year 2017.
These funds are to be used for the over $138.6
million I am recommending for capital projects
and other needs as shown on the following table.
Measure A
Measure A is the initiative approved by voters in
2012 that has allowed the County to levy a 1/8 cent
sales tax for ten years to support all County
programs. This funding, estimated currently at $51
million annually, expires on April 1, 2023. The
Board made a commitment to voters to utilize this funding to support high priority programs like
trauma care and emergency room services,
housing for the homeless, and law enforcement
and public safety.
Measure A funds have been utilized in a variety of
ways since the initiative was approved. The Board
of Supervisors has been committed to making a
difference with this revenue source, and as the
County's financial situation has stabilized,
resources have been reallocated to achieve that
goal.
In Fiscal Year 2017, the Administration is
recommending the reallocation of Measure A
resources from lower impact, distributed services
to support three significant initiatives that will have
a noticeable impact on the residents of Santa Clara
County. This is especially necessary to ensure the
funds of this nature are utilized for enduring
benefit while they are available to us.
The first initiative is the remodeling and expansion
of the emergency room at Valley Medical Center.
This project is in design, and we are now allocating
over $31 million in Measure A funds for the
construction of this critical project. With the
implementation of Health Care Reform and Medi-
Cal expansion, the increase in activity and need to
update and upgrade our systems and technology
make this an extremely important project for the
Health and Hospital system and the entire County.
The second initiative is the staffing of the
Downtown Medical Clinic on East Santa Clara
Street. With the closure of the San Jose Medical
Center, the need for health care facilities in
downtown San Jose was made clear by the
residents of that community. The Board of
Supervisors agreed with this concern and the
brand new 60,000 square foot Downtown Medical
Clinic is scheduled to open in the summer of 2016.
Measure A funding totaling $7.7 million will be
allocated to provide for the staff necessary to
operate that clinic.
The third initiative is increasing the availability of
both adult and child mental health crisis
stabilization and residential services. In reviewing
our existing system of care, Santa Clara County is
lacking adequate services in this area. We are
recommending the allocation of $3.2 million to
bolster community-based services to address the
important needs that exist in this area.
The availability of these Measure A funds will allow
the Board to fund these three very important
initiatives that will have a significant impact on our
community for decades to come.
Pay Down Deficit in Workers' Compensation Fund
Beginning in Fiscal Year 2005, the County reduced
ongoing contributions to the Workers’
Compensation Fund (Fund 78) as a budget
balancing solution to preserve ongoing programs
and jobs. This action was intended to be temporary
until the economy improved sufficiently to return
to full funding.
The Fiscal Year 2017 Recommended Budget
includes $7,368,000 in partial recoupment of the
unfunded actuarial liability in the employee benefit
rates. An additional one-time transfer of
$34,000,000 from the General Fund is
recommended to provide a total contribution of
$41,368,000, eliminating the estimated deficit for
the Labor Code 4850 benefits and fully funding the
actuarial liability to within the Board policy target
range between 70% and 80% confidence level. The
Workers' Compensation Fund (Fund 78) had a
positive balance between 1996 and 2000, but has
otherwise run a deficit before and since, as high as
$45.3 million in Fiscal Year 2014.
A Continuing Commitment
to our Physical Infrastructure
Even considering these increased resources, the
capital needs submitted by departments far exceed
the funding that is available. We are fortunate to be
able to recommend $138.6 million in capital
projects for the Board's consideration. We are
unlikely to have this degree of flexibility in the
future, and it is important that the one-time funds we have available be utilized to have a positive
impact on our aging facility portfolio. This amount
is easily the most ambitious capital project
portfolio in recent history, and each project will
contribute to the critical provision of services to
the County's customers.
The two largest allotments, $31.9 million for
SCVMC Emergency Department improvements,
and $28 million to begin the jail design and build,
total $59.9 million, greater than the $52.9
recommended in Fiscal Year 2016 for all capital
projects. An additional $26.1 million is
recommended for a variety of projects related to
health and hospital system services, including $2.25
million for the Women's and Children's Center at
SCVMC, and $9.5 million to remodel 2450 South
Bascom for the newly integrated Behavioral Health
Department.
Critical outward facing services in our community
are slated to be improved due to three clientfocused
projects: $7 million is recommended to
program and design the Vietnamese American
Service Center at 2410 Senter Road, which will be
located near the County health facilities on
Chaboya Avenue; $3 million is recommended to
remodel the Hamlin Court facility in North County
to create a Cold Weather Shelter that will also be
used as a warehouse in the warmer months of the
year; and $3.5 million is recommended to program
and design a Receiving Assessment and Intake
Center (RAIC) in the East Valley, which will replace
the facility now situated at the MediPlex building
downtown.
In addition to the New Jail, an additional $5 million
is recommended for other jail-related projects, and
$4 million is recommended for various projects in
the public safety and justice area, such as $3.5
million to provide improved facilities at the Muriel
Wright Ranch, and one-half million to fix leaks and
prevent floods in the Crime Lab. An additional
$15.4 million is recommended for a variety of
general government program projects, such as the
purchase of, and renovations to, 840 North First
Street to enable the Department of Revenue to
relocate from Berger Drive. This location is closer
to both mass transit and related County facilities.
Finally in this area, funds are recommended to
remodel the Berger Drive warehouse to
accommodate the Registrar of Voters needs for
new equipment and resources for the 2016 election
and beyond.
For many years, the County has endeavored to find
the funds available to replace the South County
Animal Shelter. An appropriation of $4 million is
recommended to serve as the initial design
funding, intended to provide an estimate for
fundraising purposes and also make sure that
potential donors are aware that the County is
taking the replacement of the facility seriously.
General backlog maintenance of County facilities is
augmented by $7 million to support 26 projects
throughout the County. This recommendation
goes hand-in-hand with the recommendations to
add personnel to FAF so that they will be able to
continue the critical work of keeping up County
facilities so as to avoid costlier maintenance down
the road. Projects planned for Fiscal Year 2017
range from upgrading the 70 West Hedding energy
management system to replacing Juvenile Hall
interview room partitions.
Other Highlights
The level of flexibility that we have in Fiscal
Year 2017 also allows us to address a variety of
other important needs across the County:
Behavioral Health Augmentations: A combination
of MediCal revenues, General Fund allocations and
Measure A funds will allow the County to open the
County's first Crisis Stabilization Unit (CSU) for
adults 18 years of age and older, which will provide
services just under 24 hours a day, seven days a
week. This funding also allows for two 16-bed crisis
residential facilities that will provide short-term
residential services to support and stabilize clients
and link them to the appropriate community
services. Crisis residential services for children are
expanded as well.
Behavioral Health is focused on expanding
community-based crisis services across the County
to reduce EPS visits, decrease acute hospital stays
and provide services within local communities.
Crisis Residential services are in high demand to
meet the needs of the adult and older adult
population. Funds are provided to increase the
capacity to provide additional Institute for Mental
Disease (IMD) beds.
Community Health Partnerships: Funds are
provided to allow the Community Health
Partnership to improve access to additional clients
desiring primary care services.
Pay for Success: One Management Analyst
position and $1.0 million in ongoing funds are
recommended to support the Acute Psychiatry Pay
for Success (PFS) project in terms of coordinating
the PFS project's planning and implementation
processes.
Social Services Agency: Funding is recommended
to improve services related to foster care, including
education, personal development/job training,
emergency aid, and foster care entry prevention
services. Four Social Work Coordinator II position
are added to support newly mandated activities
relating to qualitative case file reviews, and funds
are added to expand the provision of senior
nutrition services. Eight positions are
recommended in the Agency Office to focus on
process improvement efforts, training, technical
support, and facilities management.
Registrar of Voters: Funds are provided to lease a
new voting system, the first year of an eight year
lease. In addition, six positions are recommended
to improve outreach, ballot layout, training, and
administrative support, as are funds for the pick-up
of ballots at mid-day and an interactive voice
response system.
County Counsel: County Counsel requires
additional resources to keep up with the increase in
workload in code enforcement, general
government, including California Public Records
Act (CPRA) requests, the Whistleblower Program,
labor and employment, and support services.
Eleven positions are recommended to provide
some relief for County Counsel staff in these areas.
Possible Risks Ahead
The Fiscal Year 2017 Recommended Budget
provides significant resources to improve
programs that the County has wanted to address
for many years. However, after five positive years in a row, investing an additional $63 million in
ongoing General Fund expenditure at this point is
somewhat risky. The pace of economic growth is
slowing, and at some point, revenues will not keep
pace with the continuing cost of our known labor
agreements and the increasing size of the base
budget.
It is important to remember that our relative
dependence on the real estate economy and State
and Federal revenues makes the County vulnerable
to a downturn. This is particularly true in the
healthcare area, as the Federal waiver is anticipated
to be tapering off in future years. Performance
improvement efforts already begun in the health
and hospital system are a critical component to
preparing us for our future as revenue becomes
more and more performance-based.
The changes that the County will need to undergo
as part of reforming our correctional system will
require the system partners to focus on new
methods and options for managing our jail
population, as well as our alternatives to
incarceration. It will likely take some time before
real change takes root, and additional investments
in the system are anticipated over time.
As the County adds or expands programs, it will be
very important to assess whether or not we are
realizing the anticipated benefits from these
programs. The County will be investing additional
support for multi-level Unit-based Teams (UBTs),
which are designed to focus on performance
improvement. These efforts are an important
element required to retain the services we have
restored over the last 5 years, even if revenues begin
to flatten or decline.
Conclusion
I feel very fortunate that for another year, the
County is able to make substantial headway
towards stabilization. I am very proud of the hard
work that our employees do every day even as
demands for services increase. The demands we
face are an indicator of the importance of County
service in the lives of our customers, and we want
to do as much as possible, within reason, to meet
those demands.
In the future, how we work together as a system,
including with our labor and community partners,
how we use information to help our clients, and
how we help each other speak up safely in the
workplace will be critical to the success of our
endeavors. The Fiscal Year 2017 budget
recommendations reflect the desire to put in place
foundational pieces of the system that have been
missing since before the dot com bust, and now it is
our responsibility to manage these resources with
care so they can be sustained and improved in the
future.

recommending additional staff for purposes of 