Members of the Board:

This document represents Shasta County's Recommended Fiscal Year 2015-16 Budget, pursuant to Section 29062 of the Government Code. The budget is created from a process that includes requests prepared by the operating and support departments of the County, review and recommendations from my office, and compilation by the Auditor-Controller.

The Recommended Budget totals $421,572,057, including Total Governmental Funds, $357,233,446; Internal Service Funds, $24,509,068; Enterprise Funds, $28,917,148; and Special Districts and Other Agencies governed by the Board of Supervisors, $10,912,395. The budget represents the efforts of my staff and managers of the County’s many departments who worked diligently to prepare a budget that reflects departmental needs and program funding requests as well as the CEO's recommended appropriations for the next fiscal year.

This document is an administrative tool that provides the framework under which the County will operate for the fiscal period. Absent mandates, the budget is a vehicle by which the Board of Supervisors provides philosophical direction for programs important to the local community.

The budget process, and the ultimate adoption of a balanced budget, requires the cooperation, dedication, and labor of many individuals. I would like to extend my thanks to all department heads, and their staff, for the common effort they commit to this annual process. All are to be commended for their service and dedication to the County of Shasta and its citizens.

This represents an increase of $5.2 million, or one percent, when compared to the FY 2014-15
Adopted Budget.
About 80 percent of the overall budget is for non-general fund operating departments. Most have
various state and federal funds earmarked for specific purposes.+

LONG-RANGE PLANNING
There has been no significant improvement to revenues, and the County continues to adhere to
conservative spending due to economic uncertainty. Taking a proactive approach to spending
reductions in the past several fiscal years has helped keep the County solvent; but, absent
sustained annual revenue growth more reductions may be necessary each fiscal year.
Balancing service delivery with available resources will continue to be a challenge to the County for
many years.
DISCRETIONARY REVENUE
The national, state, and local economic downturn resulted in a decline in property values, lagging
sales of consumer goods and services, and a steep decline in interest rates. Shasta County
continues to experience the unprecedented loss of discretionary revenue. The County realized onetime
revenue due to the dissolution of redevelopment agencies. It is anticipated that revenue will
stabilize in FY 2014-15. The dissolution of redevelopment agencies may have some yet unknown
positive impact on the General Fund, as a minimal amount of tax increment may accrue to the
General Fund.

NON-DISCRETIONARY REVENUE
In addition to our discretionary sales tax revenues, sales taxes dedicated to public health, mental
health, social services, and public safety are still recovering.
1991 Realignment (Health and Human Services) is funded through State sales tax and vehicle
license fees (VLF) dedicated to public health, mental health, and social services and provide the
majority of matching funds for numerous state and federal funding sources. Sales tax realignment
revenue is expected to continue to grow in FY 2015-16 due to an improved economy, and the
growth in revenue will fund partial repayment of the prior year’s caseload growth. Under 1991
realignment, Social Services programs receive payment for the increasing cost of operating
entitlement programs by allocation of excess revenues to pay these costs before general growth
payments are made. These realignment revenues, as well as other county resources and state
allocations, are used to draw down federal matching revenues that sustain programs.
2011 Realignment (Health and Human Services) is funded through a State special fund sales tax
and vehicle license fees (VLF). Both of these revenue sources are increasing per estimates in the
FY 2015-16 California Governor’s Budget. The Administration, in consultation with county partners
and stakeholders, is continuing to develop an allocation for funds in the 2011 Realignment
Behavioral Health Services Growth Special Account. From FY 2013-14 revenues, the Account has
$60.0 million. The first priority for growth funds is federal entitlement programs: Medi-Cal Specialty
Mental Health, including those required by Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment, and
Drug Medi-Cal. Our Health and Human Services Agency is advocating for appropriate base levels
of funding to support growing costs and will be monitoring how 2011 Realignment will be structured
into the future to protect county health and human services operations.
2011 Realignment (Public Safety) included a major realignment of public safety programs from the
state to local governments. The intent of the Community Corrections Partnership Program

authorized by AB 109 is to reduce recidivism and end the revolving door of lower-level offenders and
parole violators through the state’s prisons.
The County’s Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee (CCPEC), chaired by the
Chief Probation Officer, approved their FY 2015-16 budget at their February 26, 2015 meeting and
included it in their respective FY 2015-16 budget requests. Funding for FY 2015-16 is expected to
be $6.5 million and appropriations are requested at $8.2 million (which includes 3 percent, or
$195,406, to set aside for reserves), relying on $1.7 million in AB109 Restricted fund balance.
Projected fund balance at the end of FY 2015-16, including FY 2014-15 growth funds to be received
in FY 2015-16, is $5.3 million.
Receipts from Public Safety Augmentation Proposition 172 sales tax have leveled out at $14 million
annually. Receipts in the current year are approximately eight percent (8%) higher than this time last
year. The County’s pro-rata share of this sales tax is $.004782.

The Recommended FY 2015-16 General Fund Budget is $83.6 million, which is $10 million higher
than the adjusted FY 2014-15 budget. The increase is attributable to a transfer of $10 million to
Accumulated Capital Outlay in anticipation of major capital outlay expenses for the remodel of the
old Courthouse and the old Juvenile Hall building.
The Auditor-Controller calculates the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for public safety. The
most recent calculation is FY 2014-15. The FY 2014-15 adopted budget for all the public safety
departments exceeded the adjusted MOE Base by $25.1 million. The County subsidy to the
combined health and human services programs has been held static over the last several years.
Appropriations include a Contingency Reserve of $5 million that can be used for unanticipated
requirements that may occur during the fiscal year. When no need arises, these funds return to
fund balance and become the basis of the carry-over for the succeeding year. Financing is derived
from anticipated revenue, inter-fund transfers, and carry-over fund balances.
The General Reserve is approximately $10.6 million. This is three percent of total Governmental
Funds appropriations ($357.2 million). The Board established a policy for budgetary reserves in
December 2007. The goal is to attain a Reserve of 5 percent of estimated financing uses, less
designations for reserves and capital projects, but no less than $10 million.
YEAR-TO-YEAR COMPARISON
Departments were directed to submit a budget request with a target of three percent growth in the
General Fund contribution or net-county-cost; overages could be mitigated by spending reductions
in FY 2014-15. For the fiscal year ending June 30, 2015, the General Fund is projected to realize a
14.5 percent reduction in expenditures, and a reduction to the net-county-cost ($10.5 million).
In the aggregate, the Recommended FY 2015-16 budget for select budget units, excluding special
districts, totals $413.0 million, which when compared to the 2014-15 Adjusted Budget, is a decrease
of $6.6 million, or one and one-half percent.
The following Table compares by Fund the 2014-15 Adjusted Budget (at 01/31/2015), versus
estimated expenditures at 6/30/2015, with the 2015-16 Recommended Budget for select budget
units.

AGRICULTURAL COMMISSIONER/SEALER OF WEIGHTS & MEASURES
There have been relatively few statutory or regulatory changes that have impacted the department
during the past year. While there are always bills introduced that have the potential to impact county
agricultural or weights and measures programs, at this time, only one bill has the potential to affect
the Department’s budget to any great extent. AB 296 has been introduced that will extend the
sunset date of Section 12240 of the California Business and Professions Code, which is set to expire
on January 1, 2016. This section provides counties with the authority to charge registration fees for
commercial weighing and measuring devices, and without an extension, the county would not have
the ability to collect device registration fees, which represents approximately 20 percent of the
Department’s outside revenue.
ASSESSOR
The function of the Assessor is to produce an annual assessment roll that reflects the taxable values
of land, improvements, and personal property by the Assessor’s parcel numbering system or
account numbering system. In addition to the taxable value, the roll must also indicate the current
status of ownership; the owner’s mailing address and the existence of any exemptions. To
accomplish this, the Assessor must discover, classify and appraise all locally assessable property
according to constitutional, statutory, and administrative requirements. In addition to preparing the
annual local assessment roll pursuant to Section 601 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code,
the Assessor must produce the supplemental assessment roll as provided in Sections 75 through
75.8 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
For 2014-15 there were 108,707 locally assessed properties in Shasta County with a taxable value
of $15,721,177,903 generating more than $157 million in property tax revenue for use by Shasta
County agencies that include: County government, the three cities, school districts, and other local

CAPITAL PROJECTS
The Capital Projects budget (Land, Buildings and Improvements) includes six (6) projects totaling
$4.6 million: 1) MHSA Breslauer Remodel, $1.8 million; 2) Facilities Management Building Roof,
$45,000; 3) Court Street Buildings remodel, $1.6 million; 4) Jail Upgrade HVAC Controls, $750,000;
5) Jail Upgrade Security System Study, $50,000; and 6) Public Health remodel roof and carpet,
$317,130. Each project is funded by a dedicated funding stream and none require a General Fund
contribution. Funding for the remodel of the two Court Street buildings is from funds previously setaside
in Accumulated Capital Outlay in FY 2013-14.
Additionally, planning is underway for a new adult rehabilitation facility. This multi-year project
includes appropriations of $1.9 million in 2015-16. When fully built-out the project is estimated to
cost $22.5 million, with a County-match and in-kind match of $2.5 million. The County-match has
been fully appropriated.
COUNTY FIRE
Appropriations are requested at an increase of 10.2 percent, or $662,921, from $6.5 million to just
over $7.17 million in the 2015-16 Requested Budget. Salaries and Benefits are nearly status quo
with a slight 3.2 percent increase ($12,231) at $389,117. Services and Supplies are requested at
$1.4 million, a 3.9 percent reduction compared to the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. Other Charges
are requested at almost $4.3 million, a 13.6 percent increase ($512,844) due to 25.5 percent
increase ($27,213) in Central Service A-87 charges and a requested increase of $485,607 (13.4
percent) in the CAL FIRE administrative contract due to Salary and Benefit and other operating
increases. The CAL FIRE contract amount is an estimate and could change slightly due to actual
services provided during the fiscal year. CAL FIRE annually bills the County for contract services on
an actual cost basis and in FY 2014-15 the contract was budgeted at $3.63 million but projections for
actual costs are currently at $3.03 million.
The department has requested $1.0 million in new and replacement capital assets ($300,500 are rebudgeted
from FY 2014-15), an increase of $198,900, or 24 percent, from the FY 2014-15 Adjusted
Budget. The capital asset requests for FY 2015-16 include one Heavy Utility Truck (Rescue), one
fire engine, two water tenders, one four-wheel drive truck for administration (Fire Marshal), and three
Lifepak (15 cardiac monitor defibrillators) one each for VFC 11, Hat Creek, VFC 71, Montgomery
Creek, and VFC 20, Shingletown.
Revenue totals for FY 2015-16 are requested at just over $5.4 million, a decrease of 3.5 percent, or
$193,954 from the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. This is due to a reduction in the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) grant, Reimbursement in Fire Calls (this revenue is
unpredictable and budgeted conservatively), and one-time prior period expenditure adjustment (Risk
Management rate refund) in the amount of $324,743.
The FY 2015-16 Requested Budget General Fund support is $2.1 million compared to $2.0 million in
the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget, a three percent increase ($62,446). The department requests a
use of fund balance for FY 2015-16 in the amount of $1.7 million but projects to return $661,711 to
fund balance at the end of FY 2014-15. If the department ends FY 2015-16 as projected there will
be approximately $1.62 million remaining in fund balance.

Because elections now generally occur once per fiscal year, the prior high/low cycle of budgeting
has evened out. Now, variation comes over a longer period of time – the four year election cycle.
Larger financial need occurs in the Presidential years (divisible by four) which have traditionally
higher voter turnout as compared to the Gubernatorial years.
The department submitted three requests for the reclassification of positions. These positions are
listed in the Elections budget (140); however, their cost is spread between both Elections (75
percent) and County Clerk (25 percent). Personnel studied the submitted reclassifications and
recommended that two of the three positions be reclassed. The positions recommended for
reclassification are an Elections Technician and a Clerk/Elections Specialist I/II. Both positions will
be reclassified to an Agency Staff Services Analyst I/II.
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
The combined budgeted fund balance draw for FY 2015-16 from the Social Services, Mental Health,
and Public Health reserves is approximately $2.5 million, which is $2.3 million higher than the
projected draw for FY 2014-15. Our Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA) maintains that
there are sufficient reserves to sustain fund balance draws in the proposed budget.
The Mental Health (BU 410) proposed budget yields a net contribution of approximately $100,000 to
the Mental Health fund balance. About $5 million of realignment fund transfers from Social Services
and Public Health to Mental Health have occurred since May 2013 to assist with the financial
challenges of the Mental Health budget in providing services. Since March 2012, costs for acute
hospitalization and Institutes for Mental Diseases (IMDs) have stayed at high levels. Most of the IMD
cost is ineligible for Medi-Cal reimbursement and, thus, must be supported within department
realignment funds. Efforts to mitigate costs in this area have been initiated and are a strong focus of
HHSA, but the number of people presenting at local hospitals and the length of their treatment, due
to seriousness of their illness, have made costs difficult to control. In addition, as the Board is
aware, Medi-Cal Cost Settlements for expenses incurred as far back as 2009 are still pending and
have not been included in the recommended budget. An estimated total of $3 million is owed to
Shasta County (Mental Health BU 410 and Mental Health Services Act BU 404) for prior years for
costs above the interim rate the State paid us. Payment for this continues to be delayed by State
negotiations with the federal government regarding the State Plan Amendment that has a retroactive
effective date of January 1, 2009. HHSA continues to closely watch the Mental Health budget
activities and resources.
HOUSING
The Housing Authority administers the Housing Choice Vouchers Rental Assistance Program. The
department is requesting the addition of a Housing Supervisor to provide a smooth transition for the
retirement of a long-term employee and to create an appropriate career ladder for Housing
employees. The proposed position is 100 percent funded by federal Housing Authority revenue.
PUBLIC DEFENDER
The FY 2015-16 budget requests appropriations of $3.56 million, which is $206,334, or 5.5 percent,
less than the $3.76 million FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. Salaries and Benefits are requested at just
over $3 million, compared to $3.18 million in the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget, primarily due to hiring
new employees at a lower salary range, though Termination Pay and Extra Help are increasing.

Services and Supplies are requested at $468,750, or 8.9 percent less than the FY 2014-15 Adjusted
Budget amount of $514,357. Central Services A-87 charges have decreased 46.8 percent over the
FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget, from $72,436 to $38,562.
Revenues are requested at $217,180, which is status quo. The Community Corrections Partnership
(CCP) Executive Committee has voted to continue to provide $45,000 to help the department fund
the AB109 Deputy Public Defender ($30,000) and to fully fund the AB109 extra-help Social Worker
position ($15,000). The department is using $38,820 in realignment AB 109 restricted fund balance
leaving a $36,307 balance. The net county cost is requested at $3.34 million, which is a 5.9 percent
decrease ($208,958) from the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. Additionally, due to thoughtful and
efficient operations throughout the year the department projects $424,351 in savings at the end of
FY 2014-15.
The CEO recommends increases in health insurance costs and other minor technical adjustments
that overall increase the department’s net county cost to $3.39 million, which is still within the
department’s FY 2015-16 budget target. Additionally, the CEO recommends the sunset date for the
CCP-funded attorney be deleted, as all CCP-funded positions sunset dates were deleted during the
FY 2013-14 budget process after the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act of 2012 was
approved by the voters on November 6, 2012 making the AB109/CCP funding source
constitutionally protected (this attorney position was missed).
Criminal Sentences. Misdemeanor Penalties. Initiative Statute. (Prop 47), passed by the voters on
November 4, 2014, means criminal offenders who commit certain non-serious and non-violent drug
and property crimes will be sentenced to reduced penalties (such as shorter terms in jail). State
savings resulting from the measure would then be used to support school truancy and dropout
prevention, victim services, mental health and drug abuse treatment, and other programs designed
to keep offenders out of prison and jail. Every offender both sentenced and pending sentencing
whose crime(s) fall under Prop 47 became eligible for re-sentencing on November 4, 2014.
In the 2015-16 FY Budget the Public Defender’s Office will spend approximately $35,000 on
processing re-sentencing petitions from offenders, both in- and out-of-custody, by hiring extra-help
staff (one Deputy Public Defender I/II/III, one Law Clerk, and one Data Entry Clerk). Approximately
80 percent of those who request a re-sentence review will be eligible; some make numerous
requests, some are not from Shasta County, and some will not be eligible due to their crime(s).
Some of those who are eligible, and even granted, will still remain in custody to serve time related to
non-Prop 47-eligible crimes. As of the first quarter of 2015, the Public Defender’s Office has
processed approximately 1,063 re-sentencing requests the vast majority were for in-custody
offenders representing about 600 in-custody individuals. Of these 1,063 requests, the lion’s share
are from state prisoners. The Public Defender has a back-log of approximately 250 out-of-custody
requests and so they expect to process a total of 1,500 re-sentencing requests be the end of 2015.
PUBLIC SAFETY
As a starting point the public safety departments - District Attorney, Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility,
Probation, and the various Sheriff’s budget units, including the Jail, were directed to budget for a
three percent increase in General Fund support and a 29 percent increase in Public Safety
Augmentation (Prop 172) revenue. The District Attorney, Chief Probation Officer, and the Sheriff
have worked diligently to provide a FY 2015-16 budget that protects public safety and fulfills their
core missions with consideration for the County’s overall fiscal health.
Total Recommended FY 2015-16 appropriations for the public safety group are almost $66.8 million,
an increase of $3.4 million from the current year; $400,000 increase for the District Attorney (new
positions), nearly $1 million increase for Probation (one new position at the Juvenile Rehabilitative

Facility, insurance increases, reduction in SB678 revenue and restricted fund balances), and a $2
million increase for the Sheriff’s budgets (almost $1 million for seven new positions and two vehicles
approved by the Board on March 17, 2015, insurance increases, and reduction in restricted fund
balances).
Revenues from all sources total $60.7 million, including $24.1 million from the General Fund and $14
million from Public Safety Augmentation. To balance budgets under his span of control, the Sheriff
will utilize a little over $3.6 million in fund balance (almost $3.3 million in Public Safety fund balance
and $329,464 in restricted fund balances), the District Attorney will use $604,050 in restricted fund
balances and $860,433 in Prop 172 reserves, and the Probation Department will use $311,670 in
restricted fund balances and $628,219 in Prop 172 reserves.

The County Jail is still at capacity and releasing inmates from their sentences early. However, the
number of capacity releases has dropped from 919 to 497 when comparing the first quarter of 2014
to the first quarter of 2015. While there appear to be fewer capacity releases, which could reduce
the current number of Fail to Appears (FTA) at court hearings, the number of misdemeanor FTAs
could increase. To date about 20 inmates have been released from the Jail but those 20 beds were
quickly filled. If Prop 47 does eventually decrease the number of bookings in to the Jail (currently,
law enforcement are not arresting and booking for Prop 47 offenses, but primarily citing and
releasing) then those much needed beds will likely be used to reduce the number of capacity
releases, especially for the multi-year jail sentences now imposed due to AB 109.
The Probation Department’s supervision caseload is not likely to be too much affected by Prop 47
either, though the full impact cannot be known until all re-sentencing requests are fully processed
and adjudicated (a process that could take several years to complete). In some cases, Probation is
required to recalculate the conduct/custody credits and provide updated court fines/fees and victim
restitution information to the Court. If the Probation Department’s caseloads are reduced due to
Prop 47 then it will provide opportunity for Probation to provide supervision to those medium and
high-risk offenders that are not currently supervised due to current fiscal restraints.
After the Public Defender reviews the re-sentencing request for eligibility, those who are deemed
eligible are referred to the District Attorney’s Office for review. The District Attorney’s Office
responds to every request for re-sentencing referred to them, whether or not they are approved, and
then they refer those that they agree with to the Court for final consideration and approval. Those
who are granted re-sentencing may or may not need a court hearing, though each eligible request
does impact the court’s workload, whether or not a hearing is granted. The District Attorney’s Office
has seen a slight decrease in the number of total cases opened when comparing the first quarter of
2014 to the first quarter of 2015, 2,089 compared to 1,839, respectively. However, the number of
violation of supervision cases continues to increase. Thus, the Governor has included a $26.9
million General Fund augmentation to the courts in the state FY 2015-16 budget (and $7.6 million in
FY 2016-17), but no additional funding for counties is anticipated. If a court hearing is required then
the District Attorney, Public Defender, and Probation Department require additional staff time and
resources to staff the court hearing. The state Legislature has already introduced new legislation to 

close certain ‘loopholes’ associated with Prop 47 such as, but not limited to, making stolen handguns
and possession of date rape drugs felony crimes again, collecting DNA from misdemeanants, etc.
Some of these new bills, if passed by the Legislature, will need to return to the voters for their
approval in 2016.
JUVENILE REHABILITATION FACILITY OPERATIONS
The new Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility opened and received juvenile wards on January 25, 2014.
FY 2014-15 was the first full fiscal year of operations for this new facility which is more than twice the
size of the former facility and can hold up to 90 wards. Total FY 2015-16 requested appropriations
has increased by 7.4 percent, or $364,790, from $4.95 million to $5.32 million. Salaries and Benefits
has increased by 10.2 percent, or $330,274, from $3.24 million to $3.57 million, primarily due to a
request to add two new Juvenile Detention Officer I/II positions (five were added in FY 2013-14 and
two were added in FY 2014-15), but also increases in termination/special pay, extra-help, overtime,
worker’s compensation experience, and retirement charges. Services and Supplies have also
increased by 5.2 percent, or $81,899, due to increases in professional administration services,
professional medical services, and some small facilities management projects designed to reduce
staffing costs associated with court transport. A-87 Central Services Charges have decreased by
34.8 percent, or $47,383, from $136,264 to $88,881. No new capital assets or equipment are
requested.
Total requested revenues are almost $4.96 million, a 4.1 percent increase, or $197,386. Prop 172
revenue has increased by $390,969, or 29.2 percent, and the General Fund contribution has
increased by $75,405 (3 percent) from $2.51 million to $2.58 million. However, there is also a onetime
reduction in Prior Period Expenditure Adjustment (Risk Management rebate) in the amount of
$412,907. The department requests to use $180,752 in Youthful Offender Block Grant (YOBG)
restricted fund balance, leaving a requested deficit of $167,404. This budget was balanced in FY
2014-15 by using $180,752 in YOBG restricted fund balance and this budget is projected to end the
fiscal year with approximately $23,197 in savings.
The CEO recommends approving one of the two requested Juvenile Detention Officer I/II positions,
therefore the net-county-cost has been reduced to $98,545 which will be funded by Prop 172
Reserves.
ADULT REHABILITATION CENTER CONSTRUCTION
On October 15, 2013 the Board accepted the $20 million conditional award from the state and
appropriated $2.5 million for the County’s cost of the project.
Expenditures in the amount of $1.9 million are requested in the FY 2015-16 requested budget, offset
with use of project fund balance. Expenditures will support staff and consultant work for design and
construction management, state contract negotiations, California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
compliance, state Real Estate Due Diligence costs, site preparation, as well as permits and fees.
From time-to-time the project fund will experience negative cash while awaiting state reimbursement.
The Board of Supervisors will be asked to adopt a resolution which will authorize the Auditor-
Controller to advance funds from the General Fund to the project, as needed, to repaid with interest
at the pooled-funds rate.
PUBLIC WORKS
The Department of Public Works consists of the following divisions: Facilities Management, Fleet
____________________________________________________________________________________
COUNTY OF SHASTA BUDGET OVERVIEW, RECOMMENDED BUDGET FY 2015-16
Page - 15 -
Management, Road Operations, and County Service Areas.
The FY 2015-16 Road Fund includes expenditures in the amount of $17.4 million and revenues in
the amount of $14.8 million. Expenditures exceed revenues by approximately $2.6 million and will
be covered by fund balance. Some of the larger projects that the department plans to undertake in
FY 2015-16 are: Olinda Road Improvements, Gas Point Road Improvement, and Deschutes Road
Improvements. This year, the Department lost approximately $2 million in funding from the reduction
in State Highway User Tax. The department is optimistic that funding will be restored in the future;
however, it is not known when the funding will be restored.
The Department requests to move four positions to other cost centers to more accurately reflect
where their work is being performed. An Accounting Technician is being moved to Facilities
Management and three positions are being moved to the Solid Waste Division: two
Associate/Assistant/Junior Engineers and one Supervising Engineer. The Department has also
requested the deletion of two unfunded vacant positions: an Engineering Technician and a Road
Maintenance Worker I/II.
The Department is also consolidating five different classifications to two classifications. Below is a
description of consolidation.
? 4 Road Maintenance Supervisors
? 1 Special Crews Supervisor Maintenance Supervisor
? 1 Supervising Equipment Mechanic
? 5 Lead Road Maintenance Workers
? 1 Lead Special Crews Worker Lead Maintenance Worker
? 1 Supervising Equipment Mechanic
The Facilities Management Division is financed through charges for service to user departments
and does not receive General Fund support. The Division has requested to delete an unfunded
vacant Senior Account Clerk and the addition of an Accounting Technician from Public Works-
Roads. The Division has requested two capital asset pickup trucks and the replacement of the
asphalt shingled roof of their shop with a metal roof.
The County Service Area Administration budget reflects the fiscal activity of the “umbrella”
organization, which provides operational and administrative support to the County Service Areas.
This budget unit is fully supported by administrative fees levied in the benefiting County Service
Areas.
RECREATION
The Recreation budget unit provides for the maintenance of the French Gulch Park, Hat Creek Park,
and the Balls Ferry Boat Ramp. Projects scheduled for FY 2015-16 for this budget unit include the
replacement of the roof of the building at the Balls Ferry Boat Ramp and an erosion control project at
French Gulch Park.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
The Department of Resource Management consists of the following divisions: Air Quality
Management District, Building Division, Environmental Health Division, Planning Division and
Community Education Section. 

Environmental Health is charged with the responsibility for enforcement of pertinent California health
laws, rules, regulations, and Shasta County Ordinances. The division also provides specific permit
and inspection programs which involve sewage disposal, individual wells, solid waste, hazardous
materials storage and disclosure, underground tanks, food service facilities, public drinking water
systems, swimming pools, housing and institutions, and medical waste management. The General
Fund continues to support one full-time Senior Environmental Health Specialist position that works
on un-reimbursed community Environmental Health programs.
The Building Department serves as the code enforcement arm of the Resource Management
Department. This includes serving as the code enforcement officer for Medical Marijuana cultivation.
The Department is requesting, and the County Executive Officer recommends an increase in
General Fund support for additional extra help staff authorized by the Board of Supervisors in
January 2015 to address nuisance complaints generated by the cultivation of medical marijuana.
The General Fund trans-in for the Building Department has increased from $264,011 in FY 2014-15
to $488,769 for FY 2015-16.
The Planning Division serves as the land use information center for the County. This division of the
Department of Resource Management serves as an integral part of the “planning agency” for the
County, the agency being comprised of the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors, and
adjunct departments. Building and planning activity is relatively stable and the department is
concentrating on several projects, including the General Plan. A General Fund contribution of
$398,000 is budgeted for the General Plan update. Fund balance will be utilized to offset any
revenue shortfall.
General Plan Update
By law, each California County must adopt and maintain a comprehensive, long-term general plan
that governs physical development and land use within its boundaries. Shasta County has adopted
a five year interval for review. The last comprehensive General Plan was adopted in 2004. On
March 23, 2010 the Board of Supervisors elected to proceed with a limited General Plan update
which will address the critical greenhouse gas requirement in a new air quality element and will
include the mandatory housing element update with integration of both elements into the rest of the
General Plan as needed. The update will include editorial updates to policy language and to County
profiles (population, economic trends, etc.). The total estimated cost of the limited General Plan
update is $552,000. Each fiscal year we increase the appropriation from General Revenue to
Planning to offset the expense of the update, but we only transfer actual expenses. Year to date,
approximately $40,000 has been spent on the update.
TITLE III PROJECTS
In April 2015, Congress reauthorized the program for two years. After the two year extension, the
future of the Secure Rural Schools Act is unknown.
TRIAL COURTS
The County worked closely with the City of Redding, the local Court, and the Judicial Council of
California Administrative Office of the Courts (JCC) on siting the new courthouse building. The
County and the JCC executed a Purchase Acquisition Agreement whereby the JCC exchanged its
equity in the Main Courthouse and Courthouse Annex, and the Justice Center, for the Public Safety
Building. The agreement allows each party to holdover in their respective buildings. The
Recommended Budget includes $1 million for activities related to relocating the Sheriff and the
Probation Department from the Public Safety Building. The start-date for construction of the new 

courthouse building has been delayed due to the State budget. The CEO will work with the JCC to
extend our holding over in the Public Safety Building. The County purchased two office buildings
located on Court Street, to remodel into offices for the Probation staff currently located in the Public
Safety Building. It is anticipated that the remodel project will be completed by the end of 2015, and
staff should be moving in the first part of 2016. Locating suitable office space for the Sheriff’s
operations is still in process. Upon completion of the new courthouse the Court will vacate the Main
Courthouse/ Courthouse Annex and Justice Center; the Department of Public Works has estimated
remodel of the Main Courthouse will cost a minimum of $8 million.
VETERANS HALLS
Projects scheduled for FY 2015-16 include exterior painting of the fascia and gable end siding and
replacement of kitchen lighting at the Fall River Mills Veterans Halls. In FY 2014-15, the exterior of
the Fall River Mills Veterans Hall was painted, for the Burney Veterans Hall the parking lot was restriped
and the interior painted and for the Redding Veterans Hall, the foyer doors were repaired. 

The Adopted Budget provides for a
workforce of 1,944 full-time-equivalents
(FTE’s). This includes a net increase of
13.5 FTE’s. Included in the changes is
the deletion of 37 unfunded vacant
positions. The sunset date for 79
positions will be extended, and two
positions will have their sunset date
removed. We attach a sunset date to
positions whenever the funding is timelimited,
of if the funding is uncertain.
Annually, we monitor the sunset dates
and recommend extension or deletion as
appropriate. Seven (7) new position
classifications are recommended, as
follows: Lead Personnel Assistant-
Confidential (Personnel); Public Defender Investigator I/II (Public Defender); Lead Maintenance
Worker and Maintenance Supervisor (Public Works); Lead Community Mental Health Worker
(Mental Health); IT Application Support Analyst and IT Supervisor (Information Technology).
As of May 18, 2015, total vacancies were 233, or 12.0 percent. Some of the vacancies may be due
to the County’s Controlled Hiring Process. The CEO confers with Support Services weekly to review
all requests to fill positions. This is in part to reduce expenditures, but also to preserve positions for
employees facing a layoff situation. The County’s vacancy factor is typically 10 percent.
The CEO will continue to review all requests for new positions to ensure they are offset by long-term
reliable revenue. 

The Adopted Budget does not rely on the use of unallocated salary savings. Following the Board’s
direction to delete long-term vacancies, it is not necessary to budget for unallocated salary savings.
The Auditor-Controller provided assistance in identifying and adjusting salaries and benefits as
necessary.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
The cost of workers compensation insurance, CalPERS retirement, health insurance rate increases,
and retiree health care continue to impact the County. In March 2014 the Board of Supervisors
adopted a confidence level with a range between 80 to 90 percent for the County’s self-insured
workers’ compensation and liability insurance programs. The County is committed to maintaining a
prudent reserve.
The County’s employer share of CalPERS (“PERS”) retirement had already experienced volatility
due to the investment losses PERS experienced during the downtown in the market. In April 2012,
PERS announced an assumption change which included the reduction of the discount rate from 7.75
percent to 7.5 percent. Additionally, PERS changed other important benchmarks such as the
average mortality of retirees and their survivors. In April 2013, PERS announced a change in their
amortization and smoothing policies. That is, they will employ an amortization and smoothing policy
that will pay for all gains and losses over a fixed 30-year period with the increases or decreases in
the rate spread directly over a 5-year period. In March 2014, PERS again changed its actuarial
assumptions which will result in employer contribution rates increasing starting in 2016-17, with the
cost spread over 20 years with the increases phased in over the first five years and ramped down
over the last five years of the twenty year amortization period. Since 2011-12, on average the PERSMiscellaneous
rate increased less than one percent a year, and the PERS-Safety rate increased
three percent a year. It is yet uncertain what impact pension reform will have on employee
retirement. The County successfully bargained reduced retirement benefits with labor, many of
which are now the state-norm. While beneficial to the County’s long-term fiscal health, these
pension changes will not realize any immediate financial benefit.
On the local level, the County has successfully negotiated with 9 represented bargaining units and 3
unrepresented bargaining units for wage and/or benefit concessions. Active employees now pay the
employee share of PERS retirement, and new hires will be working longer (to age 62 for
miscellaneous and 57 for public safety) and their retirement will be based on the average of high
three years (instead of highest year). 

The County of Shasta provides post-retirement medical and dental benefits (OPEB) to eligible
employees who retire directly from the County. Eligible retirees pay a portion of the medical
premium based on the PEHMCA (CalPERS medical program) “unequal method.” The remaining
premium is shared by the County and active employees in accordance with bargaining agreements.
Like most governmental agencies, the County pays for these post-retirement benefits on a “pay-asyou-
go” basis. This means that OPEB costs are ignored while an employee renders service and
recognized only after the employee retires.
GASB 45 requires governmental agencies to conduct an actuarial valuation of the liability for OPEB
and report them on their financial statements. The Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liability is the
excess of the Actuarial Accrued Liability over Plan Assets. This represents the amount of the
Actuarial Accrued Liability at the valuation date that still must be funded. The County’s estimated
Unfunded Actuarial Liability as of June 30, 2014, is $162 million.
Although GASB does not require governmental agencies to pre-fund their OPEB liability, Shasta
County is taking positive steps towards addressing OPEB. The County established two irrevocable
OPEB Trusts with initial funding of $6 million each; and implemented a charge, as a percent of
payroll, effective July 1, 2008. This percentage will increase to 3 percent effective July 1, 2015.
Additionally, one-time additions to the OPEB-Trusts are made when funding is available. The
combined assets of the two OPEB-Trusts are $32 million.
We continue to advocate for legislative changes to PEMHCA to give counties greater flexibility in
establishing a tiered benefit system; and to work towards OPEB cost avoidance through labor
negotiations. Within available resources the County may incrementally increase the payroll charges
for OPEB to pass a portion of this expense to state and federal programs when appropriate.
BONDED INDEBTEDNESS
At the end of June 30, 2014, the County had total debt obligation outstanding of $44.2 million. Of
this amount, $37.0 million comprises bonds that are secured by the County’s lease rental payments
and other dedicated sources of revenue, and $891,900 of special assessment debt secured by
property subject to the assessment. The remainder of the County’s debt represents loans secured
solely by specified revenue sources.

Moody’s Investors Service assigned an A1 rating to the Shasta County Lease Revenue Refunding
Bonds 2013 Series A. The rating action reflects the County’s solid fiscal position including
satisfactory cash levels, well-sized though recently pressured tax base, the legal covenants of the
bonds and the County’s modest debt profile. The County has consistently reduced its expenditures
which enabled it to avoid material deficits while maintaining solid cash and general fund reserves.
Pressures on the County’s fiscal outlook are caused by state and local economic factors outside the
County’s control.
In 2014, Standard & Poor’s (S&P) raised the County’s credit rating from “A” to “A+” while affirming
the stable outlook. The stable outlook reflects their opinion of the County’s strong budgetary
flexibility and liquidity supported by strong performance. Further, the County is supported by strong
institutional framework. As with Moody’s rating, S&P’s rating is lowered somewhat by our weak local
economy.
be mitigated by spending reductions in FY 2014-15. Exceptions were made for those budgets with a
minimum maintenance of effort (MOE), and for certain Board approved projects. General Fund
departments are projected to achieve a 14.5 percent reduction in the year ending June 30, 2015,
which will result in a fund balance carryover of $10.9 million
Total funding requirements for the General Fund, which includes the subsidy to non-general fund
departments, is $83.6 million. This will be offset by revenue, $64.2 million, leaving a structural
imbalance of $21.1 (including a one-time $10 million transfer to Accumulated Capital Outlay). This
will be offset by use of fund balance carryover and General Fund General Purpose fund balance.
The carryover estimate is developed through a joint effort of staff in the Auditor-Controller’s Office
and the County Administrative Office. The actual fund balance figure is not firm until the County’s
books are closed at the end of September, subsequent to the adoption of the County budget.
Department heads and their fiscal managers are to be commended for their willingness to manage
spending within available resources while continuing to meet the needs of our community.