This document represents Shasta County's Recommended Fiscal Year 2016-17 Budget, pursuant to
Section 29062 of the Government Code. The budget is created from a process that includes
requests prepared by the operating and support departments of the County, review and
recommendations from my office, and compilation by the Auditor-Controller.
The Recommended Budget totals $437,939,681, including Total Governmental Funds,
$369,703,564; Internal Service Funds, $26,714,956; Enterprise Funds, $29,641,886; and Special
Districts and Other Agencies governed by the Board of Supervisors, $11,879,275. The budget
represents the efforts of my staff and managers of the County's many departments who worked
diligently to prepare a budget that reflects departmental needs and program funding requests as well
as the CEO's recommended appropriations for the next fiscal year.
This document is an administrative tool that provides the framework under which the County will
operate for the fiscal period. Absent mandates, the budget is a vehicle by which the Board of
Supervisors provides philosophical direction for programs important to the local community.
The budget process, and the ultimate adoption of a balanced budget, requires the cooperation;
dedication, and labor of many individuals. I would like to extend my thanks to all department heads,
and their staff, for the common effort they commit to this annual process. All are to be commended
for their service and dedication to the County of Shasta and its citizens.

There has been no significant improvement to revenues, and the County continues to adhere to
conservative spending due to economic uncertainty. Taking a proactive approach to spending
reductions in the past several fiscal years has helped keep the County solvent; but, absent
sustained annual revenue growth more reductions may be necessary each fiscal year.
Balancing service delivery with available resources will continue to be a challenge to the County for
many years.
DISCRETIONARY REVENUE
The national, state, and local economic downturn resulted in a decline in property values, lagging
sales of consumer goods and services, and a steep decline in interest rates. Shasta County
continues to experience the unprecedented loss of discretionary revenue.FY 2016-17 recommended discretionary General Revenue is $50.2 million, essentially status quo
compared to the FY 2015-16 estimated year-end.
As illustrated in the following chart, total discretionary revenue recognized by the General Purpose
Revenue budget unit hovers at or below $50 million per fiscal year. The exceptions were one-time
revenues from the dissolution of Redevelopment Agencies, fees from the Teeter Property Tax
Program, and catch-up reimbursement for State Mandate SB-90.In addition to our discretionary sales tax revenues, sales taxes dedicated to public health, mental
health, social services, and public safety are still recovering.
1991 Realignment (Health and Human Services) is funded through State sales tax and vehicle
license fees (VLF) dedicated to public health, mental health, and social services and provide the
majority of matching funds for numerous state and federal funding sources. Sales tax realignment
revenue is expected to continue to grow in FY 2016-17 due to an improved economy, and the
growth in revenue will fund partial repayment of the prior year’s caseload growth. Under
1991 realignment, Social Services programs receive payment for the increasing cost of operating
entitlement programs by allocation of excess revenues to pay these costs before general growth
payments are made. These realignment revenues, as well as other county resources and state
allocations, are used to draw down federal matching revenues that sustain programs.
1991-92 State-Local Realignment Health Subaccount Redirection
Under the Affordable Care Act, county costs and responsibilities for indigent health care are
decreasing as more individuals gain access to federal health care coverage. The State-based
Medi-Cal expansion has resulted in indigent care costs previously paid by counties shifting to the
State, contributing to significant increases in State costs.
Chapter 24, Statutes of 2013 (AB 85), modified the 1991 Realignment Local Revenue Fund
distributions to capture and redirect savings counties are experiencing from the implementation of
federal health care reform. These savings are reallocated to counties to pay an increased county
contribution towards the costs of CalWORKs grants, which reduces State General Fund
expenditures. County savings are estimated to be $749.9 million in FY 2015-16 and $643.4 million in
FY 2016-17. However, actual county savings in 2013-14 were $177.4 million lower than estimated
and the May Revision assumes reimbursement of this amount to counties in FY 2016-17.With the commencement of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), the Medi-Cal
expansion population’s treatment services, and the State’s expanded treatment benefits, cost
reimbursements are funded 100 percent by the federal and state governments through 2017 with no
County cost. During the years following, federal matching will fall to 95 percent and then decline
each year ultimately to 90 percent, eventually requiring a County share of cost. Although estimated
to be a relatively small County share of cost, over time this may also present a risk to providing
entitlement services as well as the sustainability of non-entitlement programs, and could potentially
impact the County’s ability to meet the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment (SAPT) County
Maintenance of Effort (MOE) level of spending.
2011 Realignment (Health and Human Services) is funded through a State special fund sales tax
and vehicle license fees (VLF). These revenue sources are decreasing slightly in the FY 2016-17
Governor’s May Revise. Through 2011 Realignment, responsibility for mental health and alcohol and
drug services passed to the counties with a share of state sales tax to replace the state general fund
contribution. These programs include the Women and Children’s Residential Treatment, Drug Medi-
Cal, Non-drug Medical, Drug Court, Mental Health Managed Care, and Early and Periodic
Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment (EPSDT) (mental health services for children). EPSDT and
Drug Medi-Cal are both federal entitlements; however, the funding is pooled for all the above listed
programs. Because these entitlement costs can expand rapidly, it presents a financial risk to the
County in future years, presents a risk to the sustainability of non-entitlement programs, and
potentially impacts the County’s ability to meet the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment
(SAPT) County Maintenance of Effort (MOE) level of spending. 2011 Realignment funding does not
yet have a permanent base funding amount allocated to individual counties, and the state hasn’t
established permanent methodology for distribution growth to counties. However, the state has been
using growth in the Behavioral Health Subaccount to pay for entitlement growth in Drug Medi-Cal
before paying general growth. This has caused significant variations in funding from one year to the
next for many counties. Shasta County has not been harmed to date, but this remains a strong
concern. The department is advocating for appropriate base levels of funding to support growing
costs and will be monitoring how 2011 Realignment will be structured in to the future to protect
County operations.
2011 Realignment (Public Safety) included a major realignment of public safety programs from the
State to local governments. The intent of the Community Corrections Partnership Program
authorized by AB109 is to reduce recidivism and end the revolving door of lower-level offenders and
parole violators through the State’s prisons.
Shasta County’s Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee (CCPEC), chaired by the
Chief Probation Officer, has approved its FY 2016-17 budget. As in previous years, the State AB109
funds allocated to Shasta County are distributed by a CCPEC-determined percentage to the
Sheriff (235), Jail (260), Work Release (246), General Assistance Program (542), Mental Health
(410), Social Services (501), District Attorney (227), Public Defender (207), Probation (263), and
Probation Reserves. Compared to FY 2015-16, for FY 2016-17, the CCPEC voted to support an
additional $1.18 million toward the following: salaries, benefits, and operating expense increases
($312,356); increasing the BI, Inc. Day Reporting Center contract for up to 120 offenders ($20,000);
increased rent for the Community Corrections Center ($19,380), upgrading GPS monitoring units
and adding alcohol monitoring units ($15,000); reserves ($26,245); eight Probation staff ($741,899);
and out-of-county custody beds ($50,000). Considering that many individual public safety revenue
resources are declining or flat, the CCPEC is commended for collaborating to determine how AB109
funds can be spent to reduce recidivism in Shasta County and approving allocation of additional
AB109 funds in FY 2016-17. The estimated AB109 fund balance for June 30, 2017 is $6.2 million.
In the Governor’s May Revise, due to sales tax reductions, projections for the 2011 Realignment
Community Corrections Subaccount and District Attorney / Public Defender Subaccount, have been APPROPRIATIONS
The Recommended FY 2016-17 General Fund Budget is $77.4 million, which is $8.1 million less
than the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget. In FY 2015-16, we made a one-time transfer of $10 million to
Accumulated Capital Outlay for major capital outlay expenses for the anticipated facilities
acquisitions and improvements, such as remodel of the old Courthouse and the old Juvenile Hall
building.
The Auditor-Controller calculates the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for public safety. The
most recent calculation is FY 2015-16. The FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget for all the public safety
departments exceeded the adjusted MOE Base by $25.1 million. The County subsidy to the
combined health and human services programs has been held static over the last several years.
The Auditor-Controller and the Health & Human Services Agency Business & Support Services
division have cooperatively determined that the Social Services fund has some County over-match.
Each year the fund will be reviewed to determine if the over-match is resolving.
Appropriations include a Contingency Reserve of $6 million that can be used for unanticipated
requirements that may occur during the fiscal year. When no need arises, these funds return to
fund balance and become the basis of the carry-over for the succeeding year. Financing is derived
from anticipated revenue, inter-fund transfers, and carry-over fund balances.
The General Reserve is approximately $10.6 million. This is less than three percent of total
Governmental Funds appropriations ($369.7 million). The Board established a policy for budgetary
reserves in December 2007. The goal is to attain a Reserve of five percent (5%) of estimated
financing uses, less designations for reserves and capital projects, but no less than $10 million.
YEAR-TO-YEAR COMPARISON
Departments were directed to submit a budget request with a target of three percent (3%) growth in
the General Fund contribution or net-county-cost; overages could be mitigated by spending
reductions in FY 2015-16. For the fiscal year ending June 30, 2016, the General Fund is projected
to realize a 9.44 percent reduction in expenditures ($8 million), and a reduction to the net-countycost
(down from $20.2 million to $12.4 million).
In the aggregate, the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for select budget units, excluding special
districts, totals $429 million, which when compared to the 2015-16 Adjusted Budget, is an increase
of $246,527, or less than one percent (1%).
The following Table compares by Fund the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget (at 01/31/2016), versus
estimated expenditures at 6/30/2016, with the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for select budget
units.

Additionally, planning is underway for a new Adult Rehabilitation Center (ARC). This multi-year
project includes appropriations of $3 million in FY 2016-17. When fully built-out the project is
estimated to cost $22.5 million, with a County-match and in-kind match of $2.5 million. The Countymatch
has been fully appropriated.
COUNTY FIRE
The Shasta County Fire Department (SCFD)/County Service Area (CSA) #1 provides fire
suppression and protection services to unincorporated areas that are not served by either an
independent fire district or a city fire department. CSA #1 contracts with the California Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) to operate and administer Shasta County Fire Department
CSA #1. This includes the coordination of the activities of all SCFD volunteer fire companies,
maintaining mutual aid response agreements with the cities and with all independent fire districts,
and to assure that all fire safety, fire code, and fire department land use regulations are observed 

throughout the County.
The department’s requested budget includes one Fire Marshal (non-sworn) position. Currently,
there is a Fire Marshal position provided for with the CAL FIRE contract. The Fire Marshal position
under the CAL FIRE contract will be reclassified to a Fire Captain whose primary responsibilities will
be fire investigations. The Fire Marshal (non-sworn) position will concentrate on building plan
review. With the concentration of plan review duties, the department feels it is more appropriate that
this position be a county position rather than a CAL FIRE position.
The department has requested five new capital assets: one fire engine, two trucks, and two water
tenders. The total amount budgeted for capital assets is $1 million.
Intergovernmental revenues are decreasing by more than $600,000 compared to the FY 2015-16
adjusted budget due to the ending of the SAFER grant. Due to the funding loss from the ending of
the SAFER grant, the department has requested $2.8 million in General Fund support, an increase
of $630,320 compared to the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget. The County Executive Officer
recommends County General Fund support in the amount of $2.4 million.
COUNTY CLERK/ELECTIONS
COUNTY CLERK
The net county cost is increasing by $5,121, or three percent, compared to the FY 2015-16 adjusted
budget. Increasing operating costs associated with consistently more strenuous state requirements
for processing passport applications, combined with reduced County share of the passport
application fees, continue to challenge this budget.
ELECTIONS
Because elections now generally occur once per fiscal year, the prior high/low cycle of budgeting
has evened out. Now, variation comes over a longer period of time – the four year election cycle.
Larger financial need occurs in the Presidential years (divisible by four) which have traditionally
higher voter turnout as compared to the Gubernatorial years. Requested expenditures have
increased due to the regularly scheduled Presidential General Election in November 2016. However,
the department also anticipates ending FY 2015-16 under budget by $14,993. Governor Brown
signed in to law Assembly Bill (AB) 120 on April 29, 2016 which allocates almost $16.2 million during
FY 2015-16 for the support of counties that request assistance for costs incurred in conducting the
June 7, 2016 Presidential Primary Election simultaneously with completing statewide initiative
signature verifications in a timely manner. AB 120 requires the Secretary of State to establish an
allocation formula based on the total number of signatures submitted to the requesting county
(between April 26, 2016 and July 15, 2016) and the number of eligible voters as of April 8, 2016 in
that county. After these numbers are known, counties have until August 1, 2016 to seek
reimbursement for their proportional share.
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
In the aggregate, at June 30, 2016, Health and Human Services funds (Mental Health, Mental Health
Services Act, Public Assistance, and Public Health) project a return to fund balance of almost $4
million. Recommended appropriations total $173.6 million, offset by revenue $161.3 million, leaving
a structural imbalance of $12.2 million. This will be offset by fund balance available. At the end of
FY 2016-17 the Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA) projects fund balance reserves in the
amount of $29.3 million.
Included in the FY 2016-17 budget request are costs to implement the Assisted Outpatient 

Treatment Program, or Laura’s Law, as a three-year pilot. Laura’s Law allows for court-ordered
assisted outpatient treatment for people with serious and deteriorating mental illness with a recent
history of psychiatric hospitalization, incarceration, or violent behavior and who are routinely refusing
to participate in ongoing treatment.
Since March 2012, costs for acute hospitalization and Institutes for Mental Diseases (IMDs) have
stayed at high levels. Most of the IMD cost is ineligible for Medi-Cal reimbursement and, thus, must
be supported within department realignment funds. Efforts to mitigate costs in this area have been
initiated and are a strong focus of the HHSA, such as contracting with Board and Care providers to
provide housing and supportive services for clients to step down from higher levels of care.
Medi-Cal Cost Settlements for expenses incurred as far back as 2010 are still pending and have not
been included as part of this budget. Although $1.5 million in overdue cost settlement payments
were received during FY 2015-16, an estimated $1 million total is owed for prior years for costs
above the interim rate the state paid Shasta County. Payment for this is still held up by state
negotiations with the federal government regarding the State Plan Amendment that has a retroactive
effective date of January 1, 2009.
Intergovernmental transfer (IGT) revenue is included in the Budget request; these funds may not be
available past federal fiscal year 2017 due to pending changes in Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) regulations.
The May Revise includes a 1.4 percent increase to CalWORKs grants effective October 1, 2016.
The County’s share is approximately two and one-half percent. Additionally, Resolution No. 2013-
149 (adopted by the Board on December 17, 2013) authorizes the Director of HHSA to implement
changes to the County General Assistance maximum monthly grant to align with adjustments to the
CalWORKs maximum monthly assistance payment. General Assistance is funded solely with
County General funds.
Managed Care Organization (MCO) Financing
The Governor called a special session in June 2015 to address a proposed tax on health plans.
Chapter 2, Statutes of 2016, Second Extraordinary Session (SBX2 2), authorized a tax on the
enrollment of Medi-Cal managed care plans and commercial health plans for a three-year period.
This reduces General Fund spending in the Medi-Cal program by approximately $1.1 billion in the
budget year, and more than $1.7 billion in FY 2017-18 and FY 2018-19. Some health plans,
including local health plans, would fall under the new tax although the exact cost to Shasta County is
currently unknown. Without this continued revenue source (current MCO tax expired) the state would
have had to make severe funding cuts to health and human services programs.
HOUSING
The Housing Authority administers the Housing Choice Vouchers (formerly Section 8) Rental
Assistance Program through a contract with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD). Monthly rental assistance payments are made directly to landlords on behalf
of low-income tenants. Eligibility is limited to families and the elderly or disabled. There are
presently 967 tenant-based vouchers in this program. The Housing Authority assists local efforts to
provide affordable housing opportunities to low-income residents.
Three additional social service programs are provided to clients: Family Self Sufficiency (FSS)
provides mentoring and referral services to assist families in achieving economic self-sufficiency.
The Family Unification Program (FUP) provides subsidized housing so that divided families can be
reunited. The Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (VASH) program combines Housing Choice 

Voucher Rental Assistance for homeless Veterans with case management and clinical services
provided by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).
Expenditures within this budget unit are funded by HUD. Payments of $4.9 million made by the
Housing Authority directly to landlords are not reflected in this budget.
Effective January 2, 2012, the California Department of Housing and Community Development
transferred 268 tenant-based vouchers to the Housing Authority. This change increased the number
of housing vouchers administered from 644 to 912 and expanded the service area to include the
counties of Modoc, Siskiyou, and Trinity. Since July 1, 2013, HUD has awarded 55 VASH vouchers,
increasing the total number of housing vouchers administered from 912 to 967.
The budget passed by Congress for Federal fiscal year 2016 requires HUD to continue to underfund
administrative fees earned by housing authorities nationwide. As a result the department will delete
3.5 Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) vacant positions in FY 2016-17. Management has taken steps to
curb controllable costs within services and supplies. Revenue allocations from HUD will be
monitored and expenditure levels will be adjusted accordingly. 

The District Attorney, Chief Probation Officer, and the Sheriff have worked diligently to provide a
FY 2016-17 budget that protects public safety and fulfills their core missions with consideration for
the County’s overall fiscal health. After initial budget submission, there was concern about the
estimated June 30, 2017 fund balances of Proposition 172 Reserves and the Public Safety General
Purpose Fund even with some projected carryover from FY 2015-16. The District Attorney, Chief
Probation Officer, and the Sheriff were asked to review their submitted budgets again and propose
reductions to keep the public safety funds more stable as anticipated revenues are declining or flat.
For the most part, this meant considering and agreeing to hold several vacant positions vacant for all
or part of FY 2016-17. They are to be commended for proposing additional reductions during the
budget process.
Consistent with the Board’s Budget Principles, Public Safety departments were provided a three
percent increase of General Fund support. In addition, due to concerns over insurance rate
increases and some A-87 cost increases, the County Administrative Office is recommending
additional General Fund support. Total General Fund support, not including Civil, Animal Control, or
Victim Witness, for FY 2016-17 is $25.8 million. Public Safety Augmentation (Prop. 172) revenue
totals $14 million for FY 2016-17, which is flat compared to FY 2015-16.
Total Recommended FY 2016-17 appropriations for the public safety group are almost $70 million,
an increase of $3.1 million from the current year. Appropriations include items such as: standard
salary and benefits increases; services and supplies cost increases; $500,000 as part of the
County’s contribution to the Integrated Public Safety System upgrade (in collaboration with the cities
of Anderson, Redding, and Shasta Lake); approximately $750,000 to expand the Coroner’s building
to accommodate staff efficiencies and address Americans With Disabilities Act issues; and
approximately $850,000 to continue the Jail’s Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning Security
Controls upgrade. 

The net County cost for the public safety group is $9 million. After using an estimated $2.8 million in
restricted funds, such as AB109, Consumer Fraud, and Youth Offender Block Grant, the adjusted
net County cost is $6.1 million. Approximately $1.4 million will come from Prop. 172 Reserves and
$4.7 million will come from the Public Safety General Purpose Fund.
PROBATION REVENUE CONCERNS (263)
The Chief Probation Officer is diligently addressing ongoing revenue concerns. SB678, the
Community Corrections Performance Incentive Act of 2009 formula begins with a base of $200,000
then counties are eligible for additional monetary performance incentive grants for reducing the rate
of the number of probation revocations to state prison. Unfortunately, Shasta County has a very
high revocation rate and will only receive the $200,000 base allocation in FY 2016-17. This is an
eighty-four percent decrease from the $1.2 million Shasta County received for FY 2012-13. A
byproduct of receiving less revenue is that there are fewer staff and contracted service providers to
implement evidence-based programs, processes, and services to reduce recidivism. To help offset
this declining revenue, the local Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) Executive Committee
voted to allow Probation to use some of its AB109 fund balance to fund eight positions in FY 2016-
17.
Due to the significant decline in SB678 for Shasta County, Probation created a focus group in
collaboration with its justice partners to determine the reasons for the continued high return to prison
rate and to create a plan to work together to rehabilitate offenders. This collaboration is further
challenged by the increased number of individuals being released from State prisons to meet federal
requirements to reduce California’s prison populations.
PUBLIC WORKS
The Department of Public Works consists of the following divisions: Road Operations, Facilities
Management, Fleet Management, and County Service Areas.
The FY 2016-17 Road Fund includes expenditures in the amount of $19.4 million and revenues in
the amount of $14.3 million. Expenditures exceed revenues by approximately $5.1 million and will
be covered by fund balance. Some of the larger projects that the department plans to undertake in
FY 2016-17 are: Gas Point Road Improvements, Deschutes Road Improvements, and Inwood Road
at South Fork Bear Creek Bridge. The department continues to lose funding from State Highway
User Tax. This year, the department expects that approximately $2.5 million in funding will be lost.
The department is optimistic that funding will be restored in the future; however, it is not known when
the funding will be restored.
The Facilities Management Division is financed through charges for service to user departments
and does not receive General Fund support. The Division has requested two capital asset pickup
trucks and the remodel of the Facilities Management office.
The County Service Area Administration budget reflects the fiscal activity of the “umbrella”
organization, which provides operational and administrative support to the County Service Areas.
This budget unit is fully supported by administrative fees levied in the benefiting County Service
Areas.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
The Department of Resource Management consists of the following divisions: Air Quality 

Management District, Building Division, Environmental Health Division, Planning Division and
Community Education Section. The combined General Fund support to Resource Management is
$1.4 million.
The Building Department’s primary function is to safeguard the life, health, and property of Shasta
County residents through the application of uniform building standards. These standards involve
design, materials, construction, use, occupancy, and location of all buildings and structures within
the unincorporated area of the County. The Building Department additionally serves as the code
enforcement arm of the Resource Management Department. This includes serving as the code
enforcement officer for Medical Marijuana cultivation.
Environmental Health is charged with the responsibility for enforcement of pertinent California health
laws, rules, regulations, and Shasta County Ordinances. The division also provides specific permit
and inspection programs which involve sewage disposal, individual wells, solid waste, hazardous
materials storage and disclosure, underground tanks, food service facilities, public drinking water
systems, swimming pools, housing and institutions, and medical waste management. The General
Fund continues to support one full-time Senior Environmental Health Specialist position that works
on un-reimbursed community Environmental Health programs.
The Planning Division serves as the land use information center for the County. This division of the
Department of Resource Management serves as an integral part of the “planning agency” for the
County, the agency being comprised of the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors, and
adjunct departments. Building and planning activity is relatively stable and the department is
concentrating on several projects, including the General Plan. A General Fund contribution of
$353,843 is budgeted for the General Plan update. Fund balance will be utilized to offset any
revenue shortfall.
General Plan Update. By law, each California County must adopt and maintain a comprehensive,
long-term general plan that governs physical development and land use within its boundaries.
Shasta County has adopted a five year interval for review. The last comprehensive General Plan
was adopted in 2004. On March 23, 2010 the Board of Supervisors elected to proceed with a limited
General Plan update which will address the critical greenhouse gas requirement in a new air quality
element and will include the mandatory housing element update with integration of both elements
into the rest of the General Plan as needed. The update will include editorial updates to policy
language and to County profiles (population, economic trends, etc.). The total estimated cost of the
limited General Plan update is $552,000. The General Fund contributes annually to offset
expenditures for the Plan update.
TITLE III PROJECTS
In April 2015, Congress reauthorized the program for two years. After the two year extension, the
future of the Secure Rural Schools Act is unknown.
TRIAL COURTS
The County worked closely with the City of Redding, the local Court, and the Judicial Council of
California (JCC) on siting the new courthouse building. The County and the JCC executed a
Purchase Acquisition Agreement whereby the JCC exchanged its equity in the Main Courthouse and
Courthouse Annex, and the Justice Center, for the Public Safety Building. The County vacated the
Public Safety Building as of April 1, 2016. The County purchased two office buildings located on
Court Street, and remodeled them into offices for Probation staff located in the Public Safety
Building. Additionally, a building located at 300 Park Marina Circle was purchased and remodeled 

into office space for the Sheriff’s Office. Upon completion of the new courthouse the Court will
vacate the Main Courthouse/Courthouse Annex and Justice Center; the Department of Public Works
has estimated remodel of the Main Courthouse will cost a minimum of $8 million.
The continuing decline in forthwith payments for Court fines and fees is impacting the County
General Fund. Certain Court fines and fees were pledged for the debt service on the Courthouse
remodel long-term debt. The shortfall is made up by the General Fund. Once the debt is retired in
2023, any remaining funds in the Courthouse Construction Fund will accrue to the State. The
County Administrative Office has worked with the Auditor-Controller to ensure the County’s share of
these funds is appropriately transferred to the County.
VETERANS HALLS
Projects scheduled for FY 2016-17 include the sewer line replacement of the Anderson Veterans
Hall and the replacement of the roof for the Fall River Mills Veterans Hall. Additional projects were
requested (an HVAC replacement, painting, and loading ramp reconfiguration); however they will be
postponed until next year.
COUNTY WORKFORCE
The Recommended Budget provides for a workforce of 1,986 full-time-equivalents (FTE’s). This
includes a net increase of 31.0
FTE’s. The sunset date for three
positions will be extended through
June 30, 2017. Three (3) new
position classifications are
recommended, as follows: Office
of Emergency Services (OES)
Technician; Fire Marshal (Non-
Sworn); and Peer Support
Specialist.
As of February 10, 2016, total
vacancies were 229, or 12.0
percent. Some of the vacancies
may be due to the County’s
Controlled Hiring Process. The
CEO confers with Support Services to review all requests to fill positions. This is in part to reduce
expenditures, but also to preserve positions for employees facing a layoff situation.
The CEO will continue to review all requests for new positions to ensure they are offset by long-term
reliable revenue. 

The cost of workers compensation insurance, CalPERS retirement, health insurance rate increases,
and retiree health care continue to impact the County. In March 2014 the Board of Supervisors
adopted a confidence level with a range between 80 to 90 percent for the County’s self-insured
workers’ compensation and liability insurance programs. The County is committed to maintaining a
prudent reserve.
The County’s share of CalPERS (“PERS”) retirement in FY 2016-17 is 17.0 percent for
Miscellaneous, and 43.8 percent for Safety. By FY 2021-22, PERS estimates these rates will be
21.5 percent for Miscellaneous, and 53.0 percent for Safety. It is yet uncertain what impact pension
reform will have on employee retirement. The County successfully bargained reduced retirement
benefits with labor, many of which are now the state-norm. While beneficial to the County’s longterm
fiscal health, these pension changes will not realize any immediate financial benefit.
The volatility in the PERS rates is two-fold - investment losses PERS experienced during the
downtown in the market, and assumption changes. In April 2012, PERS announced an assumption
change which included the reduction of the discount rate from 7.75 percent to 7.5 percent.
Additionally, PERS changed other important benchmarks such as the average mortality of retirees
and their survivors. In April 2013, PERS announced a change in their amortization and smoothing
policies. That is, they will employ an amortization and smoothing policy that will pay for all gains and
losses over a fixed 30-year period with the increases or decreases in the rate spread directly over a
5-year period. In March 2014, PERS again changed its actuarial assumptions which will result in
employer contribution rates increasing starting in FY 2016-17, with the cost spread over 20 years
with the increases phased in over the first five years and ramped down over the last five years of the
twenty year amortization period.
The County successfully negotiated with nine represented bargaining units and three unrepresented
bargaining units for wage and/or benefit concessions. Active employees now pay the employee 

employees who retire directly from the County. Eligible retirees pay a portion of the medical
premium based on the PEHMCA (CalPERS medical program) “unequal method.” The remainingAs of June 30, 2015, the County had total debt obligation outstanding of $41.3 million. Of this
amount, $34.6 million comprises bonds that are secured by the County’s lease rental payments and
other dedicated sources of revenue, and $853,500 of special assessment debt secured by property
subject to the assessment. The remainder of the County’s debt represents loans secured solely by
specified revenue sources.
Moody’s Investors Service assigned an A1 rating to the Shasta County Lease Revenue Refunding
Bonds 2013 Series A. The rating action reflects the County’s solid fiscal position including
satisfactory cash levels, well-sized though recently pressured tax base, the legal covenants of the
bonds and the County’s modest debt profile. The County has consistently reduced its expenditures
which enabled it to avoid material deficits while maintaining solid cash and general fund reserves.
Pressures on the County’s fiscal outlook are caused by state and local economic factors outside the
County’s control.
In 2014, Standard & Poor’s (S&P) raised the County’s credit rating from “A” to “A+” while affirming
the stable outlook. The stable outlook reflects their opinion of the County’s strong budgetary
flexibility and liquidity supported by strong performance. Further, the County is supported by strong
institutional framework. As with Moody’s rating, S&P’s rating is lowered somewhat by our weak local
economy.
Both rating agencies praised the County’s ability to grow and sustain a healthy fund balance,
currently $30.9 million. With economic signs pointing to another recession, a strong fund balance
will enable the County to weather the downturn.
premium is shared by the County and active employees in accordance with bargaining agreements.
Like most governmental agencies, the County pays for these post-retirement benefits on a “pay-asyou-
go” basis. This means that OPEB costs are ignored while an employee renders service and
recognized only after the employee retires.
GASB 45 requires governmental agencies to conduct an actuarial valuation of the liability for OPEB
and report them on their financial statements. The Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liability is the
excess of the Actuarial Accrued Liability over Plan Assets. This represents the amount of the
Actuarial Accrued Liability at the valuation date that still must be funded. The County’s estimated
Unfunded Actuarial Liability as of June 30, 2015, is $162 million.
Although GASB does not require governmental agencies to pre-fund their OPEB liability, Shasta
County is taking positive steps towards addressing OPEB. The County established two irrevocable
OPEB Trusts with initial funding of $6 million each; and implemented a charge, as a percent of
payroll, effective July 1, 2008. This percentage increased to three percent (3%) effective July 1,
2015. Additionally, one-time additions to the OPEB-Trusts are made when funding is available. The
combined assets of the two OPEB-Trusts are $39 million.
The County is working with its labor partners to eliminate County-funded health benefits after
retirement for new employees. Instead, the County is proposing to match an employee 457 plan
contribution of up to three percent (3%) of gross salary in a 401(a) plan. If implemented, it is
estimated that the proposal will eliminate the OPEB liability by the year 2040.
We continue to advocate for legislative changes to PEMHCA to give counties greater flexibility in
establishing a tiered benefit system; and to work towards OPEB cost avoidance through labor
negotiations. Within available resources the County may incrementally increase the payroll charges
for OPEB to pass a portion of this expense to state and federal programs when appropriate. 

As of June 30, 2015, the County had total debt obligation outstanding of $41.3 million. Of this
amount, $34.6 million comprises bonds that are secured by the County’s lease rental payments and
other dedicated sources of revenue, and $853,500 of special assessment debt secured by property
subject to the assessment. The remainder of the County’s debt represents loans secured solely by
specified revenue sources.
Moody’s Investors Service assigned an A1 rating to the Shasta County Lease Revenue Refunding
Bonds 2013 Series A. The rating action reflects the County’s solid fiscal position including
satisfactory cash levels, well-sized though recently pressured tax base, the legal covenants of the
bonds and the County’s modest debt profile. The County has consistently reduced its expenditures
which enabled it to avoid material deficits while maintaining solid cash and general fund reserves.
Pressures on the County’s fiscal outlook are caused by state and local economic factors outside the
County’s control.
In 2014, Standard & Poor’s (S&P) raised the County’s credit rating from “A” to “A+” while affirming
the stable outlook. The stable outlook reflects their opinion of the County’s strong budgetary
flexibility and liquidity supported by strong performance. Further, the County is supported by strong
institutional framework. As with Moody’s rating, S&P’s rating is lowered somewhat by our weak local
economy.
Both rating agencies praised the County’s ability to grow and sustain a healthy fund balance,
currently $30.9 million. With economic signs pointing to another recession, a strong fund balance
will enable the County to weather the downturn.

On a positive note, due to fiscal conservatism, the State has eliminated its $26.6 budget deficit by a
combination of budget cuts, temporary taxes and the recovering economy. Over the next two years
the State budget will remain in balance. However, by as early as 2019 the Governor forecasts a
return of budget deficits with shortfalls of $4 billion.
The May Revise has five focus areas: Investing in Education ($2.9 billion new funding, $25 million
higher education system); Reducing Housing Costs ($3.2 billion in state and federal funding, $2
billion bond from Proposition 63); Counteracting Poverty ($19 billion, approximately $10.7 will come
from Proposition 98 funds); Strengthening Infrastructure ($36 billion over the next decade to improve
highways and roads, $737 million for critical deferred maintenance of levees and various state
facilities); and Fighting Climate Change ($3.1 billion cap-and-trade expenditure plan).
The CEO will monitor the eventual adoption of a State spending plan for FY 2016-17, and keep the
Board apprised of any negative impact on the County budget and the public we serve.
OTHER AGENCY INVOLVEMENT
Every County department head provided input into this report via their budget request. The CEO
and/or the CAO analysts met with department heads to discuss their budget request. The CEO and
Auditor-Controller worked collaboratively on compilation of the Recommended Budget.
FINANCING
Department heads have worked diligently to control spending in the current fiscal year to create fund
balance carryover for FY 2016-17. Departments were allowed to submit a budget request with a
target of three percent growth in the General Fund contribution or net-county-cost; overages could
be mitigated by spending reductions in FY 2015-16. Exceptions were made for those budgets with a
minimum maintenance of effort (MOE), and for certain Board-approved projects. General Fund
departments are projected to achieve a 9.38 percent expenditure reduction in the fiscal year ending
June 30, 2016, which will result in a fund balance carryover of $7.7 million.
Total funding requirements for the General Fund, which includes the subsidy to non-general fund
departments, is $77.4 million. This will be offset by revenue, $62.5 million, leaving a structural
imbalance of $14.8. This will be offset by use of fund balance carryover and General Fund General
Purpose fund balance. The carryover estimate is developed through a joint effort of staff in the
Auditor-Controller’s Office and the County Administrative Office. The actual fund balance figure is
not firm until the County’s books are closed at the end of September, subsequent to the adoption of
the County budget.
Department heads and their fiscal managers are to be commended for their willingness to manage
spending within available resources while continuing to meet the needs of our community.
Attachment – Capital Facilities Improvement Plan (CIP)