Staff recommends that the Board of Supervisors conduct Budget Hearings beginning at 9:00 a.m. on June 22, 2015 and approve an Adopted Budget at the conclusion of the hearings. During the hearings, the Board will be requested to consider increasing and/or funding additional revenue offset positions, investments in technology and County facilities, contributions to non-county agencies, reserve levels for unfunded liabilities and the use of one-time funds received in FY2014/15.
Today, Solano County is better positioned having begun to slowly emerge from the local housing market collapse and the effects of the Great Recession. Our population growth rate remains modest at 1 percent over 2014 with all signs pointing to an economy that continues to improve slowly, including employment, housing and personal income statistics. According to the California Employment Development Department, overall employment in California is better today than it was a year ago. The unemployment rate in Solano County as of March 2015 stands at 6.3 percent, down from 8.4 percent in 2014 and just slightly below state average of 6.5 percent. Although Solano County ranks as the fourth lowest in per capita income when compared to benchmark counties, our growth rate in per capita income outpaced the state, increasing by 3.4 percent in 2013. Unfortunately while things are improving, we must pay careful attention to the local economic impacts of the drought to the agricultural industry, and to our residents and businesses. We are also faced with reduced funding for streets and roads due to unsuccessful efforts with both federal and state transportation legislation. The lingering 13.3 percent poverty rate in Solano County, translates to nearly one in four residents (28.2 percent) requiring some form of public assistance. Residents are increasingly qualifying for publically subsidized healthcare through the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and/or CalFresh benefits (food stamps). Although we remain optimistic, implementation of the ACA has not been without its difficulties. Operational challenges, including identifying and enrolling large numbers of new enrollees, for primary and behavioral health services has created a shortage of quality health care providers in Solano County. In addition, with an aging population in the county and subsequent decline in the birth rate through 2020, an increasing number of older individuals will be utilizing the health care system provided by both the County and other health care providers.
Included in the budget message are the following budget-related sections: 1) Budget Overview; 2) Financial Summary; 3) Funded and Unfunded Obligations and Liabilities; 4) Overview of the Federal and State Budgets; 5) FY2015/16 General Fund Recommended Budget; 6) General Fund and Fiscal Projection; 7) Pending Issues and 8) Summary of Recommendations.
The FY2015/16 Recommended Budget for Governmental Funds is balanced and totals $892,269,052 (Schedules 1 and 2). The total budget represents an increase of $22.1 million or 2.5% when compared to the FY2014/15 Adopted Budget and relies on local, State and Federal revenues, and the use of fund balances and draws from reserves.
The most significant change is reflected in the Capital Project Funds due to construction costs for the new AB 900-funded Stanton Correctional Facility which was completed in FY2014/15 and construction costs for SB 1022 Sheriff training project which will be carried forward and reflected in the FY2015/16 Adopted Budget. The increase in the General Fund reflects higher property tax revenues, increased labor costs, and increased General Fund contributions to both Health and Social Services and Public Safety is primarily due to more Fund Balance available at year-end. The increases in the Special Revenues Funds are primarily due to growth in state and federally mandated programs in the Public Safety and Health & Social Services funds. The increases in these two program funds are attributed to new service level requirements as a result of 2011 Public Safety Realignment (AB 109), and the implementations of the Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47 and the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Increases in Special Revenues Funds in the FY2015/16 Recommended Budget also reflect repair costs related to the August 2014 South Napa earthquake that will be expended in FY2015/16.
The FY2015/16 Recommended Budget uses projected 6/30/15 fund balances in several departments with dedicated revenues and draws down $9.8 million from committed fund balances to meet County obligations. One-time General Fund revenues from FY2014/15 are recommended to be used to offset one-time costs and to help pay for increased unfunded liabilities for employee-related benefits for the projected PERS employer rate increases and as contributions toward capital renewal reserves for the maintenance of the County buildings.
The Recommended Budget provides for a workforce of 2,926.45 FTE positions, excluding extra help positions. This reflects a net increase of 110.70 FTE from FY2014/15 Adopted Budget of which 61.70 FTE were added during FY2014/15. The net difference of 49.0 FTE results from the addition of 51.0 FTE included in the Recommended Budget, and offset by the deletion of 2.0 FTE expiring limited terms. The year-over-year increase in the workforce reflects staffing needs to address new mandates and associated services related to 2011 Public Safety Realignment compliance with Proposition 47, implementation of the Affordable Care Act, as well as cost avoidance measures, and changes in operational needs.
This Budget Summary narrative is accompanied by a series of budget tables that are intended to describe the budgeted expenditures and associated revenue used to fund the programs and services outlined in the respective budget units. The individual Department Recommended Budget narratives provide the following information: the purpose; function and responsibilities; significant challenges and accomplishments as identified by the Department Head; workload indicators (where pertinent and relevant); a summary of significant adjustments to the operation or budget; summary of position changes; and identification of pending issues and policy considerations as identified by the Department Head.
The FY2015/16 Recommended Budget addresses known revenue challenges and incorporates reductions and adjustments in operating expenditures to address challenges including changing community needs and demands for services in all areas of County responsibility, invests in the future by allowing for some continued investments in technology, training, and capital renewal and includes prudent financial management recommendations for subsequent fiscal years. The Recommended Budget includes funding for technology refresh, training and support for employee development and organizational transitions, reinvests in County facilities and County information systems to ensure the County’s infrastructure and systems remain current and capable of supporting the County staff providing services and the residents and clients who access and are dependent on County services. The Budget recommendations support and rely on continued collaboration by including small investments with our community partners to leverage State and Federal funds. The Budget includes one-time funding to increase reserves, including $4.0 million for projected PERS employer rate increases, $4.5 million in General Reserves, $2.0 million for future capital renewal projects, $1.4 million for future Road Fund activities, $0.5 million in Library reserves, and $0.5 million for the Mental Health Services Act (See Schedule 4).
While the budget is balanced, it should be noted that there are no provisions in operating budgets for FY2015/16 for salary increases, and the budget relies on the use of one-time funding to cover known revenue/operating shortfalls in Behavioral Health while efforts are underway to find a means to pay for mandated Behavioral Health Services in FY2015/16. If those efforts are unsuccessful the County will face a substantial cost exposure in FY2016/17. In addition, Public Health is faced with staff challenges and new cost reporting/claiming requirements that may change their overall cost to the County in FY2015/16.
The County’s FY2015/16 Recommended Budget for the General Fund of $232.1 million is balanced with revenues of $202.3 million, drawdowns from committed fund balances of $800,000 for Accrued Employee Leave Payoff, $2.0 million for Capital Renewal Reserve, $2.0 million for Employer PERS Rate Increase and the remainder being funded by Fund Balance ($25 million).
The Recommended Budget for General Fund reflects an increase in revenues of $17.7 million when compared to the FY2014/15 Adopted Budget of $184.6 million. The increase in revenues is attributed to an anticipated increase in Tax Revenues of $12.7 million due to increased property values and an increase of $4.7 million for charges for services for various permits and services.
The Recommended Budget reflects increased General Fund appropriations of $232.1 million when compared to FY2014/15 Adopted Budget of $218.4 million. The net increase of $13.7 million is primarily due to increased County contributions to Health and Social Services and Public Safety, an increase to Contingencies to address potential exposures in Behavioral Health and Health Services, and increased labor costs due to higher retirement rates and increased staffing to address mandates and increased programs to associated services.
PENDING ISSUES
Supplemental Budget: The Recommended Budget document was prepared early in the month of May to facilitate a May release and longer review period prior to Budget Hearings in June. To accommodate the earlier release, the departmental budgets reflect only the known and approved State and Federal programs changes as of May 15, which will take effect July 1, 2015.
Historically, the County Administrator’s Office prepares a Supplemental Budget document following the completion and distribution of the Recommended Budget, as more of an administrative function, primarily to address accounting notations. To the degree possible, the Supplemental Budget may reflect additional program and service changes including possible reductions that can be expected based on the Governor’s May Revision.
Affordable Care Act: Since implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in October 2013, a total of 15,681 Solano residents have enrolled in private health insurance plans through Covered California. During the first open enrollment period (October 1, 2013 through March 31, 2014) 11,180 individuals enrolled; and during the second open enrollment period (November 15, 2014 through February 15, 2015) 4,501 individuals enrolled. With the expansion of Medi-Cal eligibility to single low-income adults, Medi-Cal enrollment has grown by 47% from 70,693 individuals in June 2013 to 114,125 individuals as of March 2015 in Solano County.
The Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act – Proposition 47: Proposition 47 is a ballot initiative passed by California voters on November 4, 2014. Proposition 47 reduces certain non-serious and nonviolent property and drug offenses from wobblers or felonies to misdemeanors, reducing penalties to offenders who have not committed certain severe crimes including murder and certain sex and gun crimes. Based on the increase workload required to implement Proposition 47, additional resources have been allocated by the Board in the District Attorney’s Office, the Public Defender’s Office and the Alternate Defender’s Office. The County Administrator in coordination with County Departments and the Courts will continue to monitor the workload impacts of Proposition 47.
2011 Public Safety Realignment/AB 109 Funding: The Recommended Budget reflects the County’s share of the estimated total AB 109 base and growth funding allocations statewide. The Solano County FY2015/16 allocations represent increases over FY2014/15 resulting from recent allocation formula changes issued by the Realignment Allocation Committee (RAC), one-time funding augmentations and increased funding statewide. The budget recommended by the Solano Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) included minimal increases in the appropriation of AB 109 funds over FY2014/15 and departments remain focused on a continuation of the programs and services previously supported by the CCP. No new positions or new “Program Funding Requests” funded by AB 109 are included in the FY2015/16. The Recommended Budget includes the continued use of one-time carry forward funding from prior years’ unspent allocations to fund these programs previously approved by the Board under the 2011 Solano Public Safety Realignment Act Implementation Plan. AB 109 Growth funding, which are based on statewide revenue estimates are subject to change pending the final state revenue figures. County staff is continuing to monitor the State allocation of AB 109 funds as departments address the mandated changes resulting from the implementation of 2011 Public Safety Realignment.
Property Tax Appeals: As of April 17, 2015 there are 561 active property tax appeals on file with the County Clerk representing $10.61 billion (cumulative over 12 years) in assessed value. This is a significant amount given that the total annual valuation of Solano County is only $44.1 billion. The final resolution of these appeals can have a significant impact on the County’s property tax revenues in the future. Efforts continue by the Assessor with assistance from County Counsel to reduce the number and value of outstanding appeals to address the uncertainty in a timely manner.
Capital Renewal and Major Maintenance – County Roads and Bridges
As required by law, the Board adopted a 5-Year Capital Investment Plan for Roads and Bridges on November 25, 2014 which shows an estimated $7.9 million in unfunded road maintenance and bridge replacement projects. The Board’s existing policy has been for the County to secure State and Federal funds for large projects, such as bridge replacements and major road reconstruction, and to use the local Road Fund to provide for all other required maintenance. As State and Federal funding for this area of responsibility continues to diminish, other options and further consideration regarding this area of liability and responsibility will be necessary. (Refer to Public Ways budget)
