On behalf of the Sonoma County staff, I am proud to submit the county’s first two year Recommended Budget with FY 2015?2016 submitted at $1.43 billion and FY 2016?2017 at $1.37 billion in appropriations. The budget follows the Board’s strong emphasis on prioritizing the long term fiscal health of the county and advances the Board’s four Strategic Plan goals: Safe, Healthy & Sustainable Community; Economic & Environmental Stewardship; Invest in the Future; and Civic Services & Engagement.
The Recommended Budget is balanced with an estimated FY 2015?2016 3.5% and FY 2016?2017 3% growth. While we must remain cautious, the positive local economic signs are welcome – property value assessments are estimated to grow through FY 2018?2019 based on staff’s most recent forecast, tourism is thriving, and our community enjoys one of the lowest unemployment rates in the State.
As we continue to recover from the Great Recession’s negative economic impacts, every additional dollar of revenue is considered through the lens of how to best serve Sonoma County citizens via the Board established priorities while also continuing to meet core service demands. The anticipated discretionary revenue growth, leveraging of state and federal sources, and continuous cost containment efforts undertaken by the Board have established a solid foundation for the County’s finances ?one that is sustainable going forward.
This two year plan reinforces this Board of Supervisors’ strategic priorities by maintaining a $9 million annual Board commitment for Roads Pavement Preservation (including Worst First road program), approximately $36 million for homeless and affordable housing programs, $6.5 million financing for Highway 12 Phase II improvements, over $1 million annually towards energy and water sustainability efforts primarily to protect our County’s water supply, resources for the completion of the Fire Services review, and resources for partnering with the City of Santa Rosa to advance the annexation of unincorporated islands in Southwest Santa Rosa.
The Recommended Budget provides for a workforce of 4,087 full?time employee (FTE) positions, excluding extra help positions. This total reflects a net increase of 151.8 FTE from FY 2014?2015 Adopted Budget and 24.6 FTE from the FY 2014?2015 Revised Budget. The position increases are primarily in Human Services and are offset by state and federal dollars.
Sonoma County is fortunate to have consistency of policy from the Board of Supervisors that reflects, at its core, the interests of the citizens. The sustained ongoing fiscal discipline has allowed the County to budget for compensation adjustments and tackle pension costs. The Board’s prudent fiscal approach has resulted in $170 million in estimated pension savings by FY 2023?2024 and added $11.3 million to the General Fund reserve in FY 2014?2015 to maintain reserves at 10.5% of adopted General Fund revenues.
In order to plan for the future and evaluate base operating needs beyond the one?year snapshot, each and every department and program submitted a 2?year balanced spending plan. The second fiscal year recommended budget anticipates base ongoing expenses and revenues, and a limited number of one?time investments specifically associated with the Board approved 5?Year Capital Improvement plan. This two?year budget
development approach enhances the organization’s ability to be forward thinking when looking at the County’s budget.
The two year plan was built with limited revenue growth and pressing service demands in mind. Maximizing the County’s limited resources is a trademark of this County’s past, current and future success.
The Board is asked to approve the two year Recommended Budget, and formally adopt the FY 2015?2016 Budget (the FY 2016?2017 Budget will be adopted next year as required by law). Changes to the County’s ongoing base and Board decisions on priority investments will be presented in the FY 2016?2017 Budget hearings for the adoption of the Adjusted Recommended Budget for that year.
The FY 2015?2016 & 2016?2017 Recommended Budget represents a structurally balanced operating and strategic investment plan, and provides the needed resources to continue delivering high quality public services that enrich our residents’ quality of life. This memorandum provides a summary of the Recommended Budget through the following: I. Budget Financial Overview; II. Significant Unmet/Deferred Needs; III. Positions Summary; IV. Strategic Plan and Outcome Measures; V. 2015 Board Priorities; VI. State Budget Potential Impacts; VII. Next Steps in Budget Process; and VIII. Acknowledgements.
Expenditure Summary
The Recommended County FY 2015?2016 Budget totals $1.43 billion, a $27.8 million or 1.9% decrease from FY 2014?2015 Adopted Budget. Most of the decrease is the result of less Operating Transfers of $62.4 million, smaller Enterprise Fund budgets of $61 million, and reduced Special District designations of $13 million. The total decrease of $136 million is offset by a $108 million budget expansion, mostly in the Health & Human Services special revenue fund budgets. The 2nd year Recommended FY 2016?2017 Budget totals $1.37 billion or a 4% decrease from the prior year mainly due to not re?budgeting capital expenditures included in FY 2015?2016, and one?time designations or expired funding allocations being taken out of other funds.
The recently implemented financial system established a new chart of accounts, which groups revenue sub?accounts differently than in prior years. Because of this change, the comparison of FY 2015?2016 Charges for Services and Miscellaneous Revenues are presented as a combined variance analysis. For example, Water Agency’s water sales were previously reported as a Miscellaneous Revenue and now are reported under Charges for Services. The combined FY 2015?2016 recommended revenues total $$299.8 million. This is a $13.9 million or 4.4% decrease from the prior year primarily driven by $31 million in disposal fees being eliminated due to the Solid Waste operations having been transferred to an outside operator. The large decrease is offset by a combination of changes, but most significantly by a $16 million increase in the FY 2015?2016 Auditor?Controller?Treasurer?Tax Collector internal service fund Pension budget in recognition of the revised amount of employer?paid pension costs collected through payroll and then transferred to the Sonoma County Employee Retirement Association. FY 2016?2017 Recommended Revenues under this combined category is $298 million or $1.8 million less than the prior year, mostly as a result of one?time Miscellaneous project funding not repeated in the second year.
Operating Transfers & Use of Fund Balances
One time expenditure designations are primarily financed with transfer of funds from designated replacement funds, or from funds accumulated for a specific purpose. The enclosed department narratives financial summary sections provide discussion of the year over year changes from the Adopted FY 2014?2015 Budget to the Recommended FY 2015?2016 and FY 2016?2017 Budgets
This year’s budget document reflects continued investments in the County’s Strategic Plan. The four Strategic Plan Goal areas are: Safe, Healthy and Caring Community; Economic and Environmental Stewardship; Investment in the Future; and Civic Services and Engagement. The outcomes we are trying to achieve in each of these areas are shown briefly below. Departments continue to establish and maintain measures to assess how the fiscal investment reflected in the budget moves progress in tangible ways to support the Strategic Plan Goals and Board’s priorities. The lists below are examples of outcome or performance measures in use by departments or agencies.
SAFE, HEALTHY, AND CARING COMMUNITY – FY 2015?16 $1.07B; FY 2016?17 $1.07B
Community members are safe in their homes and communities; are sheltered and socially supported; and
have access to clean air, water, and safe, reliable solid and liquid waste management systems.
Community development and planning promote improved health, safety, and quality of life. Community is prepared and responds appropriately to emergencies and natural hazards; and Supports overall heath beginning with the healthy development of children.
Outcome Measures (italic represent new or updated outcomes)
Decrease the percentage of Sonoma County renters whose gross rent is more than 30% of household income by 1% annually, from 54% to 49% in 2020. Meet 15 minute from dispatch to response time for Fire and Emergency Services Response 85% of the time.
Through increased outreach, increase the number of eligible residents accessing CalFresh by 10%.
Decrease average wait times for Medi?Cal applicants to 20 days.
Increase the number of 7th graders passing California Physical Fitness Test from 28% to 70% by 2020.
Increase Regional Parks visitation by 4%.
Decrease obesity in adults from 19% to 15% by 2020.
Adjudicate all scheduled revocation hearings resulting from Public Safety Realignment.
Maintain ratio of sworn peace officers at 1.08 per 1,000 population for adequate public safety presence in the
community.
Maintain percentage of successful adult felony probation and mandatory supervision terminations at 68%.
Maintain percentage of successful juvenile delinquency supervision terminations at 78% or higher.
Maintain current level of 15 fieldworker safety inspections designed to protect the health of agricultural.
ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP – FY 2015?16 $164M; FY 2016?17 $147M
Protect, maintain and manage parks, public lands and open space systems that promote recreation, health,
agricultural viability and protect watersheds, promote biodiversity and contribute to economic vitality.
A strong, diverse, and sustainable economy that supports job retention and job growth for all residents. Agricultural resources are preserved, valued for food and for maintaining links to our County’s heritage. A water and energy plan that maximizes renewable energy, reduces water use and greenhouse gas production and supports the economy. A growing diversification and enrichment of economic base.
Outcome Measures (italic represent new or updated outcomes)
Transfer all current Tier 1 Open Space District fee properties to recreational agencies.

Increase direct business assistance clients including business retention visits, business hotline calls, and business development tools by 10% in FY 2015?2016. Increase Regional Parks’ membership sales by 5%, contributing to the improved health of the community and the economic stewardship of parks. Certify an additional 5 businesses as healthy businesses through a voluntary certification program recognizing exceptional employee wellness programs annually. Maintain area under quarantine for European Grapevine Moth at 1,000 acres. Increase educational farm consultations for specialty crops by 20%. Increase 4?H membership by 10% and adult leaders by 5%. Increase green business certifications by 25%.
INVEST IN THE FUTURE – FY 2015?16 $289M; FY 2016?17 $260M
A community that is proactive in mitigating and adapting to the causes and impacts of climate change to safeguard the environment, human health, and the economy. A well maintained transportation and facility network that promotes mobility, health and safety, connectivity, and convenience. Sustainably managed local resources. Strategic investment in prevention?focused policies and interventions that reduce poverty and increase equal opportunity for quality education and good health in nurturing home and community environments.
Outcome Measures (italic represent new or updated outcomes)
Maintain road condition index at no lower than 60 (Good condition) for 90% of primary high use road network sections. Increase airline passengers from 241,000 to 258,000 (7% increase) over the next two years. Decrease greenhouse gas emissions of County operations (buildings, fleet, and employee commute) to 1990 levels by the end of calendar year 2020. Maintain technical assistance on “Upstream” principles and practices to 100 agencies. Support increased high school completion rates from 82.5% to 90% by 2020. Increase the percentage of youth who safely walk, bike or skate to/from schools from 34.5% to 50% by 2020. The community understands and supports the services provided by the County. Increased or enhanced community based partnerships. A professionally managed County organization that is accessible, transparent, fiscally responsible, and accountable to the public. Expand completion of Carbon Sequestration Analysis of forests and open space lands from 25% to 75%. Analysis has been completed and a report to the Board of Supervisors is forthcoming.
CIVIC SERVICES AND ENGAGEMENT – FY 2015?16 $119M; FY 2016?17 $121M
Increased access and greater citizen participation in County government. A community that understands and supports the services provided by the County. Increased or enhanced community based partnerships. A professionally managed County organization that is accessible, transparent, fiscally responsible, and accountable to the public.
Outcome Measures (italic represent new or updated outcomes)
Retain at least 94% of Volunteer Firefighters with 2 or more years of experience. Encourage voters to “go green” by opting to not receive printed sample ballot and voter information pamphlets by mail and instead access voting information online. Increase the number of “go green” voters to 11%. On?line service availability: accessible 99% of the time or better.

Increase youth participation in competitive exhibits and special contests at the Sonoma County Fair by 5%. ? Review and process over 95% of annual Prop 8 reassessments prior to roll close in order to update property
value adjustments; reduce the number of roll corrections, and produce a more accurate and equitable tax roll. ? Increase the number of permanent absentee voters in Sonoma County to 70% of registered voters. ? Implement a risk based audit program in accordance with the Internal Audit Charter and professional
standards, completing all audits in the approved annual plans and communicating the results in a timely manner to the County Board, Management and Citizens
V. 2015 BOARD PRIORITIES
The budget document reflects efforts on the Board’s Work Priorities for calendar year 2015. These are issues and projects of interest that require significant action and leadership within a twelve month period. Cost for implementation are included in different budgets throughout the document. Monies are programmed for affordable housing in the Community Development Commission budget. Universal preschool dollars are found in the Health Services department and First 5 budgets. Over $1 million is budgeted towards energy and water sustainability efforts primarily to protect our County’s water supply.
Monies for roads are included in the Transportation budget and the planning for the Chanate campus can be found in the Capital Projects budget. Efforts to reduce debt and provide for pension reform are major tenets of the budget and found in the County Administration under Administrative & Fiscal Services tab. Resources for the completion of the Fire Services review and for partnering with the City of Santa Rosa to advance the annexation of unincorporated islands in Southwest Santa Rosa are reflected in the budget as well.

This two?year FY 2015?2016 & 2016?2017 Recommended Budget is being provided on June 5, 2015 in order for the public to review the document in advance of the Budget Hearings. The Hearings are scheduled to begin on June 15, 2015 and may be continued from day to day as needed for a maximum of 14 calendar days. Per State law, the Board will adopt the one?year FY 2015?2016 Budget, containing such revisions as the Board of Supervisors determines at the conclusion of the Hearings.
At the beginning of the public hearings, the Board will be presented with a supplemental package containing additional information and recommendations as necessary to provide up to date FY 2015?2016 and as applicable FY 2016?2017 Budget programming needs, which were not included in the recommended budget document.
At the conclusion of the public hearings, the Board of Supervisors will be asked to adopt only the FY 2015?2016 Budget as modified per the approved Supplemental Recommended Budget Adjustment and additional Board direction during the hearings; and approve the FY 2016?2017 Budget plan recommendations. The second year FY 2016?2017 Budget will be heard by the Board in June 2016, and it will include all applicable ongoing changes made during FY 2015?2016 mid?year adjustments.

The FY 2015?2016 & 2016?2017 Recommended Budget plan is the product of collaboration and partnership. Department Heads and fiscal staff have been flexible, tolerant, and willing to develop the County’s first two year budget plan while adapting to a new financial system and implementing a new budget tool. Through this effort of checks and balances, the County Administrator staff has produced a balanced budget and operating plan covering two fiscal years that implements the Board’s policy guidance and carries out our County’s Strategic Plan. I wish to thank the Department and Agency Heads for their strong support.
Many partnerships are required for this work effort. In particular, David Sundstrom, the Auditor?ControllerTreasurer?Tax Collector, and Olena Chandler, Budget Accountant?Auditor, Carrie Reed, Payroll Manager and Kim Murphy, the long term, outgoing Payroll Manager provided essential support in producing the Salaries & Benefits data, reconciling budget recommendations and producing the required state financial schedules. Information Systems Director John Hartwig, Mike Livenspargar, Division Director, and Mary Bucher, Senior Programmer, offered technical assistance while at the same time implementing Phase II of the new financial system and designing a temporary Budget data collection tool. Director of Human Resources Christina Cramer provided professional team members, Ans Van Egmond and Tamara Kallhoff, to process position changes and verify Board approved position allocations. In addition, Reprographics kept frequent communications with our office and prioritized the Budget document reproduction in a timely fashion.
The dedicated professionals working in the County Administrator’s Office are to be specially recognized for the development of the FY 2015?2016 & 2016?2017 budget. The transfer from a traditional one?year budget to a two year planning vision will provide the County with stability and an inventory of assumptions from which to manage exceptions. To get here, it took months of compiling data, projecting expenditures and revenues, reviewing workloads and staffing needs. In particular, I wish to thank Christina Rivera, Deputy County Administrator and the County’s Budget Manager, who kept the CAO Team focused on achieving a balanced two year budget. The CAO team includes Michelle Arellano, Caluha Barnes, Mary Booher, Peter Bruland, Lois Hopkins, Joanna Lutman, Peter Rogers, Steve Sharpe, Karen Spitler, Chris Thomas, Rebecca Wachsberg, Terri Wright, Diana Wilson, and student intern Arshpreet Buttar. To each of them I extend my gratitude for their tenacity, attention to detail, positive attitudes, and strong teamwork as they completed this important process.
Once the budget is developed and approved, it is the Sonoma County employees’ daily performance of duties and continued engagement that achieve positive results for our community. I want to thank each County employee for investing their time and performing their jobs in the most innovative and collaborative way possible, making Sonoma County a great place to live, learn, work, and play.
Most importantly, Sonoma County is fortunate to have leadership from the Board of Supervisors that reflects, at its core, the interests of the citizens. I am grateful for the Board’s clear mission to enrich the quality of life in Sonoma County through superior public services and their commitment to the two year budget process. Without their solid and formidable support, this document and our stable fiscal position would not be possible.
