It is a pleasure to present, in the following pages, the Recommended Budget for FY 12-13 to the Board of Supervisors’ for consideration. The Recommended Budget totals $1.28 billion and provides a balanced financial plan for the coming year as well as investments in strategic initiatives designed to move the organization forward and advance the Board’s strategic goals and priorities.
Since the beginning of the economic recession in 2008, the County has taken a measured approach to adjust to reduced financial resources even as demands for services have increased. The past two budgets have been balanced with a combination of cost savings, service reductions, and program redesigns. The Board has remained fiscally cautious and judicially limited the use of one-time resources for one-time costs. These years have not been easy, but through the hard work, thoughtful initiative and dedication of our departments and employees, we have continued the tradition of Sonoma County- providing high quality public services and investing in a beautiful, thriving and sustainable community.
Our organization has transformed to meet the changed fiscal environment. Departments have embraced the fiscal challenge and put forth new systems, investments, and creative service models to maintain core services. The Recommended Budget refines our focus on the Board’s Strategic Goals. It moves away from trying to do everything and instead reflects your commitment to prioritize and focus the County’s limited financial resources on programs which will yield the greatest community impact. The Recommended Budget reflects a new baseline for the County. With this baseline we must find a way to provide essential services within our available resources despite growing costs and increase our investments where needed to meet our strategic goals.
The Sonoma County economy, like that of the rest of the country, has seen an unprecedented recession driven to a large extent, by the fall in the real estate and stock markets, severe credit tightening, lack of consumer confidence, and high unemployment. Recent reports on a recovering housing market and lower unemployment numbers indicate the local economy is recovering. The State Budget and worldwide economy continue to be areas of concern. While this budget is balanced the County’s resources are projected to grow slowly and fixed costs will increase, particularly in the General Fund. This budget makes the last service adjustments to address a structural deficit, estimated earlier this year at about $10 million in the County General Fund, and begins to focus on areas of investment that support the Board’s strategic goals. In the years ahead, we must continue to reduce costs and maximize revenues in order to continue this level of service sustainably for the future.
The following table summarizes total expenditures in the Recommended Budget. We have included current year estimated expenditures as a point of reference. County General Fund expenditures decrease $3 million while Special Revenue Funds and Enterprise Funds account for the $56 million increase over all from FY 11-12. The $31million increase in the Special Revenue Funds is largely due to the first full year of the 2011 realignment from the state of responsibilities for certain criminal justice offenders and Human Services programs and the Charles M. Schulz-Sonoma County Airport improvements generate the $26 million increase in the Enterprise funds.
Notable changes in revenues and financing sources include:
Federal Aviation Administration grant funds ($24 million) for the Airport account for the largest single increased funding source. The increases in Intergovernmental Revenues are due to state realignment in public safety and Human Services. Fines/Forfeitures/Penalties are down largely to supplemental property tax administration reductions and the increase in Licenses/Permits/Franchises revenues is due to the Refuse Franchise Fees which are going to support road maintenance.
The following charts illustrate the relative proportions of funding sources and uses for the total Recommended Budget, providing another view of the information from the tables above.
The FY 12-13 Recommended Budget maintains core services but due to costs rising faster than available resources some reductions are necessary to achieve a balanced budget. Provision of some services may be delayed or reduced and in some cases services are reconfigured or provided in a different way. Each departments’ narrative qualitatively and, where possible, quantitatively describes the services maintained and those reduced. Some of these reductions included in the Recommended Budget will be addressed in the Supplemental Budgetary Adjustments. Following is a summary of reductions and service impacts by functional group.
Administrative and Fiscal Services
The Administrative and Fiscal Services departments are absorbing reductions as much as possible while striving to maintain FY 11-12 service levels. Each department continues to seek innovation, technology, and new service delivery models to maintain quality services; nevertheless, there will be reductions in project coordination, customer service, staff training, legal support, and financial services.
In FY 12-13, the diminished capacity will be evident as legal resources for General Fund departments is lowered by over 10% resulting in reduced ability to direct, coordinate and oversee legal services for department and agency activities. Additionally, Strategic Plan guided Board initiatives will have fewer resources, and Board led community engagement and legislative advocacy will be hampered as a result of capacity reduction in the Administrative and Fiscal Services.
Customer service to departments will be impacted as staff reductions limit person to person interface. 24-hour standby support for information systems services will be reduced. Building maintenance and facilities operations will require prioritization of requests to address fire/life safety and maintaining core building systems. Reductions will mean a continued backlog of work in defense efforts for assessment appeals, reassessment events, new permits, title transfers, mandatory audits, and the delay of the annual closure of the assessment roll.
Justice Services
Public safety remains a very high priority for the County. Justice departments made reductions to submit budgets within available resources. As a result, response to community requests for graffiti removal will be reduced. Presentations on domestic violence, child and bicycle safety, drugs and alcohol, gang education and vehicle abatement will be reduced. Reduction of staff within the Sheriff’s Office will increase workloads, reduce coverage, and limit the ability for jail staff to liaison with Community Based Organizations. These impacts are being mitigated through innovative schedule changes and the use of extra help staff to fill vacancies caused by disability, sick, vacation, and training leaves.
The Supervised Own Recognizance adult detention alternative program is eliminated in this budget which may result in an increase in the overall jail population. The County’s gender responsive commitment program for girls, known as the Sierra Youth Center, is only funded through September 2012.
Reductions in prosecuting attorneys and investigators will increase time in the criminal justice process and investigative support will diminish as reductions require specialized law enforcement units be combined to maintain core investigative services.
Health and Human Services
Health and Human Services departments were generally able to absorb reductions and maintain service levels. Some services may be delayed and workloads of current staff will continue to increase. The volunteer coordinator position in the Animal Care and Control Division is eliminated and the department will rely on a committed cadre of volunteers to coordinate activities and recruit other volunteers.
Development and Other Services
Reduced funding to Development and Other Services will have service impacts as well. Programs designed to provide low income families with rental assistance and encourage local builders to develop low income housing have been reduced or eliminated in some cases. The dissolution of the Sonoma County Community Redevelopment Agency means a loss of $5.7 million in property tax increment derived from three project areas annually for public infrastructure, rehabilitation of commercial business and residential structures, financing for community parks and recreational facilities, tourism and marketing assistance, community clean-up activities, new business development services funding, and financing for the creation and preservation of affordable housing.
Local parks will no longer have optimum maintenance and landscaping services. Some maintenance will be deferred, parks planning and acquisition activities will be limited.
Local agriculture will be impacted by reduced pesticide use enforcement leading to fewer regulatory inspections as well as decreased opportunities for general surveillance and education. Farmers Market Regulation will be reduced and Weights and Measures and University of California Cooperative Extension staff will have decreased capacity.
III. STRATEGIC PLAN INITIATIVES AND INVESTMENTS
This year’s budget document continues the efforts begun last year to reflect the investments in the coming year in the Board’s Strategic Plan and Priorities. The four Strategic Plan Goal Areas and the outcomes we are trying to achieve in each of these areas are shown briefly below.
Goal - Safe, Healthy, and Caring Community
 Community members are safe in their homes and communities; are sheltered and socially supported; and have access to clean air, water, and safe, reliable solid and liquid waste management systems;
 Community development and planning promote improved health, safety and quality of life;
 Community is prepared and responds appropriately to emergencies and natural hazards; and supports overall heath beginning with the healthy development of children.
Goal - Economic and Environmental Stewardship
 Protect, maintain and manage parks, public lands and open space systems that promote recreation, health, agricultural viability and protect watersheds, promote biodiversity and contribute to the economic vitality;
 A strong, diverse and sustainable economy that supports job retention and job growth for all residents;
 Agricultural resources are preserved, valued for food and for maintaining links to our County’s heritage;
 A water and energy plan that maximizes renewable energy, reduces water use and green house gas production and supports the economy;
 A growing diversification and enrichment of economic base.
Goal - Invest in the Future
 A community that is proactive in mitigating and adapting to the causes and impacts of climate change to safeguard the environment, human health and the economy;
 A well maintained transportation and facility network that promotes mobility, health and safety, connectivity and convenience;
 Local resources are sustainably managed;
 Strategic investment in prevention-focused policies and interventions that reduce poverty and increase equal opportunity for quality education and good health in nurturing home and community environments.
Goal - Civic Services and Engagement
 Increased access and greater citizen participation in County government;
 A community that understands and supports the services provided by the County;
 Increased or enhanced community based partnerships;
 A professionally managed County organization that is accessible, transparent, fiscally responsible and accountable to the public.
All County departments undertake efforts in support to the Strategic Plan, and while some of these efforts are quantifiable, others are more qualitative and/or difficult to determine the specific financial investment. Further, some of the efforts arguably support multiple goal areas. Departments were asked to identify expenditures included in this budget in support of the Board’s 2012 Priorities and other Priority Projects. These are summarized below and described in more detail in the following text:

The department narratives within the Recommended Budget detail the various projects, programs and initiative expenditures that support these goals. To illustrate some of the largest investments in terms of total expenditures, the department narratives show: 1) $74 million towards Economic Development and Job Creation in: • Health Service’s - $51 million in funding directed to community based providers of services. • Community Development Commission - $14 million in redevelopment of the Roseland Shopping Center ($4 million) and the Sonoma Valley Springs Redevelopment Area ($10 million). • Fair and Expo - $5 million investment in the annual county fair for economic benefits beyond the educational, cultural and agricultural tradition. • Economic Development Board - $2.4 million in initiatives and programs. • Agricultural Commissioner’s Weights and Measures - $709,000 to continue presence in the marketplace to ensure fair business competition. • Advertising Program - $580,000 to support promotions and local non-profits. 2) $38 million toward Community Outreach and New Revenue Strategies: • Sheriff’s Office - $28 million in patrol staff and crime prevention. • Child Support Services - $9.6 million funds staff directly involved in establishing paternity. • Legislative Advocacy and Voter Outreach Programs - $241,000. • Human Resources - $137,000 supporting the Commissions on the Status of Women and Human Rights as well as the County’s volunteer coordination program.
$27 million supporting Upstream Investment Implementation:
 Community Development Commission – $26 million in financial assistance for development and preservation of affordable housing.
 Human Services - $1 million supporting the Upstream Investment Policy initiative by launching an interactive cost-benefit tool to identify expected local savings from Upstream Portfolio programs; prioritizing evaluation technical assistance for the Cradle to Career initiative, and expanding upstream principles in County activities.
4) $27 million to expand the Charles Schulz Airport and attract additional airlines and passenger service.
5) $22 million for Water Supply Strategy Implementation to ensure an adequate water supply for future generations and includes stewardship of the County’s watershed through compliance with the “Biological Opinion.”
While this discussion demonstrates that the Recommended FY 12-13 budget invests a considerable amount, $257.6 million or more than 20% of the Recommended Budget, in Strategic Plan Goal Areas, aligning the entire budget is a longer process and, more importantly, most of the Goal Areas and Priorities are not funded at the level required for full implementation and/or project completion. Funding for the Strategic Plan initiatives is constrained as departments endeavor to maintain core services and limit the service reductions required to balance the FY 12-13 budget. To fully implement these priorities to completion and to realize the desired outcomes in the four Goal Areas, additional funding and resources will be required this fiscal year and into the future.
Our County Department Heads understand and agree these strategic initiatives take precedence over the short term demands of any one department or program. Working together, we have identified and launched the implementation efforts of the Board’s and community’s strategic long term goals and these efforts are changing us for the better. We have begun to focus our resources on those strategic areas which best serve the community. This budget continues us on that needed course. We have community wide critical projects which require investment: our roads, the badly frayed social safety net, our environment and natural resources, and our economy. Our organization is transforming. As a team, we will continue to move the organization forward keeping our focus and resources attuned to those highest critical projects, programs and initiatives which best serve our community. Strategic Initiatives will yield tangible results toward our desired outcomes through innovative and smart investments.
IV. STATE BUDGET POTENTIAL IMPACTS
Perhaps most looming of our fiscal challenges is what the state will do in order to address their fiscal imbalance. Based upon their already existing deficit, and the likelihood that efforts to balance the federal budget will increase demands at the state level, we can anticipate continued impacts from the state.
In January 2012, the Governor identified a projected $9.2 billion State Budget deficit, and as a result, proposed solutions, some of which have a significant impact on the County. Locally the impact to County is estimated at $2.7 million including reductions to the CalWORKs allocation, payments for child support cases on public assistance, the D.A.’s Vertical Prosecution Program and the cost to reimburse the State for housing juvenile offenders from our county. Most of the proposed cuts are in direct benefits to the recipients of Health and Human Services, including In Home Supportive Services, subsidized child care, and CalWORKs grants. The Governor indicated further spending reductions, mostly to education, if the proposed tax increase does not pass in the November 2012 election.
On May 14 Governor Brown released the May Revision to his proposed FY 2012-13 State Budget. The May Revise estimates a two-year budget gap of $15.7 billion, an increase of $6.5 billion more than originally projected in January. The increased gap is primarily a result of lower than anticipated tax collections by the State. The May Revise proposes $16.7 billion in budget solutions to close the gap and provide for a $1 billion reserve. The solutions include $8.3 billion in spending reductions, $5.9 billion in additional revenues, nearly all of which is attributed to the Governor’s proposal for a temporary tax
increase which will not be considered by voters until November 2012. The May Revise specifies $6.1 Billion in spending cuts that will automatically take effect in January 2013 if voters do not approve the proposed tax measure in November. These spending cuts primarily impact schools, colleges, and universities. In addition to the assumed passage of new taxes, the May Revise includes $2.5 billion in fund shifts, loan payments deferrals and internal borrowing from State Special Funds.
The May Revise includes proposals that could significantly impact vital safety net services, such as CalWORKs, Child Care and Development, and In-Home Supportive Services. Most significantly, the May Revise includes a larger reduction to IHSS than the January Budget – it proposes a 7 percent across the board cut in authorized IHSS worker hours, effective August 2012, and the elimination of domestic and related services for most IHSS participants living with others. The Recommended Budget does not reflect the implementation of these proposals. Instead, adjustments will be brought to the Board when the state has taken action.
Another area of significance to the County is a proposal to increase the State’s authority over the dissolution of Redevelopment Agencies. The May Revise proposes to minimize the role and authority of locally formed Oversight Committees and to shift power to the State Department of Finance with the goal of expediting the liquidation of former Redevelopment Agency. The proposal assumes that as a result, increased property taxes will be available to schools, thereby reducing the State’s Prop 98 obligations. It is not yet clear what impact this would have on property tax revenues in the Recommended Budget.
Finally, the May Revise incorporates in the Public Safety Realignment allocation developed by a Committee of County Administrators, in which Sonoma County actively participated. Budget bill trailer language will detail allocations by county for AB 109 realignment activities and for separate allocations for District Attorney’s and Public Defenders. The allocation formula will remain in place for 2012-13 and 2013-14. The Recommended Budget does not reflect the updated allocation and related expenditures since there are several steps to complete to finalize local plans. Some of budgetary information will be included in the supplemental adjustment package for the beginning of the budget hearings and additional changes will be included in the consolidated budget adjustments during the coming year.
V. BUDGET PROCESS – NEXT STEPS
Moving forward into the Budget Hearings, the Board will have opportunities to discuss and direct how to best enhance efforts to renew, invest in and re-invent our service models. The Board’s direction will ensure the County keeps our promises to the residents of Sonoma County and all of our communities are thriving, sustainable, and beautiful places for all.
This budget is being provided on June 11, 2012 in order for the public to review the document in advance of the Budget Hearings. The hearings are scheduled to begin on June 25, 2012 at 8:30 a.m. and may be continued from day to day as needed for a maximum of 14 calendar days per state law. The Board will adopt the budget, containing such revisions as the Board determines at the conclusion of the hearings.
At the beginning of the public hearings, the Board will be presented with a supplemental package containing additional information and recommendations as necessary to bring the budget picture as up to date as possible for the hearings. At the conclusion of the public hearings, the Board will be asked to adopt the budget as modified per the Board’s direction and the budget will serve as the operating plan for Fiscal Year 12-13.
After the State of California adopts its budget and/or as needs arise after the close of the County’s Fiscal 2011-2012 books, staff will return with a collection of budget adjustments for the Board’s consideration.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS AND THANK YOU’S
I have the privilege to work with many exceptionally talented department and agency heads in reaching consensus recommendations as we put this budget together. In addition, their staff spend months compiling data and reviewing programs to submit and balance this budget in order to best reflect the Board’s priorities and carry out our County’s Strategic Plan.
In particular, David Sundstrom, the Auditor Controller, and his staff, many of whom took on new roles this year, provided great support in developing the budget document. Information Systems offered technical assistance and systems support as we adjusted our internal practices and information interfaces with the new Human Resources Management System and, as always, Reprographics shined in producing the budget document itself with their customary high professionalism.
Most importantly, I wish to recognize the dedicated professionals working in my office who put this document together. Those individuals include: Mike Gossman, Kathy Hamm, Jim Leddy, Joanna Lutman, Lori Norton, Christina Rivera, Jennifer Rogers, Terri Saunders, Chris Thomas, and Christine Williams. They all spend countless hours to make this document the best it can be. I offer my heartfelt thanks to each and every one.
Finally, it is the employees of the Sonoma County organization, committed to superior public services, who bring the budget to life by doing the work of the County day in and day out, and achieving positive results for our community. Without them, the Recommended Budget is meaningless. I am proud of our county family and am looking forward to working alongside them in the coming year.
