It is with confidence and gratefulness that I present to you the Stanislaus County’s
balanced final spending plan for Fiscal Year 2012-2013. After reviewing and
analyzing departmental budgets, sources of funds and program changes at the State
and Federal level, closing last fiscal year and taking into consideration current
economic conditions, the County budget has been thoroughly revisited and
adjustments are recommended to best meet the needs of the community for this fiscal
year.
During the Adopted Proposed Budget, I spoke of how far we had come collectively in
the last four years through unprecedented fiscal challenges and economic conditions.
The organization continues to move forward through this adversity with a
determination and drive that is unparalleled to ensure that “core services” continue to
be provided to County residents and communities in creative new ways that are
strategic and measured.
"Individual commitment to a group effort -- that is what makes a team work, a
company work, a society work, a civilization work." --Vince Lombardi
County employees continue to do what is necessary to ensure that the organization
remains sound and critical public services are provided aligned with available
resources. Collectively, all labor organizations have agreed to the continuation of the
5% salary deduction and the implementation of an additional 1% salary deduction. In
addition, employees shared in the cost of health insurance, an equivalent of another
2% of salary, which started back on January 1, 2012. This is a significant
accomplishment with tremendous sacrifice by County employees. This support from
our labor organizations speaks volumes as to their commitment to the organization
and the value placed in being fiscally responsible and maintaining the public’s trust in
the use of very scarce public dollars.

This agreement with labor is also an indicator of the flexibility provided by your Board
to allow management to be creative in negotiations, fostering open dialogue and
discussion with labor representatives and in the process effectively working together
to reach a common goal. There were endless hours spent by County employees on
both sides working through complex issues and the outcome will make us stronger
fiscally and as a public organization. As an organization, we recognize our new look
from a service delivery, workforce and available resources is where we will remain for
a while.
The County continues to anticipate severe reductions in Federal, State, and local
resources historically available to fund critical programs. Coupled with the economic
downturn and its negative impact to property and sales tax revenue, the organization
has responded to the reductions to budgets, staffing, and services by continuing to
move forward deliberately in a very calculated manner.
The County ended the 2011-2012 Fiscal Year in a positive fiscal position and begins
the 2012-2013 Fiscal Year with a balanced budget. General Fund Departments have
continued to very prudently manage their budgets, only addressing those needs most
critical to the community by maintaining those service levels. Additionally, they
continue to take advantage of the budget carryover program made available to them
to assist in mitigating budget shortfalls and unexpected events. Specifically, since
departments were issued essentially the same budget as the prior year and asked to
absorb any increases in operational costs (e.g., salaries, retirement, health care) and
declining revenue (e.g., Federal, State) in the fiscal year, they are now beginning to
rely on savings accumulated through the very proactive and effective budget
management strategies instituted in prior years. I appreciate department leadership in
the way they have creatively solved their own funding shortfalls and continued the
cooperativeness both within and outside the organization.
The Recommended Final Budget Addendum for Fiscal Year 2012-2013 reflects a total
County budget of $984,161,674, an increase of $30,033,713 (3.1%) when compared
to the Adopted Proposed Budget. The increase is primarily attributed to the success
of the carryover program bringing forward nearly $14 million to mitigate budget issues
in the current fiscal year and beyond. The remaining increase is primarily to meet
critical maintenance and operation needs in aging County facilities, for Phase 2
funding from the Community Corrections Partnership Implementation Plan (AB 109),
and for increased contract expenses with Doctor’s Behavioral Health Center (DBHC)
and out of County hospitalization utilization.
The Adopted Proposed Budget document with the addendum of recommended
changes reflects the entire final recommended spending plan for Stanislaus County
for Fiscal Year 2012-2013. The County’s General Fund recommended at
$258,693,372 is up $21,664,034 from the Adopted Proposed Budget. The Final
Budget recommends the use of one-time funds totaling $31.6 million to balance the
General Fund. This is an increase of $17 million when compared with the Adopted
Proposed Budget and is comprised principally from the carryover balances. Unlike

last year where a majority of the carryover adjustments occurred during the year-end
process, adjustments this year were made as part of the Final Budget Addendum.
The Final Budget is balanced through the use of discretionary revenue and the onetime
use of reserves that are dwindling and placing the County at some level of risk.
The Final Budget relies on Teeter Reserves of $9.2 million, Discretionary Revenue of
$147 million, and the $8.5 million of Unassigned Fund Balance (a $3.1 million
increase from the Adopted Proposed Budget) to address a variety of operational and
capital needs. As the organization moves forward and begins to recover, a central
goal will be to slowly begin to build back reserves to the level they once were prior to
the economy’s downturn. This is of great importance to the fiscal sustainability of the
organization. Recently the County’s bond rating was reevaluated by both Moody’s
and Standard and Poor’s. The County maintained its existing ratings at A1 and A+
respectively. Standard and Poor’s changed the County’s fiscal outlook from negative
to stable as a result of the County’s efforts in strategically aligning General Fund
expenditures with reduced resources.
Contained in the Final Budget is a new Fund Balance Policy necessary to address
recent changes in Fund Balance classifications by the Government Accounting
Standards Board (GASB). The County’s Fund Balance Policy, as recommended,
establishes the General Fund Assigned Contingency Reserve at a level equal to at
least 8% of the average annual Discretionary Revenue from the preceding three fiscal
years. The Contingency Reserve is intended to fund costs associated with
emergencies and to maintain core service levels.
For Fiscal Year 2012-2013, the Net County Cost Savings Program will again be
available to departments. The program has played a significant role in helping
departments manage through the fiscal challenges faced as an organization and will
again allow departments to carry over 75% of any 2012-2013 year-end savings.
The Final Budget Addendum recommends a total of 3,799 allocated and funded
positions. This is an increase of 63 from the 3,736 allocated positions approved as
part of the 2012-1013 Proposed Budget and an increase in the number of allocated
from the prior two fiscal years. There was an increase of 40 positions between the
Proposed Budget and the Final Budget in order to support the Community Correction
partnership. These positions were assigned to the Behavioral Health and Recovery
Services, the Community Services Agency, the Probation Department and the
Sheriff’s Department. An increase in 23 positions is being recommended as part of
the 2012-2013 Final Budget. The staffing changes recommended in the Final Budget
Addendum are necessary to adequately manage program workload needs during the
fiscal year. Overall there has been an increase of 192 positions from the 2011-2012
Final Budget. This is primarily as a result of the Community Corrections Partnership
Plan for Public Safety Realignment and the rising need for public assistance and
increased caseload growth in StanWORKs at the Community Services Agency. While
there has been some growth in the last year the number of full-time allocated positions
in the County is still 660 positions below the 4,459 allocated positions included in the
Final Budget in Fiscal Year 2008-2009.

As discussed in the Recommended Proposed Budget, there are a host of issues and
exposures that will need to be addressed to some level beginning in Fiscal Year 2012-
2013. As part of the Final Budget, these known challenges have been carefully
evaluated and recommendations to best mitigate their impact to the organization’s
fiscal standing and the communities are included. Specifically, these include some of
the following: increasing funding for critical capital facility needs (Finch Road Animal
Services Facility, former Medical Arts Building, and Probation/Juvenile Hall) and
establishing adequate staffing for instituting the local Community Corrections
Partnership Plan Implementation Program. The Chief Executive Office Capital
Projects Division is also adhering to very aggressive project schedules to successfully
deliver the Jail Construction and Expansion and the Juvenile Commitment Facility
Projects.
In the social services arena, County staff is working diligently to respond to the
changing environment to best meet local need. An intense strategic planning effort is
nearing completion to develop viable options and a community based strategy to
address a growing population of individuals with serious mental health problems.
Additionally, the mandated function of the Office of Public Guardian, historically a
General Fund obligation supplemented with funding from Behavioral Health and
Recovery Services, will require a different funding approach in the future that is more
sustainable. Lastly, the passage of Senate Bill 1036, the Coordinated Care Initiative,
contains a number of changes to administration of the In Home Supportive Services
(IHSS) Program that is expected to have significant impacts to the County’s ability to
adequately continue to fund the program and the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) to meet
local needs. At the heart of these program changes, is a different method for
calculating the MOE, new policies and procedures for wage negotiations not yet
enacted for all counties, and pending Federal revenue decisions (Community First
Choice Option) all of which could impact the local share of the cost of this program.
The fiscal instability in the State of California continues to place pressure on local
governments’ ability to operate effectively to deliver critical programs and services.
The Governor’s November tax increase measure, loss of highway users tax account
funding, changes in Redevelopment Dissolution Act legislation (clean-up language),
lack of a permanent funding model that meets the community needs as a result of
public safety realignment, and Proposition 1A payback uncertainty, all have the
potential to have significant fiscal impacts to the County.
In an effort to continue to address potential exposures and issues, we will continue to
revisit these areas of concern during each quarterly report to the Board of Supervisors
(First Quarter, Mid-Year or Third Quarter) and make recommendations as appropriate.
In times where immediate action is required, recommended actions will be brought to
the Board during the regular meeting schedule. Ultimately, this will be a fluid process
in order to respond to budgetary issues and make adjustments to budget in a
responsible and timely manner.

As I close, let me assure you that we will remain strong as an organization and
community. As we continue to see signs of an improving economy and the results of
our strategic planning, it will be important that the organization continues to remind
ourselves of the recent past to shape and define our future. Restructuring is always
difficult but I am very proud of the work that we have all done together—the Board for
your strong leadership, Department Heads for their expertise of their program areas,
my Chief Executive Office team for your dedication and hard work, County employees
for your commitment to excellence, and the community for your patience and
willingness to be part of the solution. In addition, I remain confident in the County’s
abilities to move forward and rely on efficiencies gained and partnerships fostered, to
continue to provide public services and programs to County residents, never wavering
from our mission “to serve the public interest by promoting public health, safety,
welfare and the local economy in an efficient, cost effective manner.”