Dear Supervisors,
I am pleased to present for your consideration the 2016-2017 Recommended Proposed
Budget. This recommended budget, totaling $1,119,019,085 represents a 2% increase
from the 2015-2016 Adopted Final Budget and a 3.4% increase above the 2015-2016
Adopted Proposed Budget. This budget provides the resources that help drive our mission
of serving our community by promoting public health, safety, welfare and the local economy
in an efficient and cost-effective manner. Our theme for this year’s budget is “Focus on the
Future” and our goal is to present a spending plan that is prudent, targeted, sustainable and
forward thinking.
I heard someone once say that each night, as they would lay their head on their pillow to fall
asleep, they would reflect on the day and ponder as to whether they had a part, in some
small or large way, in leaving the world a better place that day. That reflection has left a
lasting impression on me, as I often find myself pondering the same question as I consider
my work, my relationships or my community: “What have I done today to leave my world a
little better than I found it?”
I share that thought, and the above referenced quote, as I am sensing greater than ever, a
growing movement of “dreamers… believers… courageous… cheerful… planners…
doers… successful people with their heads in the clouds and their feet on the ground” both
within our organization and in our broader communities committed to making our world of
Stanislaus County a better place. We are coming together to change our story from one
that focuses on everything that is wrong with our community to everything that is right about
our community. Stanislaus County is becoming a place where movements are being borne
such as “Focus on Prevention,” “Love our Cities,” “Stanislaus Reads,” “Destination
Graduation,” and multiple neighborhood based movements. These movements are
anchored by a growing number of concerned and dedicated leaders, employees and
citizens committed to making Stanislaus County a better place to live, work, learn, prosper
and play.
There is also a growing recognition that no one sector acting alone can create the future we
hope for, and there is a role for all sectors to play, including: neighborhoods; businesses;
education; faith; health; non-profits; philanthropy; media; arts, entertainment and sports; and
local government. If we are to significantly improve the well-being and futures of our
families and communities, residents and leaders from across the community must act
together.
As a Board of Supervisors, you have been modeling this collaborative approach to problem
solving. A few examples include your work in creating a Water Advisory Committee, tasked
with developing strategies to ensure a sustainable groundwater supply for future
generations; your formation of a vastly diverse Medical Marijuana Workgroup to inform the
Board regarding this challenging topic; or your development of Focus on Prevention, a 10-
sector movement tasked with improving the quality of life for every family in our County.
This type of “forward thinking” is foundational to what we are trying to build in our
organization and is reflected in the Recommended Proposed Budget presented to you
today. This budget is organized by your seven priority areas and contains a prudent and
targeted spending plan that was completed with attention to multi-year, long-range
modeling. It maintains your commitment to the continued implementation of the Public
Safety Restoration and Code Enforcement Restoration Plans, continued funding for the
Technology Innovation Program and Focus on Prevention initiative, and the ongoing focus
of establishing and ensuring appropriate financial reserves.
Budget Outlook
The 2016-2017 Recommended Proposed Budget is a solid financial plan which directly ties
to the long-range financial model. We continue to use a zero-based budget process in
which a full analysis of each account and line-item cost is completed “from the ground up” to
ensure the minimum funding level required to maintain existing Board of Supervisors’
approved staff and service levels is provided to County departments as a “base-funding”
and have found this to be an extremely powerful tool. Beyond the Base Budget,
Departments have the opportunity to request additional funding to address unmet needs
and increase service levels to the Community; we have recommended a variety of such
adjustments for your consideration and approval as highlighted in Department budgets by
priority area.
The Recommended Proposed Budget reflects $1,119,019,085 in appropriations and
$1,080,698,204 in estimated revenue. This compares to the 2015-2016 Adopted Final
Budget which totaled $1,097,281,913 in appropriations and $1,052,119,986 in estimated
revenue, meaning appropriations are up by $21.7 million from the 2015-2016 Adopted Final
Budget while revenue is up by $28.6 million. Discretionary Revenue, estimated at

$190,005,874, is included in the Recommended Proposed Budget, which is an $11.2 million
increase above the 2015-2016 Adopted Final Budget.
The General Fund appropriations are approximately $288 million for the 2016-2017
Recommended Proposed Budget compared to last year’s Adopted Final Budget of $278.9
million. Special Revenue appropriations are up 1.3% from $648.8 million to $657.5 million,
Capital Projects are up .65% from $1.54 million to $1.55 million, Enterprise Funds are up
3.5% from $72.5 million to $75.1 million with Internal Service funds up 1.5% from $95.5
million to $97 million.
The County will be using fund balance and retained earnings in several areas to balance the
Proposed Budget. Net county cost savings will be added back into the budget at the time of
the Recommended Final Budget. A total of $38.3 million in balancing funds are proposed,
which is a decrease of 15.2% from last year’s Adopted Final Budget.
Issues & Budget Impacts
Water. We anticipate water resources to be a multi-year issue, as we have yet to fully
recover from the recent drought; even with this year’s rain. The County has taken many
progressive steps and we continue to appreciate the work of both the Water Advisory
Committee and the Technical Advisory Committee in providing counsel to the Board of
Supervisors on this challenging subject. We will continue to engage local, State and Federal
policy matters and to prioritize caring for our residents who are challenged with emergency
water needs. We also continue to robustly support the North Valley Regional Recycled
Water Program which will provide significant relief to farmers on the west side of our County
who continue to be challenged by not having access to water for their crops.
Public Safety Facility Construction. The County has undertaken a significant expansion
of its Public Safety Center, at a cost exceeding $150 million, with the vast majority, 90%
funded by the State. The Day Reporting Center was completed and opened in late summer
2015. The final two jail construction projects, Project One, the Maximum Security and
Medical/Mental Health Facility, and Project Three, the Intake/Release/Transportation and
Jail Administration/Staff Support building are over 80% complete and scheduled to be
opened in fall 2016. The REACT Center, a 288 bed transition and program facility intended
to close the aged downtown jail except for court holding, has received full funding and
construction is set to commence in July 2016. All projects are on time and under budget.
Public Safety Services. The three-year Public Safety Restoration (PSR) plan implemented
during the third quarter of the 2014-2015 Fiscal Year is proving to be successful. We have
added back 31 of the 39 authorized full-time public safety staff and five extra help staff who
are providing vital services for the public. We will continue to fund implementation of this
program over this next fiscal year and increase recruitment efforts to attain and retain staff
in these important positions. By Budget Year 2017-2018, PSR funding is forecast to be at
$8 million ongoing General Fund support.
Technology Innovation. This two-year effort was introduced at the 2015-2016 Adopted
Final Budget and included $1 million in Appropriations for Contingencies for department
projects that will move people from inline to more convenient online services. Also, an
Automation Reserve was created with an additional $2.25 million to be used for future

automation projects. 19 projects were funded for implementation in 2015-2016 and we will
be closely watching implementation of these projects to see if they meet success criteria in
benefitting the public.
Roads & Bridges. This is a good news/bad news story. The County completed the Kiernan
Avenue/State Route 219 interchange and the Claribel Road widening project during 2015-
2016. These were major projects for the County and will promote economic vitality, goods
movement and improved safety for drivers. These are huge successes. Unfortunately, we
continue to be faced with a massive loss of road maintenance funds from the State that has
caused us to shut down most of our road resurfacing program in 2015-2016. Due to gas
prices and statewide fuel consumption, the County lost more than $3 million in Highway
Users Tax Account (HUTA) money which is used annually to fund the road resurfacing and
maintenance program. Because of the significant revenue loss, there was no chip seal
program in 2015-2016. We should be sealing about 150 miles of road each year in order to
maintain our roads over time. This loss of revenue continues to be a huge impact on our
County and we will closely watch how voters respond to the upcoming half-cent sales tax for
transportation proposal going to the ballot in November of this year.
Parks. We are in the second year of restoring Parks services that were severely cut during
the recession. We are adding back park staff, upgrading equipment, improving
maintenance, and increasing Police Athletic League (PAL) funding in several locations.
Staffing. Budget staffing recommendations include an overall increase in the Staffing
allocation count of 72 positions to 4,243. A total of 61 new positions are recommended in
the following departments: Behavioral Health and Recovery Services (16), Community
Services Agency (5), Environmental Resources (2), General Services Agency (4), Health
Services Agency (7), Probation (13), Public Works (1), Sheriff (12) and Strategic Business
Technology (1).
Retirement Costs. The County’s retirement plan is currently one of the healthiest funded
plans in the State at 75.8% funded using the market value of plan assets. This funded ratio
is down from June 30, 2014 which was 87.5%, due to changes approved by the Retirement
Board for the actuarial mortality and discount rate assumptions. However, it is expected
that retirement costs will continue to be a significant cost driver for our organization with
annual increases and future changes are expected to increase the employer contribution
rate by 4% to 5% or higher.
Financial Reserves. The Board of Supervisors is continuing its policy of maintaining a
Contingency Reserve of 8% of the three-year average of Discretionary Revenue. We
continue to make appropriate preparations to mitigate the impacts of a future recession on
the local community.
External Assessment/Issues
Economic Outlook:
The California economy is projected to maintain steady growth in 2016 according to the
University of the Pacific Center for Business and Policy Research. State economic growth
is projected to continue at 3% for the next several years and slowly decelerate toward 1%.
State unemployment is projected to continue to decrease and stabilize at around 5%.

Regional economists are projecting Stanislaus County unemployment to continue to
decrease until it stabilizes in the 8.2 - 8.3% range through the 2017 – 2019 time period.
Non-farm Payroll Employment in the Modesto Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) is
projected to increase by 2.7% in 2016, which is a rate slightly better than the Bay Area.
Unemployment in Stanislaus County showed a slight increase in March 2016, but was more
than a percentage point better than the prior year. Unemployment rates for the first quarter
of 2016 show:

The median home prices in Stanislaus County were $242,000 for the fourth quarter of 2015,
which is a 10.5% increase over the fourth quarter of 2014.
The Property Tax Assessed Roll for valuation increased 6.75% for 2015-2016 up to more
than $41.8 billion. Property tax is projected to increase approximately 4% in the 2016-2017
year over the projected year-end close. Sales tax revenues have continued increasing
annually since 2009 and are projected to continue with moderate growth of 2% this next
year. Property tax and sales tax are two of the biggest discretionary revenue sources the
County can use to support organizational priorities.
State Impacts:
The State budget continues to be strong although Personal Income Taxes have come in
significantly under budget in April 2016. The Governor has strenuously promoted not adding
to ongoing State spending, but has supported selective one-time spending initiatives. The
legislature continues to apply significant pressure to increase spending levels based on the
increased revenues and we expect this tension to continue. The State continues to pay
down debt and place money in the “rainy day” fund to promote future fiscal stability during
an economic downturn. The State also passed a significant minimum wage increase that
will have the wage set at $15 per hour by 2022 which could have significant future
implications on the business climate.
Looking Forward
The County will maintain a number of strategies that are essential for financial stability
including long-range modeling, adequate financial reserves, and tight controls on long-term
debt. Our multi-year employment agreements will continue to provide stability through this
next budget year.
Over this next year, the County will begin implementing a two-year budget cycle more
closely linked to Board priorities, as well as a continued movement into improved
performance outcomes. Bringing together and aligning our strategic planning, Board
priorities and performance outcome efforts will yield better value for the public and more
effective use of funds into the future.

We will be closely evaluating our Technology Innovation Program for success metrics and
will evaluate how to move and continue with implementation of the Public Safety
Restoration plan. We will open new, modern, and safe public safety facilities.
The Focus on Prevention initiative continues to gain momentum; however, we are more
convinced than ever that a long-term commitment to this process will be essential for its
success. The roots of societal issues run deep and it will take the effort of all of the 10
sectors of our community working together to move the needle on positive change.
Conclusion
“Let their spirit ignite a fire within you to leave this world better than when you found it...”
I’m extremely proud to work for this great organization and the citizens of Stanislaus County.
Our Vision is to be “a county that is respected for its service in the community and is known
as the best in America” and while we still have a long way to go, I believe we are making
considerable progress in this journey. I read with a real sense of pride a recent quote in a
Modesto Bee editorial that stated: “We believe Stanislaus County is one of the best-run
government organizations in the region.” That is a testament to your leadership as a Board
of Supervisors and to the excellent employees and senior leaders who continually
demonstrate a commitment to making sure we leave Stanislaus County a better place than
when we found it.
Our goal is to light a spark in our organization that grows and spreads throughout our
communities, leaving our County a better place for generations to come. We are not afraid
of the challenges that are before us and we are more committed than ever to boldly and
passionately stride forward to make positive change.