It is my pleasure to present the attached Sutter County Recommended Budget for FY 2013-14.
The budget is balanced and the County still enjoys healthy reserves because of past planning and
conservative budgeting. My job as the Chief Administrative Officer is to present to the Board a
budget that uses no one-time reserves to fund the on-going, daily operations of the County.
Totaling $241 million, the budget is largely status quo in nature. Unfortunately, the economic
situation in this area has not experienced a strong rebound. Going into this budget cycle our
budget gap was far greater than I anticipated. It was necessary to evaluate services and look for
areas that heavily impacted the General Fund. Reorganization was approved by this Board in
mid-May that I believe will provide quality services for our customers and also save substantial
money in this budget and years in the future. Reductions of positions in several other areas were
necessary to bring the budget within our revenues. Unfortunately, this action has a negative
impact to several departments and their employees.
The stagnant nature of this area’s economy has resulted in few requests for planning and public
works projects. The impact on certain departments resulting in lower than expected revenue is
being felt and will probably continue to be in decline for the short term. Unfortunately, the
elimination and reduction of internal services has also negatively impacted the General Fund in
the area of A-87 reimbursements. As we all know, as we eliminate expenses we also eliminate
paid services which are reimbursed through A-87. This impact was an approximate $900,000
loss to the General Fund.
Hopefully, as we watch the housing market slowly rebound in the area we will also see our
revenues stabilize and begin to rise. I am not optimistic that this will occur within the next year.
I expect another lean budget in 2014-15.
County of Sutter 1 2013-14 Recommended Budget
Fortunately, the Sutter County Board of Supervisors and Department Heads have been extremely
conservative in past years resulting in a reserve that can be used if necessary. I am not an
advocate of using reserve funds for daily operations but understand that the Board of Supervisors
still wants to provide the community with the best possible services while holding down
expenses.
Summary of the Recommended Budget
The Recommended Budget for FY 2013-14 totals $241 million. The General Fund comprises
$54.4 million of this amount. The Adopted Budget for FY 2012-13 consisted of a total
countywide budget of $252.5 million and a General Fund budget of $60.3 million. The
recommended figures therefore represent a decrease of $11.5 million, or 4.6% for the total
budget. The General Fund has been decreased $6.0 million, or 10%, when compared to the FY
2012-13 Adopted Budget.
Revenues essentially remain stagnant, with decreases in A-87 reimbursements and negative
impacts of lower planning fees and other departmental revenues. Although the County
Administrative Office is estimating no increase or decrease in sales tax revenue for FY 2013-14,
property tax values are projected in this budget to increase by 3%, which is a bright spot in our
projected revenue stream.
The County Administrative Office has reviewed all aspects of this budget and is presenting the
Board of Supervisors with a balanced budget utilizing no drawdown of reserves for daily
operating expenses.

Major Budget Impacts
This section includes discussions of a number of issues which have had a significant impact on
the Recommended County budget for FY 2013-14.
Department
Reorganizations
On May 14, 2013, the Sutter County Board of Supervisors
approved a reorganization of the Community Services, Public
Works, General Services and Information Technology
functions of the County. The reorganization is effective July
1, 2013, and the actions approved on May 14 have been
reflected in this Recommended Budget. This reorganization is
designed to create efficiencies in the management structure
and delivery of services to internal and external customers.
The Recommended Budget, which reflects the spending and
organization plan for the County effective July 1, 2013, is
presented with the reorganization of the three affected
departments in place.
The reorganization actions not only provide for a
consolidation of management functions, creating efficiencies
in the overall structure, but also allows for better public
services by providing a single department which will serve
the public related to development and other outside services.
The new Development Services Department provides a onestop
development center for the public, and is responsible for
the following functions:
Road Maintenance
Engineering Services
Planning & Building
Environmental Health & CUPA
Code Enforcement
Fire Services
Emergency Services
Water Resources
Special Districts
It is envisioned that the newly created General Services
Department will be able to help the County improve
efficiency by coordinating current and new projects such as
the purchase and implementation of a county-wide purchasing
and budget system and the development of a records
management system that encompasses digital as well as
physical storage.
Replacement Vehicles
The County has deferred most vehicle replacement purchases
during the economic downturn. Although the County has
saved the money required to purchase new vehicles during
that time period, deferring replacement of an aging fleet
inevitably leads to increasing maintenance costs in the shortterm,
and a ballooning financial burden to provide County
departments with suitable transportation in the long-term. It
has been estimated by the County’s Fleet Management
division that the deferred 5-year total cost for replacing
vehicles exceeds $4.7 million for the total County, and $3.3
million for the General Fund and Sheriff’s departments only.
Using the County’s current fleet statistics and replacement
policies, the average annual replacement expenses would be
$940,000 for the total County, and $667,000 for the General
Fund and Sheriff’s departments.
In an effort to reduce the deferred costs for replacement of
Sheriff’s patrol vehicles, the County Administrative Office is
recommending the replacement of five patrol vehicles in the
Sheriff’s Department. For this year, it is recommended that
the purchase be funded with one-time monies.
It is also recommended that six passenger vehicles be
replaced this year; four for Bi-County Mental Health, one for
Welfare and Social Services, and one for the Child Support
Services Department. The Road Division of Development
Services will be replacing two heavy-duty trucks. County
Service Area F will be purchasing one fire equipped pick-up
truck to replace an aging passenger vehicle, and in the process
improving the functionality for the Department.
Health Insurance
For FY 2013-14, the County will experience an 8% increase
in Health Insurance premium costs. The County’s
participation in the Tri-County Schools Insurance Group
(TCSIG) has benefitted the County and its employees over the
past ten years that the County has been a member. There
were no increases in health insurance premiums for a seven
year period. However, for a number of years, TCSIG was
drawing down on reserves to keep health insurance costs
stable. The County faced premium increases of 14% in FY
2010-11 and 13.3% in FY 2011-12, and again no increase for
FY 2012-13.
Animal Control
Transition
In November 2011, Sutter County and the cities of Live Oak
and Yuba City entered into a Joint Powers Agreement (JPA)
to form the Sutter Animal Services Authority (SASA) with
Sutter County designated as the lead agency for operations
and Yuba City designated as the lead agency to construct a
new facility. The agreement specified that, at the completion
of construction, the County’s historical management of
Animal Services operations would transfer to Yuba City.
Construction of the new facility is set to be completed by
August of 2013.
It has been agreed that the transition of lead agency duties for
SASA from Sutter County to Yuba City will occur on July 1,
2013, in conjunction with the new fiscal year. Sutter
County’s FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects this
change.
Based on the transition of lead agency duties for the Animal
Services operations from Sutter County to Yuba City, the
County’s Animal Control budget unit has changed to one
which solely appropriates the remaining permanent staffing
and the County’s proportionate share of the approved SASA
budget. This budget unit has been moved to the Human
Resources Department to reflect the change in Sutter County’s
responsibility. The recommended budget contains residual
costs related to A-87 Overhead and Workers’ Compensation
and Liability insurances. These costs will not be shared with
all SASA members. It is expected that these costs will
decrease over the next two to ten years.

Major structural improvements (generally those costing over
$15,000) are classified as Plant Acquisition projects. Because
of the size and complexity of these projects, they tend to span
two or more fiscal years before they are completed. This
year’s recommended projects include $218,400 for the second
phase of the expansion of the Agriculture Commissioner’s
building, approximately $610,000 to replace portions of the
roof at the 446 and 463 2nd Street buildings (the cost for both
projects will be shared with the Courts), $32,855 for ADA
Improvements at various County facilities, and $19,000 for
repairs to the Jail.
The largest of the projects is the expansion of the Main Jail.
The envisioned project will remodel and expand the Medical
Services and Kitchen Areas, and will expand the capacity of
the Maximum Security facility by 42 beds. In response to the
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation
Request for Applications, in January of 2012, Sutter County
submitted a financing application for funds made available
through the AB 900 Phase II Construction or Expansion of
County Jails program.
The project was selected by the State for funding, with
$9,741,000 requested in state financing and the County
providing $514,000 as the required 5% funding match. The
County’s Criminal Justice Development Impact Fees will be
used to cover any required local match and to advance funds
to complete the initial phases of the project prior to receiving
reimbursement.
The County has awarded a design contract to an Architectural
/ Engineering Design team based in Sacramento and is
working with the Design team to satisfy all state bond
financing criteria so the project will be officially accepted by
the State Public Works Board and the project’s design can
begin. The project’s design is expected to take approximately
12 months followed by construction lasting approximately 18
months.
Zoning Code Update
The Planning and Building Division of the Community
Services Department reviews and processes general plan and
zoning applications, land divisions, use permits, variances,
and other development related requests in conformance with
all applicable state law requirements, and addresses code
enforcement violations relative to the Zoning Code.

As the result of the recent completion of the General Plan
Update, a comprehensive review and update is needed of the
Zoning Code. The Planning and Building Division’s budget
includes $100,000 to fund the second year of a two-year
project to update the Zoning Code.
Special Revenue Funds
For the past three years, Departments that had funds available
were directed to use those funds over the three-year period to
help offset further reductions due to General Fund funding
losses. If departments had special revenue funds that could
legally be used for discretionary purposes, those funds were
recommended to be drawn in the same proportions that the
General Fund was drawing down its reserves. This year,
many of those funding sources have been used and the
revenue source is not available. A limited number of
departments are recommended to continue to draw down
remaining Special Revenue Fund monies. Those include:
$60,000 from Sheriff’s Assessment Fees, $131,450 from the
Assessor’s property tax administration program fund, $51,000
from the Tax Collector’s Office of Revenue Collection
enhancement fund, and $41,000 from the District Attorney’s
Asset Forfeiture and Local Anti-Drug Abuse funds. The
Sheriff will again be using his Assessment Fees to fund a
Legal Specialist position and avoid additional staffing
reductions.
As has been done in the past, it is recommended that the
special revenue funds be transferred to the General Fund at
the beginning of the fiscal year. Any unexpended funds in the
departments’ budgets at the end of FY 2013-14 should be
used to decrease the County’s General Fund contribution to
that budget.
SunGard Personnel-
Payroll-Financial
Management-Budget-
Purchasing System
On March 31, 2009, your Board approved a contract with
SunGard LLC to update and integrate the County’s aging
financial management systems. The new system will
ultimately combine all five functions into one integrated and
up-to-date software system. The project was split into two
phases: Phase I includes the majority of the Personnel and
Payroll modules, as well as an intermediate upgrade of the
financial management system. Phase II will include the
Purchasing and Budget modules, the remainder of the
Personnel and Payroll modules, and conversion to the most
current version of the Financial Management system. Phase I
is over a year behind schedule. It is now expected that Phase I
of the project will “go live” in July of 2013. Phase II will be

implemented following the successful implementation of
Phase I. A total of $46,620 is being budgeted in FY 2013-14.
These costs include:
$9,720 in the Auditor-Controller’ budget for
temporary help staffing;
$6,900 in the Auditor-Controller’s budget for training
related to the new system;
A re-budget of $30,000 in the County Administrative
Office to implement the budget module.
Future Considerations
Labor Agreements
The Board of Supervisors will be negotiating new bargaining
agreements with all employee groups starting in FY 2013-14.
The results of these agreements have yet to be determined,
and therefore no changes have been included in this
Recommended Budget.
Realignment Phase II -
Public Health
At the time of this writing, State Budget subcommittees are
considering the Governor’s May Revision proposals, focusing
on the Administration’s proposals for calculating county
savings associated with the Medi-Cal expansion and the
redirection of those funds to a new realignment of certain
social services programs. County advocates have
communicated unanimous opposition to the Administration’s
provisions associated with realignment and continue to
express significant concerns with the proposed formula for
determining county savings.
The Administration’s approach includes a reduction in 2013-
14, before any evidence of county savings is produced.
Counties are concerned that the $300 million estimated
redirection for 2013-14 is too much, too soon and will result
in immediate reductions to the county health care safety net.
The fiscal impact to Sutter County would be a redirection of
$1,196,051 in FY 2013-14, $3,588,154 in FY 2014-15, and
$5,182,889 in FY 2015-16. While the FY 2013-14 amount
essentially does not “touch” the County’s budget, as it would
come from our current $2,996,118 mandatory contribution to
CMSP, subsequent years would clearly impact those
remaining Realignment dollars that come directly to the
County and support current programs. Under this scenario,
Sutter County would lose $592,036 from current direct 1991
Realignment dollars in FY 2014-15, and would lose all but
$400,000 in FY 2015-16. For perspective, $400,000 leaves
Sutter County with just enough to administer a limited
Environmental Health program. All other Public Health
programs that are currently funded with 1991 Realignment
funds would be eliminated, or would need to be covered
directly by the County’s General Fund.