Presented is the proposed budget for fiscal year 2015-16. The total budget including
enterprise funds, internal service funds and dependent districts is $107,300,870. The General
Fund component is $23,257,544, which includes $10,390,353 in discretionary revenues
including a cash balance forward of $1,550,000. All available revenues have been appropriated.
The budget as presented provides for a contingency of $232,575. Payments on the 98 Pension
Obligation Bond, 05 Certificates of Participation and TPUD Hospital Loan are fully funded
within the proposed budget.
The total budget has increased 14.55% over last fiscal year, with 80% of the increase
residing in social services, public health and roads, and the remaining 20% in public protection
and general government. This is attributable to the total budget having 12.48% budgeted for
infrastructure improvements, including $12.4 million for road projects and $1 million for a
portion of the County’s required cash match to the SB863 funding for the new jail. Additionally,
social services have substantial increases due to growth in their state and federal allocations, as
well as IGT funds.
The costs of salary and benefits comprise 29% of the total budget, but 56% of the general
fund budget. We have increased the payment toward our Other Post-Employment Benefits
(OPEB) obligation by 10%, bringing us to 40% of the Annual Required Contribution (ARC).
Rates for the County share of CalPERS Retirement for miscellaneous employees increased by
1.98% to 30.39%, however the contribution for safety employees dropped by 3.7% to 39.08%.
This budget funds 320 Full Time Equivalent positions. The following additional
positions were requested:
 Sheriff (5 deputies and 1 correctional officer) Funded correctional officer (half year) and
2 retired annuitants for code enforcement purposes.
 DA (1 half-time investigator, 1 legal secretary and 1 half-time victim witness advocate)
Funded victim witness advocate as it is fully grant funded.
 Administration (1 half-time admin clerk) Not funded.
 General Services (2 half-time custodians) Funded as this is a conversion of extra help to
permanent part time.
 Health and Human Services (1 admin clerk, 1 eligibility supervisor, 2 eligibility workers,
1 employment training worker, 2 social workers, 1 social worker supervisor, 1 staff
services analyst) All funded.
Within the General Fund, requested expenditures exceeded anticipated revenues and cash
balance forward by $1,124,081. The proposed budget ensures debt service obligations are met
and capacity for revenue generation is maintained. However, it does not provide for needed
enhancements to public safety services in the Sheriff’s Department and District Attorney’s
office.
Services will be impacted by the proposed General Fund budget reductions as they will
result in employee furloughs, specifically within the library and possibly other departments.
Please keep in mind that, should you desire to increase the recommended discretionary General
Fund budget contribution for any department, that same amount must be decreased in other
departments.
Preparing the budget is a long and difficult process where tough decisions must be made.
Submitting a balanced County budget cannot be accomplished without the support, cooperation,
and understanding of all County departments and certainly without the dedicated work of the
Auditor’s Office and CAO staff. My deepest thanks to all of you.