Presented is the proposed budget for fiscal year 2014-15. The total budget including
enterprise funds and dependent districts totals $93,670,142. The General Fund component is
$18,286,853, which includes $8,201,003 in discretionary revenues and cash balance forward of
$1,500,000. The budget as presented provides for an appropriation for contingency of $182,869.
This budget reflects revenue increases in both the General Fund and State and Federal
programs; however, those increases do not cover the increased cost of doing business. Again we
have increased our payment toward our Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) obligation by
10%, bringing us to 30% of the Annual Required Contribution (ARC). Rates for the County
share of CalPERS Retirement for miscellaneous and safety employees increased 1.98% and
3.35% respectively, over last year. All debt service obligations are fully funded within the
proposed budget. It goes without saying that other costs, such as insurance, fuel, utilities, and
other supplies continue to grow.
General Fund departments were not given any particular instruction in developing their
requested budgets, however it is apparent that they have given great consideration to the limited
funds available for appropriation and have submitted budgets reflecting that. Their realistic
budgeting approach is greatly appreciated, and has made this task less cumbersome.
With costs exceeding revenues, reductions are necessary. Hard decisions must be made
and priorities set. In that spirit I have proposed a budget that ensures debt service obligations are
met, capacity for revenue generation is increased, and public safety services are provided.
Several departments have increased general fund contributions due to work in progress from the
previous fiscal year, other contractual obligations, or new projects being implemented. Some
departments and/or services will fare better than others in the budget process. All available
revenues have been appropriated.
This budget funds 279 Full Time Equivalent positions. Positions in the Assessor,
Treasurer/Tax Collector, Animal Control, Environmental Health and District Attorney offices
have been restored. It is my belief that the only department that will require furlough in this
fiscal year is the Library, 1 FTE at 20%.
Unfortunately, the proposed budget does not provide for reopening of the juvenile
detention facility. At the special meeting held in June the Board directed that Chief Ridlehuber
and I work to secure additional funding to assist in offsetting the general fund contribution
required as a result of the loss of Title IVE funding. As of the preparation of this memo, no such
funding has been secured.
Health realignment revenue is anticipated to decrease nearly $346,600 due to the AB 85
provision that redirects Health Realignment to the State for costs for expanded MediCal under
the ACA, which subsequently decreases the county responsibility for the County Medical
Services Program (CMSP). The Health Realignment cash balance forward, from FY 2013/14
is less than prior years at $68,896. The need to fund ambulance services in the western part of
the county was identified, and has been included in proposed expenditures from Health
Realignment. However, due to the decreased balance forward, the contributions to Jail Health
and Public Health have been reduced. While both of these functions are critical, the departments
are working to reduce jail health costs by leveraging provisions of the ACA and other solutions.
The public health component has requested positions that can remain unfilled until revenue
numbers are firmed up.
My thanks to the departments, their fiscal staffs and our dedicated employees for their
assistance in shaping this proposed budget.
I look forward to the dialogue as we make the final determination of how to allocate our
precious resources based on state and federal mandates, desired constituent services and fiscal
prudence.