Presented is the proposed budget for fiscal year 2016-17. The total budget including
enterprise funds, internal service funds, dependent districts and contingency is $92,530,317. The
General Fund component is $23,742,186, which includes $9,191,155 in discretionary revenues
and a cash balance forward (carryover) of $1,800,000. All available revenues have been
appropriated. The budget as presented provides for a contingency of $236,901. Payments on the
98 Pension Obligation Bond, 05 Certificates of Participation and TPUD Hospital Loan are fully
funded within the proposed budget.
The total budget has decreased 13.77% over last fiscal year, 75% is due to a decrease in
infrastructure projects for the current year as compared to the prior year, the remaining 25% is
due to a decrease in social services program expenditures.
The costs of salary and benefits comprise 34% of the total budget, but 57% of the general
fund budget. We have increased the payment toward our Other Post-Employment Benefits
(OPEB) obligation by 10%, bringing us to 50% of the Annual Required Contribution (ARC).
Rates for the County share of CalPERS Retirement for miscellaneous employees increased by
2.23% to 32.62%, and the contribution for safety employees increased by 6.40% to 45.48%.
This budget funds 327.35 Full Time Equivalent positions. Department Heads were
requested to attempt to keep their staffing status quo from FY15/16. The following additional
positions were requested:
 Sheriff (4.25 deputies, 1 correctional officer, 0.5 business manager, and 1 evidence
technician) Funded 1 deputy (half year).
 DA (1 half-time investigator) Funded 1 half-time investigator as it is fully funded by non-
General Fund source. Funded an additional quarter-time investigator to perform service
of process duties currently performed by the Trinity County Marshall’s Office by
eliminating the need to pay for the service. Early contract termination is subject to mutual
agreement of the County and Courts.
 Probation (1 deputy probation officer) Funded as it is fully funded by non-General Fund
source.
 Planning (1 half-time planning director and 1 assistant planning director) Funded 1 halftime
planning director.
 Administration (1 deputy CAO) Funded 60% General Fund and 40% Solid Waste.
 Insurance/Risk Management (1 loss prevention specialist 1) Funded as it is fully funded
by non-General Fund source.
 Information Technology (1 information systems specialist) Funded as it is fully funded
by non-General Fund source.
 Treasurer/Tax Collector (1 half-time account tech 1) Not funded.
 Behavioral Health Services (1 half-time account clerk 1) Funded as it is fully funded by
non-General Fund source.
 Solid Waste (1 department head) Not funded.
Within the General Fund, requested expenditures exceeded anticipated revenues and cash
balance forward by $1,393,680. The proposed budget ensures debt service obligations are met
and capacity for revenue generation is maintained. However, it does not provide for needed
enhancements to public safety services in the Sheriff’s Department.
Services will be impacted by the proposed General Fund budget reductions as they will
result in employee furloughs, specifically within the library and possibly other departments.
Please keep in mind that, should you desire to increase the recommended discretionary General
Fund budget contribution for any department, that same amount must be decreased in other
departments.
Preparing the budget is a long and difficult process where tough decisions must be made.
Submitting a balanced County budget cannot be accomplished without the support, cooperation,
and understanding of all County departments and certainly without the dedicated work of the
Auditor’s Office and CAO staff. My deepest thanks to all of you.