Presented here is a proposed budget for fiscal year 2013-14. The proposed budget
including enterprise funds and dependent districts totals $84,751,365.
A request to hold budget proceedings earlier in the fiscal year has made developing the
proposed budget more challenging than usual. The County relies heavily on cash carry forward
to balance the budget. At this point, the accounting transactions for fiscal year 2012-13 are
weeks away from being completed. To determine what the cash balance forward will be is truly
a guess. I have based the balance forward on recent trends, but with shrinking budgets the fact
is, departments are expending more of their budgets during the year, thus reducing funds
available.
Additionally, the cash balance forward contains funds from the property tax negative
bailout. These funds are a result of the passage of SB85 in 2010. In summary, SB85 redirects
property tax allocations to 6 counties who, as a result of Prop 13 and an AFDC shift in 1979,
were left in an inequitable situation as compared to the remaining 52 counties. As this is a
relatively unique circumstance, the property tax division of the state will be on site within the
next couple of months to perform an audit of our property tax distribution process. County staff
is confident that these funds are being appropriately distributed.
The result of these two items could cause a swing of cash balance forward between
$600,000 and $1,000,000. The effects of not having these funds available will be devastating on
the County’s budget and our ability to provide services to our citizens. That being said, I have
included this amount in the proposed budget. Once the audit is completed and the books closed
for 2012-13, should the cash balance forward be less than $1.485 million, we will need to take
immediate action to reduce general fund budgets.
A 10% contribution toward meeting our Annual Required Contributions (ARC) for the
County’s Other Post Employment Benefit (OPEB) obligations is included in the proposed
budget. This increases our total contribution for this fiscal year by $440,047 over last year.
While not a huge increase it must be noted it is felt by each department. We must, however,
continue to address this issue with a long term plan.
General Fund departments were requested to build a budget that contained the same
general fund contribution as fiscal year 2012-13. This was a difficult task as the costs of
providing services to our citizens continue to rise. Most departments were able to provide the
budget requested, however some were not. The method I used to determine proposed funding is
truly subjective. Based on what I believe the Board’s priorities to be, and actions taken during
previous budget hearings, I have prepared a budget that provides funding for all county services,
with at least the same percentage of general fund contribution as fiscal year 2012-13. However,
it is nearly certain that there will be a reduction in services provided in many departments.
Additional funds have been budgeted for County Administration to cover litigation costs and in
General Services to cover necessary maintenance and repairs to county buildings.
As has been noted in previous budget proceedings, it is our job to provide vital services
to the citizens of Trinity County. To what level they can be provided, with our limited resources,
is a determination you must make. Our departments and all staff are to be commended for their
continuing hard work and dedication during these times.