The FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget for all funds totals $1.16 billion, an increase of $156 million, or 15%, when compared to the FY
2014/15 Adopted Budget. The budget supports a workforce of 4,848.63 positions and reflects a net increase of 72.6 positions. The
FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget continues the restoration of actions taken to address the Great Recession. Workers’ Compensation
charges are increased $2 million to $11.2 million, or one million more than budgeted in FY 2007/08. The County negotiated 2 year
labor agreements with its employees, providing cost of living increases, restoring the Sick Leave Buy Back program with specific
Bargaining Units, and restoring the Deferred Compensation Match program for all unrepresented employees.
The Recommended Budget provides funding for mandated and essential services, County programs, infrastructure and capital needs,
equipment maintenance and replacement, building County reserves, and maintaining a contingency fund; and adheres to the County
Budget Act, County Administrative Regulations, and the County’s financial policies.
The General Fund Budget, which encompasses the majority of County operations, totals $709.1 million, an increase of $34.6 million,
or 5.1%, over the FY 2014/15 Adopted Budget. Carryover fund balance continues to be strong for FY 2015/16 at $29.4 million, which
is available for one-time expenditures, maintaining the Contingency Budget at $5 million, and covering the General Fund’s net County
cost. County discretionary revenues total $153.9 million, a $6.4 million increase, or 4.4%, over last year.
The growth in appropriations is predominately due to an increase of $7.8 in ongoing unsubvented operations, $18 million in Health and
Human Services Agency’s budget for Child Welfare Services (CWS) caseload growth, Foster Care increases, Affordable Care Act
implementation, and Med-Cal increases, and a $5.6 million increase in one-time appropriations. Significant one-time expenditures
include appropriations for Probation security cameras and equipment ($1 million); a transfer to the Future Economic Development
Trust Fund for General Plan implementation and Community Plan preparation ($1.2 million); County building improvements, remodels,
and department relocations ($3 million); County parks maintenance and restoration ($1 million); Pension Stabilization reserve ($1
million); the purchase of property ($4 million); additional funds for new jail/public safety facilities ($1.5 million); and a cash match for
the SB 863 jail project application ($3 million).
The General Fund’s estimated revenues are $679.7 million, which are $31.5 million or 4.9% higher than the FY 2014/15 Adopted

Budget. The increase in revenues is predominately due to projected growth in countywide and Health and Human Services Agency
revenues with the related appropriations above.
As mentioned before, and most importantly, the FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget proposes to increase the County’s General Fund
reserve by $1 million to a total of $25 million in order to follow the County’s financial policies and achieve reserve funding consistent
with best practices. Finally, and also of significance, the FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget includes the County’s last debt payment,
due on August 15, 2015, for its 1998 COPs bond issuance. After this payment is made, the County’s only remaining long-term debt is
an energy improvement loan with an outstanding balance of $3.7 million as of June 30, 2015.
In conclusion, for FY 2015/16, the General Fund is continuing to see positive improvement after the effects of the Great Recession of
2008. Positions frozen for budgetary purposes during the Great Recession continue to be unfrozen on a more aggressive basis as
countywide funding becomes available. Over the next few years, the County needs to continue to unfreeze positions on a systematic,
holistic basis.
OTHER FUNDS
Activities not included in the General Fund are budgeted in Special Revenue, Enterprise and Assessment District, Internal Service,
Building Debt Service, and Special District Funds.
Special Revenue Funds - The County’s most prominent Special Revenue funds include the Fire, Building Debt Service, Roads, Child
Support Services, Library, and Capital Project budgets.
 The Fire Fund’s appropriations increase by 4% predominately due to an increase in annual salary and benefits along with an
increase in capital asset purchases. The new budget includes the purchase of fire equipment, a Bullex Smart Fire Safety training
trailer, seven utility vehicles, and one heavy-duty truck.
 The Road Fund’s appropriations increase by 21% primarily due to reduced County force road reconstruction resulting from AB
720 restrictions on the use of County forces.
 The Child Support Services Fund’s appropriations and estimated revenues are relatively static at a 1% decrease.
 The Library Fund’s appropriations decrease by 3% predominately due to decreasing professional services and completion of
library branch improvements.
 Appropriations for the Capital Projects Fund increase 118% predominately due to a proposed property acquisition and the first
of two, and hopefully three, large jail projects breaking ground in early 2016. The County applied for a third round of State jail
funding (SB 863) and will be notified in November 2015 if its application is selected for funding.
 Building Debt Service accounts for the County’s building debt service activities. Overall, the Building Debt Service fund
expenditures increase about 108% compared with the Adopted Budget for last fiscal year. The reason for the increase is due to

operating transfers out to Capital Projects for property acquisition.
The County Service Area funds account for sewer and water systems construction and ongoing maintenance within the
unincorporated areas of the County. Overall, County Service Area funds' expenses are virtually the same as the FY 2014/15
Adopted Budget.
Enterprise and Assessment Funds – These funds account for operations that are financed and operated in a manner similar to
private businesses, where the intent of the government is to provide goods or services to the public on a continuing basis at a cost
that is financed or recovered primarily through user charges. The County's Enterprise funds include Transit and Solid Waste
Management. The Assessment Districts’ funds perform specific function(s) to provide long-term maintenance of storm drainage
systems, landscape improvements, and road maintenance for residential subdivisions in unincorporated areas through district
assessment fees.
 The Transit Fund appropriations increase 4% primarily due to capital assets for Transit’s infrastructure improvement project. The
FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget includes $11.8 million in new capital assets primarily for the Transit Operation and
Maintenance Facility.
 The Solid Waste Fund appropriations decrease 2% overall due to a reduction in requested capital assets.
 Overall, assessment funds’ expenses increased $71,025, or 10.7%, compared to the FY 2014/15 Adopted Budget. The overall
increase is due to an augmentation in professional services.
Internal Service Funds – These funds provide services to departments within the County by taking advantage of operating
efficiencies. These funds provide better accountability and control over costs previously provided within the General Fund. ISFs
include services such as insurance, facilities, information and communication technology, copier, custodial, fleet, grounds, print,
mail, and utilities.
Special District Funds - Are independent units of local government generally organized and funded through assessments to the
beneficiaries of the Districts to perform a specific function(s) for a specific area.
 The County Flood Control Fund coordinates all countywide flood control activities. Flood Control’s appropriations increased by
$284,828 or 8% compared to the FY 2014/15 Adopted Budget. The FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget includes increased
funds for professional services for planned projects.
The County Redevelopment funds were responsible for improving, upgrading, and revitalizing areas within the unincorporated
territory of the County that have become blighted because of deterioration, disuse, and unproductive economic conditions. As of
February 1, 2012, all Redevelopment Agencies throughout the State were dissolved pursuant to Assembly Bill X1 26.

 Successor Agencies were created to oversee the dissolution process and all future Redevelopment Funds have been converted
into Fiduciary Trust Funds.
