The FY 2016/17 Recommended Budget for all funds totals $1.18 billion, an increase of $18.8 million, or 1.6%, when compared to the
FY 2015/16 Adopted Budget. The budget supports a workforce of 4,944.63 positions and reflects a net increase of 96 positions.
The FY 2016/17 Recommended Budget continues the restoration of actions taken to address the Great Recession. Workers’
Compensation increase by $2 million to $13.2 million. The County is in the second year of the negotiated two (2) year labor
agreements with its employees, providing cost of living increases, restoring the Sick Leave Buy Back program with specific Bargaining
Units, and restoring the Deferred Compensation Match program for all unrepresented employees.
The Recommended Budget provides funding for mandated and essential services, County programs, infrastructure and capital needs,
equipment maintenance and replacement, building County reserves, and maintaining a contingency fund; and adheres to the County
Budget Act, County Administrative Regulations, and the County’s financial policies.

The General Fund Budget, which encompasses the majority of County operations, totals $715 million, an increase of $5.9 million,
or 1%, over the FY 2015/16 Adopted Budget. Carryover fund balance continues to be strong for FY 2016/17 at $31.6 million, an
increase of $2.2 million over last year’s fund balance of $29.4 million. Essentially, the fund balance is available for one-time
expenditures, maintaining the Contingency Budget at $5 million, and covering the General Fund’s Net County Cost. County
discretionary revenues total $156 million, a $2.1 million increase, or 1.4%, over last year.
The growth in County appropriations increase overall by $6 million; key operations directly impacting growth are $4.8 million Sheriff
Department, $1.1 million County Counsel, and $1.2 million Probation. Specific one-time expenditures include appropriations for a
Countywide financial software upgrade ($1.5 million); a transfer to the Future Economic Development Trust Fund for General Plan
implementation and Community Plan preparation ($1.8 million); Emergency response ($1 million); Pension Stabilization reserve ($1
million); Litigation Trust Fund ($2 million); one-time funds for the Fire Fund ($1.2 million); additional funds for Sheriff property and
evidence facility ($3 million); and ($1 million) for the South County Detention Facility.
The General Fund’s estimated revenues are $683.4 million, which are $3.7 million or .05% higher than the FY 2015/16 Adopted
Budget. The increase in revenues is predominately based on the projected growth in the County’s General Revenues.
As previously noted, the FY 2016/17 Recommended Budget proposes to increase the County’s General Fund reserve by $1 million
to a total of $26 million in order to follow the County’s financial policies and achieve reserve funding consistent with best practices.
Also of significance, the FY 2016/17 Recommended Budget includes, the County’s only remaining long-term debt is an energy
improvement loan with an outstanding balance of $3.4 million as of June 30, 2016.
In conclusion, for FY 2016/17, the General Fund's positive direction continues to move forward cautiously and addresses both
strategic and operational responsibilities, sustainability, and structural balance. As mentioned above, the Nation's economic average
annual growth rate is a lackluster 2.1% for the past seven years, which has prompted Federal and State policy makers to plan for
the next "downturn" that has historically presented itself in five-year cycles. The County will enhance its Strategic Management
System, implement a robust Economic Development Strategy, increase reserves, maintain contingency reserves and budget
prudently and conservatively to account for the "downturn" and other horizon issues the County will face in the coming years.
OTHER FUNDS
Activities not included in the General Fund are budgeted in Special Revenue, Enterprise and Assessment District, Internal Service,
Building Debt Service, and Special District Funds.
Special Revenue Funds - The County’s most prominent Special Revenue funds include the Fire, Building Debt Service, Roads,
Child Support Services, Library, and Capital Project budgets.
The Fire Fund’s appropriations increase by 1% predominately based from an increase in annual salary and benefits. The
capital asset purchases include the purchase of a fire prevention trailer, one fire engine and three heavy duty trucks.
The Road Fund’s appropriations increase of approximately 1%.
The Child Support Services Fund’s appropriations and estimated revenues are relativity static at a 1% increase.
The Library Fund’s appropriations are static at a decrease of less than 1%.
Appropriations for the Capital Projects Fund increase approximately 7% when compared with the Adopted Budget for last
fiscal year. The reason for the increase is directly associated with the expansion of criminal justice construction projects and
County parks maintenance and restoration efforts ($1.4 million).
Building Debt Service accounts for the County’s building debt service activities. The Building Debt Service fund represents a
decrease of 67%, primarily based from the reduction in operating transfers for capital projects for building acquisitions.
The County Service Area (CSA) funds account for sewer and water systems construction and ongoing maintenance within the
unincorporated areas of the County. Overall, CSA funds appropriations represent an increase of 6.3% in combination with the
use of fund balance.
Enterprise and Assessment Funds – These funds account for operations that are financed and operated in a manner similar to
private businesses, where the intent of the government is to provide goods or services to the public on a continuing basis at a
cost that is financed or recovered primarily through user charges. The County's Enterprise funds include Transit and Solid Waste
Management. The Assessment Districts’ funds perform specific function(s) to provide long-term maintenance of storm drainage
systems, landscape improvements, and road maintenance for residential subdivisions in unincorporated areas through district
assessment fees.
The Transit Fund appropriations increase 10% primarily based from the several large projects to start in FY 2016/17. In
addition, the Recommended Budget includes approximately $10 million for the Transit Operation and Maintenance Facility.
The Solid Waste Fund appropriations increase by 9% overall predominately based on the addition of personnel and an
increase to capital assets. The Recommended Budget includes the establishment of the Solid Waste Closure Operations
Fund to account for closure construction of Waste Management Unit 1 located at the Visalia Landfill.
Overall, assessment fund expenses increased $221,726, or 13%, compared to the FY 2015/16 Adopted Budget. This increase
results from an augmentation in professional services.
Internal Service Funds (ISFs) – These funds provide services to departments within the County by taking advantage of operating
efficiencies. These funds provide better accountability and control over costs previously provided within the General Fund. ISFs
include services such as insurance, facilities, information and communication technology, copier, custodial, fleet, grounds, print,

mail, and utilities. The rates for FY 2016/17 were moderately static in comparison to prior fiscal year.
Special District Funds – These are independent units of local government generally organized and funded through assessments
to the beneficiaries of the Districts to perform targeted function for a specific area.
The County Flood Control Fund coordinates all countywide flood control activities. Flood Control’s appropriations increased
by $1,016,850 or 26% compared to the FY 2015/16 Adopted Budget. The FY 2016/17 Recommended Budget includes
increased funds for professional services for planned projects.
The County Redevelopment funds were responsible for improving, upgrading, and revitalizing areas within the unincorporated
areas of the County that have become blighted because of deterioration, disuse, and unproductive economic conditions. As of
February 1, 2012, all Redevelopment Agencies throughout the State were dissolved pursuant to Assembly Bill X1 26.
Successor Agencies were created to oversee the dissolution process and all future Redevelopment Funds have been
converted into Fiduciary Trust Funds. The Housing Successor Agency Fund is the exception, as it is classified and reported
as a Special Revenue Fund, the primary source of revenue is property taxes. At this time, the Successor Agency continues
the process of seeking the required authorization through the Oversight Board and the Department of Finance for related
expenditures, which primarily consists of long-term debt.