The General Fund budget for FY 2012/13 is hopefully the beginning of the recovery in the County’s finances. The General Fund
budget reflects a marginal increase in appropriations compared with the FY 2011/12 Adopted Budget. The General Fund’s
appropriations are almost $636.9 million, which are approximately $38.8 million or 6.5% higher than the FY 2011/12 Adopted
Budget. The growth in appropriations is predominately due to the transfer of State responsibilities and services to the County under
2011 Realignment.
The General Fund’s estimated revenues are $617.8 million, which are $36.2 million or almost 6.2% higher than the FY 2011/12
Adopted Budget. The increase is predominately due to receipt of additional Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) funds, 2011
Realignment revenues from the State, and projected growth in Countywide Revenues.
As indicated above, the County made its last pension debt payment in FY 2011/12. Estimated Countywide revenues for FY 2012/13
are expected to increase by 3.1% or $4.1 million. Consequently, the FY 2012/13 balanced budget is proposed without any
reductions to department budgets; catches up deferred merit and step increases to eligible employees through next fiscal year; does
not include a one-week furlough; and importantly does not budget reserves in order to balance the budget. These changes are all
done on a structural basis without relying on one-time monies.
As noted above, the County’s General Fund ended FY 2011/12 with a strong carryover fund balance. While the General Fund
budget is improving its current structural condition, the FY 2012/13 budget also includes one-time monies intended to defease (pay
down early) the County’s Invensys Energy Management debt for the final two years of its term (FY 2016/17 and FY 2017/18). This
internal pre-payment will free up spending authority for all of the Departments in those respective years.
The FY 2012/13 budget includes an additional $1.8 million dedicated for the purchase and installation of a new holistic permit
system for the County’s Resource Management Agency. The new system is expected to improve customer service by allowing
future permit applicants to determine their permit status online. It is also expected to integrate code enforcement activities from the
issuance of the infraction to the administrative hearing process. This continues the County’s use of technology to improve customer
service and operational innovation.
The excess fund balance allows the County to maintain its Contingency appropriations which are used to cushion the volatility in the
local and State economies. The Contingency appropriation is proposed to remain at $5 million for FY 2012/13.

The County of Tulare is currently being inundated with marijuana groves on the valley floor. This is causing significant health and
public safety problems for County residents. The recommended budget for FY 2012/13 proposes to continue using one time monies
to fund a Marijuana Strike Force Team comprised of Sheriff, District Attorney, Resource Management, and County Counsel
employees.
In conclusion, for FY 2012/13, the General Fund is turning the corner in dealing with the effects of the Great Recession of 2008. For
the first time in three fiscal years, the budget does not include Department reductions. Deferred step and merit increases are
honored through the fiscal year. One week furloughs are no longer be deployed. And most importantly, reserves are not required to
balance the budget. In addition to the improvement in the structural condition of the General Fund, the budget includes monies to
pay down debt early and to further its efforts to use technological innovation to improve customer service and enhance employee
morale. Ultimately, the County survived the Great Recession of 2008 without having to draw down any reserves and without
permanent employee compensation and benefit reductions.
OTHER FUNDS
Activities not included in the General Fund are budgeted in Special Revenue, Enterprise, Internal Service, Debt Service, and Special
District Funds.
 Special Revenue Funds
The County’s most prominent Special Revenue funds include the Fire, Roads, Child Support Services, Library budgets, and Capital
Projects.
The Fire Fund’s appropriations increase by 13.7% predominately due to a FEMA grant in the amount of $878,687 for purchase of
replacement self-contained breathing apparatuses along with one time monies from the General Fund for the refurbishment of three
fire vehicles.
The Road Fund’s appropriations and estimated revenues remain virtually the same as the FY 2011/12 Adopted Budget.
The Child Support Services Fund’s appropriations and estimated revenues remain virtually the same as the FY 2011/12 Adopted
Budget.
The Library Fund’s appropriations decrease by approximately 11.8% due to the completion of the Earlimart and Ivanhoe Library
renovations budgeted and completed in FY 2011/12.
Appropriations for the Capital Projects Fund increase about $5.6 million or 35.6% compared with the FY 2011/12 Adopted Budget.
The increase is primarily due to the $4 million transfer from unexpended Contingency appropriations at the end of FY 2011/12 for
the South Valley jail match, and the recommended transfer of $2 million one-time monies for emergency generator projects at the
Visalia courthouse and the County’s government plaza.
 Enterprise Funds
Enterprise funds account for operations that are financed and operated in a manner similar to private businesses, where the intent of
the government is to provide goods or services to the general public on a continuing basis at a cost that is financed or recovered
primarily through user charges. The County's Enterprise funds include Public Transit and Solid Waste Management. Collectively,
the appropriations for these budgets are reduced $7.2 million or 25% compared with last year's adopted budget, largely due to a
decrease in costs associated with completing a number projects in the Solid Waste fund in FY 2011/12.
The County’s Solid Waste system is currently receiving long overdue review and overhaul of its operations. The FY 2012/13 budget
reflects a number of operational changes and fee reforms approved by your Board that are expected to improve the financial
condition of the system. More careful and timely oversight is necessary in order to ensure the System is in strong financial
condition.
 Internal Service Funds
Internal Service funds (ISFs) are utilized to provide services to Departments within the County by taking advantage of operating
efficiencies. These funds provide better accountability and control over costs previously provided within the General Fund. ISFs
include services such as insurance, maintenance, custodial, fleet, printing, mail, communications, and information technology. As
part of the reorganization approved for the Resource Management Agency (RMA) effective February 2010, RMA’s ISFs were
transferred to the County Administrative Office’s newly established General Services Division.
 Debt Service Funds
Debt Service funds are used to properly account for the County’s collective debt service activities. Overall, Debt Service funds’
expenditures decrease about $7.8 million or 52.7% compared with the Adopted Budget for last fiscal year. The reasons for the
decease are due to the payoff of the County’s pension bond debt in FY 2011/12 netted with the recommended defeasement of two
years of Invensys Energy Management debt with one-time monies.
 Special District Funds
Special District funds are independent units of local government generally organized and funded through assessments to the
beneficiaries of the Districts to perform a specific function(s) for a specific area. Examples include flood control, storm drainage and
landscape assessments, redevelopment, and sewer and water systems maintenance districts.
The County Flood Control Fund coordinates all Countywide flood control activities. It is increasing in appropriations and estimated
revenues by $144,588 or 4% compared to FY 2011/12 Adopted Budget. The overall increase is for participation in the Upper Kings
Basin Integrated Regional Water Management Plan and for an increase in Road Yard charges.
The Assessment Districts’ funds provide for long-term maintenance of storm drainage systems and landscape improvements.
Overall, Assessment funds’ expenses increase $828,262 or 112% compared to FY 2011/12 Adopted Budget. The overall increase
is due to an augmentation in professional services.
The County Redevelopment funds were responsible for improving, upgrading, and revitalizing areas within the unincorporated
territory of the County that have become blighted because of deterioration, disuse, and unproductive economic conditions. As of
February 1, 2012, all Redevelopment Agencies throughout the State were dissolved pursuant to Assembly Bill X1 26. Successor
Agencies were created to oversee the dissolution process and all future Redevelopment Funds have been converted into Fiduciary
Trust Funds.
The County Service Area funds account for sewer and water systems construction and ongoing maintenance within the
unincorporated areas of the County. Overall, County Service Area funds' expenses are virtually the same as the 2011/12 Adopted
Budget.