The recommended budget for FY 2014/15 continues the recovery of the County’s finances. The General Fund budget reflects an
increase in appropriations compared with the FY 2013/14 Adopted Budget. The General Fund’s appropriations are $672.4 million,
which are approximately $6.7 million or 1% higher than the FY 2013/14 Adopted Budget. The growth in appropriations is reflected in
an increase of $4 million in the Sheriff’s Department budget to cover annual steps and merits, retirement costs, and increases to
capital assets; and $1.6 million in RMA’s budget due to the General Plan implementation and other special projects. The remainder
reflects an increase in workers’ compensation charges in the amount of $1.4 million in the General Fund, a 3% salary adjustment for
those bargaining units that are in negotiations this fiscal year, and equity adjustments to a variety of job classifications. The General
Fund’s estimated revenues are $648.3 million, which are $2.1 million or .3% higher than the FY 2013/14 Adopted Budget. The
increase in revenues is predominately due to projected growth in countywide revenues netted with projected revenue reductions in
the Assessor’s Department and Health and Human Services Agency. The reduction in the Health and Human Services Agency’s
projected revenues is attributable to the State’s taking a portion of the 1991 Health Realignment monies to implement the Affordable
Care Act.
As noted above, the County’s General Fund ended FY 2013/14 with a strong carryover fund balance. The excess fund balance
allows the County to maintain its Contingency appropriations which are used to cushion the volatility in the local and State
economies. The Contingency appropriation is proposed to remain at $5 million for FY 2014/15. The strong carryover fund balance
also allows for a variety of one-time appropriations such as funding for County building improvements, remodels, and relocating
departments - $3 million; additional funds to the Future Economic Development Trust Fund - $683,000; Contingency reserve for the
North and South County Detention Facilities - $3 million; Purchase Fire vehicles and equipment - $900,000; Radio communication
infrastructure and equipment - $1 million; and Upgrading AFIN with CGI’s Procurement Module for the County’s Purchasing
Department – $172,000.

Most importantly, the FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget proposes to increase the County’s General Fund reserve by $2 million to a
total of $24 million.
The County of Tulare continues to be inundated with marijuana groves on the valley floor. This is causing significant health and
public safety problems for County residents. The recommended budget for FY 2014/15 proposes to use ongoing monies to fund a
Marijuana Strike Force Team comprised of Sheriff, District Attorney, Resource Management, and County Counsel employees. In
prior years, the team was funded with one time funds.
In conclusion, for FY 2014/15, the General Fund is seeing positive improvement after the effects of the Great Recession of 2008.
Reserves are recommended to increase by another $2 million. Workers’ compensation charges increase structurally by $2 million
again to bring the total charges to $9.3 million. Positions frozen for budget purposes during the Great Recession continue to be
unfrozen on a limited, somewhat slow basis, as countywide funding becomes available. Over the next few years, the County has
begun and needs to address the structural level of workers’ compensation funding to approximately $12.3 million and continue to
unfreeze positions on a systematic basis. Ultimately, the County survived the Great Recession of 2008 and is now rebounding at a
slow and moderate pace with hope the drought will end this winter.
OTHER FUNDS
Activities not included in the General Fund are budgeted in Special Revenue, Enterprise, Internal Service, Debt Service, and Special
District Funds.
 Special Revenue Funds
 The County’s most prominent Special Revenue funds include the Fire, Roads, Child Support Services, Library, and Capital
Project budgets.
 The Fire Fund’s appropriations increase by 8% predominately due to an increase in annual salary and benefits along with an
increase in capital asset purchases. The new budget includes the purchase of two fire engines, two patrol vehicles, and two
fire inspection vehicles.
 The Road Fund’s appropriations are relatively static at a 1% increase.
 The Child Support Services Fund’s appropriations and estimated revenues increase by 1% due to increases by the State
affecting local child support operations.
 The Library Fund’s appropriations decrease by 20% predominately due to not budgeting fund balance and decreasing
professional services.

 Appropriations for the Capital Projects Fund increase 46%. The FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget includes $3 million in onetime
monies for County building improvements, remodels, and department moves. The Budget also includes the transfer of
one-time monies in the amount of $3 million for a contingency reserve for the construction of detention facilities.
 Enterprise Funds
 Enterprise funds account for operations that are financed and operated in a manner similar to private businesses, where the
intent of the government is to provide goods or services to the general public on a continuing basis at a cost that is financed or
recovered primarily through user charges. The County's Enterprise funds include Public Transit and Solid Waste
Management.
 The Public Transit Fund appropriations increase 111% primarily due to capital assets for Transit’s infrastructure improvement
project. The FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget includes $8 million for a new Transit Operation and Maintenance Facility.
 The Solid Waste Fund appropriations decrease 13% overall due to a reduction of salary and benefits caused by the closure of
the Woodville Landfill and the reduction of other charges, such as, road yard billings and administration overhead. The
County’s Solid Waste system continues to go through a major reorganization, both internally and externally, since the County
Administrative Office took over supervision in May 2012. The operating budget has stabilized with the changes made over the
last two years and we expect the FY 2014/15 budget to generate enough revenue to start re-building operating reserves.
 Internal Service Funds
 Internal Service funds (ISFs) are utilized to provide services to departments within the County by taking advantage of operating
efficiencies. These funds provide better accountability and control over costs previously provided within the General Fund.
ISFs include services such as insurance, facilities, information and communication technology, custodial, fleet, printing, and
mail.
 Debt Service Funds
 A Debt Service fund is used to properly account for the County’s debt service activities. Overall, the Debt Service fund
expenditures decrease about $5.7 million or 48% compared with the Adopted Budget for last fiscal year. The reason for the
decrease is due to the payoff of Invensys Energy Management debt in FY 2013/14.
 Special District Funds
 Special District funds are independent units of local government generally organized and funded through assessments to the
beneficiaries of the Districts to perform a specific function(s) for a specific area. Examples include flood control, storm
drainage and landscape assessments, redevelopment, and sewer and water systems maintenance districts.

 The County Flood Control Fund coordinates all countywide flood control activities. Flood Control’s appropriations increased by
$214,313 or 6% compared to the FY 2013/14 Adopted Budget. The FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget includes increased
funds for professional services.
 The Assessment Districts’ funds provide for long-term maintenance of storm drainage systems and landscape improvements.
Overall, assessment funds’ expenses increased $96,000 or 18% compared to FY 2012/13 Adopted Budget. The overall
increase is due to an augmentation in professional services.
 The County Redevelopment funds were responsible for improving, upgrading, and revitalizing areas within the unincorporated
territory of the County that have become blighted because of deterioration, disuse, and unproductive economic conditions. As
of February 1, 2012, all Redevelopment Agencies throughout the State were dissolved pursuant to Assembly Bill X1 26.
 Successor Agencies were created to oversee the dissolution process and all future Redevelopment Funds have been
converted into Fiduciary Trust Funds.
 The County Service Area funds account for sewer and water systems construction and ongoing maintenance within the
unincorporated areas of the County. Overall, County Service Area funds' expenses are virtually the same as the FY 2013/14
Adopted Budget.