The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget now before you is very much a status quo budget
in terms of permanent staffing and programming levels. The major variations really have
to do with changes amongst major emergency incidents and capital projects. This
reinforces the notion that the County has "leveled out" financially after a 7 year run of
pmiicularly challenging budget years and has arrived at a "new normal" for base
operations and staffing.
The following chmi illustrates the change between the FY 2013/14 Adopted Budget and
the FY 2014115 Recommended Budget:
The chart shows that the General Fund will actually decrease by $753,000 under this
budget. This decrease is heavily influenced by the one-time revenues and expenses related
to the 2013 RIM Fire of approximately $1.5 million included in the FY 2013-14 Budget. If
one were to adjust for this one-time emergency incident, the General Fund Budget will
have actually grown by $701,000 or 1.23%.
Most notable is the $17.1 million increase amongst the County's Governmental Funds.
This increase is driven by inclusion of the $16.8 million Juvenile Detention project. By
way of reminder, 100% of the estimated construction cost ($16 million) is being funded by
a State SB 81 grant. The Board should also be apprised of the following adjustments made
within governmental funds since the June 3 budget discussion: 1) a $70,000 storage area
network project has been re-budgeted and funded by an adjustment to the General Fund's
begi1ming balance; 2) $55,000 in AB 109 revenue and offsetting vehicle expense have been
removed from the Jail budget. This change was made with the knowledge and concurrence
of Sheriff administration; and 3) the Cabrini House acquisition has been re-budgeted
requiring $300,000 in offsetting revenue and expense in both the Behavioral Health and
Behavioral Health Housing Funds.
The growth of $1.3 million amongst the County's Internal Service Funds is primarily due
to a combination of $750,000 in increased health and disability insurance costs borne by
County employees and a $350,000 increase in leave liability funding in preparation for the
retirement of more of the County's "baby boomer" era employees.
The overall budget will be $18.4 million higher. However, by again adjusting for the
Juvenile Detention project, the remainder of County budget will grow by a modest $1.6
million or 1.12%. Summary chatis (a.k.a. Schedule ls) for each group offunds can be
found under Tab 3. Of the 4.35 overall position gain, 3.6 FTE were approved during the
current fiscal year (2 FTEs added in Behavioral Health, 0.6 FTE in Health and 1 FTE in the
Building Division). A mere 0.75 FTE increase is recommended in this budget.
PERSONNEL ACTIONS
A list of personnel actions recommended and contained in the Recommended Budget can
be found on the "FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget Personnel Changes" spreadsheet
(Tab 2, Attachment A). The chati details a number of reclassifications, position
conversions, additions, and reductions. Most personnel actions are referenced for
immediate implementation. The resulting change in total "Allocated Positions by
Department" can be viewed in Tab 2, Attachment B.
Also provided for reference and use during the FY 2014-15 Final Budget Hearing on
September 2, 2014 is the "High Priority Position Restoration List" contained in Tab 2,
Attachment C. By the time of the hearing, more will be known in important areas such as:
1) final fund balances; 2) updated revenue estimates; 3) the outcome of the miscellaneous
PERS cost sharing contract vote (which could increase County expenses and deficits
significantly if it fails); 4) final State Budget actions with related revenue and expense
impacts on the County; and 5) actual savings figures from the PERS Safety Side Fund
refinancing.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PRO JECT LIST
The Information Technology Steering Board (ITSB) has completed work on the FY
2014115 Project List. It has been greatly constrained given staffing and general funding
limitations. The recommended list can be found in Tab 2, Attachment D.

CAPITAL PROJECTS
The recommended capital project lists for both the Capital Fund and Road Construction
Fund can be found in Tab 2, Attachments E and F, respectively.
GENERAL FUND CONTINGENCIES
General Fund Contingencies have been established at $1,480,921. $1 million is needed to
comply with County Budget Policy to set-aside 1% of the total operating budget for
governmental funds. The remaining $480,921 is available for one-time uses (e.g. cash
match for the new County Jail, equipment needs, major road maintenance projects,
increasing the County's General Reserve, etc ... ). However, the Board may choose to use
some or all of this to address on-going operational needs. To do so would be in conflict
with existing Budget Policy.
LOOKING FORWARD TO THE FINAL BUDGET HEARING
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget has been vetted by the Board as outlined
previously and is consistent with the Board's adopted budget policies. Therefore, staff is
confident that this budget plan has been built on a solid financial foundation and reflects
the Board's general priorities. When the Board enters the Final Budget Hearing on
September 2, it will have refined revenue and expense numbers and answers to impmiant
questions that could materially impact this budget (e.g. will the Miscellaneous PERS cost
sharing contract be approved?).
Staff wanted to remind the Board of its adopted Priorities-Based Budgeting System (Tab 2,
Attachment G). This system was intended to guide decision-making at a time when base
staffing and services are being funded and the Board is deciding where future growth in
discretionary revenues should be applied. The chmi below attempts to depict how the
Priorities-Based Budgeting System should work:
Below the line is a block that represents the New Normal of base staffing and services. We
are at this point now. While managers are expected to continually evaluate the most costeffective
manner by which to offer these services, this block does represent a base-line to
be supported before growth in the County's discretionary revenues (e.g. property tax, sales
tax, TOT, etc . . . ) are applied elsewhere. With base staffinga nd services funded, where
shouldfitture growth in discretionary revenues be applied? Such investments should be
made in the general order (versus strict linear order) of Board determined priorities as
depicted in the blocks stacked above the line.
For such a system to work, great discipline must be exercised to pay down liabilities, guard
against budget creep amongst base-line staff and services and negotiating labor
agreements that are fttir and based on sustainable compensation systems. Only by doing
these things ·will the Board be allowed to make future investments consistent with their
priorities.
Again, the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget is built on a solid financial foundation and
the above is offered only as food for thought for the Board as its readies itself for additional
decision-making in the Final Budget Hearing.