The FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget now before you is very much a status quo budget
in terms of permanent staffing and programming levels. The only significant operational
changes are associated with staffing required for the Regional Juvenile Center slated to
open in the Fall of 2016 and a reorganization in the Sheriff's Office. The budget also
reflects notable changes in its capital funds, most notably with Law and Justice Center
projects.
The following chart illustrates the change between the FY 2014/15 Adopted Budget and
the FY 2014/15 Recommended Budget:
The chart shows that the General Fund will actually decrease by approximately $1 million
under this budget. A major influence is an approximate $2 million reduction in transfers
out to the Social Services, Health and Behavioral Health Funds. This is because of changes
in how State realignment funds are now .flowing directly to each of these funds rather than
through the General Fund.
The $17.6 million decrease amongst all Governmental Funds is driven by a $4.5 million
reduction in planned Road Construction Fund projects (e.g. the $3.3 million Mono Way
Widening Project was completed in FY 2014/15) and $11 million reduction in planned
County Capital Fund projects. In the latter case, nearly $18.9 million was budgeted in FY
2014-15 for the Juvenile Detention Facility ($16.8 million) and other Law and Justice
projects ($2.1 million) whereas only $8 million is contained in the FY 2015/16 Budget for
Law and Justice projects.
The growth of $1.6 milHon amongst the County's Internal Service Funds is primarily due
to an $800,000 increase in employee health insurance costs and $700,000 increase in
Telecommunications for replacement of the County's telephone system.
The overall budget will be $16.1 million lower. Summary charts (i.e. Schedule 1 's and
other standard State Controller reports) can be found under Tab 3. Cost center line item
detail reports for Governmental Funds, Enterprise Funds and Internal Service Funds can be
found in Tabs 4, 5 and 6, respectively.
Of the 16.5 overall position gain, 3.0 FTE were approved. in the middle of FY 2014/15
(i.e. 2 for the Assessor's State Partnership Program and 1 for the Community Resources
Agency). A total 13.5 FTE increase is recommended in the FY 2015-16 Budget. A
breakdown of this increase is provided below.
PERSONNEL ACTIONS
A list of personnel actions recommended and contained in the Recommended Budget can
be found on the "FY 2015/16 Recommended Budget Personnel Changes" spreadsheet
(Tab 2, Attachment A). The chart details a 13.5 FTE increase in positions:
Probation- 11 FTE increase. Staff for the new Juvenile Detention Facility.
Sheriff - 2.5 FTE increase. Cost neutral reorganization sought by the Sheriff.
District Attorney - 0 FTE change. Cost neutral upgrade of investigator position.
Social Services- 2 FTE decrease. Cost saving conversions and reductions.
Behavioral Health- 2 FTE increase. Cost is 100% revenue offset.
The 11 Juvenile Detention Facility positions will not begin until late in FY 2015/16. The
remaining changes are intended to start at or near the beginning of FY 2015/16. It should
be noted that the Sheriffs reorganization (Fab 2, Attachment B) will require approval of
one new classification specification (Jab 2, Attachment C) and issuance of one layoff
notice. The individual to receive the layoff notice will have the opportunity to compete for
a newly created position. The resulting change in total "Allocated Positions by
Department" can be viewed in Tab 2, Attachment D.
Provided for reference and use during the FY 2015/16 Final Budget Hearing is the "High
Priority Positions List" contained in Tab 2, Attachment E.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY P ROJECT LIST
The [nformation Technology Steering Board (ITSB) has completed work on the FY
2015/16 Project List. With the support of the lTSB, the coming year's Project List was
created assuming the addition of a Systems Analyst/Programmer position which appears on
the High Priority Positions List. If this position cannot be funded during the Final Budget
Hearing, the ITSB Project List will need to be amended to remove otherwise recommended
projects. Therefore, there will be discussion of the ITSB Project List in conjunction with
the High Priority Positions List during the budget hearing. The recommended list can be
found in Tab 2, Attachment F.
CAPITAL PROJECTS
The recommended capital project lists for the Road Construction, Airport Construction and
County Capital Funds can be found in Tab 2, Attachments G, Hand I, respectively.
As mentioned during the June 2 budget discussion, dependence on one-time funding to
support ongoing operating expenses should be contained to no more than 1% of the
General Fund Budget or $590,000. That means staffs goal will be to increase ongoing
revenue and/or decrease ongoing expense by approximately $618,357 ($1,208,357 per
preceding chart - $590,000 suggested cap) as part of the Final Budget Hearing.
LOOKING FORWARD TO THE FINAL BUDGET HEAIUNG
Much more than in the past several years, the Recommended Budget represents a fmancial
plan that is still very much under development. This is similar to the pattern of budgets
from the pre-Great Recession era. When the Board enters into the Final Budget Hearing on
August 18, it will have refined fund balance, revenue and expense numbers and will have
more detail on local impacts associated with the State Budget. The Board will be free to
make modifications to any area of the budget it may so desire. Areas to be specifically
addressed will include the following:
Reduce the General Fund's dependency 011 one-timefullding by at least
$618,357. Without substantial new revenue, commensurate expense reductions will
be difficult to achieve considering the tight construction of department budgets.
Restore General Fund Co11ti11gencies to $1,000,000 (will require $528,357
augmentation). Staff should point out that to the extent we arc successful in
reducing the General Fund's dependency on one-time funding for ongoing costs
(see preceding point), capacity will be created to restore Contingencies.
Jdet??tify fut??dingfor as mafly of tile High Priority Position Restorations/Additi01rs
as possible. Staff does anticipate that funding will be available to add positions
related to the Mentally Ill Offenders (MIOCR) grant program and Community
Corrections Partnership (AB 1 09) annual funding plan. Again, depending on the
outcome of Board acti.on on this item, the lTSB Project List may need to be
amended to remove otherwise recommended projects.
Make finalfutuling determinatiot??sfor three commuflity organizations: 1)
Tuolumne County Museum (a special augmentation request is being developed); 2)
Tuolumne County Arts Alliance ($60,000); and 3) Motherlode Fair ($14,000).
Reconsider funding for the emergency generator for the County's Animal
Cotltrol Office and Sllelter ($100,000).
Make ttdditional adjustments to tlae Law & Justice Projects Ftmding Plan to
further reduce potential borrowing and debt service costs.
Staff will come into the Final Budget Hearing prepared with options for Board
consideration on how to address each of the above. Depending on what the Board may
direct during the hearing and the time required to make associated changes in the budget,
the Board should be prepared to continue the hearing for a few days to allow staff time to
repackage the Final Budget for adoption.