With this letter, I submit for your consideration the 2016-17 Yolo County Recommended Budget. It is
presented as the County Administrator’s recommended budget and adjusts departmental expenditures and
revenues for the coming fiscal year, meeting State requirements and addressing Board of Supervisors
adopted policies. On June 14, the Board of Supervisors has scheduled a public hearing to consider this
recommended spending plan, at which time, the Board may add, delete or modify the recommended
budget. This letter is intended to highlight some of the expectations and assumptions used in creating the
budget. The Board agenda item presented on June 14 will include a detailed staff report describing the
significant changes, pending issues and areas of risk that comprise the recommended budget in greater
detail.
Total expenditures for the County are recommended in the amount of $372,922,234 with general purpose
revenues of $69,681,000, which represents an increase of $2,179,600 from the 2015-16 year end estimated
general purpose revenue. Capital expenditures are recommended at $16,113,806.
The 2016-17 budget represents marginal growth in discretionary funding while at the same time increasing
State and Federal revenue receipts for the third consecutive year. Additionally, this budget continues, for
a second year, the Board-approved pre-funding plan for other post-employment benefits (OPEB). For
these two reasons, the majority of budgets which rely on general purpose revenue are status quo and
include few new positions related to Strategic Plan implementation, while those programs funded
primarily through State and Federal revenue are more likely to have slightly increased expenditures and
new positions recommended. However, overall, this budget includes a reduction of 24 total positions
countywide from those approved during the 2015-16 fiscal year.
It is recommended the Board of Supervisors defer further program restorations or augmentations until the
Adopted Budget hearing in September, at which time additional information, including updated revenue
trends, final State Budget actions, labor agreements and 2015-16 closing fund balance information will be
known.
The recommended budget also relies upon the following assumptions:
Funds Priority Focus Areas within the 2016-2019 Strategic Plan:
In November 2015, the Board approved the 2016-2019 Strategic Plan and Priority Focus Areas. The
2016-17 budget is the first opportunity to provide additional resources needed to further the action items
necessary to progress the Priority Focus Area objectives. The following table highlights a few of these
funded initiatives.

Increases General Fund reserve in accordance with the Board of Supervisors adopted Fund Balance
and Reserve policy:
The adopted budgets of the recent recessionary years (2008-2010) relied heavily on the use of one-time
funds, including most notably, the General Fund reserve, to fund ongoing program needs. In 2010-11, the
Board of Supervisors directed that the remaining General Fund reserve be maintained for unexpected
emergencies, and beginning in 2011-12, the General Fund reserve has been increased annually consistent
with the Board policy on Fund Balances and Reserves. The 2016-17 recommended budget includes an
augmentation of $923,651 which brings the total reserve to $9,410,220 which is 5.0% of the General Fund
which now includes the public safety fund in determining the total General Fund. We will continue to
make progress toward the recommended reserve of 15%, which when combined with program-specific
contingencies, will ensure fiscal resilience, continued improved credit ratings and a strengthened ability
to address unforeseen emergencies.
Funds a General Fund contingency in accordance with the Board of Supervisors adopted Fund
Balance and Reserve policy:
The 2016-17 fiscal year includes many known budget risks such as increased revenue projections for
property tax and Prop 172 sales tax for public safety, a potential economic slowdown, labor negotiations
with our largest bargaining units and reliance on carryforward assumptions which represent key concerns
as staff constructs the 2016-17 budget. In addition to the aforementioned risks, specific uncertainties
identified for 2016-17 include:
 State budget
 Fire season impacts
 Drought impacts
 Water related analysis and advocacy
 Jail medical costs due to change in population and new contract
 Marijuana regulation
 Child Welfare Services review
To prepare for unexpected fiscal actions, the preliminary estimate includes a $2 million General Fund
contingency, which is 2.7% of the 2016-17 general purpose revenue allocations.

More information will be available on a number of variables at the time of the Adopted Budget hearings,
including State Budget impacts, actual closing fund balances and updated revenue trends. These variables
will inform the recommended contingency level included in the Adopted Budget. Budgeted contingency
is available for Board appropriation throughout the 2016-17 fiscal year should unexpected needs arise.
Any unused contingency may also provide additional funding flexibility in crafting the 2017-18 budget.
Supports long term financial planning:
California’s economy at the State level is beginning to show signs of slowing economic growth. While
those trends have not significantly impacted our general purpose revenues, the work done on a rainy day
fund as part of the State Budget should serve to make the next normally occurring recession less impactful.
By funding Strategic Plan strategies, increasing the General Fund reserve in accordance with Board policy,
seeking to increase operating fund contingencies at Adopted Budget hearings and including a balanced
array of cost reductions comprised of program restructuring, elimination of vacant positions and reduced
expenditures, the proposed budget scenario supports long term financial planning and places the County’s
finances in a position to also be better prepared for a normal recession.
Budget Forecast
Current economic and budget projections describe continued stability despite a lower than expected
revenue growth. Job growth, while improving, continues at a slow pace. Similar to the 2015-16 budget,
the 2016-17 budget continues to generally reflect flat local general purpose revenues.

The Yolo County budget is composed of seven major funds and a large number of smaller special funds,
internal service funds, enterprise funds, debt service and capital project accounts. The recommended
budget includes:

The total budget of all funds pays for a wide variety of services, programs and projects that are financed
by many revenue sources including grant funds, State and Federal revenues, and numerous fees that are
paid in exchange for providing requested services to the public. When all of these funds and sources are
combined, the fiscal year 2016-17 recommended budget totals $376,922,234.
New Positions
The chart below provides a listing of new positions recommended in the 2016-17 budget. The majority
of the positions (11 FTE) are funded through State and Federal resources with a small portion (2.5 FTE)
funded by General Fund.

The capital improvement budget is financed by State grants, development impact fees, Accumulative
Capital Outlay (ACO) funds and certain special revenue funds. The recommended budget for ACOfunded
capital improvements is $3,808,799, the majority of which will be utilized for the CIP debt
financing, Monroe and Leinberger jail expansion and remodel, and Probation gym, treatment and visitor
center. The 2016-2019 three-year Capital Improvement Plan and Financing strategy will be brought
before the Board in September.
Debt service remains low – only $3,520,087, representing less than 1% of the total budget. Debts currently
being paid include the West Sacramento County Service Center, the District Attorney’s building, the
Davis Library and four solar projects (Library, Monroe, Beamer/Cottonwood and Grasslands).
Reserves
During years when the County was experiencing growth, primarily in property taxes, the Board of
Supervisors put aside funds to be spent as necessary in recessionary times, which helped moderate
recessionary reductions and preserve core county services. Since 2010-11, the recommended budget has
modestly increased the reserve in accordance with the Board’s Fund Balances and Reserves Policy. This
reserve is to be used in the event of a catastrophic event or major unexpected cost and serves as a fiscally
prudent backstop to more than $372 million in County expenditures.

There are three major unfunded liabilities that continue to be a concern to the overall health of the County
fiscal climate. Pensions, retiree health and road maintenance have a combined current estimated liability
of $732,492,556. The pension liability of $204,044,955 has grown significantly (>50%) in the last two
years despite pension reform lowering the formula for new employees. This is due to CalPERS’ rate
changes, changes in accounting methodology and revised employee termination assumptions of higher
age retirement. The retiree health liability of $153,091,000 is being addressed through the implementation
of the Board-approved pre-funding plan which funds the trust, capping the county premium contribution
and one-time funds being reserved. We are hopeful the biannual actuarial study, due this summer, will
reflect a significant reduction in this liability as a result of these actions. The road maintenance liability
of $375,356,601 has yet to be addressed and staff is actively working on options for consideration which
include a sales tax measure and regional capital improvement and financing plan.
The County of Yolo continues to benefit from an engaged, skilled and dedicated workforce who should
be recognized for their ongoing commitment to making a difference by enhancing the quality of life in
our community. I wish to thank our department heads, budget staff, the Chief Financial Officer and fiscal
staff throughout the County whose hard work contributed to the creation of this budget. I also wish to
acknowledge the Board of Supervisors for focusing attention on long-term financial planning which
allows us to continue the County’s credit rating at A- with a stable outlook.