With this letter, I submit for your consideration the 2015-16 Yolo County Recommended Budget. It is
presented as the County Administrator’s recommended budget and adjusts departmental expenditures
and revenues for the coming fiscal year, meeting State requirements and addressing Board of
Supervisors adopted policies. On June 16, the Board of Supervisors has scheduled a public hearing to
consider this recommended spending plan at which time the Board may add, delete or modify the
recommended budget. This letter is intended to highlight some of the expectations and assumptions
used in creating the budget. The Board agenda item presented on June 16 will include a detailed staff
report describing the significant changes, pending issues and areas of risk that comprise the
recommended budget in greater detail.
Total expenditures for the County are recommended in the amount of $346,140,712 with general
purpose revenues of $64,267,400, which represents an increase of $2,056,823 from the 2014-15 year
end estimated general purpose revenue. Capital expenditures are recommended at $3,618,159.
The 2015-16 budget represents marginal growth in discretionary funding while at the same time
increasing State and Federal revenue receipts for the second consecutive year. Additionally, this budget
incorporates the first year of the Board-approved pre-funding plan for other post-employment benefits
(OPEB). For these two reasons, the majority of budgets which rely on general purpose revenue are
status quo and include no new positions, while those programs funded primarily through State and
Federal revenue are more likely to have slightly increased expenditures and new positions
recommended.
It is recommended the Board of Supervisors defer further program restorations or augmentations until
the Adopted Budget hearing in September, at which time additional information including updated
revenue trends, final State Budget actions, labor agreements and 2014-15 closing fund balance
information will be known.
The recommended budget also relies upon the following assumptions:
Increases General Fund reserve in accordance with the Board of Supervisors adopted Fund
Balance and Reserve policy:
The 2008-09 and 2009-10 budgets relied heavily on the use of one-time funds, including most notably,
the General Fund reserve, to fund ongoing program needs. In 2010-11, the Board of Supervisors
directed that the remaining General Fund reserve be maintained for unexpected emergencies, and
beginning in 2011-12, the General Fund reserve has been increased annually consistent with the Board
policy on Fund Balances and Reserves. The 2015-16 recommended budget includes an augmentation of
$1,117,533 which brings the total reserve to $8,486,629 which is 6.2% of the General Fund. We will
continue to make progress toward the recommended reserve of 15%, which when combined with
program-specific contingencies, will ensure fiscal resilience, continued improved credit ratings and a
strengthened ability to address unforeseen emergencies.
Funds a General Fund contingency in accordance with the Board of Supervisors adopted Fund
Balance and Reserve policy:
The 2015-16 fiscal year includes many known budget risks such as AB 109 funding that does not
increase commensurate with staffing cost increases, optimistic revenue projections for property tax and
Prop 172 sales tax for public safety, and reliance on carryforward assumptions which represent key
concerns as staff constructs the 2015-16 budget. As an example, several public safety budgets include
the need for continued or expanded AB109 funding which has yet to be recommended by the
Community Corrections Partnership. In addition to the aforementioned risks, specific uncertainties
identified for 2015-16 include:
 State budget
 Drought impacts
 Continued public safety sales tax receipts
 Labor negotiations with two groups
 Water related analysis and advocacy
 Assessment appeal outcomes
 Continued economic recovery
 Jail Medical Costs due to change in population and new contract
To prepare for unexpected fiscal actions, the preliminary estimate includes a $2 million General Fund
contingency, which is 3.1% of the 2015-16 general purpose revenue allocations.
More information will be available on a number of variables at the time of the Adopted Budget hearings,
including State Budget impacts, actual closing fund balances and updated revenue trends. These
variables will inform the recommended contingency level included in the Adopted Budget. Budgeted
contingency is available for Board appropriation throughout the 2015-16 fiscal year should unexpected
needs arise. Any unused contingency may also provide additional funding flexibility in crafting the
2016-17 budget.
Supports long term financial planning:
California’s recovery at the State level continues to show signs of improvement. While those same
increases have not significantly impacted our general purpose revenues, the strengthening State Budget
should serve to make the next normally occurring recession less impactful. By funding Tactical Plan
implementation strategies, increasing the General Fund reserve in accordance with Board policy,
seeking to increase operating fund contingencies at Adopted Budget hearings and including a balanced
array of cost reductions comprised of program restructuring, elimination of vacant positions and reduced
expenditures, the proposed budget scenario supports long term financial planning and also places the
County’s finances in a position to also be better prepared for a normal recession.

Current economic and budget projections describe continued stable improvement. Even as the economy
proceeds through a gradual recovery, Yolo County continues to experience higher unemployment levels
than surrounding areas, the state and the nation. Job growth, while improving, continues at a slow pace.
Similar to the 2014-15 budget, the 2015-16 budget continues to generally reflect flat local general
purpose revenues.

Fiscal Year 2015-16 Recommended budget
The Yolo County budget is composed of seven major funds and a large number of smaller special funds,
internal service funds, enterprise funds, debt service and capital project accounts. The recommended
budget includes:

The total budget of all funds pays for a wide variety of services, programs and projects that are financed
by many revenue sources including grant funds, State and Federal revenues, and numerous fees that are
paid in exchange for providing requested services to the public. When all of these funds and sources are
combined, the fiscal year 2015-16 recommended budget totals $346,140,712.

New Positions
The chart below provides a listing of new positions recommended in the 2015-16 budget. Of the total
number of new positions (35 Full Time Equivalents [FTEs]), only 27 create increased expenditures.
Eight of the Health & Human Services positions are a result of reallocating current positions to better
meet the needs of the organization. So while those positions are new, no additional funds are needed.

Capital Improvements and Debt Service
The capital improvement budget is financed by State grants, development impact fees, Accumulative
Capital Outlay (ACO) funds and certain special revenue funds. The recommended budget for ACOfunded
capital improvements is $3,618,159, the majority of which will be utilized for the jail expansion
and Probation gym, treatment and visitor center. A completed Capital Improvement Plan will be
brought to the Board in the Fall which will incorporate the recently adopted space utilization and needs
study as well as a financing strategy.
Debt service remains low – only $3,662,013, representing less than 2% of the total budget. Debts
currently being paid include the West Sacramento County Service Center, the District Attorney’s
building, the Davis Library and four solar projects (Library, Monroe, Beamer/Cottonwood and
Grasslands).
Reserves
During years when the County was experiencing growth, primarily in property taxes, the Board of
Supervisors put aside funds to be spent as necessary in recessionary times, which helped moderate
reductions in 2008-09 and 2009-10 and preserve core county services. Since 2010-11, the recommended
budget has modestly increased the reserve in accordance with the Board’s Fund Balances and Reserves
Policy. This reserve is to be used in the event of a catastrophic event or major unexpected cost and
serves as a fiscally prudent backstop to more than $340 million in County expenditures.

There are three major unfunded liabilities that continue to be a concern to the overall health of the
County fiscal climate. Pensions, retiree health, and road maintenance have a combined current
estimated liability of $674,296,004. The pension liability of $215,717,734 has grown significantly
(>50%) in the last two years despite pension reform lowering the formula for new employees. This is
due to changes in CalPERS’ rate changes, accounting methodology and revised employee termination
assumptions of higher age retirement. The retiree health liability of $153,091,000 is being addressed
through the implementation of the board-approved pre-funding plan which funds the trust, capping the
county premium contribution and one-time funds being reserved. The road maintenance liability of
$305,487,270 has yet to be addressed and staff is developing options for consideration which may
include a regional capital improvement and financing plan.
The County of Yolo continues to benefit from an engaged, skilled and dedicated workforce who should
be recognized for their ongoing commitment to making a difference by enhancing the quality of life in
our community. I wish to thank our department heads, budget staff, the Chief Financial Officer and
fiscal staff throughout the County whose hard work contributed to the creation of this budget. I also
wish to acknowledge the Board of Supervisors for focusing attention on long-term financial planning
which was recognized last year when Standard and Poor’s raised the County’s credit rating to A- with a
stable outlook.