Dear Members of the Board of Supervisors:
With this letter, I submit for your consideration the 2014-15 Yolo County Recommended Budget.
It is presented as the County Administrator’s recommended budget and adjusts departmental
expenditures and revenues for the coming fiscal year, meeting State requirements and
addressing Board of Supervisors adopted policies. On June 17, the Board of Supervisors has
scheduled a public hearing to consider this recommended spending plan at which time the
Board may add, delete or modify this recommended budget. This letter is intended to highlight
some of the expectations and assumptions used in creating the budget. The Board agenda
item presented on June 17 will include a detailed staff report describing the significant changes,
pending issues and areas of risk that comprise the recommended budget in greater detail.
Total expenditures for the county are recommended in the amount of $307,817,484 with general
purpose revenues of $60,670,523 which represents an increase of $1,011,123 from the 2013-14
estimated general purpose revenue. Capital expenditures are recommended at $3,443,297.
This budget reflects known revenue and expenditure projections for the 2014-15 budget year;
however, it does not include any other State Budget related adjustments. This baseline budget
is designed as a temporary measure prior to formal budget adoption which occurs following
passage of the State Budget and the close of the 2013-14 fiscal year. We anticipate the impact
of these issues will be addressed at the County’s Adopted Budget hearing in September.
The 2014-15 budget represents marginal growth in discretionary funding while at the same time
increasing State and Federal revenue receipts. This dichotomy is evidenced by minimal staff
reductions in programs reliant on general purpose revenue and staff increases in programs
funded through external revenue streams.
It is recommended the Board of Supervisors defer further program reductions, restorations or
augmentations until the Adopted Budget hearing, at which time additional information including
updated revenue trends, final State Budget actions, labor agreements and 2013-14 closing fund
balance information will be known.
The recommended budget also relies upon the following assumptions:
Increases General Fund reserve in accordance with the Board of Supervisors adopted
Fund Balance and Reserve policy. The 2008-09 and 2009-10 budgets relied heavily on the
use of one-time funds, including most notably the General Fund reserve, to fund ongoing
program needs. For 2010-11, the Board of Supervisors directed that the remaining General
Fund reserve be maintained for unexpected emergencies and beginning in 2011-12, the
General Fund reserve has been augmented to be compliant with the Board policy on Fund
Balances and Reserves. The 2014-15 recommended budget includes the recommended
augmentation of $737,459 in accordance with the Board’s Reserve Policy which will bring the
total reserve to $6,369,036 just shy of the Government Finance Officers Association minimum
recommended five percent reserve of $6,553,401. Achieving this minimum level will be the
groundwork for progress toward the recommended reserve of fifteen percent which when
combined with program-specific contingencies will ensure fiscal resilience, continued improved
credit ratings, and a solid ability to address unforeseen emergencies.
Funds a General Fund contingency in accordance with the Board of Supervisors adopted
Fund Balance and Reserve policy. The 2014-15 fiscal year includes many known budget
risks. Declines in AB 109 funding, aggressive revenue projections and carryforward
assumptions represent key concerns as staff constructs the 2014-15 budget. As an example,
several public safety budgets include the need for continued or expanded AB109 funding which
has yet to be recommended by the Community Correction Partnership. We have also included
projected Prop 172 tax revenue that exceeds the current consultant recommended projection
which is based on a conservative approach to continued increased growth. In addition to the
aforementioned risks, specific uncertainties identified for 2014-15 include:
 State budget
 Continued public safety sales tax receipts
 Labor negotiations with three groups
 Delta related analysis and advocacy
 Assessment appeal outcomes
 Continued economic recovery
 Jail Medical Costs
To prepare for unexpected fiscal actions, the preliminary estimate includes a $2 million General
Fund contingency which is 3.2% of the 2014-15 general purpose allocations.
More information will be available on a number of variables at the time of the Adopted Budget
hearings, including the State Budget, actual closing fund balances and revenue trends. These
variables will be considered in the recommended contingency level included in the Adopted
Budget. Budgeted contingency is available for Board appropriation throughout the 2014-15 year
should unexpected needs arise. Any unused contingency may also provide additional funding
flexibility in crafting the 2015-16 budget.
Supports long term financial planning. Although economists and other experts conclude the
recession has ended, the economy is fragile and unemployment remains high. California’s
recovery will be slow with governmental revenue recovery lagging behind the remainder of the
economy. By funding Tactical Plan implementation strategies, increasing the General Fund
reserve in accordance with Board policy, seeking to increase operating fund contingencies at
Adopted Budget hearings and including a balanced array of cost reductions comprised of
program restructuring, elimination of vacant positions and employee concessions throughout the
organization, the proposed budget scenario supports long term financial planning.

Current economic and budget projections describe an uncertain future. Even as the economy
proceeds through a gradual recovery, Yolo County continues to experience higher
unemployment levels than surrounding areas, the State and the Nation. Job growth, while
improving, continues at a slow pace. Similar to the 2013-14 budget, the 2014-15 budget
continues to generally reflect flat local general purpose revenues.
The Yolo County budget is composed of seven major funds and a large number of smaller
special funds, internal service funds, enterprise funds, debt service and capital project accounts.

The total budget of all funds pays for a wide variety of services, programs and projects that are
financed by many revenue sources including grant funds, State and Federal revenues, and
numerous fees that are acquired in exchange for providing requested services to members of
the public. When all of these funds and sources are combined, the fiscal year 2014-15
recommended budget totals $307,817,484.
The capital improvement budget is financed by State grants, development impact mitigation
fees, Accumulative Capital Outlay funds and certain special revenue funds. The recommended
budget for capital improvements is $2,758,159, the majority of which will be utilized for the jail
expansion and Probation gym, treatment and visitor center.
Debt service remains low – only $4,162,345, representing less than 2% of the total budget.
Debts currently being paid include the West Sacramento County Service Center, the District
Attorney’s building, Davis Library and the four solar projects (library, Monroe,
Beamer/Cottonwood and Grasslands).
Reserves
During years when the County was experiencing growth, primarily in property taxes, the Board
of Supervisors put aside funds to be spent as necessary in recessionary times, which helped
moderate reductions in 2008-09 and 2009-10 and preserve core county services. Since 2010-
11, the recommended budget has maintained the remaining reserve as well as modestly
increasing it in accordance with the Board’s Fund Balances and Reserves policy. This reserve
is to be used in the event of a catastrophic event or major unexpected cost and serves as a
fiscally prudent backstop to more than $300 million in County expenditures.
The recommended budget includes the following reserves:

Unfunded Liabilities
There are three major unfunded liabilities that continue to be a concern to the overall health of
the county fiscal climate. Pensions, retiree health, and road maintenance have a combined
current estimated liability of $588,615,295. The pension liability of $145,048,025 is being
addressed through pension reform and lowering of the formula for new employees as well as a
change in CalPERS’ rate changes. The retiree health liability of $138,080,000 is being
addressed through additional funds being added to the trust, capping the county premium
contribution and one-time funds being reserved. The road maintenance liability of $305,487,270
has yet to be addressed and staff is developing options for consideration which may include a
regional capital improvement and financing plan.
The County of Yolo continues to benefit from an engaged, skilled and dedicated workforce who
should be recognized for their ongoing commitment to quality, service and integrity. I wish to
thank our department heads, budget staff, the Auditor-Controller and fiscal staff throughout the
County whose hard work contributed to the creation of this budget. I also wish to acknowledge
the Board of Supervisors for focusing attention on long-term financial planning which was
recognized this year when Standard and Poor’s raised the County’s credit rating to A- with a
stable outlook.