Dear Members of the Board of Supervisors:
With this letter, I submit for your consideration the 2012-13 Yolo County Recommended Budget.
It is presented as the County Administrator’s recommended budget and adjusts departmental
expenditures and revenues for the coming fiscal year, meeting State requirements and
addressing Board of Supervisors adopted policies. On June 12, and 13 if needed, the Board of
Supervisors has scheduled public hearings to consider this recommended spending plan at
which time the Board may add, delete or modify this recommended budget. This letter is
intended to highlight some of the expectations and assumptions used in creating the budget.
The board agenda item presented on June 12 will include a staff report describing the significant
changes, pending issues and areas of risk that comprise the recommended budget in greater
detail.
Total expenditures for the county are recommended in the amount of $334,786,668 with general
purpose revenues of $56,444,456 which represents a reduction of $1,408,338 from the 2011-12
estimated general purpose revenue. Capital expenditures are recommended at $2,540,495.
The Recommended Budget results in a 2012-13 net operating budget (total budget less internal
transfers, capital projects and debt service) of $299,736,653.
This budget reflects known revenue and expenditure projections for the 2012-13 budget year;
however, it does not include any other State Budget related adjustments. This baseline budget
is designed as a temporary bridge until a more permanent strategy is developed after the
passage of the State Budget. We anticipate these changes will be addressed at the County’s
Adopted Budget hearings, which could occur as early as August; however, the actual date will
be dependent upon final State Budget adoption.
The 2012-13 budget represents the fifth annual budget since the onset of the recession, is
balanced, and the only positions scheduled for layoff can be retained if AB 109 funds are
allocated to the subject departments. However, it is based on assumptions that agreements will
be reached with our labor groups to continue labor cost savings. If labor cost savings are not
maintained it is likely additional cuts and layoffs will be necessary at midyear. Additionally, due
to the interconnected nature of the County and the State, once final action on the State Budget
is taken it is possible additional layoffs may be necessary.

It is recommended the Board of Supervisors defer further program reductions, restorations or
augmentations until the Adopted Budget hearing, at which time additional information including
updated revenue trends, final State Budget actions, labor agreements and 2011-12 closing fund
balance information will be known.
The recommended budget also relies upon the assumptions noted below.
Maintain the current General Fund reserve levels. The 2008-09 and 2009-10 budgets relied
heavily on the use of one-time funds, including most notably the General Fund reserve, to fund
ongoing program needs. For 2010-11, the Board of Supervisors directed that the remaining
General Fund reserve be maintained for unexpected emergencies, and in 2011-12, the General
Fund reserve was augmented to be compliant with the Board policy on Fund Balances and
Reserves. It is recommended that the General Fund reserve continue to be maintained at its
current level and reviewed at Adopted Budget hearings for possible augmentation in
accordance with the Board’s Reserve Policy.
Creation of an adequate contingency. The 2012-13 fiscal year includes many known budget
risks. The State Budget, an evolving indigent health care program, changes to mental health
services funding, and unstable revenue projections represent key concerns as staff constructs
the 2012-13 budget. As an example, several public safety budgets include the need for
additional 2011 Public Safety Realignment revenue. While we know the funding is available, it
requires the Community Correction Partnership to determine its use. In addition to the
aforementioned risks, specific uncertainties identified for 2012-13 include:
State budget
AB 109 implementation
Indigent Healthcare Program (CMSP) implementation
Continued labor concessions
Delta related analysis and advocacy
Assessment appeal outcomes
Continued effects of the economy
To prepare for unexpected fiscal actions, the preliminary estimate includes a $2 million General
Fund contingency.
More information will be available on a number of variables at the time of the Adopted Budget
hearings, including the State Budget, actual closing fund balances and revenue trends. These
variables will be considered in the recommended contingency level included in the Adopted
Budget. Budgeted contingency is available for Board appropriation throughout the 2012-13 year
should unexpected needs arise. Any unused contingency may also provide additional funding
flexibility in crafting the 2013-14 budget.
Creating a solid base for long term financial planning. Although economists and other
experts conclude the recession has ended, the economy is fragile and unemployment remains
high. California’s recovery will be slow with governmental revenue recovery lagging behind the
remainder of the economy. By maintaining the existing General Fund reserve, seeking to
increase the General Fund contingency at Adopted Budget hearings and including a balanced
array of cost reductions comprised of program restructuring, elimination of vacant positions and
employee concessions throughout the organization, the proposed budget scenario supports
long term financial planning.

Current economic and budget projections describe an uncertain future. Even as the economy
proceeds through a gradual recovery, Yolo County continues to experience unprecedented
unemployment levels and slow job growth. Similar to the 2011-12 budget, the 2012-13 budget
continues to reflect flat local general purpose revenues and a reduction in certain grant
programs such as vertical prosecution and pre-trial programs.

The total budget of all funds pays for a wide variety of services, programs and projects that are
financed by many revenue sources including grant funds, State and Federal revenues, and
numerous fees that are acquired in exchange for providing requested services to members of
the public. When all of these funds and sources are combined, and internal transfers are taken
out to avoid double counting, the fiscal year 2012-13 recommended budget totals $334,786,668.
Pomona Funds
Though Pomona Funds have historically been appropriated separately from the budget, for
2012-13, with the Board of Supervisors concurrence, and similar to 2010-11 and 2011-12,

$786,000 million in Pomona Funds have been allocated in the recommended budget in support
of indigent healthcare.
Capital Improvements and Debt Service
The capital improvement budget is financed by State grants, development impact mitigation
fees, Accumulative Capital Outlay funds and certain special revenue funds. The recommended
budget for capital improvements is $2,540,495.
Road Fund Projects are proposed in the amount of $10.4 million.
Debt service remains low – only $2,740,325, representing less than 1% of the total budget.
Debts currently being paid include the West Sacramento County Service Center, the District
Attorney’s building, Davis Library and the Megabyte property tax computer system.
Reserves
During years when the County was experiencing growth, primarily in property taxes, the Board
of Supervisors put aside funds to be spent as necessary in recessionary times, which helped
moderate reductions in 2008-09 and 2009-10 and preserve core county services. Since 2010-
11, the recommended budget has maintained the remaining reserve as well as modestly
increasing it in accordance with this Board’s Fund Balances and Reserves policy. This reserve
is to be used in the event of a catastrophic event or major unexpected cost and serves as a
fiscally prudent backstop to more than $300 million in County expenditures.
The recommended maintains the following remaining reserve balances:

The County of Yolo continues to benefit from an engaged, skilled and dedicated workforce who
should be recognized for their ongoing commitment to quality, service and integrity. I wish to
thank our department heads, budget staff, the Auditor-Controller and fiscal staff throughout the
County whose hard work contributed to the creation of this budget. I also wish to acknowledge
the Board of Supervisors for focusing attention on long term financial planning which already is
showing dividends as the County’s fiscal health begins to strengthen.