In accordance with local ordinance and State Law, presented to the Board of
Supervisors is the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Proposed Budget, as recommended by the
County Administrator.
After much thought about previous budget messages and the focus of the budget
document, we have transitioned to more of a "what's behind the numbers" document.
Our Fiscal Year 2014-2015 budget still presents information required by state law and
what is normally expected in a budget document, but my hope is the reviewers receive
further explanation.
Local Government budgets should be more than the stating of revenue and
expenditure numbers. For Yuba County and its recommended budget one can see
historical trends, challenges, accomplishments, an outline of critical services our
departments provide to the public and a planning document for the upcoming fiscal
year and beyond.
Numerous initiatives are underway within our organization to plan for the future and
further explanation is contained in this message and in the departmental narratives.
From employee development to infrastructure improvements, public health initiatives
and economic development, the leadership of Yuba County remains committed to
challenging ourselves everyday so our communities and the people we serve receive
better services and not just the status quo. We don't take that responsibility lightly
nor are we dismissive at the value brought through partnerships with other local
agencies, community groups and individuals.
Budget messages over the last five years have focused on the most difficult economic
time facing Yuba County since the Great Depression. The recovery process has been
very slow and the public and our organization is reminded everyday of the lingering
impacts. Our local government can choose to complain and agonize over the impacts,
claim to be the perpetual victim of state regulations or costs we cannot control, but
complaining simply has no value. Don’t get me wrong, we will still advocate on behalf
our County, but looking forward, being innovative and taking charge of our future is
what we choose.
There is no doubt that one day we will be back to our previous local revenue and
service levels. Until that day, our charge has been and will continue to be to work
smarter, strive to be more efficient, and ultimately become better stewards of the
public trust. Regardless of specific duties our individual employees may have, our
organization works better because we work together.
The last five or six years have been the most challenging throughout my career as a
public servant. I know for me, and those I work alongside, a greater appreciation has
been gained for the opportunity we are given to serve the residents of Yuba County. It
is truly a privilege for all of us.
The primary increases are mostly due to large capital projects through our Public
Works Department of over six million dollars, Health and Human Services Agency –
two million dollar increase for programs, the Neighborhood Stabilization Program
which is approximately two million dollars and the first levee bond payment of
approximately two million dollars. Other increases are primarily related to increased
costs of business further explained in this budget message.
During the budget development stage, which began in December 2013, departments
were asked to absorb cost increases and reflect that within their respective budgets.
While some larger departments were able to absorb those increases, most were not.
The recommendations from departments, if they had to absorb a majority of cost
increases, would have left many of them at staffing levels (due to projected layoffs) that
would result in a significant decrease in services to the public. In January of this
year, staff estimated and presented to your Board that cost of business increases and
potential revenue reductions would impact the General Fund.

Non-General fund departments that are appropriated minimal to no funding from the
General Fund such as the Health and Human Services Agency, Child Support Services
Agency and fee for service based departments in the Community Development and
Services Agency have their own challenges meeting their revenue needs as well. For
example, with fee based departments the increases in County costs drive the need to
raise fees to cover our costs, but raising fees does not help the businesses we are
trying to provide services to and is contrary to our Strategic Priority of Economic
Development.
Expenditure increase categories for this year’s budget are similar to previous years.
Increases are attributed to salaries, benefits, fuel and supplies. Benefit costs related
to employee pensions and health insurance continue to rise at alarming rates.
After all budgets and projected revenues were analyzed, a General Fund structural
deficit of approximately $691,000 remains.

While a difficult recommendation to make, use of one-time revenue in the
aforementioned amount is recommended. The one-time revenue source is from
property based auction proceeds that occurred during Fiscal Year 2013-2014.
General Fund contingencies and General Fund Reserve levels remain at or above
budgeted policy levels. A more detailed summary is provided later in the budget
message.
The recommended budget assumes a carryover General Fund balance of
approximately $1.2 million, which is significantly less than the $1.7 million adopted
with the final budget for Fiscal Year 2013-2014. That amount may increase based on
closing of the financials in July/August. Should additional funding become available
between adoption of the Proposed and Final budgets, it is recommended that one-time
auction proceed funding be replaced and the like amount be placed into one-time
funds such as contingencies, reserves or capital needs.

State Mandates – In the Governor’s May revision budget, he proposed to begin paying
off the pre-2004 mandates owed to counties, cities and special districts. Statutory
requirements state that the entire debt should be paid by 2020-2021. Unfortunately,
the legislature has not been cooperative in accelerating the debt repayment to local
governments, even though we have assumed significant shifts in programs from the
State such as prison realignment.
Property Tax Administration Fees – The County will continue to receive a reduced
amount compared to previous years from cities as a result of the California Supreme
Court ruling in the case City of Alhambra vs. Los Angeles County. As previously
stated, all property tax activities are performed by the County, from assessments to
appeals, calculations and collections. The County pays for over 90% of those activities
out of local tax payer funds.
Recognizing the State of California does not pay any administration fees for property
tax receipts, even though it receives 80% of the 1% for schools, Governor Brown made
note of it in his budget and proposed a plan to provide some funding to counties.
Unfortunately, it would only apply to nine counties, three rural, three urban and three
suburban and it would be a competitive grant and counties must provide a local
match.
Health Insurance – Mentioned in previous years, monthly health insurance
premiums continue to be a significant strain on our County budget for General Fund
and Non-General Fund departments. At the time of completion of this budget
message, CalPERS had not released the monthly premium rates for the upcoming
calendar year. Budget estimates for Fiscal Year 2014-2015 health insurance
premiums are 5% over 2013 rates.
The County currently contracts with CalPERS for health insurance, which is one of
the largest insurance pools in the State of California. The County shares in the cost of
health insurance premiums with employees that elect coverage.
• For most Non-Management Employees, the County pays 100% of the premium
for an employee-only coverage and 80% of the premium for an employee plus
one dependent or an employee plus two or more dependents (percentages based
on the standard PERS CHOICE PPO).
• For Management and Safety Employees, the County pays 90% of the premium
for employee only coverage and 70% for an employee plus one dependent or an
employee plus two or more dependents.
Prison Realignment – In Fiscal Year 2011-2012, the State of California transferred
custody and supervision responsibilities of certain criminal offenders from the state
prison system to counties. With that transfer, funding was allocated to counties to
address the impact. The shift in responsibility is intended to be permanent. The
funding was determined and ultimately distributed to counties now assuming state
responsibilities.

The intent of AB 109 is to focus on treatment of offenders, reduce recidivism and have
offenders supervised locally upon release from confinement. Results are mixed, as the
program is in its infancy. However, the State of California has effectively reduced its
prison population and transferred tasks to counties.
A reduction in the allocation received by counties is anticipated for Fiscal Year 2014-
2015. Advocacy efforts are underway to have the Governor make the allocation whole
so efforts can continue to move forward and the partnership with the State does not
become suspect.
Public Safety Departments - As stated in previous budget messages, approximately
ten years ago, the Board of Supervisors approved an agreement concerning the
budgets of the Sheriff’s Department (Jail and Operations), District Attorney and
Juvenile Hall. This agreement allows these departments to “carry forward” budget
savings into the next fiscal year (commonly referred to as fund balance) and apply it to
expenditures as they deem appropriate.
Referred to as the Public Safety Fund Balance, it is monitored and tracked by these
departments and the Auditor’s Office. Over the last several years, in an effort to
maintain service levels during difficult fiscal times, the departments have used a
majority of the savings to assist in balancing their budgets. As a result, the level of
available funds has decreased significantly.
Approximately $1,255,000 is estimated to be used in FY 2014-2015, thus continuing
an operating structural budget gap for the next fiscal year.
Pensions – Public Employee Pension Reform Act (PEPRA) became effective January 1st,
2013, with impacts to current and future member retirement benefits. PEPRA
prohibits the purchase of nonqualified service time, commonly referred to as “airtime,”
prohibits retroactive pension benefit increases and pension holidays and places
additional restrictions on the re-employment of retirees.
A second tier of decreased benefits and increased retirement age was established for
members new to CalPERS after January 2013. Recently, a new assumption related to
mortality rates of members in the pension system poses a severe challenge for local
governments and affordability of pension costs. In summary, employer rates are
expected to rise 6% to 8% total over the next five to six years, thus putting a further
burden on already strapped budgets.
Drought Conditions - Earlier this year, Governor Brown enacted certain provisions to
declare a State of Emergency for California as a result of the drought. Approximately
$687 million was appropriated in the 2014 fiscal year and additional state funding is
proposed in the budget for issues related to the drought. For Yuba County, the Office
of Emergency Services is anticipating an active fire season; however we are hopeful
that prevention efforts in past years will avoid significant danger. County emergency
response personnel and support staff are prepared to respond.

Technology - In 2013, Yuba County hired its first Chief Information Officer (CIO) and
began the process of the Information Technology Division becoming a stand-alone
department. That transition is set to take place upon adoption of this year’s budget.
Initial planning by the CIO has involved customer surveys from internal technology
users, a review of user support systems in place, and also systems currently used by
the County.
The Board has placed a high priority on advancements and efficiencies through
technology. A specific focus is placed on e-government, improving customer service
support and further identifying roles and responsibilities.
Capital Improvements – Likely to begin just prior to this fiscal year, the Public Works
department will begin managing construction of the County’s second interchange
project, this one located at Feather River Blvd/State Route 70.
With a construction manager aboard, the bid process for completion of tenant
improvements to the Sheriff’s Department building on Yuba Street will commence
soon. Once completed, the Sheriff’s Administration and Operations functions will
move to the new location and provide for a much more usable configuration.
Zoning / Development Code Update - Completion of the County’s Zoning /
Development Code is anticipated during the course of this fiscal year. A necessary
project as a result of our General Plan Update, the project will assist in clarifying land
use / development policies for our communities as well as further our goals of being a
business friendly County by creating greater flexibility and certainty for our
businesses.
Employee Development - The Yuba County Academy was created to provide a
development and career building opportunity for all employees in our organization.
The Academy has conducted three Employee Development classes thus far with
approximately 25 employees across multiple departments in attendance at each class
and plans for three more in FY 2014-2015. The classes span over three days and
participants build/reinforce relationships across individual departments and engage
in several employee development disciplines such as personal awareness and
management, customer service, budget development and leadership. The next class
will begin in July.
Strategic Planning Workshop – Approximately five years ago, the Board of
Supervisors adopted a set of strategic priorities to serve as a guide for our daily
business (Responsible Growth, Public Safety and Health, Economic Development, and
Organizational Excellence). In February 2014, the Board of Supervisors held a
workshop to revisit those strategic priorities and establish key objectives related to
each priority. Focusing on these objectives was integrated into the budget preparation
process with as many of the projects or programs as was feasible contained in the
budget. For example, one of the objectives under Public Health and Safety is the
construction of the new Sheriff’s Administration Building, which is proposed in the FY

2014-2015 budget and under Responsible Growth is an objective to update the
Development Code, which is proposed to be completed in FY 2014-2015.
Tax Sharing Agreement between the City of Wheatland and Yuba County – A
work in progress for over two years, an agreement was reached to establish a Master
Tax Sharing Agreement. The result is a $4.5 million net positive benefit for Yuba
County to continue to provide countywide services for new residents of planned
development within the City of Wheatland. Subsequent to the tax agreement,
Wheatland received approval from LAFCO on the annexation of the land that, when
developed in the future, will generate additional residences and businesses to generate
the additional revenue needed for services.
Economic Development and Business Retention – The County celebrated our fifth
Business Perspectives event in April 2014 and it proved to be the most attended to
date. The growing success of this event serves as a catalyst to further our economic
development efforts while honoring those that continue to have their businesses
located in Yuba County.
Regional Fire Study – With the approval of local of fire agencies in Yuba County,
Wheatland Fire Authority, City of Marysville, Linda Fire Department and Olivehurst
Fire Department, a study to examine regional fire efficiencies is underway through a
contract entered into by the County Administrator on behalf of aforementioned
partners. All parties are actively contributing to further examination and preliminary
results should be forthcoming in the summer of 2014.
Sycamore Ranch – Consistent with our Parks Master Plan and by using Non-General
Fund dollars designated for parks, several years ago staff took advantage of the sale of
land known as Sycamore Ranch, located next to the scenic Yuba River. Since the
purchase, numerous improvements have been made to the property. This last year,
through the efforts of our crews in the Public Works department and grant funding
through the State, gazebos and barbeque areas with electricity are being installed in
the day use area that will provide more opportunities for the public to hold events
such as weddings and family gatherings in this picturesque setting of the County.