In accordance with local ordinance and State Law, presented to the Board of
Supervisors is the Fiscal Year 20 16-20 17 Proposed Budget, as recommended by the
County Administrator.
The Proposed Budget was prepared to emphasize strategic priorities and initiatives
and address fundamental community needs while maintaining a conservative budget
approach. We continue to see the slow economic recovery that began in 2011.
While we have made progress in our fiscal health due to several strategies and policies
put in place over the last several years, we still face slow growth in our discretionary
General Fund revenues. Every step forward in revenue growth is frequently countered
by increases in the cost of providing services, much of which is out of our control.
In order to maintain and improve our current fiscal position, departments were asked
to prioritize service delivery to meet the Board's policy directives and maximize the use
of Non-General Fund revenue, including Realignment, grants and other extemal
sources, where possible.
Declining revenues in public safety sales tax for public safety departments and severe
reductions in state gas tax for local road maintenance is a major concem. Recognizing
the Board's priority of public safety, without an additional funding source identified in
the near future for both of these functions, basic govemment functions such as
technology, recording, administration, financial management, public guardian services
and property assessments will continue to suffer from limited resources.
As with Fiscal Year 2015-2016, it is recommended we continue to move forward by
making investments in our future. Of note are three capital projects: the new Sheriffs
Facility slated to be completed in FY 2016-17, the new Tri-County Juvenile Hall
Facility, and Jail Expansion projects that will commence in FY 2016-17.
Through all of the instability we have endured over the last decade, County employees
continue to be the foundation of this organization. Department employees have
displayed an extraordinary ability to provide exceptional customer service, despite the
fiscal limitations of the last several years. Your staff has continued to remain focused
on accomplishing your strategic priorities and initiatives, while at the same time
keeping a positive attitude about our organization and those we serve.
The following budget document represents the hard work and dedication of dozens of
department heads, managers, and fiscal and support staff.

Gas Tax- In FY 2014-15, the State Board of Equalization reduced the gas tax by six
cents. This impacted funding provided to local governments for road repairs and
construction. For Yuba County, the negative impact is approximately $1.5 million.
This impact was unexpected and caused a severe reduction in planned road work
repair and maintenance for Fiscal Year 2015-16 that continues on to FY 2016-17.
There have been legislative efforts to propose an alternative tax or make counties
whole eventually. However, nothing has yet to be completed in final form. Staff will
continue to monitor any developments.
Stagnant Public Safety Revenues -Public Safety revenues, like the Public Safety
Sales Tax, are no longer keeping pace with required services. Similar to the Gas Tax
that funds critical road work throughout the County, if positive changes don't occur
soon, we will be in a position where all County services will be affected negatively.
Affordable Care Act & Legislative Actions Regarding Sick Leave -
Implementation of the Affordable Care Act has created a huge impact to our
organization, requiring the County to implement certain requirements as an employer.
While the County already provides sick leave to permanent and part-time employees,
the approval of AB 1522 requires that sick leave be provided to extra help and reserve
employee classifications as well. There are numerous reporting requirements that
have to be met, creating a significant workload for departments involved in tracking
employee's time.
Pensions -Mentioned in previous budget messages, a new assumption related to
mortality rates of members in the pension system poses a severe challenge for local
governments and affordability of pension costs. The CalPERS projected increases are
significant for the next few years.
Proposition 30- Governor Brown's ballot measure, passed in 2012 to establish an
additional income tax on the wealthy and increase the sales tax rate by a quarter cent,
is due to expire in December 2016. Revenues from the taxes have gone to schools and
community colleges and funded public safety services that were transferred from the
state to local government in 2011. There is an effort to place this item on the
November 2016 ballot, in an effort to extend the tax initiative. Staff will follow this
issue, as this funding is critical to all counties.
SUCCESSES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Credit Rating- In 2008, Yuba County had its credit rating increased from an A- to an
A by Standard & Poor's rating agency. Since that time, the County endured one of the
most difficult financial periods in decades but was able to maintain the same credit
rating. In 2014, the County began an effort to finance a portion of the new Sheriffs
facility. Through another rating evaluation done by the same agency for issuance of
bonds for the Sheriffs facility, the County's credit rating was upgraded from an A to
an A+, allowing us to obtain an insured bond issuance and save taxpayers several
million dollars over the course of the borrowing. Staff will continue to focus on
financial stability by recommending additional financial management policies, with
respect to increasing reserves and setting aside funds for economic uncertainties.
Capital Projects -
Sheriffs Facility Project- Scheduled for completion in FY 20 16-17, this approximately
$10.5 million project will be the new home for Sheriffs operations, including dispatch,
patrol, investigations, administration, and training.
Tri-County Juvenile Hall- This project replaces the forty plus year old juvenile hall
facility with a new 48 bed facility located on property adjacent to the Juvenile Camp
Program and Secured Housing Unit. The County was awarded $15.2 million in SB
863 grant funds from the State of Califomia. This project is a three county effort
between Yuba, Sutter, and Colusa counties. We anticipate the project to move
towards the RFP stage in FY 20 16-17.
Jail Expansion Project - The County was awarded a $20 million grant, with no local
match required, to construct an addition to the Yuba County jail. This will allow a
significant improvement to the Sheriffs ability to serve and reduce recidivism through
the addition of programming, educational, medical, and mental health spaces; all
grossly undersized in the current facility. Initial project development has begun with
an anticipated project establishment with the State to occur in August 2016.
Financial Policies -Key financial staff continue to refine and recommend policies to
the Board of Supervisors. In the upcoming year, it is anticipated that a policy will be
recommended to create a reserve for economic uncertainties, and we will continue to
refine existing policies to make sure we are able to respond to economic downtums,
emerging community needs and organizational requirements.
Homeless Issues- The County led a collaborative effort to tackle Countywide and
regional homeless issues. Several County departments have been involved in
developing a comprehensive action plan. The plan includes the addition of a Project
Manager position in Health & Human Services to serve as the liaison for all of the
stakeholders. This project will be an ongoing effort to work towards helping those in
need obtain permanent housing.

The FY 2016-17 budget year is the last year to include full Proposition 30 revenues,
which are set to expire in December 2016. The state is counting on the extension of
Proposition 30 tax revenues to meet its ongoing commitments. Without the extension,
the state will need a sizable rainy day fund, given the volatility of income taxes on the
state's wealthiest residents, and will have less ongoing tax revenues to support its
current fixed commitments. This means a strong rainy day fund will be even more vital
to protect against devastating cuts. The extension is scheduled to be included on the
November 2016 ballot for voter approval.
Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT)- SB 1188 was introduced in February 2016 to revise
the wording in current legislation from "may" reimburse counties to "will" reimburse
counties. The state has historically removed the funding for this program during their
budget process as the language allowed it. Staff will be closely monitoring this bill in
the upcoming year.
Revenue [or Local Road Maintenance- Nothing was included in the state budget to
help local agencies recover from the loss of gas tax revenue that occurred in FY 20 14-
15. Numerous revenue generating initiatives were brought forward to the Legislature
during the past fiscal year. Staff attended legislative hearings and provided letters of
support, but all of these proposals went nowhere. This may be due in part to the
avoidance of adding new programs that generate revenue during an election year.
Staff is actively involved in this issue and will continue to monitor and support any bill
that promotes revenue stabilization for local roads.
Minimum Wage Increase - The recent passage of legislation to increase Califomia's
minimum wage to $15 per hour is anticipated to increase state General Fund costs by
an estimated $39 million in FY 2016-17. The impacts to local businesses due to the
minimum wage increase are unknown at this time.