In accordance with local ordinance and State Law, presented to the Board of
Supexvisors is the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Proposed Budget, as recommended by the
County Administrator.
The last several years have been a challenge for local governments to maintain
essential services to their communities. There are several factors that impact the
ability to continue or enhance sexvices and over the last several years those factors
relate primarily to severe reductions in local revenue. Recent indicators have
p.roduced results showing what appears to be stabilization in the economy; however
growth is limited to the extent that most local government revenues will most likely
take several years to return to previous levels experienced prior to the recession.
Our organization continues to work collaboratively to address our current and future
challenges. This has not been easy. Without the remarkable efforts of our
organization's leaders and employees, service levels would have been significantly
altered.
For Fiscal Year 2013-2014, our budget is technically balanced, but requires the use of
significant one-time funds. Unfortunately, to pay for salary and benefit increases
some layoffs are proposed that will severely impact sexvice levels to the public.
Departments have little to no flexibility remaining in their budgets to absorb cost
increases, making additional cuts and satisfying state mandates next to impossible.

Property Tax Administration Fee Lawsuit- Counties receive reimbursement in the
form of a "fee for service" from incorporated cities and some districts for the cost of
administering property tax duties performed by county departments such as the Tax
Collector, Auditor-Controller and Assessor. Even though schools receive a majority of
property taxes collected, the State of California I schools do not pay for any costs
incurred by the County.
With the creation of the "Triple-Flip" tax swap approved by the legislature in 2004-
2005, a method was used by Auditors in which California counties recouped
additional reimbursement in subsequent years from the cities and some districts.
In November 2012, the California Supreme Court ruled in the case City of Alhambra
vs. Los Angeles County regarding Property Tax Administration Fees. Several years ago,
the City of Alhambra initiated their lawsuit, contending, in essence that they were
charged in excess of what was appropriated within the Triple Flip and Vehicle License
Fee swap. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the City and 4 7 other plaintiff cities.
The ruling has resulted in a fiscal impact to California counties. For Yuba County, a
total of approximately $490,000 is owed to the cities of Marysville and Wheatland for
previous years. In addition, the ongoing revenues received by the County from the
cities beginning in this fiscal year will be reduced significantly, having a negative
impact to the county departments mentioned previously. A repayment agreement has
been approved by Wheatland and is budgeted for FY 2013-2014 and Marysville's is
pending their concurrence.
Health Insurance- Mentioned in previous years, monthly health insurance
premiums continue to be a significant strain on our County budget for General Fund
and Non-General Fund departments. During the course o f Fiscal Year 2012-2013, we
were notified that the monthly premium for the health plan most used by our
employees was increasing by 16.9%. Through year end savings and departmental
reductions, we were able to meet the increase but not without significant fiscal strain,
considering the budgeted increase was only 10%.
The County currently contracts with CalPERS for health insurance, which is one of
the largest insurance pools in the State of California. The County shares in the cost of
health insurance premiums with employees that elect coverage.
For Non-Management Employees, the County pays 100% of the premium for an
employee-only coverage and 80% of the premium for an employee plus one
dependent or an employee plus two or more dependents (percentages based on
the standard PERS CHOICE PPO).
For Management Employees, the County pays 90% of the premium for employee
only coverage and 70% for an employee plus one dependent or an employee
plus two or more dependents.
For Fiscal Year 2013-2014, it is estimated the County's share of cost for
monthly health insurance premiums is $10.5 million, which exceeds the
County annual share of cost for pensions.


Simply put, the County cannot afford to continue paying health insurance costs at the
80% level. If an employee elects family coverage with our most selected plan, the
monthly premium is $1,741.00 or $20,892 a year and the County pays 80% of that
cost. A majority of the employee associations the County negotiates contracts with
have declined to pay an additional share of their health insurance premiums (i.e.
similar to what managers currently pay).
In addition, the County has been active in exploring altematives. Due to the
complexities of exiting CalPERS Health and having to negotiate changes with employee
associations, it is challenging. Over the next year, the County will enhance its efforts
to advocate for change in the health insurance plans.
Prison Realignment- In Fiscal Year 20 11-20 12, the State of California transferred
custody and supervision responsibilities of certain criminal offenders from the state
prison system to counties. With that transfer, funding was allocated to counties to
address the impact. The shift in responsibility is intended to be permanent. The
funding was determined and ultimately distributed to counties now assuming state
responsibilities.
The intent of AB 109 is to focus on treatment of offenders, reduce recidivism and have
offenders supervised locally upon release from confmement. Results are mixed, as the
program is in its infancy. However, the State of California has effectively reduced its
prison population and transferred tasks to counties.
A new allocation formula for Fiscal Years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 has been
submitted to the legislature. Recipients of the funding are identified by law and
amounts are ultimately determined through a local collaborative. A separate funding
stream, albeit much smaller, is also allocated to the Public Defender and District
Attorney.
Yuba County leaders, specifically the Chief Probation Officer, Sheriff, District Attorney
and Health and Human Services Director, have all worked together to accomplish the
realigned mandates. Managing this new population does not come without concern.
Programs have been enhanced and developed locally with an emphasis on the criminal
justice community working together for greater community safety.
Public Safety Departments - As stated in previous budget messages, approximately
ten years ago, the Board of Supervisors approved an agreement concerning the
budgets of the Sheriff's Department (Jail and Operations), District Attorney and
Juvenile Hall. This agreement allows these departments to "carry forward" budget
savings into the next fiscal year (commonly referred to as fund balance) and apply it to
expenditures as they deem appropriate.
Referred to as the Public Safety Fund Balance, it is monitored and tracked by these
departments and the Auditor's Office. Over the last several years, in an effort to
maintain service levels during difficult fiscal times, the departments have used a
majority of the savings to assist in balancing their budgets. As a result, the level of
available funds has decreased significantly.
Approximately $860,000 is estimated to be used in FY 2013-2014, thus continuing an
operating structural budget gap for the next fiscal year.
Employee Salaries· Per Board direction, staff continues to speak with labor groups,
hoping to achieve concessions needed to weather the prolonged recession, address
revenue shortfalls, and most importantly, to assist in reducing and eventually
eliminating the General Fund structural deficit.
Health Care Reform- The Health and Human Services Agency has embarked on an
effort to address the requirements of the Affordable Care Act. The federally approved
statutory program attempts to insure all Americans. Some states have implemented
their versions, coupled with federal funding. California is certainly one of them.
"Covered California" as it has been labeled is a statewide initiative that takes the
Affordable Care Act and implements its provisions while blending access to insurance
policies through private, non-profit, state and county agencies. Creation of new
regulations and mandates for California counties have added to our workload. To
date, the retraining of our HHS employees has started, a call center is being created
and additional personnel are being hired to address the projected f required need.
California Public Employee's Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA) -Pension
Reform became effective January 1st, 2013, with impacts to current and future
member retirement benefits. PEPRA prohibits the purchase of nonqualified service
time, commonly referred to as "airtime," prohibits retroactive pension benefit increases
and pension holidays and places additional restrictions on the re-employment of
retirees.
A second tier of decreased benefits and increased retirement age was established for
members new to CalPERS after January 2013. In addition, new members are required
to pay fifty-percent of the normal cost rate of their pension benefit; an amount which
may be higher than that charged to current members.
Over time these changes are expected to decrease the County's contribution rates as
current employees retire and employees subject to the new formulas make up a larger
percentage of the workforce. However, any savings will not be realized in the
immediate future as the employer rates set by CalPERS for new members will continue
to match the rates of current members through at least June 30, 2014.
Additionally, CalPERS has proposed changes to the amortization and smoothing
policies to be effective in June 2013 which will result in higher volatility in employer
contribution rates in years of normal fund performance; a change that CalPERS
anticipates will result in an increase in contribution rates over the next five years.
These changes have required a significant amount of analysis and preparatory work
from our Administrator's Office and Human Resources. In addition, having employees
on multiple retirement tiers expedites our need for a common software system that
can accurately track and produce budget projections for our departments.

Infrastructure Needs- Last year, the Administrative Services department and
County Administrator embarked on an effort to improve the County's aging technology
infrastructure. While cumbersome, the priority for all County operations and the
public was identified as critical. Several technology failures over the last several years
required fiscal and human resources that only allowed a "fix in place."
Through a methodical process coordinated by Administrative Services and its
technology division, necessary replacement assets and costs were identified. Work
continues with the Technology Review Committee and several department heads to
improve our approach to technology. In addition, the County is currently recruiting
for its first ever Chief Information Officer.
Beginning now and in the years to come, our organization must place a higher priority
on technology advancements to become more efficient in the services we provide
internally and to the public.
In addition to technology needs, facility improvements were identified as a priority in
order to provide for proper upkeep of our public facilities. Over the last several years,
the County has set aside facility related funding, however has used portions of it to
fund operational costs due to funding shortfalls. The Board is encouraged to limit or
eliminate the use of these funds for ongoing operations and prioritize use towards
critical infrastructure needs.

The budget presented today continues to provide for essential community services
and, where possible, minimizes potential service level impacts. I sincerely appreciate
the hard work of all department heads and management for their leadership. The last
few years have been extremely difficult, and our leadership team has managed well
with fewer resources. They continue to work collaboratively to resolve current and
future challenges. Our workforce is commended for their leadership and dedication.
As stated in years past, I am thankful for the opportunity to serve the Board, our
employees and, more importantly, our communities. Your executive leadership team
and employees have worked very hard and been creative, all the while remaining
focused on providing the best service possible.