The Proposed FY 2015-2016 Budget recommends a balanced $2.7 billion spending plan for
County programs and services, including an increase of $71 million for the General Fund, and
supports a workforce of over 9,500 employees. The Proposed Budget closes a $65.1 million
funding gap through a deliberate and public process, and reflects the invaluable input provided
by your Board, agency and department heads, and other County stakeholders.
Alameda County’s financial status has benefitted from the robust growth in the national and
local economies over the past year. While jobs have been slow to return following the recession,
employment levels are finally back to pre-recession levels. Alameda County’s unemployment
rate of 4.5% as of April is about half of what it was three years ago. Even those out of work for
six months or longer, who have had a particularly difficult time finding employment, are
returning to work. The number of long-term unemployed has declined by half since February
2011.
However, many in our communities continue to struggle to make ends meet. A report by the
Economic Policy Institute, a nonpartisan nonprofit think tank, reveals that income for the
working poor has remained stagnant for the last several decades, with the lowest 10% of income
earners actually seeing their average wages decline by about 5% since 1979, compared to a 41%
increase for the highest 5% of earners. According to a U.C. Berkeley study, nearly threequarters
of the people helped by government programs geared to the poor are members of a
family headed by a worker, which partly explains the persistently high numbers of County
residents who qualify and receive cash aid and benefits assistance.
There is some hope that wages for lower-income workers will soon begin to increase as the
demand for workers rises. In fact, according to Beacon Economics, wages, jobs, consumer
spending and virtually every other major economic indicator point to continued steady growth
for the East Bay and Alameda County in the near-term. In Alameda County, residential home
values have fully rebounded and continue to grow at a fast pace thanks to the improved
employment picture, a rapidly growing population and continued low mortgage interest rates.

The rise in real estate values led to an increase in Alameda County’s FY 2014-15 assessment roll
of 6.47%, bringing much-needed general purpose revenues for the County. However, higher
home values and rents reduce the stock of affordable housing, putting additional strain on those
who are paying a larger share of their lower incomes for housing costs. Your Board has been
proactive in taking steps to address this problem with the demise of redevelopment agencies that
were formerly required to set aside funds for affordable housing. In July 2014, your Board
allocated $13.7 million in one-time residual General Fund property tax revenues for the
development of affordable housing and a rapid re-housing rental program. In addition, your
Board approved designating $2 million of General Fund discretionary revenues for affordable
housing annually beginning in FY 2016-17. The County continues its efforts to document those
most affected by economic disparities and cumulative State budget reductions. These “human
impacts” are again included in a special section of the Proposed Budget.
STATE BUDGET
The economic expansion combined with greater fiscal responsibility in Sacramento has resulted
in a dramatic improvement in the State’s finances. Just four years ago, the adopted budget for
the State of California provided $86.4 billion in General Fund appropriations, as compared to a
proposed $115.3 billion in the Governor’s May Revision this year. State revenues have grown
rapidly, increasing by an estimated $6.7 billion since the Governor’s January Budget proposal.
The higher revenues, which are mainly from greater capital gains and other income from
high-wage earners, are almost entirely allocated to education as required by voter-approved
Proposition 98. Funding for K-12 education and community colleges is proposed to increase by
$21 billion from just four years ago. In addition, Proposition 2—the Rainy Day Fund—requires
paying down debt and building up reserves before the next economic downturn.
Little additional funding remains after Proposition 98 and Proposition 2 requirements are met,
and the Governor continues to advocate for restraint in spending given that more than half of the
State’s revenues come from personal income taxes, which can change dramatically from one
year to the next and leave the State with a significant shortfall. The Governor proposes minimal
restoration of programs cut during the recession. CalWORKs grants would remain far below the
deep-poverty threshold and Supplemental Security Income/State Supplementary Payment
(SSI/SSP) grants, which have been cut by more than a third from FY 2007-08, would continue at
such low levels that recipients would remain in poverty.
The Governor also recommends a long-overdue reimbursement to local governments for pre-
2004 State-imposed mandates. Should the proposal be adopted by the Legislature as is, the onetime
funding will provide an opportunity to reduce some of the County’s unfunded liabilities,
address one-time immediate needs, and/or invest in long-deferred capital maintenance and
infrastructure projects.
With the State’s implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), enrollment into both
subsidized health coverage on the Exchange and the Medi-Cal program have exceeded initial
estimates. It is projected that a third of the State’s population is now enrolled in health coverage
through Medi-Cal. Unfortunately, problems persist with the State’s enrollment and technology
systems, and its ability to communicate with counties’ computer systems. These technological

challenges have created a significant backlog and delayed the processing of applications for
many Medi-Cal recipients.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
The FY 2015-2016 Proposed Budget for all funds totals $2.7 billion, a decrease of $86.0 million,
largely due to a reduction in capital projects costs, or 3.1%, from the FY 2014-2015 Final
Budget. The General Fund, which supports most County operations, totals almost $2.4 billion,
an increase of $70.7 million, or 3.1%.

The Proposed Budget includes funding to provide mandated and essential services, meet debt
service obligations, maintain a minimum level of infrastructure and capital funding, and adhere
to the Board’s financial management policies. The Proposed Budget supports a workforce of
over 9,566 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions and reflects a net increase of 49 FTE, all of
which were approved by your Board mid-year and are fully offset with new revenue.
The Proposed Budget funds cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) for most of our employees
based on negotiated labor agreements, and for many of our community-based organizations
(CBOs). The Proposed Budget includes $485 million for services provided by 256 CBOs, an
increase of $16.4 million from FY 2014-15. This includes $78.5 million for services provided
by Alameda Health System (AHS). Other CBOs funded in the Proposed Budget include nonprofit
service providers, cities, school districts, and local hospitals. A list of all CBO contracts
with funding recommendations is included in the Appendix of the Proposed Budget document.
Measure A, the voter-approved half-cent sales tax for essential health care services, which was
reauthorized through 2034 by over three-quarters of voters on June 3, 2014 as Measure AA,
continues to provide over $120 million a year in crucial funding for health services. AHS
Honorable Board of Supervisors -4- June 9, 2015
receives 75% of the revenue directly and the remaining 25% is allocated by the Board of
Supervisors to support other essential health services. The Proposed Budget includes only $29
million in Measure A funds for non-AHS essential health services, matching the three-year
Measure A spending plan previously adopted by your Board. This represents a decrease of
approximately $0.6 million, or 2.0%, compared to the FY 2014-15 budget and is less than the
currently projected FY 2014-15 receipts of $31 million. Given the current economic outlook, FY
2015-16 revenues may be even greater.
Board-approved funding of $17.7 million for capital projects in the unincorporated areas
supported with General Fund property tax revenues is included in the Proposed Budget. This
funding is consistent with your Board’s decision to allocate up to $18 million annually for five
years to fund Tier I capital projects in the unincorporated areas of the County. Prior to the State’s
dissolution of redevelopment agencies in February 2012, a similar amount of discretionary
property tax increment revenues had been committed to the County’s redevelopment agencies to
support capital projects and affordable housing in the County’s unincorporated areas.
Consistent with your Board’s financial management policies, the Proposed Budget recommends
designating $ 6.0 million—the equivalent of 1% of discretionary revenue—for both capital
projects and the general reserve. Contingencies for pending labor negotiations, benefit cost
increases, and other contractual obligations are also included in the Proposed Budget.
CLOSING THE GAP
The Proposed Budget closes a funding gap of approximately $65.1 million that was projected
based on the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) funding requirement. The funding gap was
determined by identifying the difference between the cost of maintaining existing programs and
projected revenues. The MOE Budget for the General Fund is over $2.38 billion, an increase of
$74.9 million, or 3.2%. Available revenues to finance the projected MOE costs totaled about
$2.32 billion, an increase of just $9.9 million, or 0.4%.
Your Board’s Values-Based Budgeting (VBB) priorities and Strategic Vision initiatives were
considered in developing balancing strategies within each program area.

Proposed solutions to close the $65.1 million funding gap include a combination of spending
reductions, revenue increases, and one-time strategies. The Proposed Budget recommends the
use of $27.3 million or 42% in ongoing strategies and $37.8 million or 58% in one-time
strategies, with most of the one-time savings coming from the Fiscal Management Reward
Program (FMR). The FMR net savings have been generated through the efforts of County
agencies/departments to operate their programs well within budget, to avoid future funding cuts
and maintain the continuity of services. FMR is considered a one-time funding source as these
savings may not be available to assist with balancing budgets in future years. A structural
imbalance between ongoing revenues and expenditures remains, largely due to the State’s shift
of property taxes from local governments.

PROGRAM AREA NET COST REDUCTIONS AND FUNDING CONCERNS
General Government – The General Government program area contributed net cost savings of
$14.8 million through $0.1 million in spending reductions, $0.4 million in increased revenue,
and $14.3 million in FMR savings.
In July 2014, your Board’s policy to utilize former redevelopment funds for five years to fund
“Tier 1” capital projects in the unincorporated areas was amended to align expenditures with
slower-than-anticipated property tax revenues from former redevelopment agencies. However,
the completion of Tier 1 projects could be delayed if tax receipts do not keep pace with project
plans and timelines. In addition, the Public Works Agency continues to monitor the possible
effects of the State Board of Equalization’s decision to lower the excise tax rate for gasoline by
six cents a gallon effective July 1, 2015. Lower excise tax revenues may jeopardize the County’s
ability to complete a variety of traffic and pedestrian safety projects in the unincorporated areas.
Health Care – The Health Care Services Agency contributed net cost savings of $15.8 million
through $1.7 million in appropriation reductions, $3.6 million in increased revenue, and $10.5
million in FMR savings. The spending reductions include a $0.1 million decrease in the indigent
care contract with AHS; $1.6 million in Behavioral Care by decreasing $0.3 million in

vocational program temporary service spending without affecting program deliverables and $1.3
million in Institution for Mental Diseases Ancillary service budget adjustments. Revenue
increases include $0.2 million in increased federal Medi-Cal Administrative Activities revenue;
$2.0 million in Behavioral Care Medi-Cal and Alcohol and Drug funding; $0.2 million in
Environmental Health fee revenue and $0.7 million in Public Health federal and Tobacco Master
Settlement revenue; and the one-time use of $0.5 million in Measure A funds to support CBO
contracts.
The County continues to have concerns about the State’s “take back” of 1991 Realignment
funding for indigent health services, amounting to about $45.9 million from Alameda County for
FY 2015-16, $4 million more than this year. The funding cut reduces the County’s contract with
AHS for indigent health services, which could impact its ability to serve those least likely to
benefit from coverage expansion under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).
Under the ACA, the percentage of Medi-Cal and Medicare payors has increased while revenue
from commercial and self-pay insurers has declined. This change in payor mix could impact
funding for service providers and the 911 emergency response system. In Behavioral Health, the
possible renewal of the Drug Medi-Cal Waiver by the federal government may provide a new
and significant source of federal funds to establish an organized system for substance use
disorder services. However, the County may also be required to invest in its community-based
organizations and its own staff infrastructure to address the intensified State and federal
regulatory requirements of Drug Medi-Cal.
Public Assistance – The Public Assistance program area achieved net cost savings of $14.7
million through $0.8 million in appropriation reductions to align salary and benefit costs with
available staffing and $13.9 million in revenue increases. Revenue increases include a $9.0
million Medi-Cal allocation adjustment confirmed in the May Revision; $4.4 million from
growth in 2011 Realignment; and $0.5 million now available in the CalWORKs and CalFresh
allocations.
In addition to the concerns regarding enrollment in Medi-Cal under the ACA described earlier,
federal and State base funding for older adults programming has not increased in the past decade
despite the rapid growth in the senior population. Cuts in SSI/SSP with ineligibility for food
programs have seriously compromised the ability of low-income seniors to afford basic
necessities.
Public Protection – The Public Protection program area achieved net cost savings of $19.8
million through $1.7 million in appropriations reductions, $10.1 million in revenue increases,
and $8.0 million of FMR savings. Appropriation reductions include decreased discretionary
operating expenses in the Probation department of $1.7 million. Revenue increases total $6.1
million and include the Sheriff’s negotiated contracts with Sonoma County ($2.9 million) and the
United States Marshals Service ($2.1million) and a $1.0 million Community Oriented Policing
Services (COPS) III Hiring Grant; Public Defender fee and grant revenue of $0.1 million; $2.2

million related to Consumer Fraud prosecution activities; and $1.7 million related to Juvenile
Probation activities funding. FMR savings contributed by all Public Protection departments
further reduce the net cost of this program area.
After declining this year, due to an anticipated drop in the projected Post Release Community
Supervision (PRCS) population, the State's FY 2015-16 estimate for AB 109 Public Safety
Realignment base program funding has increased both in the Governor’s January budget
proposal and the May Revision. However, it remains to be seen whether the State will ever fully
fund counties’ cost of public safety realignment or indirectly reduce funding when temporary
income tax and sales tax increases expire in the coming years.
Another ongoing concern for the County is the significant reduction in Trial Court Funding
revenue resulting from a continuing decline in the Courts’ collections of fines and forfeitures.
This revenue reduction results in a significant increase in County General Fund costs for Trial
Court Funding.
FISCAL MANAGEMENT REWARD (FMR) SAVINGS
Your Board’s FMR Program allows General Fund departments to carry over net savings each
fiscal year to be used in subsequent years for budget balancing, one-time expenditures and/or
program enhancements. Through ongoing cost-saving and revenue generation efforts, County
agencies/departments contributed $32.8 million in prior-year FMR savings to help balance the
FY 2015-2016 budget.

Ongoing efforts by agencies and departments to reduce spending and conserve resources have
enabled the County to mitigate major program reductions and maintain vital services. However,
departments must continue to balance these efforts with the need to fund increased costs and
meet the growing demand for essential services in all program areas.
UNFUNDED OBLIGATIONS
While your Board has adhered to your long-standing financial management policies, which
include strategies and guidelines to build and maintain prudent reserves, the County has

unfunded obligations that must be considered. At the close of FY 2013-14, the County’s longterm
unfunded obligations were estimated at $2.75 billion, or about $200 million less than the
close of the prior year. Pension costs for current and future retirees account for $1.2 billion of
the total. In addition, to date the County has issued debt of $607 million related to construction
of the Acute Care Tower Replacement project for the Alameda Health System (AHS) and has
remaining pension obligation bond debt of $378 million. Other outstanding debt includes the
County’s shared ownership of the Coliseum/Arena and other prior capital commitments for
essential facilities like the Juvenile Justice Facility and Santa Rita Jail.
The debt incurred by the County for capital improvements was based on responsible financial
plans that identified revenue sources to retire the debt over time and ensure that the County was
also able to maintain its core services and other mandated commitments. The Proposed Budget
includes funds for annual debt service payments and the County’s annual required contributions
to the pension fund through the Alameda County Employees’ Retirement Association (ACERA).
In addition, in response to your Board’s directive that the County Administrator and Auditor
consider options to reduce the County’s unfunded pension liability using existing designations
and reserves, your Board transferred $200 million into a new designation to help reduce the
County’s portion of the unfunded pension liability and committed to transfer at least $50 million
more in each of the next five years. Paying down future liabilities will reduce annual principal
payments and interest, and will ultimately improve the County’s ability to plan for and invest in
future projects and initiatives while maintaining strong credit ratings.
PENDING FACTORS
Although the economy continues to improve, ensuring adequate and stable long-term funding for
county programs and services remains a challenge. Given economic fluctuations, there are
concerns that sales tax and vehicle license fee based revenues may not be sufficient to fund the
cost of program responsibilities transferred by the State to counties in health care, public
assistance and even public safety. Our growing reliance on federal and State funding bears
careful monitoring as they face their own fiscal challenges that could result in funding cuts or
further program shifts to counties. Other longer term issues such as health care and pension costs
will also continue to challenge our limited resources.
On the global front, many events could put the U.S. or world economies back in a recession,
including actions by the Federal Reserve, tight lending from banks, slowing economic growth in
China, the European economy, and/or the impact of conflicts around the world. While we do not
know when the next recession will occur, we do know based on historical trends that the
economy is cyclical and the longest time between recessions since World War II has been 10
years. We also know that when another recession hits, it will be double jeopardy for counties –
as safety net providers, the demand for our services will rise at the same time that County
revenues decline, severely limiting our ability to support the need.

RECOMMENDATIONS
The FY 2015-2016 Proposed Budget is balanced and reflects the collective effort and
contributions of County stakeholders to develop a sustainable approach to providing services in
the coming year. In addition, balancing the budget using a significant amount of one-time funds
will necessitate careful monitoring throughout the year to ensure that expenditures remain within
budget and revenue estimates are fully realized.
As you conduct public hearings and deliberate on the FY 2015-2016 Proposed Budget, your
Board’s leadership and strong fiscal management will assist the County in once again
maintaining that critical balance between service demands and limited financial resources.