The Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-2014 Proposed Budget is balanced and provides $2.7 billion in spending for County programs and services. The Budget reflects input from your Board, agency and department heads, and other County stakeholders to close an $80.2 million deficit. While the FY 2013-2014 funding gap is only the second shortfall under $100 million in five years, closing a deficit this size does not come without sacrifice. Service recipients and providers, County departments and agencies, and the County’s more than 9,100 employees have all contributed in order to maintain essential services and keep the County on solid financial footing.
The national economy is continuing its slow uphill recovery. The national unemployment rate is slowly declining. Spending by consumers and businesses has increased while the inflation rate remains low. These improvements are largely the result of the Federal Reserve’s extraordinary monetary policies, established immediately following the great recession in the fall of 2008, that now include purchasing approximately $85 billion dollars a month in Treasury securities in order to drive down long-term interest rates and spur economic growth. Although not planned until the unemployment rate falls below 6.5%, if the Federal Reserve were to immediately eliminate these purchases, the national economy would likely collapse back into recession.
Although declining, the national unadjusted unemployment rate, currently at 7.1 % representing about 11.0 million people without work, is still well above normal levels. In California, the statewide unemployment rate has dropped to 8.5%. Alameda County’s unemployment rate has dropped to 7.0%, which is below both the national and statewide levels, representing an estimated 722,800 employed and 54,500 unemployed. Median home values are up 30% on an annual basis, although the number of sales compared to the prior year is down because of a decline in the inventory of homes for sale. Property foreclosures are down 44%. The County’s assessment roll grew by 2.1% in FY 2012-13 and the Assessor’s current preliminary estimate of the assessed value of land and improvements has increased to about 4%. Sales tax revenues are also increasing. In general, based on these indicators and the recent Beacon Economics’ East Bay Outlook report, the County’s economic outlook is brighter than that forecast a year ago.
At the same time, caseloads of many of our categorical aid programs that provide safety net services to families, adults, and children are increasing and continue to be far above historic long-term levels. This, in part, reflects the human impact of cumulative State budget reductions and the Great Recession on the vulnerable populations that we serve.
Federal and State funding continues to finance over half of the County General Fund. The recently approved caps on federal discretionary spending and sequestration will have a negative impact on federal revenues received by the County. An estimated $7.1 million net revenue loss is projected with implementation of federal sequestration and some of the cuts are already directly affecting the County.
The Governor’s May Revision forecasts an improvement in near term revenues, but suggests that because of unanticipated federal deficit reduction actions, increased Proposition 98 funding requirements for schools, and a worsening financial outlook, revenue growth in FY 2013-2014 will be less than that anticipated in the Governor’s January Budget. For example, while capital gains revenues are increasing, they may not be sustainable, given the potential volatility of the stock market and should be viewed as one-time only revenues. The State Legislative Analyst’s Office (LAO) suggests that the projected revenue growth picture will be brighter than the Governor’s forecast with a significant portion funding Proposition 98 requirements. Moreover, both the Governor and the LAO suggest caution in upcoming budget negotiations due to uncertainties and risks in the financial forecast, the potential for a boom or bust budget mentality, and the need to provide flexibility and choices when making funding decisions based on the outcome of actual revenue receipts.
The May Revision also proposes a major new realignment of health and public assistance programs related to implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act (ACA). The Governor plans to implement a State-administered Medi-Cal expansion program and redirect projected savings from county health departments to fund increased local share of cost requirements for public assistance programs like CalWORKs and CalFresh, the former Food Stamps program. Statewide, savings are estimated at $300 million next fiscal year, $900 million the following year, and $1.3 billion in FY 2015-16. Savings would be determined on a county by county basis factoring in both current and historic expenditure and revenue data related to the cost of indigent care with an annual year-end reconciliation.
The Governor’s proposal raises significant concerns about the ongoing cost to counties of providing services to those individuals not covered by the expansion. In Alameda County, an estimated 100,000 people may still be uninsured and will require County indigent health care services. In addition, the proposed transfer of projected cost savings prior to implementation of the ACA is troubling, knowing that the federal government will reimburse the State for its costs during the first three years of health reform.
These considerations create an extremely challenging and uncertain fiscal environment as we head into FY 2013-2014 and beyond.

The Proposed Budget includes funding to provide mandated and essential services, meet debt service obligations, maintain a minimum level of infrastructure and capital funding, and adhere to the Board’s financial management policies. The Proposed Budget supports a workforce of almost 9,200 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions and reflects a net increase of 66 FTE. This includes mid-year Board-approved adjustments of 110 positions, offset by the elimination of 44 FTE as part of budget balancing.
For the first time in five years, the Proposed Budget funds cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) for most of our employees based on negotiated labor agreements, and for many of our community-based organizations (CBOs). The Proposed Budget includes over $507 million for services provided by 260 CBOs, many with multiple contracts with the County. This includes $131 million for health care services provided by the Alameda Health System (AHS), formerly the Alameda County Medical Center. Other CBOs funded in the Proposed Budget include non-profit service providers, cities, school districts, and local hospitals. A list of all CBO contracts with funding recommendations is included in the Proposed Budget document.
Measure A, the voter-approved half-cent sales tax, continues to provide funding for essential health care services. AHS receives 75% of the revenue and the remaining 25% is allocated by the Board of Supervisors to support other essential health services. The Proposed Budget includes $28.4 million in Measure A funds for non-AHS essential health services, an increase of approximately $1.2 million or 4.5%, compared to the FY 2012-13 budget.
The Proposed Budget also incorporates Board-approved funding of $14.2 million in Tier 1 Successor Agency capital projects funded with property tax increment returned from former redevelopment agencies that were dissolved by the State effective February 1, 2012. This is consistent with your Board’s decision to allocate for the next five years, up to $18M annually of former redevelopment agency property tax increment to fund infrastructure and capital projects in the unincorporated areas of the County.
Consistent with your Board’s financial management policies, contingencies for pending labor negotiations and benefit cost increases, contractual obligations, and a $5.0 million general reserve contribution are also included in the Proposed Budget.

The Proposed Budget closes an $80.2 million funding gap that was projected based on the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) funding requirement. The funding gap was determined by identifying the difference between the cost of maintaining existing programs and available financing. The MOE Budget for the General Fund is $2.25 billion, an increase of $92.8 million, or 4.3%. Available revenues to finance the projected MOE costs totaled $2.17 billion, an increase of $12.6 million, or only 0.6%.
To the extent possible, your Board’s Values-Based Budgeting (VBB) priorities and Strategic Vision initiatives have been considered in developing balancing strategies within each program area. The table below summarizes the total proposed net cost reductions by program area:

Proposed solutions to close the $80.2 million funding gap include a combination of permanent ongoing program reductions, revenue increases, and one-time strategies. The Proposed Budget recommends the use of $32.1 million or 40% in ongoing strategies and $48.1 million or 60% in one-time strategies. Fiscal Management Reward Program (FMR) savings of $43.4 million are available to help balance the FY 2013-2014 Proposed Budget. These one-time savings have been generated through the ongoing efforts of County agencies/departments through the years to operate their programs efficiently and effectively within budget, to avoid further program and staffing reductions. While a structural imbalance between ongoing revenues and expenditures remains, FMR savings allow for the preservation of vital services.

PROGRAM AREA NET COST REDUCTIONS
General Government (including Internal Service Funds and Capital Projects) – The General Government program area contributed net cost savings of $19.9 million through $2.0 million in appropriation reductions, $0.8 million in increased revenue, and $17.1 million in FMR program savings. Net cost savings include spending reductions and increased revenue collections in most general government departments and the elimination of one vacant funded position in the Community Development Agency. The Capital Projects budget is also reduced by $0.5 million which may delay completion of projects including accessibility compliance and hazardous materials abatement.
Health Care – The Health Care Services Agency contributed net cost savings of $25.5 million through $3.2 million in appropriation reductions, $7.3 million in increased revenue, and $15.0 million in FMR Program savings. The spending reductions include eliminating 3.42 vacant Public Health positions; reducing support for community-based contracts and the Alameda Health System (AHS) indigent care contract by $1.1 million; reducing costs for contract oversight, Medi-Cal eligibility and enrollment, and environmental health code enforcement activities by $1.1 million; and decreasing funding for equipment and training by $0.6 million. Revenue increases include $6.3 million in Behavioral Care Medi-Cal funding; $0.5 million in federal Public Health support; and the one-time use of $0.5 million in Measure A funds to support CBO contracts.
Public Assistance – The Social Services Agency achieved net cost savings of $16.7 million through $3.6 million in appropriations reductions, $8.9 million in revenue increases, and FMR Program savings of $4.2 million. Net cost reductions include $3.0 million by eliminating 40 vacant child welfare worker positions due to declining foster care caseloads; $0.4 million resulting from projected caseload declines in Adoptions, KinGap and Foster Care and realigning the budget to reflect the current In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) program maintenance of effort (MOE) requirement; and adjusting Title IV-E out-of-home placement prevention services. In addition, realignment revenues increased by $6.5 million; child support collections and Healthy Families revenues grew by $1.0 million, and one-time CalFresh closeout and Fraud Recovery incentives contribute $1.5 million.
Public Protection – The Public Protection program area achieved net cost savings of $18.1 million through $4.0 million in appropriations reductions, $7.0 million in revenue increases, and $7.1 million of FMR Program savings. Balancing strategies in the Public Defender’s Office include managing declaration of conflicts to reduce indigent defense services contract costs by $0.5 million; partnering with the Social Services Agency to increase the pass through of Title IV-E waiver funds by $0.4 million; eliminating a partially funded vacant position; and use of FMR. The Sheriff’s Office net savings result from a $1.1 million reduction in discretionary operating costs; a $1.1 million salary and benefit offset from the Police Protection County Service Area; a $0.2 million contribution from the Social Services Agency for School Resource Officers; $0.7 million in salary savings; and increased revenues of $2.6 million for services provided to outside agencies. The District Attorney’s Office contributed increased revenue and FMR Program savings as did the Probation Department. Proposition 172 Public Safety sales tax revenue has increased by $4.2 million based on more current data and projections.

FISCAL MANAGEMENT REWARD (FMR) PROGRAM SAVINGS
Your Board’s FMR Program allows General Fund departments to carry-over net savings each fiscal year to be used in subsequent years for budget balancing, one-time expenditures and program enhancements. Through ongoing cost-saving and revenue generation efforts, County agencies/departments contributed $43.4 million in prior-year FMR savings to help balance the FY 2013-2014 budget.
Ongoing efforts by County departments to reduce spending and conserve resources have enabled the County to mitigate major program reductions and maintain vital services. However, departments must balance these efforts with the need to fund increased costs and meet the growing demand for essential services in all program areas.
COUNTYWIDE STRATEGIES
In past years, it has sometimes been necessary to recommend countywide strategies that are not unique to a particular program area to help balance the budget. This year, the early signs of economic recovery enabled us to include growth in both program and discretionary revenues in the initial phases of budget development. Balancing strategies identified by departments to reduce net costs, FMR Program savings and updated revenue projections are recommended to close the $80.2 million funding gap.
While the use of countywide strategies to help close the FY 2013-2014 funding gap is not recommended, the Proposed Budget transfers $5.0 million or the 1% of discretionary revenue for capital improvements established by Board policy, into a designation account for future budget balancing. It is also recommended that unanticipated year-end fund balance up to the Auditor-Controller’s current estimate of $7.0 million be added to that designation account. These two one-time countywide strategies combined will provide up to $12.0 million to be set aside and maintained in a special designation account for future budget balancing. This will ensure that funds are available if necessary during FY 2013-2014 to help mitigate the impacts of pending federal and State funding reductions and policy changes; unforeseen costs and/or revenue losses related to major program realignment; implementation of the Affordable Care Act; as well as pending and potential litigation and other risk factors.
The proposed Designation for Future Budget Balancing will provide up to $12.0 million to address significant pending factors and risks that could impact the County throughout FY 2013-2014. However, we must also continue to identify additional funding strategies throughout the coming year in anticipation of further federal and State actions and to address the structural imbalance that will likely result in another funding gap for the following fiscal year.
PENDING FACTORS
The recently approved federal reduction in discretionary spending and the sequestration of funds may be the first in a long line of deficit reduction strategies imposed by Congress and the administration. According to the Congressional Budget Office and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, while efforts to reduce the deficit may be well intended, the near term impact of these actions may slow the pace of the recovery and dampen economic growth.
There is significant concern about the Governor’s realignment plan that calls for a State-based expansion of Medi-Cal and shift of potential county savings before implementation of the ACA and without knowing the impact and cost of providing services to the remaining uninsured. The magnitude of the proposed cost shifts may also eliminate opportunities to strengthen the County’s remaining safety net programs. Anticipating savings prior to program implementation and redirecting those funds to help the State reduce its costs is premature. Counties are once again being forced to accept program responsibilities without adequate funding and assume greater risks for future State and federal law changes and potentially adverse court actions.
Since the State imposed the Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) shift on local government to help meet its own budget obligations to schools almost two decades ago, Alameda County alone has transferred $5.0 billion in local discretionary funds to the State. Furthermore, even without further federal and State cuts, Alameda County’s discretionary revenue represents only 24% of the Proposed General Fund budget. With almost 90% of the County’s limited discretionary revenue now property tax-based, the continued weakness in property values and slow economic recovery will continue to impact our ability to fund core services.
The impact of current and future federal and State cost shifts and funding cuts and an uncertain economic outlook pose significant challenges for the County. Your Board will again be faced with limited choices and difficult decisions as you continue to provide the strong leadership necessary to maintain the County’s fiscal integrity and provide essential services to our residents and those in need.
RECOMMENDATIONS The FY 2013-2014 Proposed Budget is balanced and reflects the collective effort and
contributions of County stakeholders to develop a balanced and sustainable approach to
providing services in the coming year. In addition, balancing the budget using a significant amount of one-time funds will necessitate careful monitoring throughout the year to ensure that expenditures remain within budget and revenue estimates are fully realized. As you conduct public hearings and deliberate on the FY 2013-2014 Proposed Budget, your Board’s leadership and strong fiscal management will assist the County in once again maintaining that critical balance between service demands and limited financial resources.
