On behalf of the dedicated Butte County staff, I am pleased to present the fiscal year 2016-17
Recommended Budget to the Board for its consideration. The budget is balanced, and for the first time in
many years, we are seeing appreciable growth in discretionary revenues allowing us to restore services,
and in some cases, actually expand services. The return to fiscal health also provides us with an
opportunity to prepare for the future, to shape our organization into one that responsibly provides
services while preparing to weather future storms.
This return to fiscal health required difficult decisions by the Board of Supervisors, sacrifices from our
employees, and patience from our community. It has taken many years for us to get here, and I thank
you, our employees and our residents for allowing us to arrive at this point.
Under the Board’s leadership, we have accomplished several significant milestones in returning to fiscal
health. Some of these accomplishments include:
 Implementing a plan to pay down and eventually eliminate any unfunded liability for our retiree
health care programs;
 Implementing a plan to pay down the principal and interest for our existing Pension Obligation
Bonds;
 Addressing the County’s deferred building maintenance;
 Updating our Capital Improvement Plan to replace aging and substandard buildings that are well
beyond their expected lifespan;
 Setting General Fund Appropriations for Contingencies to the level of $7.8 million, which is 5% of
the General Fund Budget, as recommended by County Policy;
 Increasing General Fund reserves to $8 million, which will place us in a much better position to
manage the next economic downturn;
 Planning for projected increases in CalPERS retirement costs within the anticipated available
resources; and
 Implementing a financial management system upgrade allowing for much better monitoring,
reporting and controls of the County’s finances.
While the above list is not all-inclusive, it does offer several examples of the Board’s fiscal responsibility
and sound financial planning. The Board’s priorities have also resulted in an improved outlook for the
future, and the ability to plan for future economic challenges.

In addition to the items listed above, staff is in the midst of a number of other important initiatives such
as:
 Undertaking an extensive review, in cooperation with all labor organizations, of our health care
options for our 2,400-person workforce. While still not complete, the process will ensure that
whatever plan is chosen, it will be the overall best and most cost effective program for both the
County and our employees;
 Reviewing our County Fire operations by exploring changes to the delivery of service to maintain
future years’ cost increases in line with projected general purpose revenue increases;
 Undertaking a comprehensive user fee analysis to balance fairness for the taxpayers with the
benefit received by the individual or business receiving the service;
 Beginning a thorough review of our County Reserve Policy to ensure that we adequately provide
for our future reserve needs; and
 Continuing to work with our cities and other economic development partners to further implement
the County’s Economic Development Strategy to support continued job growth, enhancing our
move toward better financial health.
While uncertainties still remain (e.g. international affairs affecting our economy, continuing drought, the
implementation of the Affordable Care Act, etc.), I am more upbeat about our current situation than I
have been in many years.
With fiscal stability, a critical issue we need to address is Butte County’s long-term organizational health.
We continue to lag behind comparable cities and counties in our salaries and benefits and have seen
increased pressure in almost every department in our ability to recruit and retain employees. Ultimately,
we must be able to keep our existing employees and attract new employees or our community will suffer
through poor service or the lack of services altogether. As a result, a major effort this year will be to work
together with the Board and our employee organizations on solutions that make us more competitive
while maintaining our short and long-term fiscal health.
In conclusion, I again want to thank the Board, department heads, and employees for their efforts to
maintain fiscal stability in the County. It was and continues to be a team effort. In addition, I specifically
want to thank the budget staff of all the departments, as well the staff in my office who once again
performed the herculean task of putting this budget together.

Years of sound financial choices along with commitment and sacrifice from the community and
employees have made
Butte County financially
stable and improved the
outlook for the future.

Increase the General Reserve by $500,000 to $8
million.
 Increase Chico Library hours by 14 per week, including
Mondays and expanded morning hours.
 Provide initial funding for a number of Capital Projects
including the Jail Program and Capacity Expansion,
a new Evidence Storage and
Morgue facility, and infrastructure
improvements at County Center.
 Provide initial funding for
a mobile radio system upgrade
that will improve public safety
communications and interoperability
with other agencies. The
recommended upgrade will allow
clearer, faster communications and
responsiveness.
 Update and replace outdated
IT network components to facilitate
improved communications countywide and begin Voice-
Over-IP implementation.
 Replace the communications tower at the Chico Sheriff
Sub-station.
 Begin construction of the Oregon Gulch and Midway
Bridge replacements.
 Complete several bike lane, sidewalk, and safety
improvement projects.
 Purchase a Digital Literacy Coach with Community
Development Block Grant funds to bring internet access
and digital literacy tools to the residents of the Gridley
Farm Labor Housing Property.
 Target of $7.8 million General Fund contingency, which
is an increase of $400,000 from the fiscal year 2015-16
adopted budget. This achieves the County goal of a 5%
General Fund contingency and provides added security in
the event of an emergency.
 Complete efficiency improvement projects at the Chico,
Oroville, and Paradise Libraries, including self-service
checkout stations and automated
materials handling and sorting
equipment.
 Complete several large facility
maintenance projects, including
completion of roof replacements
at the Chico Library and 25 County
Center Drive and parking lot and
accessibility improvements at 3 and
7 County Center Drive, as part of the
County’s on-going effort to address
the backlog of deferred maintenance.
 Complete the next phase of
construction at the Butte County Veterans Memorial Park,
including the Wall of Honor.
 Construct a new module at the Neal Road Recycling
and Waste Facility and evaluate development of a septage
receiving facility as an alternative to the existing ponds,
which are slated for removal as the new waste module is
developed starting in fiscal year 2016-17.
 Increase of 33 net positions in the County workforce.
Most of the positions are in the Employment and
Social Services Department to meet state and federal
requirements.
 Restore staffing in the Development Services Code
Enforcement Division, including staff to continue enforcing
the County’s medical marijuana cultivation ordinance.
Budget Highlights

Overview
The overall Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2016-17 totals $526.5 million. This is an increase of 8.9% from fiscal year
2015-16.
The Recommended Budget for the General Fund is $164.5 million, which is an increase of 6.7% from fiscal year 2015-16.
This includes increases in the targeted General Fund Appropriations for Contingencies, transfers to the Capital Projects
and Equipment Replacement Funds, and varied increases in departmental budgets. The recommendation also includes an
increase to General Reserves of $500,000, raising the total to $8 million.

The fiscal year 2016-17 Recommended Budget is $526,459,300 for all funds, which is an
increase of $43.2 million or 8.9% compared to the fiscal year 2015-16 Adopted Budget. This is a
reflection of all County funds including governmental funds (operating funds and non-operating
funds), internal service funds (insurance and utilities), enterprise funds (the Neal Road
Recycling and Waste Facility), and special districts and County Service Areas.
For the governmental funds, the Recommended Budget is $500,578,894, which is an increase
of 9.4% or $43.2 million compared to the fiscal year 2015-16 Adopted Budget. Of this total,
$61.8 million is from recommended operating transfers between funds. The majority of these
transfers, $51.2 million, are from non-operating to operating funds. An additional $3.5 million in
transfers from the General Fund to support expenditures in Special Revenue, Capital Project
and Debt Service Funds is included in this total. The remaining $7.1 million in transfers is made
up of other Departmental transfers between funds including transfers to equipment replacement
funds and the Capital Projects Fund.
