Pursuant to statute, the Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2012-2013 (July 1, 2012 – June 30, 2013) is
presented for consideration on June 12, 2012. The Recommended Budget provides Butte County with a
prudent spending plan that is balanced with the resources available to the County and provides the
foundation to conduct hearings as required by California law. It is requested that the Board of
Supervisors accept this Recommended Budget as the basis for budget hearings scheduled to begin on
Tuesday, June 26, 2012. As specified under statute, budget hearings can last no longer than 10 days.
Subsequent to those hearings, the Board of Supervisors may adopt a budget that is smaller, but no larger,
than the accountings made at the conclusion of the hearings. The Board of Supervisors will consider
adoption of the budget on July 31, 2012.

Under the leadership of the Board of Supervisors and department heads with help from our employees,
the Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2012-2013 is balanced and Butte County is holding its own
after a long, drawn-out economic downturn. In fact, there may be a light at the end of the tunnel as the
national, state and local economies inch forward in a slow recovery.
The public, county employees and the Board of Supervisors can be proud of the work done over the
past year to keep Butte County heading forward in spite of tough economic times. I am pleased to
provide a brief summary of some of the highlights from the past year:
? A partnership of the Sheriff’s Office and Probation Department, along with Behavioral Health,
Employment and Social Services and numerous community organizations began implementation
of public safety realignment (AB 109). Their efforts have been recognized statewide for the
County’s initial progress in the transition of state prisoners and state parolees to local control.
? The Development Services Department received the Building Department of the Year award from
the California Association of Building Officials.
? The Administration Department implemented portions of the County’s Economic Development
Strategy, in cooperation with other local agencies and County departments. Accomplishments
include creating a business ombudsman, reinstating the development review committee, building
permit streamlining, assisting with identification of business financing, updating the business
resources webpage, and supporting business incubation and innovation.
? The Child Support Services Department partnered with Tehama County to implement a regional
child support services call center with seven other counties, utilizing a portion of the other
counties’ State and federal allocations.
? The Administration Department implemented live audio and video streaming of Board of
Supervisors meetings.
? The Administration Department obtained approximately $7.4 million in Disaster Relief Initiative
(DRI) funding to help rebuild communities devastated by the 2008 fires.
? The Public Works Department oversaw the construction of the state-of-the-art landfill gas-toenergy
project at the Neal Road Recycling and Waste Facility. The project will take previous
carbon based emissions from the landfill and convert them into enough electricity to power over
1,300 homes while generating revenue for the facility.
? The Development Services Department helped the County take a major step forward in
completing an updated General Plan, with an updated zoning code to follow, making it easier to
do business in Butte County.
? Department head work teams completed several major policy documents including a Pension
Obligation Bond payment plan, a Communication Plan, an Asset Management Plan, and a longterm
Master Plan for the County Campus.
? The Behavioral Health Department won two California State Association of Counties (CSAC)
Awards of Merit for innovative programs designed to help youth avoid drug, alcohol and
tobacco use, as well as build the skills and capacity of young people to foster mental and
emotional health and well being.
? The General Services Department oversaw the first phase of construction of the Oroville
Veterans Memorial Park for all of Butte County, utilizing outside funding.
? The District Attorney became the first in the state to provide discovery to defense counsel over
the web. The e-web Discovery process allows defense attorneys to download documents and media
over a secure connection and avoid time-consuming and costly printing of the materials.
? The Farm, Home and 4-H Department implemented a Honey Bee Tech Transfer Team of three
research associates - a first in the nation. The department is part of the Bee Informed
Partnership, a nationwide program that facilitates the cooperation of scientists and beekeepers
who are working together to increase honey bee colony survivorship. Improving colony
survivorship will make more honey bees available to farmers for cost effective pollination

RECOMMENDED BUDGET
The Recommended Budget essentially provides for the same County services as it did last year - a
significant accomplishment as many other jurisdictions continue to reduce services and staff. We are
also seeing new programs and expanded programs primarily related to realignment of certain
responsibilities from the State to counties. Consistent with Board direction from prior years, public
safety remained the highest priority as the County’s limited resources were considered in the budget
process. The Recommended Budget also includes $500,000 for deferred facility maintenance to address
the most critical work of the millions of dollars that are needed to maintain the County’s facilities and
infrastructure for long-term use.
The Recommended Budget includes a net addition of 23.7 positions, resulting in a 1.1% increase in the
County’s workforce. Most of the positions are in federal and state-funded programs and related to the
realignment of certain programs from State responsibility to County responsibility, as previously
mentioned.
We must recognize that the Recommended Budget is balanced in part by employees paying a portion of
their pension costs and paying increases in their health care premium costs while receiving no cost of
living increases for a number of years. The reality is that without the contributions and sacrifices of our
employees, many more jobs would have been lost and the services we provide our residents would have
been noticeably reduced. For helping the County balance its budget, I say “thank you” to our
employees.
The Recommended Budget does not depend on any one-time funding solutions to be balanced, which is
a positive sign. We were able to balance on-going expenditures with on-going revenues for the new
budget year.
The good news of a balanced budget for the new budget year must be tempered with the fact that there
are many unknowns in the future beyond our control. Once again, the State of California has significant
budget issues, especially if voters reject the Governor’s tax plan. Budget shortfalls at the State can
impact the County, especially health and human services programs. The realignment of programs last
fiscal year will have negative impacts on the County’s budget if guaranteed funding is not in place and
there are unknown additional impacts from federal budget decisions.
Unknown factors that could work in the County’s favor include additional revenue the County may
receive through leasing a portion of its Table A Water to other State Water Contractors. If the lease
takes place, and the County is able to obtain concessions from all employees to pay their share of
pension costs, the County may have a structurally balanced budget going into the future, absent any
negative impacts out of the County’s control. In addition, there is the possibility of additional property
tax revenue from the dissolution of the four redevelopment agencies in Butte County, although the exact
amount is still being calculated. Finally, the economy is forecasted to grow, albeit slowly. Any sign that
we are no longer sliding backwards is a good sign!

THE FUTURE
In summary, the County faces another year of holding its own with no major service reductions, though
a great deal of uncertainty remains. While things point toward improvement and the budget maintains
stability for now, it does not take care of the substantial unmet needs that have been building up since
the recession began in 2007. At some point, most likely in the fall, the Board of Supervisors will be
asked to prioritize the use of discretionary dollars as resources exceed what is necessary to maintain
current service levels. Priority areas for discussion may include, but are not limited to:
? Increasing reserves to prepare for future uncertainties;
? Funding deferred maintenance to ensure the County’s facilities and infrastructure are usable in
the future;
? Increasing service levels to meet demand;
? Reviewing and updating compensation levels for the County’s workforce to remain competitive
in the professional marketplace as the economy expands; and
? Funding new facilities and infrastructure to meet future demands.
As you will see in Exhibit C, the Multi-Year Budget Trend Analysis indicates that our plan for closing the
structural gap is working. Based upon the budget trend analysis, the $3 - $4 million structural gap
anticipated a year ago has been reduced to $1.2 - $1.5 million annually in future years. That gap will be
further reduced with all County employees paying their full share of the employees’ portion of pension
costs.
The gap will also shrink further in the future if the County realizes the additional revenues mentioned
previously. The budget trend analysis does not include water lease revenue or increased revenue from
dissolution of redevelopment agencies. The redevelopment revenues have yet to be quantified and most
likely will not be realized right away, and water leases depend upon a number of parties agreeing to the
terms.
Things to watch at the State and national level that could affect future County budgets include:
? Economic growth – when and at what rate?
? State budget concerns – how will the State address its deficit?
? Additional realignment of programs from the State – will there be adequate funding with the
new responsibilities?
? Public pensions – what does the future hold?
? Local housing market – when will the market in general, and property values specifically, begin
to stabilize?
? Unemployment – when will we move to a more normal level of unemployment?
Local issues that need to be addressed include:
? The end of grant funds for some positions in the Fire Department.
? On-going deferred maintenance to our buildings and infrastructure that, unless addressed, will
result in greater costs as major systems or facilities fail.
? The lack of growth in the County’s property tax revenues. Property tax, which is our largest
discretionary revenue, is expected to be relatively flat for the next five years, and until it begins to
grow again, the County will have a difficult time meeting all the needs mentioned above.
? Restoration of service levels cut in previous years to better serve the needs of our community.
In many cases, even the previous levels of service did not meet demands. Reductions to staffing
and service levels have only worsened this situation.

CONCLUSION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In addressing the many challenges over the past few years, the Board of Supervisors chose action over
indecision and solutions over gimmicks, and allowed the County to move forward while other
jurisdictions wait around for things to get better. With a status quo year ahead of us, we can continue
working on new and innovative ways to increase revenue, become more cost effective and provide
services in entirely new ways. The world has changed and we must change accordingly, identifying
fundamentally different ways to provide services. Some of the initiatives we will address in the coming
year include:
? Increase revenue through a lease of our Table A water allocation.
? Successful conclusion through the courts, legislation and/or settlement of our Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) claims regarding the relicensing of the Lake Oroville Project.
Use new technologies to improve efficiency and advance communications with our citizens and
employees.
? Identify solutions to long-term unfunded liabilities such as retiree health care costs.
? Explore regional service provision with surrounding cities and/or counties.
? Analyze services that might be provided more efficiently or through a different service provision
model.
? Learn from other jurisdictions how to improve service delivery in Butte County.
While not all of the above initiatives will be successful, I believe that it is the County’s responsibility to
analyze the options before taking anything off the table. We are well underway on some of the
initiatives, while others have yet to be discussed.
As I predicted last year, fiscal year 2011-2012 was a year of transition for Butte County. With uncertainty
at all levels – national, state and local – Butte County managed to move forward and is planning a small
amount of budgetary growth in fiscal year 2012-2013. The economy continues to take very small steps
forward and Butte County appears to be stabilizing after a rough few years.
Before I delve into the details of the Recommended Budget as provided in Exhibits A and B, I want to
express my appreciation and gratitude for the hard working and dedicated employees throughout the
organization who helped prepare this document. With fewer resources than in the past and no relief
from other workloads, staff continues to meet their deadlines and produce a quality product. Last year
we revamped the design and content of the budget document. The fiscal year 2012-2013 Recommended
Budget continues down the path of providing clearer and more detailed information for the Board and
the public.
Special thanks to all of the department heads and their budget staff who provide the foundation of the
budget every year. Though the Board is receiving this budget in May, the departments began their work
in December and January. During the year, these same staff monitor and implement their budgets and
assist the County in maintaining its financial position.
I also want to recognize and thank my staff who take the foundation the departments provide and
complete the construction of the County’s budget each year - your many hours of work do not go
unnoticed.
In addition, thank you to the Auditor-Controller, the Information Systems Director and their staff for
providing invaluable support to my staff during this process.
Until you witness the enormous amount of data and work that is required to pull together information
from 23 different departments and countless funds, budget units and cost centers, you cannot fully
comprehend the amount of knowledge, experience and effort it takes to produce an annual budget.
Butte County is fortunate to have the dedicated and talented employees that make this process go so
smoothly, year after year.
