The County Administrative Officer (CAO) is pleased to forward to the Board of Supervisors the
Fiscal Year 2015-16 Recommended .Budget (Recommended Budget) for its consideration.
Recommended Budget Hearings will begin on Tuesday, June 9, at 1:30 PM and will continue
through Tuesday, June 16, or until the Board, by formal action approves the Recommended
Budget.
The Recommended Budget for all funds includes revenues of $106 million and appropriations of
$121.5 million. Fund balances of $15.5 million are used to finance the difference between
appropriations and revenues. The Recommended Budget Fund Recapitulation summarizes the
revenues, appropriations, and fund balances, for all county funds and is included in the
Recommended Budget binder.
The General Fund is a subset of the total budget and contains the discretionary funds over
which the Board has the most control. For FY 2015-16 the General Fund includes revenues of
$39.4 million and appropriations of $41.8 million. The General Fund budget is balanced using
projected one-time resources including $2.4 million in FY 2014-15 fund balance and an
$978,303 transfer from the Teeter Fund. This represents a reduction of $836,135 (46%) in the
year-over-year use of one-time funding ($1.8 million) to balance the annual operating cost of
the General Fund and is another very positive step towards improved financial stability for the
County.
The Recommended Budget includes a General Fund reserve of $2.4 million, which represents
5.9% of General Fund appropriations; and $819,488 (2%) is budgeted for General Fund
contingencies. Per the Board's adopted budget principles, contingencies should be increased to
3-4% of General Fund appropriations at Final Budget.
Budgets are a planning document, and like all plans, include projections for what will occur in
the future. The Recommended Budget includes projected year-end fund balances and projected
property tax revenues. A significant change in either of these numbers will impact the
Recommended Budget. The property tax roll will close on July 1, and the actual FY 2014-15

General Fund balance will be known in late July to early August, when the current fiscal year is
closed and all associated adjustments are made. Any significant changes in the Recommended
Budget will be addressed in September when the Final Budget is presented to the Board.
Budget Development Process
The county budget content, adoption procedures, and dates by which certain actions must be
taken are guided by The County Budget Act (Government Code §29000 et. Seq.), administrative
directives, and recommended practices which are published by the State Controller in the
County Budget Guide. The Recommended Budget was prepared pursuant to state law and in
conformance with the County Budget Guide and Board direction. The County Budget Act
(Government Code §29064(a)) requires the Board to adopt the Recommended Budget by June
30. A copy of the County Budget Act is included in the budget binder.
FY 2014-15 Mid-Year Board Direction
On February 24, 2015, during the FY 2014-15 Mid-Year Budget Report, the CAO reported on the
progress made in reducing the projected $8 million deficit discussed in the FY 2013-14 Mid-Year
Budget Report. In response to the FY 2013-14 Mid-Year report, the Board took immediate
action to reduce appropriations in the FY 2013-14 budget and provided policy direction for
preparation of the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget, beginning the multi-year process to align
General Fund expenditures and revenues.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget instructions to county departments included a reduced
General Fund contribution target of 10%. Although difficult, through the efforts and support of
every county department and the Board of Supervisors, the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget
included a $2.2 million reduction to appropriations, reducing the reliance on one-time funds
from the Teeter Fund by nearly $1.6 million from $3.4 million to $1.8 million.
As a result of advances made in FY 2014-15 to close the budget deficit, the FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget instructions provided to county departments required a status quo
budget, whereby department's General Fund contributions remain at the same level as
included in the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. This meant in essence a reduction for
departments as they would need to absorb the negotiated 4% cost of living adjustment (COLA),
PERS contribution rate increase, and the normal step and longevity increases. Although an
improvement over FY 2014-15 instructions, the CAO recognized this would still b~ difficult for
some departments that are already operating with minimum staffing levels, and any further
reductions could mean the elimination of services to the community.
Once budgets were submitted, the CAO, Auditor-Controller and Interim Assistant CAO-Human
Resources/Risk Management met with departments to discuss their proposed budgets and
potential impacts to services. It was determined during the course of the budget meetings that
certain departments would be unable to maintain a status quo General Fund contribution and
provide the necessary services to the community. The degree to which General Fund
departments depend on a General Fund contribution varies dependent on the size of the

department and other available sources of revenue. While some departments have significant,
department specific revenues and designated fund balances that can be drawn upon to support
their operations, other general fund departments have limited resources and rely mainly on
their General Fund contribution.

Recommended budget revenues for all funds, departments and programs total $106 million
and appropriations $121.5 million. Fund equity of $15.5 is used to balance the budget.

Significant budget changes since the adoption of the FY 2014-15 Budget include:
• $836,135 reduction in the use of Teeter Funds to balance the General Fund budget.
• $1.5 million in appropriations for Information Technology {IT) infrastructure projects
funded with Teeter funds.
• $1.6 million increase to salary and benefits due to a full year of a negotiated 4% COLA
and increased PERS costs.
• $1.4 million reduction to Capital Improvements appropriations due to the completion of
the new Jail and Sheriffs Headquarters.
• $1 million increase to Mental Health for services under the Mental Health Services Act.
The General Fund
As stated previously, the General Fund is a subset of the total budget and contains the
discretionary funds over which the Board has the most control. The General Fund is the focus of
the majority of our budget discussions. This is in part due to the fact that the Board has greater
control over the allocation of resources in the General Fund, and also because many of the
most visible services, such as public safety, are financed by the General Fund.
3 I Page
General fund revenues are the sources of money used to pay for General Fund expenditures. Of
the total $39.4 million in General Fund revenues approximately $19.5 million (49.4%) are truly
discretionary and can be allocated by the Board to county departments to support the Board's
priorities. The remaining $19.9 million (50.6%) of General Fund revenues are dedicated to
specific purposes. For example, Prop 172 sales tax of approximately $1.75 million must be used
by the Board to support public safety, and charges for services can only be used to fund the
cost to provide the service for which the fee is charged.
Figure 3 below provides a comparison of General Fund revenues by classification and compares
the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget to the FY 2014-15 Final Adopted Budget. As indicated in
Figure 3, General Fund revenues have experience a slow growth, with an overall increase of
$2.9 or 8.7% projected for FY 2015-16. This is an improvement over the FY 2014/15
Recommended Budget, where revenues remained basically unchanged from the prior year.
This increase in revenue provides for a 46.1% reduction in the use of Teeter funds to balance
the budget.

Taxes account for $13.3 Million (39%) of the total $33.9 million in General Fund revenue. Of
that total $9.9 million (74%) is local property tax which is projected to increase by $380,548
(4%) in FY 2015-16. Other significant changes in general fund revenues include:

• $1 million increase to Charges for Services, the largest portion of which, over $1 million,
can be attributed to an increase in A-87 Revenues to central service departments.
• $786,765 increase to Operating Transfer In is due in part to a Designated Fund transfer
of $475,000 for the Recorder's Vital Statistics Data system.
General Fund Appropriations
FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget General Fund department appropriations include an overall
increase of $3 million (7.8%) over the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget. Increased appropriations
across all functional groups can be attributed to increases to salary and benefits related to the
4% COLA and PERS contribution rate increase. Additionally, the largest year over year increase
is found in General Government and Other Departments. The increase to General Government
is due to the new Recorder's Vital Statistics Data System funded with designated funds, Utilities
and the FY 2014/15 mid-year renewal of the Microsoft Enterprise Agreement. The increase to
Other Departments is mainly due to the increase to Insurance Premiums such as Workers
Compensation. Even with the increases to General Government and Other Departments, Public
Safety (Sherift Probation, District Attorney, Public Defender, County Fire) appropriations
remain at 46% of the overall General Fund budget. This is a reflection of the Board's continued
support for public safety as the highest spending priority.
In Figure 4 below, General Fund appropriations are organized on the basis of the six functional
areas including: General Government, Public Safety, Records and Land Use, Health and Human
Services, Education and Recreation, and Other Departments. These functions reflect the broad
cross section of programs and services provided by General Fund departments. Figure 4
provides a summary of the Recommended Budget appropriations by functional area, and
compares them to the FY 2014-15 Final Adopted Budget.

General Fund department appropriations by expenditure category provide a different look at
how the $41.8 million is divided (see Figure 5 below). Salaries and benefits account for $24.8
million (59%), services and supplies $11.8 million (28%), and $819,488 (2%) is budgeted for
contingencies. The remaining $4.4 million (10%) is distributed between other expenditure
classifications. Increased Salaries and Benefits is a combination of the negotiated 4% COLA for
a full fiscal year, normal step increases and longevities, increased PERS contribution rate and
recommended new positions and reclassifications. The increase to Services and Supplies can be
attributed in part to an increase in insurance premiums, utilities and gas and oil expense.

The County provides services and like most service providers our largest expense is salaries and
benefits. Salaries and benefits represent 59% of General Fund expenditures. Multiple years of
budget cuts have resulted in the reduction or elimination of one-time and non-labor related
expenses. Due to these reductions in past years, a number of departments have requested new
positions or the restoration of eliminated positions. The CAO and Human Resources reviewed
all department requests for new, restoration, and reclassification of positions. Discussions with
departments fully vetted the requests, determining need, ongoing stable funding sources, and
appropriateness of the position. Not all requests are being recommended or included in the
Recommended Budget.
As a result of those discussions and reviews, the following General Fund position changes are
included in the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget:
• Auditor/Controller:
o Reclassification of an Accountant Auditor II to Assistant Auditor/Controller.
The position of Assistant Auditor/Controller was unfunded in 2010 and placed on
the inactive list (parking lot) in FY 2014-15. This has left the Auditor/Controller's
Office with no succession plan and has opened the office for risk should the
Auditor/Controller be absent from the office. The Auditor/Controller has
expressed the need for a higher level manager to ensure that policies and
procedures are kept abreast of state and federal requirements. This position will

provide the necessary education and experience to handle the more complex
assignments and reporting as well as act in the Auditor/Controller's place as
required. This action will transfer the Assistant Auditor/Controller to the active
list and move the Accountant Auditor II to the inactive list. The additional cost of
$5,709 is covered by an increase in the Indirect Cost Plan (A-87) revenues.
o Reclassification of an Account Technician Ill to an Account Technician IV. The
position of Account Technician Ill is filled by an individual who, in her nine years
in the Auditor/Controller's Office, has completed the Account Technician 1/11/111
series while furthering her education. She has taken on increasingly complex
accounting duties that are more in line with the Account Technician IV duties.
The additional cost of $4,524 is covered by an increase in the Indirect Cost Plan
revenues.
• Elections:
o Reclassification of the Elections Coordinator to an Elections Coordinator 1/11.
This will create a series within the Elections Coordinator position allowing for
growth and advancement in the position. There is no additional cost for this
reclassification. The current position will be an Elections Coordinator I at the
same pay range as the Elections Coordinator.
o Reclassification of the Elections Supervisor to Recorder-Clerk. The Elections
Supervisor position is currently vacant due to a recent resignation. The ClerkRecorder
has determined that reclassifying this position to a Recorder-Clerk will
provide her office the flexibility and cross-training of employees that will result
in more efficient operation of her department. This reclassification will provide a
savings of $4,279.
• Technology Services Division (TSD):
In December 2013, the Chief Information Officer (CIO) position was vacated due to
retirement. On February 11, 2014, the department head position was reclassified to a
mid-management position and TSD became a part of the Administrative Office. At that
time the Board was informed that the CAO would work with TSD to identify efficiencies
that may be achieved through a reorganization of staff. In July 2014, an Information
Technology Services Manager was hired and has worked with Human Resources and the
Administrative Office to analyze the issues and business needs of the division. It was
established that the current structure of the TSD created numerous challenges including
difficulties in recruiting personnel, providing advancement opportunities for current
staff, and allowing for cross-training and support of personnel. As an example, the
current structure has stand-alone positions in the Network Specialist class. This creates
problems in recruiting because the department must recruit for a specific level in the
class (I, II, Ill) instead of doing a combined recruitment. Nor does this provide for
advancement unless each position is reclassified. With the assistance of Human
Resources, job positions have been rewritten, some pay ranges have been adjusted to
be competitive with similar size counties, and reclassifications are recommended based
on the new job description, duties, skills and education needs. The total cost of
restructuring the department is $30,973. These additional costs will be offset by savings
in other County Administrative Office divisions; the Administrative Office- $246,638 and
Human Resources/Risk Management- $74,904. The reorganization includes:

Reclassification of the Information Technology Manager to Deputy CAO/CIO.
o New Position- Network Specialist Manager
o Deletion of Vacant Network Specialist IV
o Reclassification/Formation of Class Series- Network Specialist 1/11/111
o Reclassification of Computer Support Technicians (2) to Network/Specialist I
o Reclassification of Programmer Analyst Ill to Network Specialist II
o Reclassification of a Business Analyst II to a Network Specialist II
Information Technology Services is a critical component of county government. It is
crucial that we have the necessary personnel, as well as a solid and reliable
infrastructure, to meet all departments' operational needs. The county recently
experienced the problems that resulted from a catastrophic system failure. This may be
considered a minor failure if we don't take the steps to replace aging infrastructure and
are unable to recruit staff to fill vacant positions.
• District Attorney:
o New Position- Paralegal-Criminal. This position will be shared between the
District Attorney (40%), Code Compliance (20%) and Animal Services (40%). In
the past, the Board has expressed an interest in shared positions between
departments in an effort to maximize resources and reduce costs. This position
will be a step towards realizing that goal. The Paralegal-Criminal positon will be
share among three departments and will provide the District Attorney with the
ability to consider bad check reports for criminal charges or referral to a
diversion/restitution program; provide Animal Services with the ability to
process necessary paperwork, identify and prepare those matters that need
cross-departmental attention and provide criminal and civil litigation support;
and provide Code Compliance Officers with assistance in tracking and preparing
both civil and criminal litigation. The cost of this position is $64,172, of which
$51,337 is General Fund costs and $12,835 will be fund through Code
Compliance revenues.
o Fund District Attorney Investigator I effective January 9, 2016. This position has
remained unfunded and vacant for a number of years as a result of the recession
and required reductions. This has left a single D.A. Investigator position in the
D.A.s Office and the employee has stated that he plans to retire in June 2016.
Due to the current case load and complexity of the cases, it is imperative that a
new D.A Investigator I be hired and trained prior to the pending retirement. The
mid-year start date will permit effective succession planning and may be
adjusted if retirement plans change. The D.A. Investigator is a sworn peace
officer that is involved in follow-up investigations, search warrants, witness and
trial preparation, confidential investigations, officer involved shootings and
security. The half-year cost to the General Fund is $43,742.
o Investigative/ Trial Support Assistant-Limited Term. This limited term position
was added as part of the FY 2013-14 Final Budget. This position was scheduled
for elimination as part of the FY 2014-15 Budget, but was extended for one year
until June 30, 2015 to assist the D.A. Investigator because of the D.A.'s caseload.
This position will be eliminated as scheduled, as funding was included for the
higher level position of District Attorney Investigator I.

Sheriffs Office:
o New Position- Sheriff Deputy 1/11-School Resource Officer. As part of Board
discussion regarding acceptance of the Cops Hiring grant, and as part of the FY
2014-15 Mid-Year Budget report, several Board members indicated that the
School Resource Officer position was a high priority. The Sheriff also reiterated
the importance of this position in his new position request as it will increase and
improve school safety, reduce truancy, reduce gang and drug activity while
reducing the need to take patrol deputies out of the community. The first year
costs for this position is $90,631.
o Fund CNEU/CaiEMA Deputy Sheriff 1/11. As this position is mainly funded
through the CaiEMA grant, it makes sense to include the position in the
Recommended Budget. The total cost of the position is $90,630, of which
$80,000 is covered by the grant. The cost to the General Fund is $10,630.
o Reclassification of a Sergeant to Lieutenant in the Jail. Prior to the recession,
the Sheriffs Office was staffed with three Lieu~enants. Currently the Sheriff's
Office is staffed with two Lieutenants. One oversees Patrol and Administration,
the second oversees Court Security, Dispatch and the Office of Emergency
Services. The Lieutenant position that was previously assigned to the Jail was
transferred to oversee Court Security, Dispatch and the Office of Emergency
Services. This reassignment left the Jail without the necessary oversight that was
previously provided by the Lieutenant. Reclassification of the Jail's Sergeant
Position to Lieutenant provides management of Jail operations, close supervision
of Correctional Sergeants, development and oversight of contracts, major
incident management and budget and policy development. The General Fund
cost is $12,707.
• Probation- New Position- Deputy Probation Officer 1/11. This will be a juvenile
probation position dedicated to a split between juvenile case management and
prevention work in the schools. Adding this position will allow the department to move
beyond the most basic elements of supervision and enable the officers to engage family
members in the case planning process to improve long-term outcomes. This represents
a third officer in the juvenile unit, increasing the department's capacity to facilitate
programming for juveniles and their family members, such as Parent Project and
Forward Thinking. Funding for the $73,891 cost of this position comes from increases in
three juvenile revenue sources. There is no increase to the General Fund Contribution.
• Planning:
o New Position- Planner Ill. The Planning Department has seen a steady increase
in workload during over past few of years. Project applications have increased
substantially in 2014 over the previous four years, going from an average of 40
per year to 69 last year. The additional workload means longer timeframes for
processing development applications, which result in greater costs for project
applicants. Additionally, there has been an increase in Building Permit activity
which necessitates additional Planning review and consultation with property
owners and applicants on zoning and planning-related matters. This is in
addition to work on the General Plan update and Housing Element. Based on
current trends, the Planning Director believes increased revenues will fully fund
the $94,708 cost of this position and there will be no increase to the
department's General Fund contribution.
o Reclassification of a Planner IV position to Planner 1/11. This position was
underfilled as a· Planner I. As the Planner I and Planner IV positions are in
different bargaining units, and the current duties are in line with a Planner 1/11,
the Planning Department has requested that this change be made permanent
and to reclassify and transfer the position from mid-management to
miscellaneous. There is no General Fund cost or savings for this reclassification.
• Building Department- New Position- Plan Checker. The workload for the sole Plan
Checker continues to increase resulting in longer turnaround times for plan review and
submittal. The average time to process submittals for new dwellings has increased from
about two weeks to four to six weeks. All projects submitted to the Building
Department for plan review, including commercial, remodels, additions, decks, and new
dwellings, are being processed by one Plan Checker. Building Permit revenue has seen
an increase of approximately $150,000 since 2010. In the years when revenues exceed
expenditures, the excess revenue is transferred to the Building Designated Fund. The
cost of $81,863 for this position will be funded exclusively with Building Permit revenues
with no cost to the General Fund. If revenues are lower than anticipated in the
Recommended Budget, funds will be transferred from the Building Designated Fund to
offset any shortfalls.
• Code Compliance:
o New Position- Permit Technician 1/11. In FY 2014-15 funding was included for
an Extra Hire Permit Technician 1/11 to assist Code Compliance with
administrative support and initial case review. The Building Department and
Code Compliance recognize the need for this position and have requested that a
new permanent Permit Technician 1/11 position be created. Revenues generated
through Nuisance Abatement and Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Fees, along
with a portion of Building Permit Fees will fund the $53,150 cost of this position.
There is no General Fund contribution to Code Compliance.
o New Position- Code Enforcement Officer. The current number of acting and
pending Code Compliance cases is approximately 1200 and the demands of the
public are not being met with two Code Compliance Officers. It is recommended
that this position be added to the department. Revenues generated through
Nuisance Abatement and Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Fees, along with a
portion of Building Permit Fees will fund the $76,328 cost of this position. There
is no General Fund contribution to Code Compliance.
• Animal Services Division- New Position- Animal Shelter Assistant. The need for the
Shelter Assistant position is tied in part with the introduction of the two new modulars
that were dedicated to the County by the Friends of Calaveras Animal Services (FOCAS).
These modulars are to serve as the site for housing felines, while the existing shelter will
serve to house canines. Animal Services currently has two Animal Control Officers
(ACOs) to provide field coverage for the entire county. However, because of staffing
shortages, the ACOs must not only cover their field duties, but also cover the shelter and
office two days a week, significantly impacting the department's ability to respond to
calls. In a 6-month period, the two ACOs collectively spent 55 days or about 25% of

their time performing shelter duties. Despite the assistance of volunteers, the addition
of another and separate facility only increases the need for additional help in order to
provide sufficient coverage for the shelter, enabling the ACOs to return to their field
duties. The department initially requested that this position to be funded for the entire
year. In conversations with the Administrative Office, the department agreed to delay
the hire date for the position until January 9, 2016 (mid-year) to ensure county revenues
were being received as expected and adequate funding is available for this position. The
cost to the General Fund is·$23,401.
• Health and Human Services- New Position- Veterans Services Representative. This
position will be a new county job classification. In November 2008, the Board appointed
Chele Beretz as the Calaveras County Veterans Service Officer (VSO). Ms. Beretz is also
classified under Merit Systems as an Eligibility Worker Ill. Classified as an Eligibility
Worker Ill and appointed VSO, allows Ms. Beretz to provide a wide range of services to
veterans and their families, including not only those benefits under the Department of
Veteran's Affairs (V.A.), but also Medi-Cal, Food Stamps and cash assistance. This dual
classification also allows the county to receive federal and state reimbursement for time
spent on assisting veterans and their families with Medi-Cal and Food Stamp
applications. The number of veterans in our county needing services justifies the
addition of a new VSR to assist the VSO in serving our veterans and state funding for the
VSO may be used to fund a portion of both positions. In February 2014, a grant-funded
extra hire Community Services Liaison-Veterans was hired to assist the VSO with
community outreach and provision of services to our veteran population. Since that
time, contacts with veterans have more than doubled from 192 to 469. In addition to
the regular services provided, the VSO has been able to make more home visits, assist
veterans in finding long-term home care, helped start the Veteran's Court, made
arrangements to be notified when a veteran is jailed, working with Mental Health to
provide services and beginning the process to provide Telemedicine for county veterans.
According to a letter from the V.A., during the period of July 1, 2013 through June 30,
2014, the VSO obtained new and increased monthly cash benefits in the amount of
$44,146, and one-time benefits of $525,662. The VSO made entitlement determination
on all public assistance (cash aid, Food Stamps and Medi-Cal) of $43,416 in annualized
monthly benefits and $280,248 in one-time benefits. Funding the VSR will allow provide
continued outreach and services to our veteran population. The $55,117 cost of this
position will be funded entirely by the General Fund.
Non-General Fund Staffing Changes
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget also includes staffing changes to Non-General Fund
Departments. With the exception of the Health and Human Services' request for the above
mentioned VSR, the staffing positions included below have no cost to the General Fund. They
are:
• Public Works:
o Equipment Services Center-New Position Request- 0.5 FTE Administrative
Services Officer -This position will assist the Administrative Analyst and Fleet
Manager with various shop duties and learn the shop administration and
operations to provide continuity during vacations and provide for succession
planning.
o Public Works Administration - Reclassification of Permit technician Ill to Public
Works Analyst 1-This position will assist with conducting stormwater
compliance inspection, stormwater education and community service programs
and water quality related issues. Transfer from Roads and Bridges to PW
Administration.
o Roads & Bridges- Reclassification of Engineer Technician II to Public Works
Analyst II-This reclassification is requested as this position assists with Surveyor
duties, including many of the routine technical reviews.
o Transfers Between Divisions:
• Permit Technician (#81-14) from Roads and Bridges to PW Administration
• Permit Technician (#96-06) from Integrated Waste Management to PW
Administration
• Deputy Director (#81-02) from Engineering to Roads and Bridges
• Senior Engineer (#81-72) from Roads and Bridges to Engineering
• Health and Human Services:
o New Position Request- Employment Training Worker -This position is needed
to due to the increased federal and state requirements and the addition of the
need to meet the mandate for home visits to sanctioned clients
o New Position Request- Social Worker IV-This position will provide ongoing
case management and services via the Independent Living Program to the
increased number of young adults in Foster Care.
o New Position Request- Transportation Officer- Provides transportation
services for clients receiv.ing Adult and Children's Services.
o New Position Request- Staff Services Specialist- This position will provide
administrative support to the agency director.
o Increase in time- Public Health Emergency Preparedness Manager 0.5 to 1.0
FTE- This will eliminate the need for a contractual arrangement for disaster
preparedness.
o New Position Request- Mental Health Case Manager Ill-This position will be
responsible for supervision of the conservatorship unit while carrying a caseload.
o New Position Request- Mental Health Case Manager 1/11- This position will
provide services in the Adult System of Care.
o New Position Request- Mental Health Case Manager 1/11- This position will
provide focused case management services for youth, ages 16 to 25.
o New Position Request- Mental Health Community Health Assistant Ill-This
position will present educational materials to public schools and the community
dealing with suicide prevention and stigma reduction towards persons with
mental illness.
o New Position Request- Office Technician 1-will provide specialized support
specific to complex electronic medical records and billing system as a result of
expanding services in the Mental Health Clinic.

Increase in time- Mental Health Community Services Liaison 0.5 to 1.0 FTE -
This will add a second staff person to assist with the day to day operation of the
Living Room Peer Wellness and Recover Center.
Capital Asset Requests
The Recommended Budget includes funding for those Capital Asset requests that have a source
of funding other than the General Fund. Capital Assets included in the Recommended Budget
are:
• Recorder- Vital Statistic Data System- $450,000 funded from the Recorder
Modernization Designated Fund.
• Non-Departmental-Information Technology Infrastructure projects- $1.5 million.
• Sheriff- Two (2) Command Vehicles- $115,500 funded from AB 443 funds.
• Sheriff Civil Fees- One (1) Civil Fee server- $10,000 funded from Designated Fund 5434.
• Sheriff-Jail- One (1) Live Scan Palm Reader- $15,500 funded from the Criminal Justice
Facilities Designated Fund.
• Environmental Health-One (1) 4X4 Sports Utility Vehicle- $32,000 funded from the
LPA Enforcement Grant
• Airport- Parking Lot Improvement Project- $41,000.
• Public Works-Roads & Bridges
o Two (2) Message Sign Trailers at a cost of $17,500 each, for a total of $35,000.
o One (1) Vacuum Trailer- $50,000.
o One {1) Printer for Surveyor's Office- $18,000.
• Public Works-Integrated Waste Management
o One {1) Air Curtain Wood burner- $135,000.
• Public Works-Transit
o One (1) Intercity Bus- $93,553.
o Three {3) Class C buses at a cost of $92,845 each, for a total of $278,534.
o Two (2) Class C buses at a cost of $92,845 each, for a total of $185,689.
o Two (2) Mini Vans Class D at a cost of $45,646 each, for a total of $91,292.
o One (1) Maintenance Truck- $32,000.
o Bus Shelter Improvements/Lighting- $314,538.
• Public Works-Murphys Lighting District- Two (2) new lights at a total cost of $55,000.
• Health & Human Services-Human Services
o One (1) Vehicle- $35,000 (will surplus two older, high-mileage vehicles).
o One (1) Network Color Copier/Printer- $18,000.
• Health & Human Services-Public Health
o One (1) Vehicle- $35,000
• Health & Human Services-Mental Health
o Four (4) Vehicles at a cost of $35,000 each, for a total of $140,000 (will surplus
four older, high-mileage vehicles).
o One (1) Network Copier/printer- $16,000.
Other Additions
In departmental budget meetings, it was determined that certain line items within department
budgets were under funded. This was because the budget submitted had either already met or
exceeded the required status quo budget. In discussions with those departments, it was
determined that it was necessary to augment those line items to bring the amount of the
appropriation closer to the projected need of the department. These augmentations included:
• Facilities- Public Works overhead costs- $44,623. When Facilities was moved from the
Administrative Office to Public Works in FY 2014-15, the cost of oversight of the division
by Public Works Administration was not included in the budget. The estimated cost of
the PW overhead has been added to the Facilities budget and will be recouped in part
through the Indirect Cost Allocation Plan in future years.
• District Attorney- Litigation and Expert Witness costs- $25,000.
• Public Defender -Increased contract costs for recently approved contract amendment$
20,602.
• Sheriff: - Increase to Overtime- $77,000; increase to Vehicle Maintenance- $40,000;
and increase to Gas & Oil - $87,000.
• Agriculture- Wildlife Services contract increase- $15,721.
Teeter Funds
The Recommended Budget utilizes $978,303 in Teeter Funds to balance the general fund.
Included in the $978,303 is the $250,000 annual General Fund contribution transferred to
offset the loss of penalty and interest income to the General Fund when the County decided to
participate in the Teeter Plan. This is a significant improvement over the prior fiscal year when
Teeter Funds totaling $1,814,438 were used to balance the FY 2014-15 Adopted Budget and
$3,379,906 were required to balance the budget in FY 2013-14.
Teeter Funds in the amount of $1.5 million is included in the budget to fund improvements to
the County's Information Technology (IT) infrastructure. As the Board is aware, earlier this year
the county experienced a catastrophic failure of one of our servers. This failed server affected
every department. It took over a week and countless hours of staff time to identify, repair and
restore information stored on the server. It has been over eight years since the county has
invested in its IT infrastructure. As a result, many of IT systems are at or near end of life. If we
fail to take steps now, the county may continue to experience system failures, potentially worse
than the one we had this past spring. The IT department has identified the most critical areas
that need to be addressed over the next two years, how the project will benefit the county, the
risks of not moving forward with the project and the potential range of costs associated with
each of the identified needs. The total estimated costs of the proposed projects range from a
low of $1.2 million to $2.5 million. IT will bring each project to the Board for approval once the
project is fully vetted and actual costs are known. It is important to understand that investing in
our IT infrastructure will not be a one-time cost, but by necessity will be an ongoing expense in
order to maintain equipment in the future.

Although Teeter funds may continue to be used to balance the budget until such time as
general fund revenues and expenditures are aligned, we hope that the amount required will
continue to be reduced with each successive fiscal year, providing an ongoing funding source
for IT infrastructure and other capital needs.
Other Issues to Monitor
Future Increases in Salaries and Benefits
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget contains a full year of the across-the-board, four
percent (4%) salary increase (effective January 15, 2015) which was approved by the Board in
December 2012 for the Deputy Sheriff's Association and January 2013 for all other employees.
All current labor contracts expire December 31, 2015. Negotiations with all bargaining units
will begin in the coming months.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes $6.4 million, of which $4.2 million is General
Fund, to fund the County's annual payments to PERS for employee retirement costs. In FY 2015-
16, PERS will begin phasing in increased costs due to amortization and smoothing policies.
Additional PERS assumption changes will be implemented in FY 2016-17 based on projections
that retirees are living longer, therefore collecting pension payments longer. As a result of
these changes, the County's PERS payment obligation is anticipated to increase by 50% or more
by 2020.
The Sheriff's Office is facing an ongoing challenge to recruit and retain Deputies and
Correctional Officers. It is vitally important to have a static and stable workforce prior to adding
new positions. Even then, it's important to rebuild slowly as revenues allow, to avoid the
possibility of future layoffs should the economy face another downturn. The Sheriff's Office is
working with the Administrative Office and Human Resources to review and update the
Sheriff's Recruit program, as well as, review and modify a Sheriff's Intern program recently
adopted by Stanislaus County to better fit the needs of our county. It is hopeful that these two
programs will assist in the recruitment and retention of Deputies and Correctional Officers.
Other General Fund Departments will need to begin the process of succession planning and
reorganizing/rebuilding staff in future years. Many of those departments, such as but not
limited to, Facilities, the Auditor/Controller, Assessor, and Treasurer/Tax Collector Offices,
experienced significant staffing reductions during the past eight years and struggle to provide
services to the public, maintain Government Center buildings and grounds, and keeping current
with ever-increasing workloads.
Finally, FY 2016-17 includes a 2ih pay period, for which the Board has planned and set aside
funding.

State and Federal Funding
The County receives significant funding from the state and federal government to administer
health, welfare, transportation, and public safety programs. As proposed, the Governor's May
Revise Budget for FY 2015-16 reflects increased state revenues. However, the projected
increase of revenues will have a minimal impact on the County as the largest share of the
revenues will go to Proposition 98 (education), the State's "Rainy Day" Fund, and paying down
state debt.
The issue of transportation funding is a high priority for counties. State and federal gas taxes
have not increased in over 20 years, while increased road construction/maintenance costs,
improved fuel efficiency, and the move to non-gasoline vehicles have eroded the buying power
of these funding streams. The recent drop in gas prices has resulted in counties, cities, and the
state losing hundreds of millions of dollars. Calaveras County has included a loss of nearly $1
million in transportation funding in the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget. Senator Jim Beall
has proposed two bills to address transportation funding, SB 321 and SB 16. SB 321 will make a
technical fix to the complex process for setting the gasoline excise tax rate under the gas swap,
while maintaining revenue-neutrality with the former sales tax on gasoline. SB 321 will prevent
a massive decrease in transportation funding in FY 2015-16 and reduce drastic rate hikes in the
future. SB 16 is a five-year funding plan which would raise about $3.5 billion a year, split
equally between the state and local systems. SB 16 strikes a balance by ensuring existing
transportation revenues fund transportation projects, and increasing targeted taxes and fees.
However, any legislative plan that raises revenues will require two-thirds vote of the
Legislature.
Budget subcommittees in both houses of the Legislature have approved the $644,000 for FY
2015-16 Payment in Lieu of Taxes {PILT), as well as $8 million in back payments. In addition, the
budget subcommittees have rejected the Administration's proposal to make the program
permissive rather than required. PILT funds offset the loss of tax revenue and help local
agencies provide necessary services.
The State agreed to repay the pre-2004 SB 90 Mandate Debt owed to local entities. The State
will issue the warrants for the debt principal on June 26, 2015. Counties can expect to receive
the warrant a week after issuance. The debt interest will be issued the following week. As
these funds will not be received until after June 30, 2015, the revenue has been included in the
FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget. The County was informed that it will receive an additional
$397,868.
These and other State legislative actions impact the citizens and businesses and overall
economy of Calaveras County. Continued implementation of the Federal Affordable Care Act
will also affect the county as an employer and as a provider of services to recipients of health
related services.

Conclusions
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget is balanced and includes a reduction in the reliance of
one-time funds as the county strives to align annual revenues with expenditures. This is a
critical step towards financial sustainability. The budget remains vulnerable to external forces
and the economy but decreased reliance on one-time funding improves the County's ability to
react, if faced with another economic downturn. Past experience has shown a cycle of
economic decline every five years followed by a period of recovery. It should be noted that the
economy is now in its sixth year of recovery from the ''great" recession. However, while the
metropolitan and coastal areas of the state have experienced significant economic growth, that
hasn't held true for the inland and rural counties who are faced with a much slower recovery.
It is unknown what impact the specter of a continued drought will have on the economy locally
and statewide.
The Recommended Budget includes $2.4 million in General Fund Reserve funding and $819,488
in contingencies. These funds may be required to replace unanticipated revenue losses, fund
unplanned cost increases, costs associated with emergencies, and to meet cash requirements
necessary to satisfy the County's municipal credit rating. In addition, should the year-end
General Fund balance and/or Property Tax Roll be higher than estimated, it is recommended
that the additional funds be used to increase contingencies. The 2% included in the
Recommended Budget is less than ideal given the current drought situation and extreme fire
damage and is less than the 3-4% state in the Board's adopted budget principles. In an effort to
grow the General Fund Reserve for periods of economic downtimes, the Board may wish to
consider adopting a policy that will transfer a percentage of the unspent year-end fund balance
to the General Fund Reserve at the end of each fiscal year. This will gradually increase the
General Fund Reserve in future years and provide a measure of stability and reduce the need
for budget reductions and layoffs should the county be faced with another severe recession.
The County's primary source of revenue is property taxes, and although the housing market in
California is rebounding, the local market lags behind urban and coastal areas and is expected
to slowly grow over the next several years. Current projections are that the County's property
tax revenues will increase by 4% in FY 2015-16.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Preparation of the county budget is a significant work effort which requires the dedication of
resources from every county department. I would like to acknowledge and thank every county
department head and their staff for assisting in this effort, with a special thanks to the AuditorController.
I would like to thank and acknowledge the Board for their leadership and
commitment to serving all of the people of Calaveras County. I would especially like to thank
CAO staff, Mary Rose and Karen, for their assistance and hard work preparing the budget.