Executive Summary
The County Administrative Office (CAD) is pleased to forward to the Board of Supervisors
(Board) the Fiscal Year 2014-15 Recommended Budget (Recommended Budget) for its
consideration . Recommended Budget Hearings will begin on Tuesday, June 10, at 2:30 PM and
will continue through Tuesday, June 17, or until the Board, by formal action approves the
Recommended Budget.
The Recommended Budget for all funds includes revenues of $97.6 million and appropriations
of $109.3 million. Fund balances of $11.7 million are used to finance the difference between
appropriations and revenues. The Recommended Budget Fund Recapitulation summarizes the
revenues, appropriations, and fund balances, for all county funds and is in included in the
recommended budget binder. Across all funds, full time equivalent (FTE) staffing in the
Recommended Budget totals 483.02 FTEs, which is a reduction of 26.79 FTEs from the 509.81
FTEs adopted in the FY 2013-14 Final Budget.
The general fund is a subset of the total budget and contains the discretionary funds over which
the Board has the most control. For FY 2014-15 the general fund includes revenues of $33
million and appropriations of $37.4 million. The general fund budget is balanced using
projected one-time resources including $2.7 million in FY 2013-14 fund balance and an $1.8
million transfer from the Teeter Fund. This represents a significant reduction in the year-overyear
use of one-time funding ($2.7 million) to balance the annual operating cost of the general
fund and is a very positive step towards improved financial stability for the County.
The Recommended Budget includes a general fund reserve of $2.4 million, which represents
6.5% of general fund appropriations; and $1.1 million (3%) is budgeted for general fund
contingencies. General fund staffing included in the Recommended Budget totals 258.87 FTEs
which is a reduction of 22.35 FTEs over the FY 2013-14 Final Budget.
As presented, the Recommended Budget includes a $2.3 million reduction in the general fund
contribution. This was achieved through the efforts and support of every county department.
Staffing and funding reductions in the general fund will impact the level of services provided to
891 MOlllltaill Rallc" Rd ~ Sail Andreas, CA 95249 Tel: (209) 754-6025 0 Fax: (209) 754-6316
the public and Board. It is impossible to continuously reduce resources without an associated
reduction in service levels. Departments already prioritize workload and by necessity higher
priority work takes precedence. Budget reductions will in some departments result in delayed
response times and non-mandated services may no longer be provided.
Budgets are a planning document, and like all plans, include projections for what will occur in
the future. The Recommended Budget includes projected year-end fund balances and projected
property tax revenues. A significant change in either of these numbers will impact the
Recommended Budget. The property tax roll will close on July 1, and the actual FY 2013-14
general fund balance will be known in late July, when the current fiscal year is closed and all
associated adjustments are made. Any significant changes in the Recommended Budget will be
addressed in September when the Final Budget is presented to the Board.
The Board may be asked to delay budget reductions until the current fiscal year is closed and
actual year end fund balances known. I urge the Board not to delay implementing the
reductions included in the Recommended Budget. Any delay will result in the need to cut
deeper to achieve the same level of budget savings over a shorter time-frame.
Budget Development Process
The county budget content, adoption procedures, and dates by which certain actions must be
taken are guided by The County Budget Act (Government Code §29000 et. Seq.), administrative
directives, and recommended practices which are published by the State Controller in the
County Budget Guide. The Recommended Budget was prepared pursuant to state law and in
conformance with the County Budget Guide and Board direction. The County Budget Act
(Government Code §29064(a)) requires the Board to adopt the Recommended Budget by June
30. A copy of the County Budget Act is included in the budget binder.
FY 2013-14 Mid-Year Board Direction
On February 25, 2014, during the FY 2013-14 Mid-Year Budget Report, the CAO projected an $8
million deficit in the FY 2014-15 budget, if actions were not taken by the Board to reduce
expenditures financed by the general fund. The Board took immediate actions to reduce
appropriations in FY 2013-14 and provided the policy directions for preparation of
Recommended Budget which included:
 to maximize current year savings, authorized the CAO and Auditor-Controller to move
$947,719 in FY 2013-14 General Fund appropriations, which were projected to remain
unspent by year end, into contingencies
 to minimize future layoffs and contain salary and benefit costs, approved a hard hiring
freeze with exceptions to be approved by the CAO prior to departments hiring, promoting
or otherwise increasing personnel costs
 to identify cost savings and revenue generating ideas, directed the CAO to consider
suggestions from SEIU, county staff, department heads, the public, etc.
 to begin the multi-year process to align general fund expenditures and revenues, seek to
achieve a $2.5 million general fund reduction in FY 2014-15
The Recommended Budget instructions provided to county departments included a reduced
general fund contribution target. To arrive at the initial target, the CAO compared each
department's FY 2012-13 general fund contribution to the amount the department would
receive if their FY 2013-14 general fund contribution was reduced by 10%. One-time
expenditures and other adjustments were made to arrive at the initial reduction target.
Once budgets were submitted, the CAO, Auditor-Controller and Human Resources Director met
with departments to discuss their proposed reductions and in some cases additional
adjustments were made to the target. The Recommended Budget includes general fund
contribution reductions ranging from 0% - 42.9%. A copy of each department's general fund
contribution reduction target and actual general fund contribution is included in the budget
binder.
The degree to which general fund departments depend on a general fund contribution varies
dependent on other sources of revenue. Some departments have significant, department
specific revenues and designated fund balances that can be drawn upon to support their
operations. Other general fund departments are anticipating reductions in other revenue
sources as well as the general fund contribution. In short, there are a number of factors that
were considered in establishing the initial general fund reduction target.
Recommended Budget at a Glance
Total Budget Summary
Recommended budget revenues for all funds, departments and programs total $97.6 million
and appropriations $109.3 million. Fund equity of $11.7 is used to balance the budget.

As stated previously, the general fund is a subset of the total budget and contains the
discretionary funds over which the Board has the most control. The general fund is the focus of
the majority of our budget discussions. This is in part due to the fact that the Board has greater
control over the allocation of resources in the general fund, and also because many of the most
visible services, such as public safety, are financed by the general fund.
General fund revenues are the sources of money used to pay for general fund expenditures. Of
the total $33 million in general fund revenues approximately $18 million (55%) are truly
discretionary and can be allocated by the Board to county departments to support the Board's
priorities. The remaining $15 million (45%) of general fund revenues are dedicated to specific
purposes. For example, Prop 172 sales tax of approximately $1.7 million must be used by the
Board to support public safety, and charges for services can only be used to fund the cost to
provide the service for which the fee is charged.
Figure 3 below provides a comparison of general fund revenues by classification and compares
the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget to the FY 2013-14 Final Adopted Budget. As indicated in
Figure 3, general fund revenues are flat, with an overall increase of $731,138 or 2.3% projected
for FY 2014-15. This slight increase in revenue, in combination with expenditure reductions
provide for a 46% reduction in the use of Teeter funds.

Taxes account for $12.9 Million (39%) of the total $33 Million in general fund revenue. Of that
total $9.6 million (74%) is local property tax which is projected to increase by $96,211(1%) in FY
2014-15. Other significant changes in general fund revenues include:
 $595,421 decrease to Charges for Services, the largest portion of which, $468,350 can
be attributed to a reduction in A-87 Revenues.
 $1,220,537 increase to Other Financing Sources. This is related to a change in
accounting practices. In prior fiscal years, reimbursed expenses were budgeted as a
negative appropriation. In FY 2014/15 reimbursed expenses are budgeted as a revenue
- County Reimbursement, accounting for the significant increase in Other Financing
Sources.
 $237,334 decrease to Operating Transfer In due to the elimination of a one-time
transfer in from the General Liability Insurance Designated Fund.
General Fund Appropriations
FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget general fund department appropriations include an overall
reduction of $2.0 million (5%) over the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. The largest year over year
decrease is in public safety. Even with the reduction, public safety appropriations at $17.1
million are 46% of the overall general fund budget. This is a reflection of the Board's continued
support for public safety as the highest spending priority.
In Figure 4 below, general fund appropriations are organized on the basis of six functional areas
including: general government, public safety, records and land use, health and human services,
education and recreation, and other. These functions reflect the broad cross section of
programs and services provided by general fund departments. Figure 4 provides a summary of
the Recommended Budget appropriations by functional area, and compares them the FY 2013-14 Final Adopted Budget.

General fund department appropriations by expenditure category provide a different look at
how the $37.4 million is divided (see Figure 3 below). Salaries and benefits account for $22.7
million (61%), services and supplies $10 million (27%), and $1.1 million is budgeted for
contingencies. The remaining $3.6 million is distributed between other expenditure
classifications. The largest year-over-year percentage change is in other financing uses. The
increase in this expenditure category is due to a change in accounting practice.

To achieve necessary reductions in general fund departments 19.5 vacant and 5.05 filled
positions are recommended to be eliminated. In addition, there is one partial retirement and
three positions that have taken a voluntary reduction in time reducing each of those four
positions from 1.0 FTE to 0.6 FTE. Figure 6 below provides a list of the positions and indicates
whether the position is filled or vacant. Although general fund resources are not saved by
eliminating unfunded positions, the elimination of these positions provides a more accurate
accounting of the number of county positions by department and minimizes departments
seeking to fill or move people into positions for which no funding has been authorized by the
Board.

The recommendation to reduce staff, particularly filled positions, is a recommendation of last
resort. Mitigation efforts have and will be taken to minimize to the extent possible the number
of layoffs in FY 2014-15. This includes looking to move potentially impacted individuals into
vacant, funded non-general fund positions, the elimination of positions through attrition,
continuation of a hard hiring freeze, and the consolidation of departments or divisions to
achieve efficiencies and cost savings.
The county provides services and like most service providers our largest expense is salaries and
benefits. Salaries and benefits represent 61% of general fund expenditures. Multiple years of
budget cuts, have resulted in the reduction or elimination of one-time and non-labor related
expenses. At this time, it is very difficult to achieve on-going savings without reductions in the
cost of labor.
Salary and benefit cost reductions can be achieved in two ways - by reducing the number of
positions or by maintaining the number of positions and reducing the cost to fund them. The
Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (MMBA) mandates the process through which the County meets and
confers in good faith (negotiates) with employees on matters relating to employment. Changes
in employment related matters, such as changes in salaries and benefits, reductions in hours,
etc, would be negotiated through a meet and confer process. The process is lengthy and with
new fact finding and other requirements could take in excess of 12 months to conclude.
The Recommended Budget does not include reductions that require a meet and confer process.
However, the CAD believes that salary and benefit changes will be necessary to balance the
budget in FY 2015-16 and beyond. As a result the Board should be prepared to initiate the meet
and confer process in FY 2014-15.
In addition to the recommended staffing reductions, there are four general fund position
changes included in the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget. They are:
 County Counsel- Reclassification of a Legal Clerical Assistant to a Paralegal. This will
allow for the assignment of certain activities that would otherwise be performed by an
attorney. These activities would include coordination of Public Record Act request,
initial preparation of pleadings and discovery documents coordination and monitoring
of claims and adjustments of claims and oversee court ordered public defender costs.
This will help offset the loss of one attorney due to the pending retirement of County
Counsel.
 Planning - Reclassification of a Planner I to Administrative Assistant II. The employee
in this role does primarily administrative work, including accounts payable, preparation
of Planning Commission minutes and agendas, provides administrative support to staff,
and handles reception duties. This reclassification will recognize the current work
performed by the incumbent.
 Environmental Management Agency - Transfer a Registered Environmental Health
Specialist (REHS) position from Onsite Wastewater to Environmental Health. This
position is currently vacant in Dnsite Wastewater. Environmental Health will provide
funding for the REHS position through the Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA)
related Underground Storage Tank and Local Primacy Agency-Small Public Water System
grant funds.
 Calaveras Adult Tutoring - Literacy Program Coordinator increase from 0.8 FTE to 1.0
FTE. The additional 0.2FTE will be funded through the AB 109 spending plan for FY 2014-
15.
 County Administrative Office - Transfer the Administrative Analyst from the County
Administrative Office to Buildings and Grounds. The Administrative Analyst manages
the facilities maintenance and custodial employees. This position is also responsible for
the oversight of the CGL Kitchell maintenance contract for the new Jail and Sheriffs
Office. The transfer of Building and Grounds to Public Works better aligns functions and
responsibilities and the transfer of the Administrative Analyst position provides an
individual to continue to oversee these functions.
 County Administrative Office - Reclassification of the Director of Human Resources
and Risk Management to Assistant CAO-Human Resources. This will accompany the
planned consolidation of Human Resources back into the Administrative Office. Human
Resources was part of the CAO until 2009 at which time a separate department was
created. Merging this function back into the CAO office will result in an on-going cost
savings and better coordination and alignment of administrative functions.
Non-General Fund Staffing Changes
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget also includes staffing changes to Non-General Fund
Departments. They are:
 Public Works:
o Deputy Director Public Works (PW) Engineering - Transfer from PW
Administration to PW Roads Engineering
o Public Works Analyst - Transfer from PW Roads and Bridges to PW
Administration
o Administrative Services Officer - Transfer from PW Roads and Bridges to PW
Administration
o Public Works Analyst II - reclassification to a Public Works Analyst III. Public
Works unfunded the Transit Manager position in the FY 2014-15 Recommended
Budget. This reclassification will allow the PW Analyst to take on a large share of
the Transit Management duties in lieu of funding the Transit Manager position.
o Junior Engineer - New position request. This position is needed to provide
support to the Roads and Bridges Capital Improvement Program and move away
from consultants contracted at a much higher cost.
 Health and Human Services:
o Eligibility Supervisor - eliminate 1.0 vacant position.
o Eligibility Workers - eliminate 6.0 vacant positions.
o Clerical Assistant III - eliminate 1.0 vacant position.
o Office Technician - downgrade to Clerical Assistant 1/11- this position is vacant.

o Clerical Assistant 1/11- transfer from Public Health to Social Services
o Clinician 1/11 - New 0.5 FTE position request. This position will be a liaison
between Child Welfare and Behavioral Health Services. Since the advent of the
Katie A lawsuit, coordination, planning and receipt of services for children within
the Child Welfare System has received heighten attention and requires frequent
reporting to the state. This position will be fund through Child Welfare Services.
o Community Services Liaison - increase time for three positions from 0.48 FTE to
0.5 FTE in an effort to attract and retain qualified personnel.
o Case Manager 1/11- New position request. This position will act as a Sheriff's
liaison and will be tasked with crisis intervention services during evening and
weekend hours facilitating a stronger coordination of care to mentally ill
consumers. This position will be funded under the provisions of Senate Bill 82,
Triage Grant services.
Multi-Year General Fund Step-Down Required
As previously discussed with the Board, the general fund structural deficit created by increasing
expenditures and flat revenues cannot be reduced in one-year without devastating impacts on
mandated services. The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget is a very positive step in a planned
three-year step-down that once complete, will result in a new general fund baseline from which
the Board can rebuild as revenues rise. It is hoped that as permanent reductions are phased in
over the next three years, revenues will begin to increase so that the full $8 Million in cuts may
not ultimately be required. In the absence of a significant, unanticipated increase in revenues,
reductions similar to the level included in the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget will be
required in FY 2015-16.
Teeter Funds
The Recommended Budget utilizes $1,814,438 in Teeter Funds to balance the general fund. This
is a significant improvement over the prior fiscal year when Teeter Funds totaling $3,379,906
were required to balance the budget. Teeter Funds will continue to be used to balance the
budget until such time as general fund revenues and expenditures are aligned. An updated
Teeter balance chart will be included in the budget presentation to the Board.
Other Issues to Monitor
Future Increases in Salaries and Benefits
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget contains six months of the across-the-board, four
percent (4%) salary increase (effective January 15, 2015) which was approved by the Board in
December 2012 for the Deputy Sheriff's Association and January 2013 for all other employees.
In FY 2015-16 the Budget will contain a full year of the increased salaries, and the associated
increases in PERS and other county costs that rise in direct proportion to salary increases.

The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget includes $5 million, of which $3.7 million is General
Fund, to fund for the County's annual payment to PERS for employee retirement costs. In FY
2015-16, PERS will begin phasing in increased costs due to amortization and smoothing policies.
Additional PERS assumption changes will be implemented in FY 2016-17 based on projections
that retirees are living longer, therefore collecting pension payments longer. As a result of
these changes, the County's PERS payment obligation is anticipated to increase by 50% or more
by 2020.
Finally, FY 2015-16 includes a 27th pay period, for which the Board has planned and set aside
funding.
Sheriff's Office and Jail Project
The Sheriff's Office and Jail Project will be complete and fully occupied by June 30 of this year.
The State Fire Marshall approved occupancy of the Sheriff's Office and the Jail on March 14,
2014. Final training and punch list items are in progress with occupancy of the Jail planned for
mid-June. This marks a major milestone in the history of the county. The current and past
Board's, Sheriff and his staff, CGL Kitchell, Flintco, and everyone else involved in the planning
and execution of this project deserve tremendous credit and thanks.
FY 2014-15 will be the first full year of operations of these new facilities and actual experience
in the facilities will establish the baseline for ongoing operations and maintenance costs. Jail
staffing will be evaluated to determine if current levels are sufficient to safely operate the new
facility. Any increase in jail staffing will be an added general fund expense. Similarly, actual
utility costs will be established which too may require a general fund increase. In February
2014, the Board approved a 3-year agreement with CGL Kitchell for maintenance of the
Sheriff's Office and Jail, and approved the addition of two county custodial staff to provide
janitorial services. The $350,000 annual cost for maintenance and janitorial services is included
in the Recommended Budget.
State and Federal Funding
The County receives significant funding from the state and federal government to administer
health, welfare, transportation, and public safety programs. As proposed, the Governor's May
Revise Budget for FY 2014-15 reflects increased state revenues, and will have minimal impact
on the County. The County may receive additional transportation funding and an additional $30
- $40 thousand in one time funding if the Governor's proposed acceleration of a $100 million
statewide mandate repayment is approved. Other State actions may decrease overtime
payments for In-Home Support Service providers and accelerate increases in the minimum
wage. These and other State legislative actions impact the citizens and businesses and overall
economy of Calaveras County. It is unclear what actions the Federal Government will take to
reduce the Federal deficit, but as a major funding source for the State and the County, the
Federal Budget discussions remain an issue to watch. Continued implementation of the Federal
Affordable Care Act will also affect the county as an employer and as a provider of services to
reCipients of health related services.

Potential increased Court Security Funding
The county may benefit from State Budget trailer bill language crafted in response to our
lawsuit against the State Administrative Office of the Courts, in which we asked for additional
funding for increased court security costs required by the programmatic changes resulting from
the State Court move to a significantly larger and more complex Courthouse. If passed by the
legislature, the trailer bill language establishes a process through which the County can apply
for a share of $1 million in additional court security funding. In FY2014-15, Calaveras and San
Benito are the only counties eligible to apply for these funds. Staff, through the California State
Association of Counties (CSAC) and the California State Sheriff's Association (CSSA) are
advocating for passage of this bill which is critical to ensure the State pays the full cost for
mandated court security provided by the County Sheriff.
Conclusions
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget is balanced and includes general fund cost reductions
necessary to align annual revenues with expenditures. This is a critical step towards financial
sustainability. The budget remains vulnerable to external forces and the economy but
decreased reliance on one-time funding improves the County's ability to react, if faced with
another economic downturn.
The Recommended Budget includes $2.4 million in general fund reserve funding and $1.1
million in contingencies. These funds may be required to replace unanticipated revenue losses,
fund unplanned cost increases, costs associated with emergencies, and to meet cash
requirements necessary to satisfy the County's municipal credit rating.
The County's primary source of revenue is property taxes, and although the housing market in
California is rebounding, the local market continues to lag with anticipated slow growth over
the next several years. Current projections, which are conservatively estimated, are that the
County's property tax revenues will increase by 1% in FY 2014-15, and 2% annually thereafter.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget contains a $2.3 million reduction in the general fund
contribution to general fund departments. Budgeting for this level of reduction is just the first
step; actually achieving it will require spending discipline on the part of every department and
the Board.
AKNOWLEDGMENTS
Preparation of the county budget is a significant work effort which requires the dedication of
resources from every county department. I would like to acknowledge and thank every county
department head and their staff for assisting in this effort, with a special thanks to the AuditorController.
I would like to thank and acknowledge the Board for their leadership and
commitment to serving all of the people of Calaveras County.