The County Administrative Officer (CAO) is pleased to forward to the Board of Supervisors the Fiscal Year 2016-17 Recommended Budget (Recommended Budget) for its consideration. Recommended Budget Hearings will begin on Tuesday, June 14, at 1:30 PM and will continue through Friday, June 17, or until the Board, by formal action approves the Recommended Budget.
FY 2015-2016 brought many challenges to the County. The Butte Fire was one of the worst disasters in the history of the County, burning 70,868 acres and destroying or damaging 965 structures and the loss of two lives. Response and recovery efforts have significantly affected all departments as the county struggles to assist fire victims with debris removal and rebuilding efforts, tree debris removal and repair of roads, and meeting FEMA and California Disaster Assistance Act (CDAA) claiming and reimbursement requirements. Following close on the heels of the Butte Fire, has been the Tree Mortality Emergency. A Board approved task force has been developed to deal with this ongoing emergency. Additionally, due to changes to state law, many hours have been spent on the issue of Medicinal Marijuana Cultivation. These issues, along with normal county operations, have strained county resources. The county is resilient however and continues to move forward.
Given the impact of these events, the Recommended Budget for all funds includes revenues of $123.4 million and appropriations of $140.8 million. Fund balances of $17.4 million are used to finance the difference between appropriations and revenues. The Recommended Budget Fund Recapitulation summarizes the revenues, appropriations, and fund balances, for all county funds and is included in the Recommended Budget Binder.
The General Fund is a subset of the total budget and contains the discretionary funds over which the Board has the most control. For FY 2016-17 the General Fund includes revenues of $50.6 million and appropriations of $53.6 million. The General Fund budget is balanced using projected one-time resources including $3 million in FY 2015-16 fund balance and a $1,849,513 transfer from the Teeter Fund. This represents an increase of $871,210 in the year-over-year use of one-time funding ($978,303) to balance the annual operating cost of the General Fund.
The Recommended Budget includes a General Fund reserve of $2.4 million, which represents 4.6% of General Fund appropriations; and $833,255 (2% of appropriations when adjusted for Butte Fire costs) is budgeted for General Fund contingencies. Per the Board's adopted budget principles, contingencies should be increased to 3-4% of General Fund appropriations at Final Budget.
Budgets are a planning document, and like all plans, include projections for what will occur in the future. The Recommended Budget includes projected year-end fund balances and projected property tax revenues. A significant change in either of these numbers will impact the Recommended Budget. The property tax roll will close on July 31st this year due to the Butte Fire impacts to the Assessor's Office, and the actual FY 2015-16 General Fund balance will be known in late July to early August, when the current fiscal year is closed and all associated adjustments are made. Any significant changes in the Recommended Budget will be addressed in September when the Final Budget is presented to the Board.
Budget Development Process
The county budget content, adoption procedures, and dates by which certain actions must be taken are guided by The County Budget Act (Government Code §29000 et. Seq.), administrative directives, and recommended practices which are published by the State Controller in the County Budget Guide. The Recommended Budget was prepared pursuant to state law and in conformance with the County Budget Guide and Board direction. The County Budget Act (Government Code §29064(a)) requires the Board to adopt the Recommended Budget by June 30. A copy of the County Budget Act is included in the budget binder.
FY 2015-16 Mid-Year Board Direction
On March 8, 2016, during the FY 2015-16 Mid-Year Budget Report, the CAO reported on status of the current year budget, discussed the adjustments that were made to the Adopted Budget as a result of the Butte Fire and discussed concerns regarding future financial constraints due to recovery efforts, reimbursements from FEMA and CDAA for eligible Butte Fire related costs and the County's required share of cost for response and recovery. Also discussed was the impact of the fire to property tax revenues, an allocation to backfill those revenues that was included in the Governor's January FY 2016-17 Budget release, and legislation put forth by Assemblyman Bigelow and Senator Berryhill to provide the county relief from the property tax losses and county share of cost. With so much uncertainty, the CAO requested that the Board direct staff to prepare a status quo budget.
Subsequently, the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget instructions were sent to county departments requiring a status quo budget, whereby department's General Fund contributions remain at the same level as included in the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. However, departments were not required to absorb the cost of 27th pay date that occurs in FY 2016-17. Over the past eleven years, the County has been setting funds aside to cover those costs. In addition, these funds will cover the increases to health insurance contributions and uniform allowances included in the 18-month contract extensions negotiated with all bargaining units 
except the Sheriffs Management Unit (SMU). The CAO recognized that a status quo budget would still be difficult for some departments that are already operating with minimum staffing levels, and any further reductions could mean the elimination of services to the community, but it was a starting point for budget discussions.
Once budgets were submitted, the CAO and/or Senior Administrative Analyst, Auditor- Controller and Deputy CAO-Human Resources/Risk Management met with departments to discuss their proposed budgets and potential impacts to services. It was determined during the course of the budget meetings that certain departments would be unable to maintain a status quo General Fund contribution and provide the necessary services to the community. The degree to which General Fund departments depend on a General Fund contribution varies dependent upon the size of the department and other available sources of revenue. While some departments have significant, department specific revenues and designated fund balances that can be drawn upon to support their operations, other general fund departments have limited resources and rely mainly on their General Fund contribution.
Recommended Budget at a Glance
Total Budget Summary
Recommended budget revenues for all funds, departments and programs total $123.4 million and appropriations $140.8 million. Fund equity of $17.4 is used to balance the budget.
Significant budget changes since the adoption of the FY 2015-16 Budget include:
•	Inclusion of $10.6 million in General Fund appropriations and revenue related to the Butte Fire Recovery and Tree Mortality;
•	Inclusion of $1 million in revenues and appropriations related to adoption of the Medical Marijuana Cultivation Urgency Ordination adopted in FY 2015-16;
•	Appropriations for ongoing Information Technology (IT) infrastructure projects funded with Teeter funds are budgeted in Capital Improvements as opposed to the General Fund in the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget;
•	$3.2 million increase to salary and benefits due step increases, longevity increase, and negotiated increases to county contributions for health insurance and uniform allowances. The large contribution to the increase to salary and benefits is due to the 27th pay date falling in FY 2016-17. General Fund costs for the additional pay date are offset by transfers in from the Designated Fund created for this purpose.
The General Fund
As stated previously, the General Fund is a subset of the total budget and contains the discretionary funds over which the Board has the most control. The General Fund is the focus of the majority of our budget discussions. This is in part due to the fact that the Board has greater control over the allocation of resources in the General Fund, and also because many of the most visible services, such as public safety, are financed by the General Fund.
General fund revenues are the sources of money used to pay for General Fund expenditures. Of the total $50.6 million in General Fund revenues approximately $19.1 million (37.7%) are truly discretionary and can be allocated by the Board to county departments to support the Board's priorities. The remaining $31.5 million (62.33%) of General Fund revenues are dedicated to specific purposes. For example, Prop 172 sales tax of approximately $1.75 million must be used by the Board to support public safety, charges for services can only be used to fund the cost to provide the service for which the fee is charged, $400,000 in Tobacco Settlement Funds are for the debt service payments on the Certificates of Participation, $1 million in registration fees for administration and enforcement of the Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation Program and while Teeter Funds have been included to close the budget gap, they are, by Board direction, designated for Technological improvements.
Figure 2 below provides a comparison of General Fund revenues by classification and compares the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget to the FY 2015-16 Final Adopted Budget. When adjusted for slightly over $10.6 million associated with the Butte Fire Recovery in Figure 3, General Fund revenues have remained basically unchanged from FY 2015-16.
Taxes account for $13.8 Million (27.2%) of the total $50.6 million in General Fund revenue. When adjusted for the Butte Fire reimbursements, the percentage increased to 34.4% of General Fund revenue. Of that total, $10.1 million (73%) is local property tax which is projected to remain unchanged in FY 2016-17 due to the state budget allocation to backfill property tax losses due to the Butte Fire. Other significant changes in general fund revenues include:
•	$523,281 due to projected increase in Building Permits and Franchise Fees;
•	$10.2 million increase to Intergovernmental Revenue-Federal due to projected reimbursement from FEMA for the Butte Fire response and recovery;
•	$225,206 decrease to Charges for Services, which can be attributed to a decrease in A- 87 Revenues to central service departments;
•	$472,970 reflects the decrease of $1.5 million for IT Infrastructure projects moved to Capital Projects, $1 million transfers in from the Medical Marijuana Designated Fund and transfers in of $1.2 million from the Designated Fund for the 27th pay date.
General Fund Appropriations
FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget General Fund department appropriations include an overall increase of $10.5 million (24.2%) over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. Increased appropriations across all functional groups can be attributed to increases to salary and benefits related to normal step increase and longevities, increased county health insurance contribution, PERS contribution rate increase, the 27th pay date and additional staffing for administration and enforcement of the Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation Program. These issues account for the major portion of the increase to all functional groups. Flowever, the largest increase in overall appropriations of $10.6 million is due to appropriation for Butte Fire recovery efforts. Other Departments include Insurance, which has experienced a $300,000 increase to workers compensation insurance, Contingencies, which was reduced by $400,000 from FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget, and Non-Departmental, which was reduced by $1.5 million due to the above mentioned transfer of IT Infrastructure projects to Capital Projects.
In Figure 3 below, General Fund appropriations are organized on the basis of the six functional areas including: General Government, Public Safety, Records and Land Use, Health and Human Services, Education and Recreation, and Other Departments. These functions reflect the broad cross section of programs and services provided by General Fund departments. Figure 3
provides a summary of the Recommended Budget appropriations by functional area, and compares them to the FY 2015-16 Final Adopted Budget.
General Fund department appropriations by expenditure category provide a different look at how the $53.6 million is divided (see Figure 4 below). Salaries and benefits account for $27.3 million (51%), however when adjusted for the Butte Fire appropriation the percentage increases to 68%. This is mainly attributed to the 27th pay date. Services and supplies account for $23.7 million (44.2%), and $833,255 (2%) is budgeted for contingencies when adjusted for Butte Fire appropriations. The remaining $1.8 million (3.2%) is distributed between other expenditure classifications. As mentioned above, the increase to Salaries and Benefits is mainly due to the 27th pay date, but also includes new positions for the Medical Marijuana Cultivation Program, normal step increases, and an increase to county contributions for health insurance and uniform allowances. Increases to Services and Supplies are attributed to appropriations for the Butte Fire Recovery projects. The negative $1 million in Intrafund Transfers are chargebacks for services between General Fund Departments.  
General Fund Staffing. Capital Asset, and Special Equipment Requests
The County provides services and like most service providers our largest expense is salaries and benefits. Salaries and benefits represent 64% of General Fund appropriations when adjusted for the Butte Fire Recovery costs. The FY 2016-17 Budget Instruction requested that departments submit requests for new positions or reclassifications only if those requests had a funding source other than the General Fund. The CAO and Human Resources reviewed all department requests for new and reclassification of positions. Discussions with departments fully vetted the requests, determining need, ongoing stable funding sources, and appropriateness of the position. Not all requests are being recommended or included in the Recommended Budget.
Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation Registration Program:
On May 10, 2016 the Board adopted an Urgency Ordinance related to the administration and enforcement of the Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation Registration Program. Departments have requested new positions, extra hires, capital assets and other equipment needed for the implementation of this program. It is important to remember the Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation Registration fees are expected to fully fund these positions, capital assets and equipment requests. The appropriations for Departments' requests related to the Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation Registration Program included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget total $1,052,023. As of June 7, 2016, the County has received $131,200 in registration fees. Should revenues from the Registration Fees fall short of what has been anticipated, departments will either need to delay filling the positions and/or purchasing capital assets and equipment or eliminate certain appropriations, otherwise those expenditures in excess of revenues received will require a draw on General Fund contingencies. The County should know the total amount of revenue received from the registration fees by June 30, 2016. The following are departments' requests to implement the Cannabis Cultivation Registration Program:
•	Sheriffs Office:
o New Position - 2.0 FTE Deputy Sheriff l/ll - $224,000 (Board approved 5/24/16) o New Position -1.0 FTE Sergeant - $135,017 o Capital Assets - 2 unmarked 4WD vehicles - $96,000 o Equipment - $14,119
•	Building/Code Enforcement
o New Position - 2.0 FTE Code Enforcement Officer - $160,687 (Board approved 5/24/16)
o Capital Assets - 2 4WD vehicles - $72,000 o Equipment - 2 computers - $4,000
•	County Counsel
o New Position - 1.0 FTE Deputy County Counsel Limited Term - $124,218 (Board approved 5/24/16) o Equipment-1 computer-$2,000
•	Environmental Management - Agriculture
o New Position -1.0 FTE Agriculture Biologist l/ll/ll- $67,993
•	Environmental Management - Onsite Wastewater
o New Position -1.0 FTE Environmental Health Technician l/ll/lll- $64,145
•	Planning
o Extra Hire - 2.0 FTE Planner l/ll - $73,844 o Equipment - 2 computers - $4,000
•	Human Resources
o Overtime specific to recruitment of above positions - $10,000
Other General Fund Department Requests Included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget
As a result of discussions and reviews with Department Heads, the following General Fund position changes and capital assets are also included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget:
•	Administrative Office:
o Extra Hire Public Information Officer (PIO). The extra hire PIO will continue to issue press releases and update the county website and social media sites relative to the Butte Fire recovery, Tree Mortality issues and other information that needs to be relayed to county citizens. The cost of the extra hire PIO is $25,000. Although this is an appropriation of general fund monies, a portion of it may be recoverable under the California Disaster Assistance Act if the County's application for funding under the Tree Mortality Disaster is approved.
•	Information Technology:
o Reclassification of 1.0 FTE Business Analyst l/ll to a Business Analyst III. This position is a critical project management position that works closely with the Auditor-Controller's Office. The position is responsible for the management of projects related to our county financial system including moving the county from IFAS to One Solution. This position will also act as project manager for the implementation of new Time and Attendance software. The reclassification is a $6,931 cost to the General Fund.
•	Geographical Information Systems (GIS):
o Reclassification of 1.0 FTE GIS Technician l/ll/lll to GIS Coordinator. During the Butte Fire the position of a GIS Coordinator was recognized as a significant county need, especially during major events. This position will act as the main point of access for GIS information for county departments as well as outside agencies. This position will also coordinate the upgrades of ESRI, the GIS software, providing enhanced features to meet county needs, update the GIS layers with the current satellite imaging for the Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation Ordinance, work with Human Resources to institute and coordinate an intern program with Columbia College, and coordinate with the Building Department regarding addressing issues. The cost of the reclassification is $4,579. The cost of the reclassification will be offset by chargebacks to the Building Department for addressing coordination, the Medicinal Cannabis Designated Fund for related satellite imaging work and other department specific services, such as Tree Mortality.
•	Assessor:
o Capital Assets - 2 4WD vehicles. The Assessor's Office is in need of two four- wheel drive vehicles for Appraisers to take into the field to do property appraisals. The $75,000 cost of the vehicles will be funded from the Assessor's Designated Fund. There is no cost to the General Fund.
•	Probation:
o New Position -1.0 FTE Supervising Deputy Probation Officer. This position will supervise Juvenile Probation. Upon promotion of a Deputy Probation Officer III to this position, a 1.0 FTE Deputy Probation Officer l/ll/lll position will be eliminated. The cost differential of $8,070 between the Supervising Deputy Probation Officer and the Deputy Probation Officer III will be funded with Title IV-E funds and will provide for increased compliance in the event of an audit. There is no cost to the General Fund.
o Capital Assets - 2 vehicles. These vehicles will replace high mileage vehicles that can only be used to commute between the Colombo Building and Government Center. The Department needs reliable vehicles that can be used in the field. The cost of the two Ford Explorers is $57,711. Probation will use SB 678 funds to purchase the cars.
•	Sheriffs Office:
o Extra Hire/Limited Term - 4.0 Sheriff Recruits/Sheriff Trainees. Due to
continued issues with recruiting and retaining Sheriff Deputies, the FY 2016-17 includes $80,000 to cover the cost of salaries, tuition, materials and equipment for Extra Hire Sheriff Recruits/ Limited Term Sheriff Trainees. This program is proving successful in filling vacant Deputy Positions within the Sheriffs Office, o New Position -1.0 FTE Correction Officer. This Correctional Officer position will backfill the Correction Officer position that will be funded through AB 109. The $76,075 cost of this position will be offset by the Correction Officer Position funded through AB 109. There is no additional cost to the General Fund, o Rename Senior Deputy to Corporal - This is a change to the position title only.
There is no change to the job description or salary, o Eliminate Vacant Position - 1.0 FTE Budget Analyst. When the Budget Analyst position became vacant, it was determined that the complexity and scope of work needed by the Sheriffs Office required a higher level position. The Board approved a Business Administrator position for the Sheriffs Office on March 8, 2016. As a result, the Budget Analyst position is no longer needed, o Capital Asset - Communications Tower Repeaters - The new repeater for the communication towers will be funded with the Homeland Security Grant. The cost is $47,649.
o Capital Asset - New Civil Server - This will replace a near end-of-life Civil Server. The cost of the new server is $12,000 and is funded with the Sheriff Civil Fees in the Sheriff's Designated Fund.
•	Building Department/Code Compliance:
o Return the Building and Code Compliance Budgets to a single Budget Unit - These budget units were separated out under the Community Development Agency. As both budgets are managed by the Building Official, it is recommended that the budget units once again be combined, o New Position - 1.0 FTE Permit Technician l/ll/lll. This position is being requested due to the steady increase in the number of permits issued over the past several years as a result of a somewhat stronger economy and the decline of existing home inventories. The impact of the Butte Fire and destruction of over 800 structures has just begun to add pressure to Building Department staff. There are currently two Permit Technicians issuing permits at the service counter. An additional Permit Technician will provide the additional support needed to meet the demands of the department and building community. The cost of this position is $56,108 and is fully funded with Building Permit Fees, o New Position - 1.0 FTE Senior Plans Examiner. There is a need for a high level Plans Examiner to provide plans examination and approval for contractors, design professionals, and owner builders county-wide. This position will deal with the complex issues involved with building plans and provide direction and guidance for the Plans Examiners. The Building Department is currently sending the more complex building plans out to a consulting firm due to the lack of the necessary high level of expertise in the Building Department. This will also provide a second management-level position besides the Building Official in the department. The $83,935 cost of this position is fully funded with Building Permittees.
o Rename Plan Checker to Plans Examiner - This is a change to the position title only. There is no change to the job description or salary, o Capital Assets - 3 Pickup Trucks. The three pickup trucks will replace three high mileage Rangers with odometer readings in excess of 250,000 miles. The total cost of the vehicles is $101,000 and will be funded from the Building Designated Fund.
o Capital Asset - 1 Ford Escape. This vehicle will replace a high mileage vehicle and will be split 50/50 between Code Compliance and Abandoned Vehicle Abatement. The $35,000 cost of the vehicle will be funded from the Building Designated Fund.
•	Library:
o New Positions - 6 - 0.3 FTEs Branch Library Assistants. These additional Branch Library Assistants will allow the Branch Libraries to maintain the additional hours they currently have while ensuring that the branches are manned by county employees. The cost of the additional permanent part-time positions is $66,030. They will be funded by a donation from the Friends of the Library.
General Fund Requests Not Included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget
The following requests made by departments are not included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget as 100% of the cost would need to be funded by the General Fund:
•	District Attorney:
o New Position - 0.75 FTE Office Technician III - General Fund cost of $65,800 o Extra Hire Deputy District Attorney I - General Fund cost of $75,984 o Capital Asset - SUV Vehicle for DA Investigator - General Fund cost of $35,000
•	Sheriff:
o New Position -1.0 Correctional Technician - General Fund cost of $59,948 o Capital Asset - 2 Expedition 4x4 Patrol Cars - General Fund cost of $128,000 o Insurance Deductible for Patrol Car Accident - General Fund cost of $20,000 o Stab-proof vests (12) for Correctional Officers - General Fund cost of $10,000
Non-General Fund Staffing. Capital Asset, and Special Equipment Requests
Non-General Fund Departments included numerous staffing changes and capital asset request in their budget submittals. In prior years, Non-General Fund requests were generally approved provided funds were available. Given reduction to some State and Federal revenue, especially in the Public Works arena, all requests were carefully analyzed to ensure they met the needs and operational structure of the department. The following staffing changes and capital asset requests are recommended by the CAO and included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget:
• Public Works:
o Equipment Services Center - Capital Asset - Tire Alignment Machine - This will replace an old tire alignment machine that is obsolete. The cost is $25,000. o Public Works Administration - Transfer of a Public Works Analyst l/ll to Roads & Bridges - This position primarily supports the Road Department and manages the stormwater programs. Public Works requested a transfer of this position from Roads & Bridges to Public Works Administration as part of the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget, o Roads & Bridges - Capital Asset Requests
	Dump Truck with Snow Plow Attachment - This capital asset is rebudgeted from FY 2016-17. The cost is $150,000.
	Snow Plow Truck - This capital asset is re-budgeted from FY 2016-17. The cost is $85,000.
	Semi Truck (new or used) - This capital asset is re-budgeted from FY 2015-16. The cost is $150,000.
	Pickup Truck - The new truck is needed for the Public Works Inspector. The cost is $30,000.
	Generator - This generator will replace one located at the Arnold Maintenance Yard. The cost is $75,000.
o Transit Capital - Capital Asset Requests
	Class C Buses (3) - The cost per bus is $99,236, for a total of $297,708. The purchase of the buses is funded from Public Transportation
Modernization, Improvement & Service Enhancement Program Account (PTMISEA).
	Automatic Vehicle Locator System and Service - The cost is $68,775 and is funded from PTMISEA.
	Phase 4 Bus Shelters (4) - The cost is $427,398 and is funded from PTMISEA.
o Integrated Waste Management - Capital Asset Requests
	Walking Floor Trailer - This equipment, used for green waste operations, is re-budgeted from FY 2015-16. The cost is $85,000.
	Yard Mule - This equipment, used to move other equipment around Rock Creek landfill and improve operations, is re-budgeted from FY 2015- 16. The cost is $50,000.
	Pickup Truck-Fuel and Lube - This truck will be used at Rock Creek Landfill. It is re-budgeted from FY 2015-16. The cost is $75,000
o Murphys Lighting District - Capital Asset Requests - The request is for new light poles for the District. The cost is $55,000 and will be funded by the district.
• Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA):
o Create a new HHSA Administrations Budget Unit/Fund 10320010 - In September 2014, the Board authorized combining Calaveras Works and Human Services Agency (CWHSA) and the Health Services Agency (HSA) into one "super" agency. At that time in was determined that it could take 2-3 years to fully integrate the two departments. One of the final stages of that integration is the formation of a new HHSA Administration Budget Unit and Fund. One of the challenges of merging the two agencies related to personnel issues. CWHSA positions fell under Cooperative Personnel Services (Merit Systems) while HSA positions did not. In researching this issue it was recommended that the separate Administrative Unit be established. Positions in this unit would oversee both Merit System and non-Merit System positions. The positions that would be transferred to the new HHSA Administrative Unit would be non-Merit System positions, including the Director, Deputy Director and a Senior Administrative Analyst (from Behavioral Health Services). Three former Merit System positions must be reclassified to non-Merit System positions and transferred into this unit from Human Services. Those reclassifications are:
	Reclassification of a 1.0 FTE Program Manager ll-Fiscal to a Business Administrator
	Reclassification of a 1.0 FTE Staff Services Specialist to an Administrative Assistant l/ll
	Reclassification of a 1.0 FTE Staff Services Analyst to a Contract Management Analyst
o New Position Request -1.0 FTE Eligibility Worker III (Fraud) - This position will replace the vacant Fraud Investigator position and will work closely with the D.A. Investigator who will perform the higher level tasks of the fraud program on cases where needed. The lower level tasks, such as verifications, data and information matching, and other fraud prevention and early detection activities
will be handled by this position with oversite from the supervisor and investigator.
o New Position Request - 1.0 FTE Social Worker l/ll/lll/IV - This position is needed to meet the new federal and state mandates in child welfare for the Continuum of Care Reform. This will enable foster care and/or adoption parent applicants to go through a unified certification process to enable children, for whom adoption becomes the permanent placement recommendation, to have the adoption process expedited due to pre-qualified placement potentials. Current statute requires a Masters in Social Work degree for work in adoptions.
o New Position Request -1.0 FTE Program Coordinator l/ll (Limited Term) - This position will provide support for the Emergency Preparedness Program. Although HHSA was initially asking for an Administrative Assistant position, in discussions with Human Resources, HHSA agreed that the duties and requirements of the position are more aligned with a Program Coordinator. This position will perform functions previously done by a consultant and extra hire. This includes coordinating the Hospital Preparedness Coalition meetings, community meetings and trainings, outreach and tracking of data, participating in multiple plan preparation, assist in developing policies and procedures and preparing reports. This position will also develop a volunteer network and California Health Alert Network (CAHAN). The position will be funded with the Emergency Preparedness Grant.
o Reclassification of 3.0 FTE Public Health Nurse l/ll and 1.0 FTE Public Health Nurse III to Public Health Nurse l/ll/lll - These positions will be correctly classified as part of the Miscellaneous Unit verses Mid-Management.
o Capital Asset Request - 2 4WD Vehicles - These vehicles are for the Human Services Division. Currently, Human Services has only 2 4-WD vehicles in their fleet which was determined to be inadequate during and since the Butte Fire given the amount and nature of field work the division performs. With the advent of bringing previously contract services in-house, the number of staff needing transportation has increased. The cost of the vehicles is $45,000 each for a total of $90,000.
o Capital Asset Request -1 Vehicle - This vehicle is for the Public Health Division and will replace a high-mileage 2003 Ford Taurus with a Ford Fusion Sedan. The cost is $35,000.
o Capital Asset Request - Generator - This would be used for the Human Services building which would be the main facility for health emergencies. The Sequoia Room has been plumbed for the necessary hardware. The cost of $22,000 will be funded from two grants.
o Capital Asset Request -1 Vehicle - This vehicle is for the Mental Health Division and will be used for transportation of clients to court, services, and placements. The cost is $35,000.
• Air Pollution Control District:
o Reclassification of a 1.0 FTE Air Pollution Control Technician to Air Pollution Control Specialist l/ll - The duties of this position is more in line with and comparable to an Air Pollution Control Specialist. This position is the sole inspector and full time position for the District. This position requires the technical expertise and comprehensive knowledge of local, state and federal regulation commensurate with the Specialist position. There is no General Fund contribution to the Air Pollution Control District.
Non-General Fund Requests Not Included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget
The following requests for new position and/or reclassifications made by Non-General Fund Departments are not included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget:
•	Public Works: The Public Works Department is requesting the reclassification of three positions in PW Administration, and an increase in time from 0.5 FTE to 1.0 FTE in the Equipment Services Division. In reviewing the requests, both the Administrative Office and Human Resources had serious concerns regarding the requests. Funding for other Public Works Divisions that in essence fund PW Administration and Equipment Services are facing some potentially significant declines in revenue in the FY 2016-17 and future years, with reductions to revenues such as the Highway Users Tax (HUTA) and Solid Waste Fees. The Roads & Bridges budget shows a reduction in overall revenues of $820,026, PW Engineering shows a reduction of Federal Aid of just over $100,000, and it is still unknown what the impact will be to Solid Waste Fee revenue as a result of the Butte Fire. Human Resources looked at the organizational structure of the department, job duties and current classifications and determined that the current classifications of the positions are in line with the duties as outlined the job descriptions. The reclassification requests and increase in time by Public Works are:
o Reclassify 1.0 FTE Business Administrator to PW Deputy Director-Finance o Reclassify 1.0 FTE Permit Technician l/ll/lll to Administrative Assistant l/ll o Reclassify 1.0 FTE Permit Technician l/ll/lll to Administrative Assistant l/ll o Increase time from 0.5 FTE to 1.0 FTE Administrative Services Officer l/ll (Equipment Services Division)
•	Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA): The HHSA is requesting a number of new positions, reclassifications and elimination of vacant positions. With the retirement of the HHSA Director, the Administrative Office and Human Resources believes the department will be better served to wait until a new Director is appointed and can assess the needs of the department. With the exception of the three positions recommended above, it is recommended that no further personnel actions be taken at this time.
Other Budget Impacts:
This year, unlike past years, the county is dealing with some unprecedented issues such as the Butte Fire Recovery, Tree Mortality and Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation, as well as ongoing concerns such as increases in the county's worker's compensation insurance and jail medical costs, PERS rate increases and increase cost of utilities and gas. Over $10 million has been included in the budget for Butte Fire Recovery and Tree Mortality with the majority of funding coming from FEMA and CDAA. Over $1 million in appropriations has been included for the administration and enforcement of the Medicinal Cannabis Cultivation Registration Program to be funded with registration fees from cultivators. It is hoped that the fees will cover budgeted costs, otherwise reductions to the program will need to occur. The County's worker's compensation premiums increased just over $300,000 for FY 2016-17, Jail medical has increased almost $80,000 and the price per gallon of gas continues to climb.
The 27th pay date also falls in FY 2016-17. Fortunately, the County had the foresight to set aside funds each of the last eleven fiscal years to offset the costs and fund the extra pay date.
Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) with all county bargaining units expired December 31, 2015. Employees as a whole were very understanding of the position the County was in and the obstacles it was facing as a result of the Butte Fire. With the exception of the Sheriffs Management Unit (SMU), all bargaining units agreed to an 18-month extension of the current contract with minimal financial impacts. The MOUs included no cost of living adjustments, but did provide for an increased county contribution to health insurance and uniform allowances. Those increases are funded from the same designated fund as the 27th pay date.
The Administrative Office will continue to closely monitor these issues in the coming year.
Teeter Funds
The Recommended Budget utilizes $2,349,513 in Teeter Funds to balance the general fund. Included in the $2,349,513 is the $500,000 annual General Fund contribution transferred to offset the loss of penalty and interest income to the General Fund when the County decided to participate in the Teeter Plan. This is a significant increase over the prior fiscal year when Teeter Funds totaling $978,303 were used to balance the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget and $1.8 million was required to balance the budget in FY 2014-15. It should be noted that the transfer from Teeter Funds also cover nearly $200,000 General Fund Butte Fire Recovery costs included in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget.
Teeter Funds in the amount of $1.1 million is included in the Capital Projects budget to fund continued improvements to the County's Information Technology (IT) infrastructure, purchase a Time & Attendance System, and for upgrades to Megabyte (property tax software system) and ESRI (GIS software system). The need for a Time & Attendance System became a high priority after the Butte Fire. The Auditor's Office spent untold hours tracking time for all departments that was spent on the Butte Fire response and recovery in order to properly claim and receive reimbursement of those costs from FEMA and Cal OES. Upgrades to our property tax and GIS software are overdue and will provide efficiencies and enhancements to the current software.
Although Teeter funds may continue to be used to balance the budget until such time as general fund revenues and expenditures are aligned, we hope we will once again be able to reduce the amount required to balance the budget with each successive fiscal year. This may not happen in the near future as we continue to deal with the Butte Fire Recovery and Tree Mortality issues. 
Other Issues to Monitor
As mentioned earlier in the memo, MOU's with all bargaining units except SMU were extended for 18 months until June 30, 2017. Although there will be no additional impact to the FY 2016- 17 Budget, negotiations are expected to begin in March 2017.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes $7.2 million, of which $4.6 million is General Fund, to fund the County's annual payments to PERS for employee retirement costs. This is an increase over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget that included $6.4 million for all departments, of which $4.2 million was General Fund. A portion of the increase can be attributed to inclusion of the 27th pay date, however, in FY 2015-16, PERS began phasing in increased costs due to amortization and smoothing policies. Additional PERS assumption changes were implemented in FY 2016-17 based on projections that retirees are living longer, therefore collecting pension payments longer. As a result of these changes, the County's PERS payment obligation is anticipated to increase by 50% or more by 2020.
Earlier this year, SB 3 was adopted and put into law increasing the minimum wage to $10.50 per hour effective January 1, 2017 with an additional $.50 per hour each January 1st through 2022 when the minimum wage will reach $15.00 per hour. This will have a significant impact to the county over the next five years as salary grades for county positions will need to be adjusted accordingly. In addition, changes to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) updating the salary and compensation levels needed for executive, administrative and professional (EAP) workers to be overtime exempt effective December 1, 2016. Future automatic updates to salary and compensation levels will occur every three years, beginning on January 1, 2020.
The Sheriffs Office continues to face challenges recruiting and retaining Deputies and Correctional Officers. It is vitally important to have a static and stable workforce prior to adding new positions. Even then, it's important to rebuild slowly as revenues allow, to avoid the possibility of future layoffs should the economy face another downturn. In FY 2015-16 the Sheriffs Office instituted a new Sheriffs Intern program and reestablished the Sheriffs Recruit Program. The Sheriffs Recruit Program is proving successful and the FY 2016-17 includes funding for four Sheriff's Recruits. In an effort to augment the Sheriffs Recruit Program and to create a path for current employees, the Sheriffs Office, in conjunction with Human Resources is developing a Sheriff Trainee Program. This program will be brought to the Board for approval in the near future. It is hopeful that these three programs will continue to assist in the recruitment and retention of Deputies and Correctional Officers.
During and after the Butte Fire and with input from Cal OES, it was suggested that the County's Office of Emergency Services be looked at to ensure that fundamental requirements of the program are being met. Programmatic responsibility includes, but are not limited to; planning for emergency response like fire, flood, drought and tree mortality; coordinating emergency activities with local, state and federal agencies and other stakeholders; conducting National Incident Management System (NIMS) and Standard Emergency Management System (SEMS) updates and trainings; reviewing Emergency Operations Center (EOC) protocols, updating operating documents; providing coordination and oversight of long term recovery efforts; and assuring collaboration and communication with all stakeholders when planning, during and after an emergency event. As the Board is aware, the Sheriffs Office led the response during the Butte Fire, but the responsibility for fire recovery operations, as well as work on the declared Tree Mortality emergency, has fallen to the Administrative Office and other departments.
Recommended staffing for local OES programs require, at a minimum, a dedicated full time equivalent and either a part or full time Public Information Officer (PIO). The PIO is critical to ensure that accurate and timely communication is maintained with the public during all phases of an emergency event.
There has been some discussion by Board members regarding the potential reorganization of County OES. Before any changes are made, it is important to bring all the players to the table to fully vet and weigh the impacts of different options. Now that Sheriff Dibasilio has been appointed by the Board of Supervisors, it is recommended that representatives of both the Sheriff and Administrative Offices meet to discuss the future of the local OES program in Calaveras County. The program may remain in the Sheriffs Office, be removed and placed under another established county department or become its own stand-alone Department.
Other General Fund Departments will need to begin the process of succession planning and reorganizing/rebuilding staff in future years. Many of those departments, such as, but not limited to, Facilities, the Auditor/Controller, Assessor, and Treasurer/Tax Collector Offices, experienced significant staffing reductions during the past eight years and struggle to provide services to the public, maintain Government Center buildings and grounds, and keeping current with ever-increasing workloads. The Butte Fire only added to the burden of all county departments.
State and Federal Funding
The County receives significant funding from the state and federal government to administer health, welfare, transportation, and public safety programs. As proposed, the Governor's May Revise Budget for FY 2016-17 reflects increased state revenues, although projections are lower than initially determined in January. The projected increase of revenues will have a minimal impact on the County as the largest share of the revenues will go to Proposition 98 (education), the State's "Rainy Day" Fund, and paying down state debt. However, included in the FY 2016- 17 State Budget is an allocation for Calaveras County of $597,000 to backfill property tax losses as a result of the Butte Fire for all taxing entities and $267,000 to cover the cost of the Cal FIRE dispatch contract. Unfortunately, the two bills, AB 2314 and SB 1118, requesting ongoing property tax relief and relief from the 6.25% county share of cost for the Butte Fire response and recovery did not make it out of the Appropriations Committees. The County may wish to seek another property tax relief bill during the FY 2016-17 legislative session in order to backfill what is likely to be another property tax loss in FY 2017-18.
The issue of transportation funding is still a high priority for counties. State and federal gas taxes have not increased in over 20 years, while increased road construction/maintenance costs, improved fuel efficiency, and the move to hybrid and non-gasoline vehicles have eroded the buying power of these funding streams. The recent drop in gas prices has resulted in counties, cities, and the state losing hundreds of millions of dollars. Calaveras County has included a loss of over $800,000 in transportation funding in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget. The Governor's budget proposal includes a reintroduction of his September 2015 transportation funding and reform package. The Senate and Assembly Republican Caucus, Senator Jim Beall and Assemblyman Jim Frazier all have funding proposals on the table. The outcome of the various proposals remains to be seen.
The State Budget includes $644,000 for FY 2016-17 Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PUT). PILT funds offset the loss of tax revenue and help local agencies provide necessary services. However, Calaveras County's PILT is minimal, less than $400.
During the Governor's Budget May Revise, $11 million was earmarked for addressing Tree Mortality. Out of the $11 million, $5 million will be used by Cal FIRE to purchase equipment for the purpose of addressing Tree Mortality. The remaining $6 million will be allocated to Fire Safe Councils and Fire Districts in the form of grants to manage Tree Mortality issues. An additional $150 million from cap and trade revenues may become available to Cal FIRE for resource management and wildfire protection services, including dedicated funding for Tree Mortality.
The Governor's budget did not address the outstanding payments for state mandated services and programs. As you will recall, last year's budget included funding to repay counties for mandated service through 2004.
As mentioned before, SB 3, increasing the minimum wages over the next five years and changes to FLSA salary and compensation levels for exempt positions could have a profound impact on counties. These and other State legislative actions impact the citizens and businesses and overall economy of the state and the county.
Conclusions
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is balanced and for the first time in the past two years, sees an increase in the reliance of one-time funds as the county strives to recover from the Butte Fire disaster. The budget remains vulnerable to external forces, the economy, fire recovery, tree mortality, cannabis cultivation and the ongoing drought. It will be critically important to monitor the FY 2016-17 Budget and make necessary adjustments quickly should projections change. Past experience has shown a cycle of economic decline every five years followed by a period of recovery. It should be noted that the economy is now in its seventh year of recovery from the "great" recession and there have been projections of another downturn in the next 2-3 years. Although the Butte Fire received a Presidential Declaration for the Butte Fire making the County eligible for Public Assistance, the time period for reimbursement from FEMA and CDAA is unknown and may create future cash flow issues if the county's reserves are not protected. The Tree Mortality Task Force is just beginning its work. Future costs to the county and potential state and or federal funding are unknown at this point in time. The county will experience additional expenses and potential revenues due to changes in state laws and the adoption of a county urgency ordinance dealing with medical marijuana cultivation. It remains to be seen whether the revenues from registration fees are sufficient to support the program. If not, appropriations will need to be reduced. Although the county has experienced more precipitation this year than in the past four years, drought conditions will continue, causing concerns throughout the summer and fall.
The Recommended Budget includes $2.4 million in General Fund Reserve funding and $833,255 in contingencies. These funds may be required to replace unanticipated revenue losses, fund unplanned cost increases, costs associated with emergencies, and to meet cash requirements necessary to satisfy the County's municipal credit rating. In addition, should the year-end General Fund balance and/or Property Tax Roll be higher than estimated, it is recommended that the additional funds be used to increase contingencies. The 2% included in the Recommended Budget is less than ideal and is less than the 3-4% stated in the Board's adopted budget principles. In an effort to grow the General Fund Reserve for periods of economic downtimes, the Board may wish to consider adopting a policy that will transfer a percentage of the unspent year-end fund balance to the General Fund Reserve at the end of each fiscal year. This will gradually increase the General Fund Reserve in future years and provide a measure of stability and reduce the need for budget reductions and layoffs should the county be faced with another severe recession.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Preparation of the county budget is a significant work effort which requires the dedication of resources from every county department. I would like to acknowledge and thank every county department head and their staff for assisting in this effort, with a special thanks to the Auditor- Controller. I would like to thank and acknowledge the Board for their leadership and commitment to serving all of the people of Calaveras County. I would especially like to thank the Administrative Office staff, for their assistance and hard work preparing the budget.
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS
At the conclusion of the Recommended Budget Hearings, the Board will be asked to take actions to implement the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget on June 28, 2016 to include:
1.	Adopting Resolutions approving the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget
2.	Adopting a Resolution to implement position allocation changes to General Fund and Non-General Fund departments
3.	Adopting a Resolution authorizing the purchase of Capital Assets
