Presented for your consideration is the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Recommended
Budget. The total budget including the general fund, special revenue funds,
enterprise funds, internal service funds, county service areas, dependent special
districts and other restricted funds is $84,855,410. The General Fund component
of this budget is $30,624,924, and includes an estimated fund balance forward of
$4,502,817.

The total budget has increased 1.8% over last fiscal year with 80.6% of the
increase residing in non-general fund functions. It should be noted that for the
first time there is a General Fund appropriation required for the Migrant Housing
Program due to reductions in State reimbursements for this program.
Salaries and Benefits comprise 43.5% of the total budget, an increase of 5.8% over the
past year. This increase is due in part to the successful negotiation of collective
bargaining agreements with all of our represented employees, as well as appointed
department heads. These agreements allow us to remain competitive in the labor market
and provide our most valuable resources with fiscally prudent benefit levels. This budget
funds 375 Full Time Equivalent positions, including 6 new positions (1 in the general
fund and 5 non-general fund). Two other positions were requested in the general fund
but are not recommended for funding.
The Recommended Budget includes the purchase of 13 new vehicles, 6 in general fund
and 7 non-general fund. Five of the vehicles in the General Fund will be purchased using
Rural Law Enforcement Funds. Two additional vehicles were requested in the General
Fund, but are not recommended for funding.
The Recommended Budget provides for the payment of all debt obligations, including the
final payment on the Courthouse Annex. This payoff, combined with the payoff on the
Powell Slough in FY 14/15 and the upcoming payoffs of the Pension Obligation Bonds
and Behavioral Health Construction Loan in FY 17/18, leave the County almost debt
free.
Through the improved budget processes of the past two years, including more accurate
forecasting of revenues and expenditures and better leveraging of state and federal funds,
we are able to reduce our anticipated needs for contingency funds to $1,000,000, a 50%
reduction in this expenditure line item.
Finally, I am most pleased to report that even with the increased costs of doing business,
fluctuating revenue streams, and meeting the majority of the departments' operational
needs, we are able to recommend the addition of $754,720 to the County's General
Reserve.
I have provided a broad overview of the budget in this memo. Further details for each
department will be found in their respective sections of the Recommended Budget.
Additionally, supplemental information will be provided shortly before the
commencement of the budget hearing, currently slated for September 20, 2016.
Submitting a balanced County budget cannot be accomplished without the support,
cooperation, and understanding of all County departments, and certainly without the
dedicated work of the Ad Hoc Budget Committee. My thanks to all of you.