After several years of significant challenge we are starting to see improvement in our financial
status. Although it is too early to celebrate, we have every reason to be cautiously optimistic
that our 2013-14 budget represents a structurally balanced budget based upon cost avoidance.
There is no significant change proposed in net County cost projected for 2013-14.
Contra Costa County has managed the economic downturn of the past several years through
cooperation between the County Board, Department Heads, and Employees to make prudent
fiscal choices, live within our means, and continue to plan ahead. None of this has been easy
nor has it been painless. However, it is through this combined effort that we have been able to
achieve a budget that is structurally balanced for 2013-14.
The Board, Department Heads, and the entire County workforce will continue to work together
to retain the balance in this $2.6 billion (all funds/$1.3 billion General Fund) budget for FY 2013-
14 and beyond.
In addition to the structurally balanced budget, there have been a number of key
accomplishments this past year.
• We launched “Discover & Go”, a web platform for reserving and printing museum passes
online. Developed by the Contra Costa County Library, the program has been expanded
and made available in Alameda County as well. It serves as a new business model
where library systems work together to share and build public services. In the first year
of operation Contra Costa County residents reserved and downloaded almost 24,000
free passes to approximately 40 local venues.
• Also in its first year using LiveChat, a real time chat reference service seamlessly
integrated within the County website to support access to government information, the
Library responded to almost 7,000 real time questions; the vast majority of the questions
resulted in referrals to the Clerk-Recorder, Treasurer-Tax Collector, Sheriff,
Conservation and Development, Contra Costa County Superior Court, and Assessor
Departments.

Our Treasurer’s Office implemented Check 21 and ACH Conversion for personal and
real property tax payments as well as treasury deposits. With electronic check
processing (Check 21), paper checks are imaged and transformed into electronic debits.
Electronic check processing leads to lower costs, expedites access to funds and
improves collection on returned items.
• The Office of the Sheriff’s Community Warning System(CWS) has made Contra Costa
one of the first counties in the nation to integrate their local warning system with FEMA’s
Integrated Public Alert and Warning System, setting the stage for future integration of
Cellular Mobile Alerting System and the Next Generation Emergency Alert Systems.
The CWS has made major revisions to how it communicates alerts to citizens on their
mobile devices within the County. Alerts are now broadcast to any cell phone within the
broadcast range of cell towers in the county.
• The Office of the Sheriff also implemented the last phase of a 5 year project, adding 922
new Mobile and Hand held radios within the Office, to improve communications within
the Office and Bay Area Region under the East Bay Radio Communications System P-
+25 Digital Radio System. With other Law Enforcement Agencies within Contra Costa
County currently transitioning to this system, this project will allow for interoperability
and improved communications amongst regional agencies.
• We continue the configuration of an electronic timekeeping system with a projected golive
date later this year. It is important to note that implementation of this system will
include electronic capture of supervision thereby allowing the County to begin to report
supervision levels. This feature will provide key information required to support the
County’s goal of flattening the organization.
Budget Message
The Recommended Budget continues to provide for essential community services to our
residents and minimizes adverse impacts to the community. However, as per the norm, once
the State budget is adopted, we likely will need to consider budget adjustments and will provide
the Board with options at that time. By the end of the current fiscal year, we expect to be in
labor negotiations with the majority of our labor unions. In the last two contract periods, with
their help we have implementing a long-term rebalancing plan to reduce our expenditures and
restructure our service delivery to provide the most effective services within annual available
resources. This collaboration has meant that we can propose additional resources to augment
public safety, public works, and human resources in the upcoming budget and has virtually
eliminated the need for lay-offs.
The County Board, Department Heads, and employees have come together and have worked
collaboratively to address our fiscal challenges. I particularly want to thank Department Heads
and all of our employees for their dedication and sacrifice, as well as their valuable and
thoughtful input throughout the process. Our goal has been to ensure a fair and transparent
budget process and to produce a user-friendly budget document. A great deal of effort has
been put into developing and producing this budget.
The Recommended Budget represents a work plan to achieve our mission and priorities in the
coming year. Below are a number of key issues that have informed the development of our
budget for next year.
• Property Tax Recovery: The low growth in the housing market continues to impact the
County budget as over 84.2% of General Purpose revenues and 21.2% of total General
Fund revenues come from property taxes. As a result, the slowdown in the housing market
continues to have a greater impact on our County than most other Bay Area Counties. After
three straight years of negative growth of assessed valuation, the County experienced
positive growth of 0.86% in FY 2012-13; however, the majority of cities were still negative.
We are hopeful that we will continue to see property tax recovery to counterbalance the
cumulative negative assessed valuation since FY 2008-09. The County is projecting a 2%
property tax growth rate for FY 2013-14. In years prior to FY 2008-09, growth had been
atypically high and, unfortunately, our expenditures counted on that growth. Once recovery
is achieved, a more modest 2-3% annual growth is projected. This reduced growth rate
means that less money will be available to fund current and emerging service needs.
• Employee Benefits and Retiree Health Care/Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB):
Another key issue is the continued financial pressures related to the cost of benefits,
including health care, for employees and retirees. Over the last few years, the County
reached agreement with the vast majority of our employee groups to reduce the County cost
of current employees and eliminate retiree health care costs for future employees. This
action substantially reduced our long-term liability relating to the provision of retiree health
care. This action, in combination with pre-funding virtually eliminated growth in the County’s
OPEB liability. The budget continues the $20 million annual set-aside, which began in FY
2008-09, to reduce our unfunded liability for retiree health care. While we would prefer a
greater level of pre-funding, the absence of any new resources makes this impossible
without further service cuts. Nevertheless, $20 million will continue to have a positive
impact on the County’s OPEB liability. Our most recent OPEB valuation indicated that over
the last six years, the County has reduced its OPEB liability by over 60% and reduced our
annually required contribution by over 72% (from $216.3 million to $59.3 million). None of
these reductions could have been achieved without the support and cooperation of our
employees. Continued negotiations towards Countywide health care cost containment
strategies and the redirection of designated future resources remain key to resolving the
OPEB dilemma for the County. The challenge of offering health care options to our
employees that are affordable and competitive will be a significant focus in future
negotiations. The Board of Supervisors continues to make significant progress towards a
solution for one of the biggest fiscal challenges the County has faced to date.
• Pension Benefits: A major issue in FY 2013-14 and beyond continues to be the impact of
the 2008 equity market losses in our pension fund. Market gains in calendar year 2011 were
2.7%, 5.05% below the Assumed Investment Rate (AIR) of 7.75%. Gains for 2012 are
estimated to be 14.1%, 6.35% above the AIR. Over the last two years, employees in the
majority of our bargaining groups began paying a greater percentage of pension costs.
Additionally, we began to look forward to paying off a significant pension obligation bond in
FY 2013-14. Projected relief was virtually eliminated, however, by the pension board’s
recent reduction of the AIR from 7.75% to 7.25% (see the Retirement/Pension Costs –
Future Year Projection/Budgets section of this letter for more information on pension).
• Long-Term Rebalancing: One of the most important challenges we faced over the last few
years was to rebalance and restructure the County's budget. A long-term solution including
a targeted negotiation strategy was developed and implemented. Our office will continue to
work with the Board and departments to review our historical trends, identify service

priorities, and to develop strategies to address any budget imbalance that exists between
our annual expenditure needs and our annual revenues. Our goal will be to provide the most
effective and efficient community services within our available resources.
• State Budget: Given that the County receives approximately 25% of its General Fund
revenues from the State, we are significantly impacted by State budget uncertainties. For FY
2013–14, the Governor’s Budget states that California is on its most stable fiscal footing in
well over a decade and that the tough spending cuts enacted over the past two years and
new temporary revenues provided by the passage of Proposition 30 will allow the State’s
budget to remain balanced for the foreseeable future. The Governor’s Budget projects
baseline General Fund revenues to grow by 5 percent, from $93 billion in FY 2012-13 to
$97.7 billion in FY 2013-14. The vast majority of the spending growth is in education and
health care, which has a significant impact on Contra Costa County. The County’s
structurally balanced budget relies on the State not altering the current Health Realignment
funding (see Health Services Department write-up beginning on page B-165). Our
Recommended Budget includes a budgeted contingency reserve to allow us time to adapt
to loss of program revenues, if necessary. We will also continue to work with labor to
develop additional contingency options.
• Capital Improvement Plan: The County has made great strides in planning the
recovery/rebuilding of our infrastructure in order to provide high quality and accessible
services to our residents. It is no secret that we have accrued substantial deferred
maintenance and capital renewal needs throughout the County. However, due to significant
fiscal constraints, the FY 2008-09 through 2011-12 fiscal years budgets included no
appropriations for deferred facilities maintenance and capital renewal from the general fund.
Because there were no appropriated funds, emergency funds were spent as critical
equipment failed and needed to be replaced. These emergency repairs often cost more
than regular maintenance of the facility would have cost. Non-general funds are sometimes
available for special projects. In 2009, $1.0 million was appropriated from the Criminal
Justice Construction Fund and allocated for Criminal Justice Facilities only; in FY 2011-12
Land Development funds were used for a large $12 million dollar renovation of 30 and 40
Muir Road in Martinez; and approximately $5.5 million of identified deferred maintenance
were completed during the renovation.
A comprehensive building condition analysis report completed in FY 2007-08 revealed the
level of deferred maintenance and improvements that will be required to extend the useful
life of County facilities and promote the health and safety of employees and the public who
utilize our facilities. The report included comprehensive building condition assessments of
89 facilities and a total of 2.9 million square feet of building space. The report identified a
total of $251.2 million in deferred facilities maintenance and capital renewal requirements to
be addressed over 10 years. Up-to-date status of the deferred facilities maintenance and
capital renewal requirements are in a database, which correcting for inflation currently total
approximately $270.2 million.
The comprehensive building condition analysis report and database is the blueprint of our
Strategic Plan to address the County’s infrastructure needs. Deferred maintenance and
capital renewal projects were categorized as having a Priority 1 through Priority 4 ranking.
• Priority 1 projects are defined as needing immediate action to return a facility to normal
operation, stop accelerated deterioration, or correct a safety hazard: $2,165,000.
• Priority 2 projects are defined as needing correction within a year to avoid intermittent
interruptions, rapid deterioration, or potential safety hazards: $27,391,000.
• Priority 3 projects include conditions requiring appropriate attention to prevent
predictable deterioration or potential downtime and the associated damage or higher
costs if deferred further: $186,933,000.
• Priority 4 projects include items that represent a sensible improvement to existing
conditions. These projects are not required for the most basic functions of a facility;
however, they will either improve overall usability and/or reduce long-term maintenance:
$53,743,000.
Beginning in the current fiscal year, funding in excess of $5 million was allocated from Tax
Losses Reserve to begin to address deferred facilities maintenance and capital renewal. FY
2012-13 projects funded were: the replacement of two chillers that were in critical condition
at the Martinez Detention Facility with new energy efficient units that contain the latest
ozone friendly refrigerant; replacement of the metal roof, recondition of the ornamental roof
components, upgrades/repairs, and foundation wall waterproofing to the historic Finance
Building; and a sewer project at the Orin Allen Youth Rehabilitation Facility.
The objective is to begin to strategically fund deferred facilities maintenance and capital
renewal on a yearly basis with an emphasis on completing Priority 1 projects.
Per Budget Policy, the FY 2013-14 budget process again includes a strategic planning and
financing process for facilities renewal and new construction projects (short and long term
capital budgets) and a comprehensive management program for the County’s general
government real estate assets relative to acquisition, use, disposition, and maintenance.
This process includes funding decisions for maintaining the County’s facility assets, allowing
the Board of Supervisors to weigh competing funding decisions using credible information.
Our 2013-14 recommendations include both currently critical and potentially critical projects.
Ten million has been targeted to address the remainder of items in Priority 1 and almost
30% of Priority 2 with the goal of completing Priority 2 projects in FY 2014-15.
• Facility Lifecycle Improvement:
For FY 2013-14 in addition to funding budget year projects, building lifecycle funding will
begin. Per the County Finance Committee, $750,000 was set-aside on a cost-per-foot basis
for future projects. New accounts were established for this purpose and the Public Works
Department included these costs in their FY 2013-14 estimates (unless the space houses a
claiming department that cannot make a claim for these expenses).
Additionally, every department was encouraged to continue to target Real Estate Asset
Management Program opportunities such as negotiating reduced rents, consolidations, and
moving into County owned space.
• Outstanding Debt: As of June 30, 2012, the County had a total of $634.3 million of
outstanding Pension Obligation Bonds and Lease Revenue Bonds, a detailed listing of
which is shown below. The County had a total of $717.9 million and $729.6 million of
outstanding Pension Obligation Bonds and Lease Revenue Bonds as of June, 30, 2011 and
2010 respectively. The County’s entire debt portfolio is composed of fixed-rate debt issues.

The Debt Policy permits variable rate issues such as variable rate demand obligations only
under special circumstances and does not presently permit derivatives such as swaps.
Even prior to the implementation of its formal Debt Policy, the County had issued only fixed
rate issues. This approach continues to shield the County from the risks associated with
swaps and variable rate issues. It should be noted that Pension Obligation Bonds are
taxable securities whereas the County’s Lease Revenue Bonds are tax-exempt securities.
Thus, the True Interest Costs for the Pension Obligation Bonds are generally higher than
those for Lease Revenue Bonds.

Bonded Debt Limitation and Assessed Valuation Growth: The statutory debt limitation
for counties is 5% of assessed valuation (Government Code Section 29909), but it is
actually 1.25% of assessed valuation pursuant to the California Constitution which requires
taxable property to be assessed at full cash value rather than ? of that value. For Fiscal
Year 2011-12, the growth rate of total assessed valuation in the County was -0.36%,
reflecting housing sector weakness in response to the demise of the sub-prime mortgage
market. The total assessed valuation base was $143.6 billion, resulting in a statutory
bonded debt limitation of $7.2 billion and a California Constitution limit of $1.8 billion. This
limit applies to all County-controlled agencies, including the County General and Enterprise
Funds, Redevelopment, Housing Authority and Special Districts. For technical auditing
1 Excludes the $13.1 million of 2012 Lease Revenue Obligations issued on October 11, 2012 with a TIC of 2.68%.
2 The yield shown for the Refunding Series 2001 POBs is the arbitrage yield, not the TIC.
3 The yield shown is the blended TIC for all indicated series, net of the receipt of federal subsidies of interest cost.
- 7 -
purposes, only pension obligation bonds and tax allocation bonds are counted as “general
obligation bonded debt” even though neither form of debt requires voter approval; lease
revenue bonded debt and assessment district debt are not required to be included. As of
June 30, 2012 the County’s outstanding bonded debt was $454.8 million leaving a statutory
margin of $6.7 billion and a Constitutional margin of $1.4 billion. Subsequent to this
reporting period, assessed valuation rose 1.74% to $146.1 billion for the current fiscal year.
• Debt Service Requirement: The County has debt service requirements for Outstanding
Lease Revenue and Pension Obligation Bonds that must be provisioned in each fiscal year.
The following obligations are current as of June 30, 2012. Note that these are County
obligations and do not include Special Districts or Redevelopment obligations (also excluded
are capital leases) and that years 2030-2040 are the average - each year is $2.47 million.

Refundings: The County Finance Director monitors market conditions for refunding
opportunities that, pursuant to the Debt Management Policy, will produce at least 2% net
present value savings for each maturity of bonds refunded and a minimum of 4% overall
present value savings. The table below sets forth the amount of savings achieved on
refundings undertaken since 2002. A total of $9.61 million of net debt service savings were
achieved over the remaining terms of bonds refunded since 2002. The County’s largest
refunding occurred in fiscal year 2006-07 when $200.9 million of prior Certificates of
Participation and Lease Revenue Bonds were refunded as part of the plan of finance for the
2007 Series A and 2007 Series B Lease Revenue Bonds. To the extent that federal and/or
State programs offset debt service cost for projects funded with Lease Revenue Bonds, the
County must share the refunding savings attributable to such projects with the Federal
and/or State program.

State Realignment: In October 2011, the Governor began implementing massive changes to
the relationship between State funding and management of County operated programs. The
realignment of public safety programs has transferred to counties the fiscal and programmatic
responsibility for many Criminal Justice and Health and Human Service programs previously
administered by the State. Public Safety Realignment transferred oversight of felons exiting
State prison for nonviolent, non-serious and non-sex crimes from the State to County probation
departments and custody of newly convicted "non, non, non" felons to county Sheriffs instead of
State prison as part of an effort to reduce bulging populations in the prisons.
County public safety departments began implementing Public Safety Realignment with the
Board’s October 4, 2011 adoption of the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) Plan.
Since that time, the CCP Executive Committee has met monthly to monitor the progress of plan
implementation and to discuss the need for modifications, if needed. In January 2013, the CCP
Executive Committee recommended and the Board of Supervisors approved a $20.7 million
program for implementation of realignment services, $16.7 million in ongoing and $4.0 million in
one-time costs, by County departments and through community programming for fiscal year
2012-13. The 2013-14 Recommended Budget includes $20.3 million, $19.2 million in ongoing
and $1.1 million in one-time costs, for the continued provision of realignment programs within
the County.
In November 2012, voters approved Proposition 30, which, among other things, secured a
constitutional guarantee that local community corrections funding would continue to counties.
Although the funding has been guaranteed, AB 109 granted discretion for the allocation of
those funds, including any growth, to the California Department of Finance (DOF) through fiscal
year 2013-14. In 2012, a two-year funding formula (fiscal years 2012-13 & 2013-14) was
adopted by DOF, with the advice of the California State Association of Counties (CSAC) and
the County Administrative Officers Association of California (CAOAC), to guide the allocation of
funding by the State to counties. There has been no formal decision by the Legislature
regarding funding allocation methodology for fiscal year 2014-15 and beyond. The Governor’s
January Proposed Budget contemplates $998.9 million available to counties for implementation
of realignment in 2013-14, which is approximately a 19% increase over the statewide allocation
in 2012-13 (excluding growth). County departments impacted by the realignment have been
working diligently to implement programming for the new population; however, with the absence
of a 2014-15 funding methodology in place, it is important to exercise fiscal prudence in the
expansion of programming countywide.
Historical Perspective
Between FY 2002-03 and FY 2007-08, total expenditures for the General Fund grew by an
average of 5.0%. They declined by 2.6% in FY 2008-09 and another 6.1% in FY 2009-10.
Although they were budgeted to grow by approximately 4.3% in FY 2010-11, actual growth was
within 2% and was funded with one-time resources. The one-time resources were not available
in FY 2011-12 and expenditures dropped by 2.6% to below FY 2009-10 expenditures.
Although the current year budget shown in the graph below displays growth, year-to-date
expenditure projections indicate additional decline.

As depicted in the following chart, total revenues began a two year decline in FY 2008-09 and
have been relatively flat since then. Growth of 3.5% is included in the Recommended Budget;
the majority of this growth is from State sources. These revenues are projected based on
historical trends, which have been impacted by the property tax and general economic
slowdown (as described above).

As shown below, the County has struggled with maintaining a structurally balanced budget over
the years; however, both the FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14 Recommended Budgets are
structurally balanced. State impacts on FY 2013-14 are currently unknown. Appropriations for
Contingency have been budgeted to address mid-year unanticipated issues.
Change in General Fund Actual Status (in millions)

Prior to the housing market collapse, the County had reversed the declining reserves trend
experienced in the last decade and achieved a balanced General Fund budget for fiscal years
2005-06 and 2006-07. However, as is their purpose, reserves were spent in FY 2007-08 and
FY 2008-09 to alleviate two fiscally difficult years. In FY 2009-10 and FY 2010-11, due to
Federal Stimulus funding and negotiated compensation concessions, the budgets were
balanced. The FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget did not anticipate reserve spending for ongoing
program expenses and in fact projected a $3 million repayment of reserves from the FY
2010-11 loan to Doctor’s Hospital. The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget does the same.
Fiscal year-end 2010-11 marked a change in the calculation of the County’s General Fund
Reserve to comply with terminology revisions required by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB) Statement No. 54-Fund Balance Reporting and Governmental Fund
Type Definitions. GASB issued Statement No. 54 in an effort to improve consistency in
reporting fund balance components, enhance fund balance presentation, and improve the
usefulness of fund balance information reported annually. The Statement required a revision to
the County’s 2005 Reserve Policy – unreserved was changed to unassigned. The impact was
that $32.5 million of previously categorized unreserved balance is now considered either
assigned or committed. In the following chart, the ten year history of unreserved balance has
been over-laid with year-end 2009-10 figures calculated using both definitions and the following
years calculated pursuant to the revised policy. There was no change in the total fund balance.
The County is still meeting the minimum 5% target (Unassigned Fund Balance was 7.1% of
total General Fund Revenues). Although the graph below depicts a drop in fund balance for the
current and budget year, it should be noted that actuals will likely be higher than shown. Fund
balance is shown as a percentage of total General Fund revenues, which are not projected to
reach budgeted figures in the current year (reduced revenue will decrease the ratio between
the two). As noted, actual expenditures will be less than budget as well.
Unreserved/Unassigned Fund Balance (as of June 30)

General Fund Revenue and Appropriations
The County Summary Information available beginning on page C-1 of the Recommended
Budget depicts history and recommendations for all revenue sources and uses for all County
funds. The recommended General Fund budget of $1.278 billion is supported by local, federal,
and State resources. Almost half of the revenue, $571.4 million, or 44.7%, is dependent upon
State and federal allocations. General purpose revenue available from sources such as
property tax and interest income is $321.5 million. The remaining ‘Other Local’ revenue is
generated primarily by fees, fines, and licenses. Note that the difference between revenues
and expenditures is due to the “repayment” of reserves from the West Contra Costa Healthcare
District (see page B-65 for more information). In the two fiscal years prior to 2007-08, the
assessed valuations of the County’s tax rolls had increased by double digits due to the strong
housing market. The continued economic downturn has slowed growth in assessed valuation
and has reduced most revenue sources.

Our General Fund resources fund three functional areas: General Government, Health &
Human Services, and Law & Justice. The following chart shows the distribution of resources in
these three areas in the FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget. In both FY 2011-12 and the
current year, Health & Human Services represented 56% of General Fund expenditures (Law &
Justice and General Government were 27% and 17% respectively).
Distribution of Expenditures ($1.275 Billion)
Each department of the County, within the General Fund, is included in one of these functional
areas and is described in detail in the Recommended Budget. The General Government
Functional Group includes Agriculture, Assessor, Auditor-Controller, Board of Supervisors,
Central Support Services, Clerk-Recorder, Conservation and Development, Contingency
Reserve, County Administrator, County Counsel, Crockett/Rodeo Revenues, Debt Service,
Department of Information Technology, Employee/Retiree Benefits, Human Resources, Public
Works, and Treasurer-Tax Collector. The Law and Justice Functional Group includes Animal
Services, Conflict Defense, District Attorney, Justice Systems Development/Planning,
Probation, Public Defender, Sheriff-Coroner, and Superior Court Related Functions. The
Health and Human Services Functional Group includes Employment and Human Services,
Health Services Department, and Veterans Services.
Each department was asked to submit a budget that balanced its requirements to provide
services with the County’s goals of adopting a FY 2013-14 General Fund budget that balances
annual expenses and revenues, addresses revenue challenges, pension cost increases, and
includes an appropriation for partially pre-funding the County’s OPEB liability.
The chart on the following page summarizes data for the General Fund. The budget is
balanced and reflects sound financial practices. For example, ongoing revenues are used for
ongoing expenditures while one-time revenues support one-time spending. As was mentioned
above, a portion of General Fund sources is obligated to support debt service payments.

The table below provides FTE positions for all funds for the prior year (2011-12 Actual), current
year (2012-13 Budget), Projected Year (2013-14 Baseline), and for the 2013-14 Recommended
Budget. Current year figures reflect total estimated net position counts as of today for all
departments. Positions targeted for elimination are in the Land Development and Contra Costa
Fire Protection District funds. Please note that these numbers represent rounded/funded FTEs.
The positions in Land Development are vacant (not filled); as of today, 15 of the fire district
positions are filled. The actual number of positions recommended for elimination on May 14,
2013 may be higher; this is due to clean-up of additional unfunded vacant positions. The actual
number of lay-offs is expected to be less than fifteen.
The County is currently carrying an abnormally high number of vacant positions due to
unprecedented numbers of retirements during calendar year 2011 and 2012. The chart below
provides the last seven years of retirement history by year and for the month of March.
Historically March retirements are the highest because retirees must be retired by April 1 in
order to receive a cost-of-living adjustment from the Contra Costa County Employees’
Retirement Association.

American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009
Department and County Administration staff continue to be involved in tracking and pursuing
opportunities available through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Federal
Stimulus), which was signed into law on February 17, 2009. The $787 billion stimulus package
provided for unprecedented levels of transparency and accountability and offers a unique
opportunity to strengthen our local economy, create jobs, and fund a variety of local and
regional projects. As of March 2013, Contra Costa County has been awarded over $77 million
in ARRA funds and has received $76.5 million. Funding was highest in FY 2010-11 with the
County receiving $29.9 million, over $18.8 million was received in FY 2011-12 and $3.5 million
is expected in the current year; however, under $0.5 million is expected in FY 2013-14. In an
effort to keep residents informed about ARRA and our efforts in Contra Costa County, the
County Administrator’s Office has posted a report that tracks the County’s efforts in securing
stimulus funding for various projects and programs that will improve the lives of our residents
and stimulate the economy. The report, which is updated regularly, is available for review at
www.cccounty.us. In addition, the County took advantage of special ARRA bond structures
known as Build America Bonds and Recovery Zone Facility Bonds in 2010 to finance the West
County Clinic. The County’s interest cost expense on these $33.8 million in bonds will be
reduced by about $8.9 million over the term of the bonds when compared to traditional taxexempt
bonds. The expectation when the bonds were issued was that the federal subsidies of
a portion of the debt service interest cost would be fully funded in each annual federal budget.
However, the lack of a permanent resolution of the recent federal “Fiscal Cliff” crisis resulted in

were implemented on March 1, 2013. The sequestration includes a reduction of 8.7% of the
federal subsidies that are paid from March 1, 2013 through September 30, 2013. In the case
of the Build America Bonds and Recovery Zone Facility Bonds, the County will receive about
$41,000 less than it would have otherwise received if the full debt service interest subsidies
were paid by the federal government. Sequestration occurs one fiscal year at a time and it is
not yet known whether a sequestration will occur of Fiscal Year 2013-14 and, if so, what the
applicable percentage reduction in subsidies will be implemented. Any subsidies not received
from the federal government must be covered by the County’s General Fund so that the entire
amount of debt service on the bonds is timely paid.
Fleet/Internal Services Fund
The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget includes a fully funded vehicle budget, including full
vehicle depreciation expense. Requiring the annual budgeting of full vehicle depreciation will
continue to facilitate regularly scheduled replacement of County vehicles, which began in FY
2008-09.
Venture Capital Resources
The Board of Supervisors adopted a Budget Policy in 2006, which included a resource intended
to improve departmental operations and in FY 2012-13 approximately $1 million in reserve
funding was available for technology projects to be used to increase efficiencies and economies
in departments that do not have resources available within their normal operating budgets for
such expense. In FY 2012-13, approximately $600,000 was allocated for projects that ranged
from electronic appointment scheduling software to procurement system hardware and
licenses. In FY 2013-14, departments requested over $2.4 million and the County
Administrator is recommending the full $1 million for projects in six General Fund departments.
Projects include high speed central count ballot tabulation machines, wireless infrastructure
upgrades, file and virtualization servers, and asset management software.
Retirement/Pension Costs - Future Year Projections/Budgets
As was discussed above, the rising costs of pension benefits are a key issue in Contra Costa.
In the 2009 Budget Message, a graph was included that projected the impact of the 2008
Contra Costa County Employees’ Retirement Association (CCCERA) market losses (26.5%) in
combination with an unachieved earning assumption (then 7.8%) to be a negative impact of
over 34%. Even using a five-year smoothing model, County costs were expected to begin to
rise in FY 2010-11 and virtually double by FY 2015-16. Since that time:
• Positive market experience for calendar year 2009 of 21.9% drastically changed the original
projection; however, pension costs were still expected to increase significantly over the next
five years;
• Positive market experience for calendar year 2010 of 14% again reduced projected
increases; however, pension costs were still expected to increase significantly over the next
five years;
• Market experience for calendar year 2011 was disappointing at 2.7%. Although it was a
positive number, it has a negative impact on costs because it was below the earning
assumption of 7.75%;
• Positive market experience for calendar year 2012 of 14.1% would have improved the last
projection;
• The CCCERA Board adopted changes in Economic Assumptions, which decreased the
Assumed Investment Rate from 7.75% to 7.25%.
In a letter dated March 12, 2013, CCCERA’s actuary issued a report which projected employer
contribution rate changes based on an estimated 14.17% gross market value investment return
for 2012 and other changes in economic assumptions including reducing the expected longterm
rate of return assumption from 7.75% to 7.25%. The projection is derived from the
December 31, 2011 actuarial valuation results, which are the most current available. A new five
year projection will be available in the Fall using December 31, 2012 valuation figures. The
December 31, 2012 valuation will also include new three year updates to demographics.
Demographic changes may impact these projections. Again, the projections do not reflect any
changes in the employer contribution rates that could result due to future changes in the
demographics of active members or decreases in the employer contribution rates that might
result from new hires going into the PEPRA tiers. These modeled projections are intended to
serve as illustrations of future financial outcomes that are based on the information available to
us at this time. Emerging results may differ significantly if the actual experience proves to be
different from these assumptions. The four most significant variables are demographic
experience, the economy, and stock market performance, and the regulatory environment.
As can be seen in the chart, the cumulative impact of smoothing gains and losses for the
aggregate plan is projected to be 8.75% (as of December 31, 2016). These projected rate
increases are implemented 18 months after the actuarial date. Therefore, the projected
increase of 9.24% in in the chart below for 2012 will be implemented on July 1, 2014.
Note that because the actuary estimated the allocation of the rate changes across the cost
groups, the actual rate changes by group will differ from those shown in the exhibit, even if the
plan-wide rate changes are close to those shown below. For instance, the cost of a General
Tier III employee is projected to increase by 6.84% in 2012, a County Safety employee by
16.43%, and a Contra Costa County Fire District Safety employee by 19.77%. The total impact
to the County, all things considered, is expected to be very close to these figures.

The chart below, which County Administration staff and the Auditor prepared together, uses all
of the latest information available for a new five year projection of total County pension costs,
including Fire. The cumulative effect of the market rate improvements is dramatic; however, so
too is the economic impact of the change to assumed investment rate. Presented in the chart
are four years’ of actual data, a projection of the current year (straight-lining eight months of
actual data), the Recommended Budget for FY 2013-14, and a projection based on the
Recommended Budget for FY 2014-15 and beyond (no increases in FTE or wages). A
significant drop in projected expenses in FY 2014-15 is illustrated in the blue line; due to the
retirement of one of the County’s pension obligation bonds. Note that per the Board’s current
OPEB funding policy, the savings achieved ($33 million annually) will be redirected to the
County’s OPEB Trust. The projected impact of increased pension costs and the current OPEB
funding policy is shown in red.
The following impact statements from several of our major departments depict the tone of the
Recommended Budget, which is optimistic. The goal of the FY 2011-12 budget was to make
cuts that would balance the budget in a way to promote future sustainability into FY 2012-13
and beyond. The goal was reached and the majority of our immediate problems were solved.
Due to mandates on service levels, budget reform was enacted primarily in the area of
employee compensation. The majority of our County employees were impacted by reduced
wages and increased pension costs (the impact ranged to a high of 5.8%). Taken together the
County saved an annual average of 5% of wages and benefits, which structurally balanced the
County budget. The vast majority of our labor contracts expire June 30, 2013. There are no
increases built into the FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget. Any negotiated increases will have
to be absorbed by departments. The Recommended Budget for FY 2013-14 includes slight
growth in appropriations and increased general fund subsidies for many County departments.
There was insufficient growth however to fund all FY 2013-14 baseline requests. The budget
includes a net increase of eight positions in the General fund.
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Human Resources:
The Human Resources Department services all County departments and is funded primarily
from charges to departments. Approximately 23.9% of the funding is through a direct general
purpose revenue allocation. The FY 2013-14 recommendation includes an increased net of
$116,649 to reflect the addition of two positions: one Human Resources Technician in the
Employee Benefits unit and one Labor Relations Specialist II position in the Labor Relations
unit. An additional staff-person is needed in the Employee Benefits unit to continue to
implement the Deferred Compensation Loan program as there are currently 350 loans in place,
totaling $4.5 million. This position will be offset by charges to departments for Benefits
Administration. The additional staff-person in the Labor Relations unit will support the collective
bargaining negotiations, meet and confer obligations, and assist in managing grievances and
unfair labor practice complaints. The Department has experienced a significant number of
retirements in recent years and additional staffing is needed in crucial areas so that services
may be delivered in a more effective manner.
Library:
The County Library is not part of the General Fund. In excess of 80% of the County Library
budget is dependent upon property tax revenue, therefore it has been impacted by reductions
in assessed valuations. In years prior to the economic downturn, annual revenues exceeded
on-going expenditure needs and the Library was able to not only fund one-time projects and
enhance materials, but was also able to build a reserve. Due to sound financial planning, and
continued diligence in strategically filling vacancies based on workload, classification, and
community library needs, use of reserves was not necessary for FY 2013-14. The Library
budget is balanced and structurally sound.
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Employment and Human Services:
The Employment and Human Services Department (EHSD) General Fund allocation is being
maintained at approximately the same level as in the past two years. The Recommended
Budget does not include the impact of sequestration nor any appropriations for the Health
Benefit Exchange Call Center due to timing of the completion of the contract process.
Increases in salary and benefits are being offset by increases in State realignment revenue to
produce a balanced budget and may allow for some staff additions in areas that have been
hard hit by previous staff reductions. As with all of our FY 2013-14 recommendations, this
budget does not take into account any unknown impacts to funding due to the State budget;
however, we have based our revenue projections on the Governor’s Proposed Budget and are
cautiously optimistic. EHSD is continuing a redesign of how social services are provided in
Contra Costa County to better utilize strategic partnerships and the innovative use of
technology to assist clients and provide more efficient and effective services.

Health Services:
The Recommended Budget for the Health Services Department for the 2013-14 fiscal year
includes an $11.6 million reduction from baseline costs and a $3.2 million reduction from the
2012-13 fiscal year budget. The budget is predicated on the assumption that (1) the enrollment
in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) programs will remain constant with the existing Low Income
Health Program levels; (2) the ACA payment rates coupled with the increase in the Federal
Matching Percentage (FMAP) will yield a return $11.6 million higher than fiscal year 2012-13;
and (3) the State does not alter the current Health Realignment funding. The $11.6 million
revenue increase is utilized to replace a $5 million decrease in County general purpose
revenue and to fund a $6.6 million increase in pension costs.
Management reorganization and service delivery modifications continue to be implemented at
the Hospital and Health Centers to improve accountability, standardization and efficiency. The
Department is actively pursuing enrollment of individuals in the Low Income Health Program,
restructuring the delivery system, and implementing an Electronic Medical Record as part of the
Health Care Reform transition plan.
LAW AND JUSTICE
District Attorney:
The 2013-14 budget funds baseline expenditures, including new initiatives established in the
2012-13 budget specifically targeting the Richmond Ceasefire program, gang prosecution,
domestic violence prosecution, the Family Justice Center, and prosecution of sexual assault,
human trafficking and firearm cases. In addition, the Recommended Budget augments funding
from the AB 109 Public Safety Realignment in the amount of $700,000 to fund additional
responsibilities borne by the District Attorney due to the realignment. Funding initiated in prior
budgets related to AB 109 is continued in the 2013-14 budget for the District Attorney. This
includes ensuring that victims and their families are notified of matters related to the custody of
defendants pursuant to Marsy’s Law.
Although the stability of the District Attorney’s budget has improved considerably, we remain
cautiously optimistic for the future taking into account the continued impacts related to AB109
implementation and general increases in baseline costs.
Probation:
The 2013-14 budget will result in a minimal impact to departmental operations. After many
years of significant impacts to the department by State budget reductions, both to juvenile and
adult programming, the department is anticipated to have a temporary reprieve. For this reason,
the 2013-14 budget recommends a minimal vacancy factor of $641,299 coupled with a revenue
augmentation of $200,000 from AB 109 Public Safety Realignment funding to balance. Funding
initiated in prior budgets related to AB 109 is continued in the 2013-14 budget for the Probation
Department.
The minimal impact to the department is classified as temporary due to the expectation that the
State will reduce, in whole or significant part, funding to local probation departments from SB
678, the “Community Corrections Performance Incentives Act of 2009” in fiscal year 2014-15.
The Act, among other things, created an incentive for counties to establish local evidence
based programming with the goal of reducing the prison population. Counties benefit financially
from a share of the cost savings to the state from the reduced average daily population (ADP)
in state prisons. The Probation Department benefits significantly from this funding stream due to
the robust and highly successful programming implemented prior to and after passage of SB
678. The impact to the County is estimated at $4 million should the State discontinue funding,
which would likely resulting in elimination of programming and positions related to SB 678.
Public Defender:
The 2013-14 budget continues to fund increased service levels established during 2012-13,
which has completely eliminated the practice of referring clients to the Contra Costa County Bar
Association solely due to attorney caseloads. In addition, the Recommended Budget funds all
departmental initiatives funded previously by AB 109 Public Safety realignment, including the
Arraignment Court Early Representation (ACER) program, which provides legal representation
to defendants during arraignment hearings. The budget balances by reducing temporary
salaries by a minimal amount, $88,585, to reflect a reduced need for temporary services due to
the augmentations to permanent full-time staffing during fiscal year 2012-13.
Sheriff-Coroner:
The 2013-14 budget continues to restore services previously curtailed by several years of
serious expenditure reductions in the Sheriff’s Office. The budget augments county patrol by
two Deputy Sheriff positions and reduces the departmental vacancy factor significantly, from
$4.9 million to $1.2 million, allowing for more flexibility in staffing core functions within the
Office. Similar to other departments, the departmental budget condition has improved
considerably; however, we remain cautiously optimistic for the future taking into account the
continued impacts related to AB109 implementation, specifically increased average daily
populations associated with housing those individuals and the potential for long-term
sentencing of inmates in County facilities. Continued increases to baseline expenditures remain
an issue as well.
The Recommended Budget also maintains the services established in previous budgeted
related to AB 109 and increases the departmental allocation of realignment funding by an
additional $1,300,000 to offset expenditures associated with that population. The key role of the
Sheriff’s Office under realignment is to manage the incarceration of lower-level offenders, as
defined by the legislation, in County facilities.
FIRE DISTRICT
Contra Costa County Fire District:
The Contra Costa County Fire Protection District (CCCFPD), a special district within the
County, continues to face significant fiscal difficulties. Those difficulties have been magnified
during fiscal year 2012-13 with the defeat of Measure Q (a parcel tax measure that was
designed to fund a significant portion of the District’s ongoing structural deficit) resulting in the
closure of four Fire Stations throughout the District.
The District’s baseline budget balanced by depleting operating reserves entirely and relying on
a draw of approximately $570,000 from the Pension Obligation Bond Stabilization Fund, leaving
the District in significant financial turmoil entering fiscal year 2014-15. To compound matters,
the Contra Costa County Employee’s Retirement Association (CCCERA) recently changed
policy regarding assumption rates for investments returns – reducing the assumed rate from
7.75% to 7.25% beginning in fiscal year 2014-15. The impact of this change to the District in

that year is estimated to be an increase of approximately $3.1 to $3.6 million depending on the
personnel composition of the department and number of stations in service during fiscal year
2014-15. Recognizing the burden to the community of entering fiscal year 2014-15 with a
significant structural deficit and no operating reserves, the Recommended Budget includes the
closure of two fire stations; one effective July 1, 2013 and one effective January 1, 2014. More
detailed information is included in the departmental narrative section of the budget beginning on
Page B-323.
Conclusion
This budget continues to reflect years of careful, comprehensive and continuing review of
County operations to cope with economic challenges. In our assessment of County operations
– and at every opportunity – we continue to make changes in delivering services that are more
efficient and less costly. These changes, which could not have been accomplished without
financial sacrifices from our employees, have allowed us to protect the services that residents
need and expect from County government.
The County has and will continue to adapt to changing circumstances. Our strategy over the
last several years has been to harness our organizational discipline and innovation to reduce
our spending and continue our Mission: “to provide public services that improve the quality of
life of our residents and the economic viability of our businesses”. Our success depends upon
a continuation of that strategy.