Submitted for your review and consideration is the Chief Administrator’s Recommended
Budget for FY 2014-15. This budget is balanced. This budget continues to be based
on the Board adopted Investment Plan with long term strategies geared towards limiting
government and enhancing services. These strategies include moving forward with
replacement of costly, inefficient systems that require more and more resources to
maintain, allowing employees to become more efficient and turning these savings into
enhanced services. This budget is based on the core principals of spending
conservatively, investing wisely and being flexible and ready to act. The strategy is to
minimize future shortfalls by holding down spending until efficiencies can be gained
through system and process improvements. Any “surplus” or unanticipated fund
balance should be invested wisely based on the investment plan. One time funds
strategically invested result in future on-going operational savings to help close our
structural deficit and enhance services.

The County continues to have a structural deficit (see Attachment A) resulting in a
projected shortfall of $12.5 million in FY 2015-16. Many of the projects in the Board
adopted Strategic Investment Plan are already underway and as efficiencies are
recognized this projected shortfall will decrease.
Each department summary provides a detailed list of program areas with corresponding
budgetary information, number of staff, extra help costs, and net county cost and/or
general fund contribution. Ten year information is shown in a staffing allocation trend
chart and a ten year fiscal history by line item class. Organizational charts show the
department’s staff by allocation and distribution by program. Detailed financial
information is shown by department, by fund type. Additionally the Budget Basics has
been updated to include current data and is incorporated into the Recommended
Budget document. CAO staff and departments will be available to discuss this
information with the Board in functional group meetings and during the Budget Special
Meetings.
The Budget Special Meetings will be formally set at the Board of Supervisors meeting
scheduled for June 10, 2014. CAO staff will provide an overview of the Recommended
Budget as well as present a new Personnel Resolution for adoption. Budget Hearings
are scheduled to begin on September 15th with approval of the Adopted FY 2014-15
Budget on September 30th.
OVERALL BUDGET OUTLOOK
The total Recommended Budget for Government Funds for FY 2014-15 is $485M,
which is $13M (3%) less than the Adopted FY 2013-14 budget of $499M. The County’s
proposed General Fund budget, which includes discretionary funds for County services,
is $254M, which is $5M (2%) more than the Adopted FY 2013-14 budget of $249M. The
chart below provides a five-year trend of County budget changes:
The Recommended Budget includes slight growth in the General Fund discretionary
revenue sources. Non-General Fund revenues are restricted in their use for programs
delivered by the Department of Transportation, Public Health, Mental Health,
Community Services and Erosion Control. The decrease of $19M within Non-General
Fund revenues and appropriations are primarily related to a decreases in the Road
Fund ($10M), Housing, Community and Economic Development ($4M), Public Health
($6.5M), and the Accumulative Capital Outlay fund ($1.5), offset with an increase in
Mental Health ($3M).
The Recommended FY 2014-15 Budget includes funding for 1837.34 full-time
equivalent positions (FTEs). This represents a 9.64 FTE decrease from the current FY
2013-14 allocation. The chart below details these changes and includes only
departments with personnel allocation changes.
DEPARTMENT REQUESTS “PARKED” UNTIL SEPTEMBER
In an effort to balance the Recommended Budget, the Chief Administrative Office held
to the Board direction of essentially a “status quo” budget. The list below details
department requests that were considered to be an “add” to the budget. The Chief
Administrative Office is recommending that these requests be “parked” until the
September budget hearings at which time we will have a final fund balance figure and
have started discussions on Priority Based Budgeting.
• Chief Administrative Office – Addition of 1 Administrative Technician to help with
the increased facilities workload as projects related to the Vanir study increase
• Chief Administrative Office - $70,000 for professional services related to Federal
Advocacy
• Probation Department – 3 FTE’s at an annual cost of approximately $300K in the
areas of Administration, Juvenile Supervision and Adult Supervision.
• Public Defender – 2 FTE’s to create a fully staffed investigative unit for a total
cost of approximately $250K.
• Animal Services – Addition of 1 Animal Services Officer to help absorb workload
impacts at an annual cost of approximately $70K
• HHSA Administration – Addition of 1 Program Coordinator to develop a volunteer
and internship program within the agency
• HHSA Social Services – Addition of a Paralegal for the Child Protective Services
program
iv
• HHSA – Community Services – Addition of a 0.5 Mental Health driver for the
Public Guardian program
GENERAL FUND SUMMARY
The chart below reflects the increases and decreases in General Fund appropriations
by expenditure class for the Recommended Budget. Salaries and benefits have
increased $11.8 or 8%. This increase is primarily due to increased salaries, retirement
and health insurance costs. Expenses have increased slightly at 2% primarily related to
costs for the facilities investment plan. Fixed assets and other expenses have
decreased overall by approximately $787K. Operating Transfers have decreased
slightly by $591K or 2%. The majority of this decrease is related to a reduction in the
General Fund contribution to DOT ($1.8M). The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget
does include an increase of $739,366 to the General Reserve bringing that total to
$10,741,788 or 5% of adjusted General Fund appropriations. In FY 2013-14 General
Fund contingency was increased significantly to help offset future costs related to
employee negotiations. The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget reduces the General
Fund Contingency from $10.3M to $6.5M (approximately 3% of adjusted General Fund
appropriations).

The charts below reflect the distribution of increases and decreases in General Fund
appropriations, revenues and Net County Cost (NCC) by functional group. The largest
change in appropriations is in Non Departmental, comprised of the decrease of $4M in
Contingency, $2M to ACO, $1.8M to DOT, approximately $1M in pass through funding
and $500K to the Meyers Landfill Special Revenue Fund. The increase in NCC for the
General Government functional group is related to the change in methodology regarding
Information Technology cost applied charges. In the past, charges for network,
mainframe and PC support were spread across all departments. With the FY 2014-15
budget, these costs remain 100% in Information Technologies resulting in an increased
Net County Cost of $5.4M. NCC for Law and Justice has increased 7% or $4.6M. This
is the result of decreased revenues and increased appropriations. All groups
experienced large increases in workers compensation and general liability insurance
due to the lifting of the rate holiday applied in FY 2013-14. Land Use has remained
fairly static with a 1% or $108K increase in NCC. Health and Human services actually
saw a reduction in NCC of 10% or $476K related to increased revenues.
in addition to the Net County Cost noted above, the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget
includes the following General Fund contributions to programs (detail is provided in the
General Fund – Other Operations section of the budget (aka Dept. 15)):
• $500K to the Road fund for Road Maintenance
• $268K to Airports
• $4M to Public Health programs
• $2.5M to Community Services programs
Appropriated fund balance: The current fund balance estimate of $35.8M includes
$8.6M in roll-over contingency, approximately $9M in departmental savings, $4.1M in
additional non-departmental revenues, $2.2M in use of Designation for Capital Projects
and $11M in savings in the ACO fund that will be carried forward to FY 2014-15 for
various projects (including $4.5M for FENIX). This estimate is subject to change with
the close of the FY 2013-14 financial records in August.
Contingency / Reserves Budgeted at 8%: The Recommended FY 2014-15 Budget
sets aside 8% for “rainy-day” reserves. The contingency fund is proposed to be $6.5M
or 3% of adjusted General Fund appropriations. The reserve fund is proposed to be
$10.7M or 5% of adjusted General Fund appropriations. The reserve has increased
$739K from FY 2013-14 due to the increase in General Fund appropriations. With the
high degree of uncertainty we are facing it is critical to have resources to address those
unknown but highly likely future fiscal challenges.
Designations: The Recommended FY 2014-15 Budget includes $4.9M in the
Designation for Capital Projects fund balance set aside for the future facilities
investment plan.
OTHER SCHEDULES
Provided in a separate section of the budget document, “Other Schedules,” is a list of
proposed fixed assets and memberships included in the Recommended Budget.
THE OUT YEARS
Attachment A is the five-year projection for the General Fund. While we have made
much progress in the past year, this projection indicates on going potential deficits if
current fiscal conditions continue. Appropriations are still growing at a higher rate than
revenues resulting in a structural deficit. The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget does
include some discretionary revenue growth. However, there are potential increases in
the range of 4-7% in our PERS rates, and there is still much uncertainty in regards to
State actions. The Board has adopted the Investment Plan which relies on a long term
strategy of limiting government and enhancing services by spending conservatively,
investing wisely, and being flexible and ready to act. Through strategic investments the
County will reduce operating costs and allow employees to become more efficient
moving towards closing the structural deficit.
BUDGET AND BEYOND
The closure of the Recommended Budget special meeting will not conclude the FY
2014-15 Budget process. There are still many issues at play including the State budget,
the final closing of the County books, and investment strategies. The Chief
Administrative Office will be returning to the Board multiple times over the next several
months with a goal of implementing Priority Based Budgeting.
The most expensive investment that the County has is in staff. Included in the budget
detail are ten year histories by department with summaries at the functional group level.
Over the past ten years the County has gone through many changes.

While overall staffing levels have dropped, total Net County Cost has steadily increased.
The chart below summarizes the changes in Net County Cost by functional group
between FY 2005-06 and FY 2014-15.

The County will continue to face fiscal challenges as costs increase at a greater rate
than revenues. We need to develop a budget plan that supports the County’s core
functions for the long term. We need to adopt strategic questions to focus future
discussions of community values and the relative benefits of different programs and
services. Over the next twelve to eighteen months the Chief Administrative Office will
be working with the Board and departments to better define priorities and link these
priorities to programs.

CONCLUSION / ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This year’s budget document is the culmination of continuous budget review and
dialogue with department heads, their staffs and the Board over the past several
months. This budget could not have been balanced without their assistance.
I wish to acknowledge my staff, and especially Chief Budget Officer Laura Schwartz, for
their perseverance and dedication in preparing this document and the Auditor-
Controller’s Office for providing the budget summary schedules. I also want to thank the
Board of Supervisors for their support of this office. My staff and I look forward to
working with you as you review and discuss the Recommended Budget.