Submitted for your review and consideration is the Chief Administrator’s Recommended
Budget for FY 2013-14. This budget is balanced. This budget continues to be based
on the Board adopted Investment Plan with long term strategies geared towards limiting
government and enhancing services. These strategies include moving forward with
replacement of costly, inefficient systems that require more and more resources to
maintain, allowing employees to become more efficient and turning these savings into
enhanced services. This budget is based on the core principals of spending
conservatively, investing wisely and being flexible and ready to act. The strategy is to
minimize future shortfalls by holding down spending until efficiencies can be gained
through system and process improvements. Any “surplus” or unanticipated fund
balance should be invested wisely based on the investment plan. One time funds
strategically invested result in future on-going operational savings to help close our
structural deficit and enhance services.

The County continues to have a structural deficit (see Attachment A) resulting in a
projected shortfall of $10.2 million in FY 2014-15. Many of the projects in the Board
adopted Strategic Investment Plan are already underway and as efficiencies are
recognized this projected shortfall will decrease.
Each department summary provides a detailed list of program areas with corresponding
budgetary information, number of staff, extra help costs, and net county cost and/or
general fund contribution. Ten year information is shown in a staffing allocation trend
chart and a ten year fiscal history by line item class. Organizational charts show the
department’s staff by allocation and distribution by program. Detailed financial
information is shown by department, by fund type. Additionally the Budget Basics has

been updated to include current data and is incorporated into the Recommended
Budget document. CAO staff and departments will be available to discuss this
information with the Board in functional group meetings and during the Budget Special
Meetings.
The Budget Special Meetings will begin on June 3, 2013 and continue on June 5, 2013
if necessary. CAO staff will provide an overview of the Recommended Budget as well
as present a new Personnel Resolution for adoption. Budget Hearings are scheduled to
begin on September 16th with approval of the Adopted FY 2013-14 Budget on October
1st.
OVERALL BUDGET OUTLOOK
The total Recommended Budget for FY 2013-14 is $451M, which is $26M (6%) less
than the Adopted FY 2012-13 budget of $478M. The County’s proposed General Fund
budget, which includes discretionary funds for County services, is $223M, which is $7M
(3%) more than the Adopted FY 2012-13 budget of $216M. The chart below provides a
five-year trend of County budget changes:

The Recommended Budget includes no growth in the General Fund discretionary
revenue sources. The $7M increase is primarily related to the use of designated fund
balance for capital expenditures. The Recommended Budget includes the use of $5.6M
to fund the facility investment plan. Non-General Fund revenues are restricted in their
use for programs delivered by the Department of Transportation, Public Health, Mental
Health, Community Services and Erosion Control. The decrease of $34M within Non-
General Fund revenues and appropriations are primarily related to a decreases in the
Road Fund ($13M), Road District Tax Fund due to use of fund balance ($5M), Public
Health ($1M), Mental Health ($1M), Community Services ($2M) and the Countywide
Special Revenue funds ($21M), offset with an increase in the Accumulative Capital
Outlay Fund of $9M due the facilities investment plan.

The Recommended FY 2013-14 Budget includes funding for 1813.21 full-time
equivalent positions (FTEs). This represents a 23.33 FTE increase from the current FY
2012-13 allocation. The chart below details these changes and includes only
departments with personnel allocation changes.
GENERAL FUND SUMMARY
The chart below reflects the increases and decreases in General Fund appropriations
by expenditure class for the Recommended Budget. Salaries and benefits have
increased almost $9M or 6%. Some of these increased costs are covered with
increased revenue. This is the first budget with the full annualized costs of AB 109
staff. In addition, retirement and health insurance costs have increased. The increase is
spread fairly evenly between salaries and benefits across all departments. Expenses
have increased slightly at 2% primarily related to costs for the facilities investment plan.
Fixed assets and other expenses have decreased overall by approximately $250K.
Operating Transfers have increased significantly at $7.3M or 56%. The majority of this
increase is related to the transfer of $5.6M (Fund balance in the Designation for Capital
Projects) to the Accumulative Capital Outlay fund for the facilities investment plan as
well as an increase of $1.8M in General Fund to the Road Fund for maintenance costs.
In FY 2012-13 the Board added one time funds ($10.3M) to the Designation for Capital
Projects to increase this fund balance based on the investment strategy. The balance
in this fund in FY 2012-13 was $18.5M. The FY 2013-14 budget does propose to use
$5.6M of these funds for the facilities investment plan. In addition the Board allocated
approximately $6M of these funds to purchase and implement the Enterprise Resource
Planning System (ERP). The budget for the ERP will be presented separately during
the budget workshop. The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget does not include any
one-time funds to be added to the Designation for Capital Projects at this time. If there
is additional fund balance after the books close in August, the Chief Administrative
Office may recommend adding those funds to the Capital Projects fund balance. The
FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget does include an increase of $490,064 to the
General Reserve bringing that total to $9,871,286 or 5% of adjusted General Fund
appropriations. General Fund Contingency has increased from $5.6M to $6.2M
(approximately 3% of adjusted General Fund appropriations).

The charts below reflect the distribution of increases and decreases in General Fund
appropriations, revenues and Net County Cost by functional group. The largest change
in appropriations is in Non Departmental, comprised of the $5.6M to the Accumulative
Outlay Fund and the additional $1.8M to the Road Fund as well as $500K to the Meyers
Landfill Special Revenue Fund. Land Use/ Development Services appropriations have
also increased significantly, however the majority of the increase is offset with increased
revenues ($4.9M). The major change in the land use group has to do with moving all
Administrative and Fiscal services into Development Services for the entire Community
Development Agency. A large portion of these costs are being offset with revenue from
the Transportation division, resulting in a total Net County Cost increase of $798K. The
increase in Net County Cost is primarily related to long range planning services. Law
and Justice has the largest increase in Net County Cost at $2.7M. This increase is due
to a combination of decreasing revenues and increased costs. Health and Human
Services has remained relatively flat with increased appropriations offset with increased
revenues.

In addition to the Net County Cost noted above, the FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget
includes the following General Fund contributions to programs (detail is provided in the
General Fund – Other Operations section of the budget (aka Dept. 15)):
• $2.3M to the Road fund for Road Maintenance
• $252K to Airports
• $3.6M to Public Health programs
• $1.8M to Community Services programs
Appropriated fund balance: The current fund balance estimate of $18.7M includes
$5.7M in roll-over contingency, approximately $6.7 in departmental savings, $2.7M in
additional non-departmental revenues, $2.6M in non-departmental savings and $1M in
one-time savings related to a rate holiday for General Liability and Worker’s Comp
expenses. This estimate is subject to change with the close of the FY 2012-13 financial
records in August.
Contingency / Reserves Budgeted at 8%: The Recommended FY 2013-14 Budget
sets aside 8% for “rainy-day” reserves. The contingency fund is proposed to be $6.2M
or 3% of adjusted General Fund appropriations. The reserve fund is proposed to be
$9.9M or 5% of adjusted General Fund appropriations. The reserve has increased
$490K from FY 2012-13 due to the increase in General Fund appropriations. With the
high degree of uncertainty we are facing it is critical to have resources to address those
unknown but highly likely future fiscal challenges.
Designations: The Recommended FY 2013-14 Budget includes $12.9M in the
Designation for Capital Projects fund balance. This fund balance started at $18.5M.
The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget currently includes the use of $5.6M for the
facilities investment plan which brings the total to $12.9M. Of this remaining balance,
approximately $6M has been allocated to the new Enterprise Resource Planning
System, now known as FENIX (Fiscal Enterprise and Information Exchange). The FY
2013-14 budget for FENIX will be presented to the Board during the budget workshop
on June 3, 2013.
THE OUT YEARS
Attachment A is the five-year projection for the General Fund. While we have made
much progress in the past year, this projection indicates on going potential deficits if
current fiscal conditions continue. Appropriations are still growing at a higher rate than
revenues resulting in a structural deficit. Discretionary revenues continue to remain flat;
there are potential increases in the range of 4-7% in our PERS rates, and there is still
much uncertainty in regards to State actions. The Board has adopted the Investment
Plan which relies on a long term strategy of limiting government and enhancing services
by spending conservatively, investing wisely, and being flexible and ready to act.

Through strategic investments the County will reduce operating costs and allow
employees to become more efficient moving towards closing the structural deficit.
OTHER SCHEDULES
Provided in a separate section of the budget document, “Other Schedules,” is a list of
proposed fixed assets and memberships included in the Recommended Budget.
BUDGET AND BEYOND
The closure of the Recommended Budget special meeting will not conclude the FY
2013-14 Budget process. There are still many issues at play including the State budget,
the final closing of the County books, and investment strategies. The Chief
Administrative Office will be returning to the Board in August with relevant updates and
will incorporate State actions and final fund balance figures into the Adopted Budget to
be discussed during the September budget hearings.
CONCLUSION / ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This year’s budget document is the culmination of continuous budget review and
dialogue with department heads, their staffs and the Board over the past several
months. This budget could not have been balanced without their assistance.