Submitted for your consideration is the CAO Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-2016.
The CAO Recommended Budget is the collaborative effort of Chief Administrative Office staff,
input from department heads, and Board direction.
BUDGET DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
The Board of Supervisors first began FY 2015-2016 budget activities on January 6, 2015, when
the Board was made aware of the projected $19 million General Fund deficit. Other steps in the
process included:
February 24, 2015: A Mid-Year Review of the FY 2014-2015 budget status and direction to
work with departments to balance the budget and review of the operating impacts of 6.25%
reductions to Net County Costs.
April 1-10: CAO Analysts completed their initial review and met with departments to discuss
budget submissions.
April 15: CAO provided update to the Board on the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget
May 22: Recommended budget document provided to the Board
Since that time, through the hard work of county staff, the structural deficit has been reduced
from $19 million to $8.4 million. As you know, the Board is scheduled to begin the budget
special meetings on June 1st. Attachment B of this memo outlines the hearing schedule which
sets forth the timeline for department presentations.
Within the budget document, each department summary provides a detailed list of program areas
with corresponding budgetary information, number of staff, and net county cost and/or general
fund contribution. Historic information is shown in a staffing allocation trend chart and a four
year fiscal history chart. Organizational charts show the department's staff by allocation and
distribution by program. Detailed financial information is shown by department, by fund type.
CAO staff and departments will be available to discuss this information with the Board during
the Budget Special Meetings.
As previously discussed, Budget Special Meetings begin on Monday, June 1, 2015. At that time
staff will present the Recommended Budget and your Board will accept public comment.
Presentations on individual department budgets will then commence. Once public comment and
staff presentations are concluded, your Board will be asked to make decisions on appropriations,
revenue and financing levels, approve the capital assets and the position allocation.
The purpose of the budget special meetings are to allow the Board of Supervisors with the
opportunity to provide direction to staff to amend the Recommended Budget by;
1) Modifying appropriations and/or revenues
2) Transferring obligations to other agencies
3) Determining the use and level of reserves and/or contingency
Priorities are supported by aligning the appropriation of financial resources through the
development of the budget. Following the conclusion of the budget special meetings,
modifications to the Recommended Budget will be made based on the direction of the majority
of the Board. The Budget will be submitted for approval at the regularly scheduled Board
meeting on June 23rd and requires a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors for approval.
As such, the CAO Recommended Budget for FY 2015-2016 is intended to be a starting point for
the Board of Supervisors. CAO staff will provide an overview of the Recommended Budget with
department heads providing a more detailed analysis of the department. Following a
comprehensive review of all of the department budgets and appropriations, the Board of
Supervisors will be faced with the difficult choices of which services will be eliminated or
reduced and will provide direction to staff for modifications to appropriations based on the
priorities set forth by your Board.
Given that there is a significant projected structural budget deficit in the General Fund for
FY 2015-2016, the Board will be required to make adjustments to the budget that will
undoubtedly result in service delivery impacts. Additionally, the approval of the early separation
incentive will result in a reduction of human resources which were previously available to
deliver services.

The closure of the Recommended Budget special meeting will not conclude the FY 2015-16
Budget process. There are still many issues, including the final closing of the County books and
the strategic plan. Budget Hearings are tentatively scheduled to begin on September 141h with
approval of the Adopted FY 2015-16 Budget on September 29th.
COUNTY BUDGET OUTLOOK
The total Recommended Budget for Government Funds for FY 2015-16 is $490 million, which
is $43 million (8%) less than the Adopted FY 2014-15 budget of $533 million. The County's
proposed General Fund budget, which includes discretionary funds for County services, is $254
million, which is $1million (<1%) less than the Adopted FY 2014-15 budget of $255 million.
The chart below provides a five-year trend of County budget changes:

The Recommended Budget includes a slight decrease in General Fund discretionary revenue
sources. Non-General Fund revenues are restricted in use. There was a decrease of $42 million
within the Non-General Fund revenue and appropriations.

The most expensive investment that the County has is in human resources. Included in the
budget detail is ten year staffing trends by departments. Over the past ten years the County has
gone through many changes. The table below summarizes the changes in total FTE count by
functional group.

The Recommended FY 2015-16 Budget includes funding for 1833.89 full-time equivalent
positions (FTEs). This represents a 28.35 FTE decrease from the current FY 2014-15 allocation.

In addition to the changes noted above, if the changes to Senior Services detailed within Health
and Human Services budget are approved, total FTE's would be reduced further as follows:
• Reduced congregate meal sites- 4.36 Filled FTE reduction
• Closure of County Sr. Day Care- 10.65 Filled FTE reduction
Additional modifications will need to be made to the position allocation list based on any early
retirement incentives approved by your Board or policy/budgetary decisions made by the Board
to reduce services which would subsequently impact staffing levels.
THE GENERAL FUND
The General Fund for FY 2015-2016 is $253,487,366. The General Fund includes many
programs and appropriation which are mandated. Most notably are the services performed by the
Health and Human Services Agency.

Property values are expected to continue to increase at a projected rate of 4%.
The Recommended General Fund Budget remains relatively flat in appropriations compared to
the FY 2014-2015 Adopted Budget. The Recommended FY 2015-16 budget does include using
fund balance to purchase the land for the public safety facility ($2.6 million) as well as funding
for the Courthouse Road ($3 million). The Recommended FY 2015-16 budget does not include
any additional funding for roads or fire.

The chart below reflects the increases and decreases in General Fund appropriations by
expenditure class for the Recommended Budget. Salaries and benefits have increased
$2.9 million or 2%. This increase is primarily due to increased salaries, retirement and health
insurance costs. Expenses have decreased $5.3 million or 2%. Fixed assets have remained fairly
static. Transfers to other funds have increased by $1.8 million or 7%. The majority of this
increase is due to changes in accounting methodology whereas appropriations that were
previously categorized in the "expense" line item have been moved into the "transfer" line item.
Therefore a large portion of this increase is offset with the $5.3 million decrease in expenses.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget does not include an increase to the General Reserve.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget reduces the General Fund Contingency from $3.9
million to $3.5 million (approximately 1.6% of adjusted General Fund appropriations).

The charts below reflect the distribution of increases and decreases in General Fund
appropriations, revenues and Net County Cost (NCC) by functional group. The largest change in
appropriations is in General Government ($1.4million) and Non-Departmental ($836K). Land
Use includes a $1.5 million increase in revenues primarily related to increased building activity
as well as a $1.1 million use of fund balance to purchase a new LMIS system. The increased
revenue in Department 15 is related to 4% growth in property and sales tax as well as $700K in
A87 cost plan recovery costs from Non-General Fund departments. NCC has remained fairly
static for Law & Justice and Health and Human Services. General Government has an overall
reduction of $1.8M in NCC. A large portion of this ($861K) is in Economic Development due to
the spend down of large carryforward TOT balances from prior years as well as the reduction
from 75% to 51% in TOT funds available to fund NCC. Land Use includes a reduction of
$705K in NCC primarily related to increased revenues.

In addition to the Net County Cost noted above, the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes
the following General Fund contributions to programs (detail is provided in the General Fund -
Other Operations section of the budget (aka Dept. 15)):
• $4.7 million to Public Health programs
• $1.8 million to Community Services programs
• $96K to Airports
• $63K to Housing, Community and Economic Development (HCED)

The County Budget Policy developed and recommended by the Budget Ad Hoc Committee and
adopted by your Board on May 19, 2015, recommends that Contingency be set at 3% of adjusted
General Fund appropriations and that the General Reserve be set at 5% of adjusted General Fund
appropriations. Funding reserve and contingency at the recommended level in a one year period,
would result in additional service level reductions to fund one time appropriations.
After a review of all special revenue funds to determine if there are any one time funds which
can be directed to fund either the contingency or the reserve, the determination has been made
that most of the dollars in these funds are restricted in nature and can not be added to
contingency.
Designations and Capital Projects:
The Recommended FY 2015-16 Budget includes $2.7 million in the Designation for Capital
Projects fund balance set aside for the future facilities investment plan. The Capital Project
work plan anticipates spending these funds next fiscal year to complete the Building AlB
renovation project.
MULTI-YEAR BUDGET PROJECTION
Attachment A is the multi-year projection for the General Fund for the period of 5 years. While
we have made significant progress in the last few months, this projection is a compelling
indicator of the need to re-engineer the County. Simply stated; expenditures continue to outpace
revenues. The projection includes 4% growth on discretionary General Fund Property and Sales
Tax revenues and 3% growth on salaries and benefits.
In addition, all future year projections do not assume any additional fund balance as budgeting to
actuals will result in diminished or minimal fund balances (other than the prior year contingency
carry forward). In addition to the structural deficit in the General Fund, there are many priorities
which the Board is discussing that remain unfunded.

ADDITIONAL BUDGET CHALLENGES
Mental Health
The Affordable Care Act has resulted in some ripples that may impact Mental Health Costs in
the County. As a result of the Affordable Care Act and the state's effort to sign up more people
for Medi-Cal, indigent patients who once received care in psychiatric hospitals at no charge now
have Medi-Cal. Under Medi-Cal, counties are financially responsible for psychiatric
hospitalizations. Currently the County does not provide any additional General Fund support for
Mental Health. The Department is evaluating options to transition clients to lower level of care
placements in MHSA programs, and implement cost effective ways to provide clients with the
necessary treatment and care levels.
Additionally, the Mental Health Division has significant exposure from the cost of State Hospital
beds. Proposition 4 7 allows certain felony crimes to be reclassified as misdemeanors resulting in
the county being responsible for additional state hospital placements. El Dorado County was
responsible for one case in Fiscal Year 2014-15 costing $80,000 for approximately a four month
stay. One state hospital bed is approximately $292,000 per year.
Capital Infrastructure Needs
The County has over 746,000 square feet of owned facilities under its direct operational control.
The facilities are comprised of numerous administrative offices, senior centers, libraries, animal
shelters, jails and juvenile halls, health facilities as well as workshops and storage facilities. The
replacement value of these facilities is approximately $250,000,000. The County owns over 70
buildings and structures. The average age of all owned buildings is approaching 40 years old.
In June of 2013, Vanir Construction Management produced a Conditions Assessment Report for
the County. The report identified $46 million in deferred maintenance costs for various County
owned facilities. Of this amount $8 million was determined to not be expended because the
buildings were near end of life and not worth investing additional maintenance dollars into.
These buildings were the Sheriff Administration Building, the District Attorney offices and the
South Lake Tahoe El Dorado Center. Of the remaining $38 million deferred maintenance
required, the County has identified $23 million in funding between the Accumulative Capital
Outlay fund balance and monies set aside in the Designations for Capital Projects. The
remaining $15 million in deferred maintenance funding has not been identified. The Facilities
division of the Chief Administrative Office estimates that this funding shortfall will hit during
the middle of FY 2016-17. The County will need to identify approximately $3 million annually
beginning in FY 2016-17 for the next 5 years to complete the projects identified within the
VANIR assessment. Once all projects identified in the VANIR assessment have been completed,
the county will need to set aside an annual amount to maintain county buildings into the future.
A standard metric used within the industry for determining the required budget to properly
maintain public facilities is 2 to 4 percent of their replacement value. 2% of the $250,000,000
current replacement value equates to $5,000,000 in annual deferred maintenance funding
beginning in FY 2022-23.

In addition to deferred maintenance, the County also needs to assess facility options for those
facilities that have been identified as near end of life. The FY 2015-16 budget includes funding
to purchase land for a new Public Safety Facility. Future year budgets do not include debt
service payments which will need to be funded at approximately $3 million annually.
Roads
The FY 2015-16 budget does not include any General Fund contributions for Road maintenance.
As State transportation funding continues to decrease and without any General Fund
contributions, the long term financial health of the Road Fund could be a concern.
Labor Negotiations
Labor negotiations will begin again in FY 2016-17. Currently the County does not have any
additional funding identified for impacts related to future labor negotiations and/or the
classification and compensation study.
Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB)
The County currently funds retiree health costs on a pay as you go basis. In other words, costs
are paid for annually without any additional funds set aside to pre-fund the County's retiree
health future liability.

STATE BUDGET IMPACTS
The Governor's May Revision was released on May 14, 2015. The revised budget proposal has
a few items that may impact the County. The Governor has deferred to the Legislature to
develop specific solutions for the significant funding shortfalls in transportation.
The May Revision does include funding to pay off the last of the pre-2004 mandate debt
payments to counties. The Chief Administrative Office is working with the Auditor-Controller
to determine the remaining amount owed to El Dorado County. The Chief Administrative
Office recommends that any amounts received for mandate debt payments are put into the
General Fund Contingency account to help bring our Contingency back up to the recommended
level of 3%.
The May Revision also calls out a total of $125.8 million in SB 678- Community Corrections
Performance Incentive Act that provides incentive funding to county probation departments for
reducing admissions to state prison by individuals on felony probation, Mandatory Supervision,
and Post Release Community Supervision (PRCS). The Chief Administrative Office is working

with the Probation Department to determine if additional funds will be available in FY 2015-16.
Any changes to funding will be brought back during the September Addenda process.
The 2011 Realignment funding estimates have been updated in the May Revision and are still
lower than the FY 2014-15 estimate. The amount will continue to change based on statewide
sales tax performance until the data is finalized in August. Any required adjustments to
Realignment funding will be brought back during the September Addenda process.
The May Revision does not provide adequate funding for Medi-Cal County Administration. The
budget includes $150 million for county Medi-Cal eligibility office workload. This amount does
not cover the full-year costs of counties Affordable Care Act-associated workload and may result
in longer response times for beneficiaries, reduced oversight activities, and delayed
redetermination activities. The Chief Administrative Office will be working with Health and
Human Services to determine service impacts and any related fiscal impacts of this inadequate
funding.
KEY ISSUES
The Board has some difficult decisions ahead as the County works towards a structurally
balanced budget. While the Strategic Planning process is under way, definitive priorities have
yet to be established. In the absence of these defined priorities, the Board has competing
priorities as the County looks at ways to bring expenses in line with revenues and to begin
setting aside funding for necessary Capital Improvements and unfunded liabilities.
During the budget special meetings the Chief Administrative Office will present the budget
"tool" to the Board. This tool will detail out the discretionary programs funded by General Fund
dollars as well as the Net County Costs for each department. If the Board chooses to make
changes to the Recommended Budget, any costs associated with programs, services or staffing
added back into the budget will have to have a corresponding reduction elsewhere.
CONCLUSION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to acknowledge the Chief Administrative Office and department staff for their
perseverance and dedication in preparing this document and the Auditor-Controller's Office for
providing the budget summary schedules. I also want to thank the Board of Supervisors for their
support of the Chief Administrative Office. Staff and I look forward to collaborating with you as
you review and discuss the Recommended Budget.