Submitted for your review and consideration is the Chief Administrative Office’s
Recommended Budget for FY 2016-17. This budget is balanced. This budget is based
on the Board adopted budget policies and overall direction to maintain a status quo
budget. While this budget is balanced, future year projections indicate expenditures
outpacing revenue growth, resulting in budget deficits. The strategy is to minimize
future shortfalls by holding down spending until efficiencies can be gained through
system and process improvements. Any “surplus” or unanticipated fund balance should
be invested wisely based on the strategic plan. One time funds strategically invested
result in future on-going operational savings to help close our structural deficit, invest in
infrastructure and enhance services.
Each department summary provides a detailed list of program areas with corresponding
budgetary information, number of staff, and net county cost and/or general fund
contributions. Organizational charts show the department’s staff by allocation and
distribution by program. Detailed financial information is shown by department, by fund
type. Additionally the Budget Basics has been updated to include current data and is
incorporated into the Recommended Budget document. CAO staff and departments will
be available to discuss this information with the Board during the Budget Special
Meeting.
The Budget Special Meeting is scheduled for Monday, June 13, 2016. Staff will provide
an overview of the Recommended Budget and the Board will accept public comment.
The Board has the opportunity to approve the Recommended Budget as presented or to
make modifications to the Recommended Budget and approve the modified budget,
including fixed assets and position allocations. The approval of the Recommended
Budget will not conclude the FY 2016-17 Budget process. Final adjustments to the
budget will be made in late August, once the FY 2015-16 books have closed. These
revisions will be presented to the Board during the Budget Hearings scheduled to begin
on September 12th with approval of the Adopted FY 2016-17 Budget on September
27th.

The total Recommended Budget for Government Funds for FY 2016-17 is $510M,
which is $9.3M (2%) less than the Adopted FY 2015-16 budget of $519M. The County’s
proposed General Fund budget, which includes discretionary funds for County services,
is $275M, which is $9.3M (3%) more than the Adopted FY 2015-16 budget of $266M. Of
the $275M, $120M is used to fund County programs and services that do not have an
outside funding source, referred to as the department Net County Cost (NCC). For
more detail regarding the distribution of these funds, please see page 56 in the budget
document.

The Recommended Budget includes slight growth in the General Fund discretionary
revenue sources. Non-General Fund revenues are restricted in their use for programs
delivered by the Department of Transportation, Public Health, Mental Health,
Community Services and Erosion Control. The decrease of $19M within Non-General
Fund revenues and appropriations are primarily related to a decreases in the Road
Fund ($11M), Mental Health ($3M), and Countywide Special Revenue ($4M).
POSITION ALLOCATION
The most expensive investment that the County has is in human resources. Included in
the budget detail is ten year staffing trends by departments. Over the past ten years,
the County has gone through many changes. The table below summarizes the changes
in total FTE’s by functional group.

The Recommended FY 2016-17 Budget includes funding for 1891.49 full-time
equivalent positions (FTEs). This represents a 28.9 FTE increase from the current FY
2015-16 allocation.

In an effort to balance the Recommended Budget, the Chief Administrative Office held
to the Board direction of a status quo budget. On April 26, 2016, the Chief
Administrative Office presented budget information for the Board to consider.

The majority of funding identified for these projects is one time. The recommendation is
to reduce the General Reserve by $2,303,061 and reduce General Fund Contingency
by $1,810,000 to help fund the majority of items noted in the chart above. Past practice
has been to calculate the General Reserve and Contingency based on total adjusted
General Fund appropriations. General Fund appropriations are adjusted to pull out onetime
expenses, such as Capital Projects, as well as appropriations covered 100% by
other funding sources, such as Child Support Services. Human Services is a large part
of the General Fund appropriations and in prior years, appropriations related to Human
Services were included in the General Reserve/Contingency calculation. The majority
of Human Services appropriations are covered by Federal, State and Realignment
dollars. Therefore there is less of a need to set aside General Fund reserves and
contingency dollars against these programs funded with other sources. The
recommendation for FY 2016-17 is to pull Human Services out of the
Reserve/Contingency calculation which reduces the total amount required to meet the
5% General Reserve and 3% Contingency amount.

The chart below reflects the increases and decreases in General Fund appropriations
by expenditure class for the Recommended Budget. Salaries and benefits have
increased $10.4M or 7%. This increase is primarily due to increased salaries,
retirement and health insurance costs. Services, supplies and other charges remain
relatively flat. Fixed assets have decreased by approximately $417K. Transfers have
decreased slightly by $1.3M or 5%.
Reserves and Contingency will be discussed in more detail later in this memo.

The charts below reflect the distribution of increases and decreases in General Fund
appropriations, revenues and Net County Cost (NCC) by functional group. The largest
increase in Net County Cost is related to Law & Justice. Decreased revenues of $2M
and increased appropriations of $5.3M result in an increase in Net County Cost of
$7.4M or 11%. The Net County Cost related to General Government increased $1.9M
or 6%, based on decreased revenues of $641K and increased appropriations of $1.2M.
The Net County Cost for Land Use and Development Services decreased $175K,
primarily due to increased revenues in the Community Development Agency.
The increase in Net County Cost related to Health and Human Services is a result of a
change in methodology related to A87 charges. A87 charges are countywide overhead
charges calculated annually and approved by the State Controller. These expenses are
allocated to County programs and charged to departments that have the ability to
recover these charges through outside funding sources, such as the Road Fund, Public
Health and Mental Health. Beginning in FY 2016-17, A87 costs are also being charged
to Human Services-Social Services ($2.7M), Public Guardian ($285K), and Animal
Services ($645K). These charges result in a corresponding increase in Net County
Cost. This increase in Net County Cost is offset with an expenditure abatement in
Department 15 so the bottom line is a net cost of zero. The benefit of charging the A87
costs to these departments are the ability to recover some of these costs when
developing rates and charging for services.

In addition to the Net County Cost noted above, the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget
includes the following General Fund contributions to programs (detail is provided in the
General Fund – Other Operations section of the budget (aka Dept. 15)):
 $4.2M to Public Health programs (primarily jail medical)
 $2.5M to Community Services programs
 $80K to Airports

This estimate is subject to change with the close of the FY 2015-16 financial records in
August. The Chief Administrative Office is recommending that any additional General
Fund fund balance identified after the books close be directed toward the Capital
reserve.

The Recommended FY 2016-17 Budget sets aside 8% for reserves and contingency.
The contingency is proposed to be $5.4M or 3% of adjusted General Fund
appropriations. The General Reserve is proposed to be $8.2M or 4.6% of adjusted
General Fund appropriations. As noted previously, these amounts have decreased from
prior year amounts based on a change in the methodology for calculating adjusted
General Fund Appropriations by pulling out appropriations related to Human Services.
The FY 2015-16 Contingency was budgeted at $6.7M and the General Reserve was
budgeted at $11.2M. The proposed change in methodology reduces these amounts by
$1.3M and $3M respectively.

The Chief Administrative Office is recommending a one-time “borrowing” of $650,800
out of the General Reserve to fund a request by the Resource Conservation Districts
(RCD’s) related to the King Fire Restoration and Reforestation Project. The RCD’s
received a grant that is funded on a reimbursement basis. The RCD’s are in need of
cash flow up front in order to provide the services. These funds will be added back into
the General Reserve over the next 4 years in lieu of the annual payments normally
given to the RCD’s for their share of County property tax dollars.
The Recommended Budget also includes a new audit reserve in the amount of
$240,000. The State is in the process of auditing Health and Human Services claims
for Medical Administration Activities (MAA) and Targeted Case Management (TCM)
claims. The State has changed the criteria for what constitutes a claimable expense
and is applying these rules retroactively. There is a possibility that the County may
need to pay funds back to the State if audit exceptions are noted. Therefore an audit
reserve of $240,000 is requested to cover these audit exceptions if necessary. Any
funds remaining in the audit reserve after the State has completed the audits will revert
back to the General Fund.
Designations and Capital Projects
The Recommended FY 2016-17 Budget includes the use of $6.2M in the Designation
for Capital Projects fund balance to complete the A/B renovation project as well as other
Capital Projects. The Recommended Budget includes setting aside $706,300 in the
Capital Designation as a replacement reserve for future projects. If additional funding is
not identified, FY 2016-17 will be the last year that the deferred maintenance projects
identified in the VANIR report will be worked on.
OTHER SCHEDULES
Provided in a separate section of the budget document, “Other Schedules,” is a list of
proposed fixed assets and the County-wide Personnel Allocations included in the
Recommended Budget.
MULTI YEAR BUDGET PROJECTION
Attachment A is the five-year projection for the General Fund. As presented on April 26,
2016, the projection indicates on going potential deficits if current fiscal conditions
continue. Appropriations are still growing at a higher rate than revenues resulting in a
structural deficit. These projections do not include sufficient funding for Capital
infrastructure, road, or the approximately $2.2M necessary to annually fund lease
financing costs for the Public Safety Facility.

Several departments have identified pending issues and policy considerations for the
Board to consider. These are outlined in the department summaries. The Chief
Administrative Office is not requesting specific direction at this time, other than the
approval of the Recommended Budget with any Board directed changes (approved by a
majority vote).
Public Safety Facility
As noted above, the approximate $2.2M necessary for annual lease payments for the
Public Safety Facility is not included in the FY 2017-18 budgets and beyond. The Chief
Administrative Office will be returning to the Board on June 28 with a presentation
regarding financing options and budget scenarios that include annual lease payments of
$2.2M. In order to pursue interim financing options as well as the USDA loan, the
County will need to show a balanced 5 year projection that includes a $2.2M lease
payment. If revenue projections remain as projected, the County will need to hold down
future costs in order to balance revenues and appropriations. As an example, based on
the attached 5 year forecast, in FY 2020-21 the County would need to reduce
appropriations by approximately $8M in order to balance the budget and fund the Public
Facility payment.
CONCLUSION
Over the next several months the Board will be presented information regarding some
important issues that are going to require strategic planning to align resources with
service needs. Simply stated, the budget is a closed system with competing priorities
for limited resources. The Chief Administrative Office will be working closely with
departments to present options for Board consideration to begin implementation of the
County’s Strategic Plan and address system wide challenges. The County must
continue to find efficiencies, focus on cost containment and seek out new revenues in
order to provide the “Gold Standard” of service.