For the first time, in this, my sixth budget transmittal letter as Administrative Officer for the
County of Fresno, it is my pleasure to be able to present a balanced recommended budget
which recognizes positive economic change through modest growth in Countywide
revenues coupled with beneficial results from instituting the prudent policies and practices
that have been directed by your Board over the preceding years of fiscal challenges.
Throughout departments Countywide, core services are gradually being recommended for
increased funding and positions are slowly beginning to be restored following a few years
of lowered staffing levels. The salary reductions for employees which were instituted as a
strategic response during the years of fiscal constraints are incrementally being addressed.
During the current year, progress was made as compaction issues were addressed and
the extraordinary countywide promotion and hiring controls were eliminated. As the fiscal
outlook improves, your Board directed County Personnel to proceed in labor negotiations
with a cautious, sustainable approach to dealing with employee recruitment and retention.
The recommended budget includes appropriations to fund a total of 7120 positions, with 61
new positions in general fund departments and 8 added positions across the other
budgetary funds. Appropriations also support the ongoing annual costs of actions taken in
the current year: $5.8M cost of lifting the promotion controls; $2.5M increase to the
County's healthcare contribution, and $2.9M for the salary step conversion. While the
year-over-year employer contribution to the retirement association and the payment of
pension obligation bonds continues to grow in FY 2014-15, that cost is partially offset by
cost reductions realized from implementing Tier IV and the impacts of the Public
Employees' Pension Retirement Act (PEPRA) with a combined total cost reduction of
approximately $3.5M.
Fiscal challenges addressed with appropriations and designations in the FY 2014-15
Recommended Budget include the potential end of third party payer participation in the
payment of certain pension obligation bond debt service costs estimated at $8.9M for the
first year; the payment due to the Road Fund for the Proposition 42 Maintenance-of-Effort
of $5.5M by June 30, 2015; the staffing level for the Sheriffs department at $5.95M,
including the results of the jail staffing study commissioned as part of the settlement
discussions; and specialty healthcare services for those without documentation of legal
residence given the adjustments to healthcare realignment funding instituted by the State
in the current year as the first full-year of redirection of health realignment dollars begins in
FY 2014-15. The ability to respond to these situations is due in large part to the foresight
and long range planning done over the previous fiscal years by your Board. As outcomes
on some of the pending issues are reached, some of these funds may become available to
address other Board priorities in the future. This office intends to provide updates to your
Board and the public during the quarterly budget updates.
The Affordable Care Act, which expands Medi-Cal services to individuals with income
between 138% and 400% of the Federal Poverty Level, became effective January 1, 2014.
This major program change has been a factor in the current year for the Department of
Social Services during enrollment prior to the effective date, and to the Departments of
Behavioral Health (DBH) and Public Health (DPH) as funding and service delivery are
redefined under the new system of health care financing. The impacts of Assembly Bill
(AB) 85 on Health Realignment funding available locally, resulted in the need for a public
hearing to make the determination that transferring 1 0% of Mental Health realignment
funds is the most cost effective use of available resources to maximize client outcomes for
both the current fiscal year, as well as FY 2014-15. Negotiations with the State
Departments of Health Care Services and Finance are ongoing in attempts to achieve
more equitable funding to serve all indigent residents of Fresno County.
Implementation of AB 109 Public Safety Realignment continued in FY 2013-14 with
approval of updates to the 2011 Implementation Plan along with funding for programs and
services by the Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) on October 15, 2013 and the
Board of Supervisors on January 14, 2014. Increases in funding focused on correctional
supervision for the jail, post release community supervision officers, data positions, a jail
records unit, and a continued emphasis on creating, expanding, and implementing
community and agency resources for the offending populations. These include funding for
staff, programs, and services as follows:
• With the number of Post Release Community Supervision offenders being above State
estimates for Fresno County, the number of Deputy Probation Officers was increased
to bring the supervision ratios in the AB 109 unit closer in line with the supervision
standards included in the CCP plan.
• To meet the growing and continuous data needs related to public safety realignment,
two data positions were approved. These positions will assist with Fresno County's
participation in the Pew Results First Initiative, the Public Policy Institute of California
(PPIC), and the Urban Institute research efforts.
• With the increase in the inmate population in the last two years and 20·25% of the
population comprised of AB 109 inmates, additional supervision was necessary.
Therefore, four Sergeant positions were added as first line supervisors to assist the
staff and to take immediate action, as necessary, during incidents related to the inmate
population.
• With the implementation of AB 109 locally, there was a significant increase in long-term
commitments and with them, an influx of legal and judicial documents. As the
custodian of records for all AB 109 commitments to the Jail, the Sheriff's office
requested, and was approved, to add four Program Technician positions to process
commitment packets received from the Court.
• An allocation was made for in-custody, out-of-custody, and pre-trial counseling
services for identified offenders. Services were designed to target the individual
behavior of offenders and to provide services to family members to reduce recidivism
and increase the offenders' chance of success in the community, as well as improve
family functionality.
• Funding for a contract to provide employability services for offenders was also added.
This was done to help offenders who have little to no work experience and/or have
difficulty keeping a job, as well as job placement services. Ancillary services such as
job coaching and counseling! including substance abuse education and sociai work
services that focus on pro-social development to increase job retention, would also be
provided.
As a member of the Realignment Allocation Committee, I continue to stress the need for
the longer term AB 109 allocation formula (beginning in FY 2014-15) to properly fund high
caseload counties. This is essential in high caseload counties, such as Fresno, where a
high unemployment rate, coupled with high poverty levels, limits the local resources
available to provide required services to adequately meet the needs of the realigned
population.
In the current fiscal year, Fresno County took significant steps to address healthcare
access for adult inmates and juvenile wards and made necessary facility improvements in
the jail system. These steps will continue in FY 2014-15. DPH and DBH have historically
provided State and Federal mandated medical and behavioral healthcare to the adult
inmate and juvenile ward populations housed at the County's Adult Detention Facilities
(Jail) and the Juvenile Justice Campus (JJC). DPH currently provides medical and
behavioral healthcare services to approximately 3,000 adult inmates housed within the Jail
facilities and also provides medical healthcare services to approximately 300 juvenile
wards housed at the JJC. DBH provides behavioral healthcare services to the juveniles at
the JJC.
On September 10, 2013, the Board of Supervisors authorized and directed the GAO, DPH,
and DBH to initiate a competitive bidding process and issue a Request for Proposal (RFP)
for the provision of comprehensive medical and behavioral health care services in the Jail
and JJC. On March 25, 2014, the Board of Supervisors approved a three-year contract
(with the option to renew for two additional one-year periods) with Corizon Health, Inc.
Since approval of the agreement, DPH and DBH have been coordinating with the
contractor and affected County staff to establish an effective transition plan to commence
services in the adult and juvenile detention facilities beginning June 23, 2014. Emergency,
inpatient hospitalization, and outpatient specialty care services for the adult inmates and
juvenile wards will begin when the County provides Corizon Health, Inc. with a 30-day
advance written notice (in the interim these services will continue to be provided under the
current contract with Community Regional Medical Center).
On October 29, 2013, the Board of Supervisors approved $2M in funding to update and
extend the useful life of the South Annex Jail (SAJ). The areas being addressed include:
replacing corroding and failing plumbing fixtures/pipes in the original building (to be
scheduled); Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) - limited/selective duct
cleaning, replacement of a failing air handler coil, upgrading an air handler fan in the
basement to increase air flow/circulation and improve efficiency of heating and cooling,
servicing the chillers and cleaning the cooling tower (completed); replacing one and
rebuilding one automatic transfer switch to assure that emergency generators will transfer
power to the building during an electrical outage, cleaning electrical panels and replacing
defective breakers (in process). On that same date, the Board of Supervisors also
approved $1M to address a variety of issues at the Fresno County Detention Facilities
including necessary facility modifications (e.g., accessible showers). A consultant has
been hired to complete an Americans with Disability Act (ADA) transition plan for the jail
facilities. The plan is expected to be completed by late July/early August 2014. Once
completed, staff will proceed with scheduling necessary facility modifications.
In a highly competitive process for a limited amount of funds ($500,000,000 available
statewide), Fresno County was successful in its efforts to secure State funds to replace the
1940's SAJ with the proposed West Annex Jail project that will contain new generation
pods along with space to provide treatment programs. The need for these types of beds
and programs was further amplified with the implementation of AB 109 (the Public Safety
Realignment Act), which became operational on October 1, 2011. The current Jail
Detention Facilities were not designed for the AB 109 population or for providing the
treatment programs and services that these offenders need.
On October 22, 2013, the Board of Supervisors allocated the required matching funds and
authorized the County's submittal of an application to the California Board of State and
Community Corrections (BSCC) for State SB 1022 funding in the amount of $79,194,000
for construction of a 300-bed West Annex Jail project; including treatment programs and a
shipping/receiving/laundry facility. As a large county (population exceeds 700,000), the
County of Fresno was eligible to submit an application requesting State Lease Revenue
Bond financing for up to $80,000,000. On January 16, 2014, the BSCC approved Fresno
County's application in the fully requested amount of $79.2M. As a successful applicant,
Fresno County is conditionally approved for funding and must now complete the necessary
appioval piocess, which includes site assurance, compietion of reai estate due diligence,
approval of Fresno County's project by the BSCC and the State Public Works Board at
various stages, executing the necessary agreements, and State Lease Revenue Bonds
being sold for the approved project.
The proposed West Annex Jail will be 3 floors with 300 medium/maximum security beds
and will be located west of the North Annex Jail. Once the new West Annex Jail is
constructed and ready for occupancy, the SAJ will be taken off line. The West Annex Jail
will replace outdated linear cells with new generation pods and allow for greater
observation and supervision of inmates. Of equal importance, it will provide necessary
housing, treatment, and program space for special needs inmates, specifically those with
behavioral health issues. It will also include a new centralized video visitation area on the
first floor and a new separate shipping/receiving/laundry area.
The annual cost of operating the SAJ is approximately $15M with 91 positions allocated to
the facility. Of this number, 65 positions will be transferred to operate the new West Annex
Jail facility. Of the remaining staff, 4 will remain in the SAJ to staff the Court Holding Area
and the remaining 21 positions will be available for the Sheriff to transfer to the Main and
North Annex Jails. Five new program staff positions, required to operate the West Annex
Jail, will be funded with the Inmate Welfare Fund and current services and supplies costs
along with medical/mental health costs associated with operating the SAJ will be reallocated
to operate the West Annex Jail so additional net County cost will not be required.
Staff is proceeding with the required steps to successfully complete the processes
necessary for the receipt of State funds and the completion of the project with occupancy
expected in late 2019.
Acknowledgements
This document reflects the diligent efforts of many Fresno County employees, from
appointed and elected Department Heads, departmental business managers and budget
staff, program and operation staff, clerical support and others. Sincere thanks are due and
given to all, especially the departments of !he Auditor-Controller/Treasurer-Tax Collector
and Internal Services, who are essential partners in the production and distribution of this
budget material to the Board and to the public. Since December of 2013, the entire County
Administrative Office team, including all analysts and administrative support staff, has been
involved in planning, strategizing, instructing, coordinating, reviewing, balancing, formatting
and finalizing the documents that represent !he FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for
your consideration. Documents have been made available to the Board and to the public
well ahead of any required legal notification timelines in the interest of full transparency
and disclosure in this public process.