It is my pleasure and distinct honor to submit the Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget for
your Board's review, modification, and adoption; my first County of Fresno budget. The FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget is balanced, utilizes conservative revenue estimates, includes salary
adjustments for substantially all employee bargaining units and increases General Reserves by $2.3
million. Overall, this Budget continues the rebuilding process started over the last few years following
the impact of the Great Recession of 2008.
The organization of the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is somewhat different from FY 2015-16
budget documents with the goal of improving the overall clarity of the budget and usefulness to your
Board and to County residents. The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is organized by Fund type
instead of by function, such as Justice Services, Administration, Fiscal & Internal Services, etc. Funds
are self-balancing accounts used in governmental accounting. The most important fund type is the
General Fund, which is by far the largest operating budget for the County. Operating budgets, not
required by statute and function to have separate funds, are accounted for in the General Fund.
Examples of budgets statutorily required to have separate funds include the Library and Road Special
Revenue Funds. In turn, Capital Projects, Debt Service, Internal Services and Enterprise functions are
accounted for in funds outside the General Fund. The Departments are organized by Fund type and in
alphabetical order with their individual budget, or "Org #", in parenthesis. In this document, the
General Fund is followed by the Capital Projects Fund, Debt Service Fund, Internal Services Funds,
Enterprise Funds, and finally the multitude of Special Revenue Funds.
Unlike prior years' fiscal budgets, this Recommended Budget is prepared without allowing
departments to carryover a percentage of the estimated appropriations associated with Net County
Cost (NCC) savings. Any leftover departmental savings, actual NCC under budgeted NCC, will be
calculated after fiscal year-end and will be brought back to your Board in August 2016 for potential
adjustments to this Budget. Finally, effective with this Recommended Budget, my Office is preparing
Countywide revenue estimates along with estimated carryover Fund Balance. Ultimately, this Budget
properly reflects my Office's desire to maintain a prudent approach to overseeing the County's fiscal
operations.
As noted above, the County is rebounding and moving in a positive direction in its continued recovery
from the Great Recession. The FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget and subsequent adjustments continue
the rebuilding process by restoring pay reductions, increasing General Reserves, increasing
designations for potential Pension Obligation Bonds litigation, and adding correctional staff under the
Quentin Hall Settlement. The General Fund is projected to end FY 2015-16 in positive financial shape
with a carryover Fund Balance of $35.5 million due to greater than anticipated Countywide revenues,
projected unused appropriations, and the expiration of one-time designations for future budget
challenges. Overall, the General Fund has sufficient carryover Fund Balance to cover its structural
Fund Balance of $8.6 million and use of the remaining one-time monies for its Pension Obligation
Bonds litigation reserve along with other one-time needs.
FY 2016-17 RECOMMENDED BUDGET
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for all funds totals $2.73 billion, an increase of $70.4 million,
or 3% when compared to the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. The Budget supports a workforce of 7,591
positions, reflecting a net increase of 97 positions, and continues the restoration of actions taken to
address the Great Recession.

The Recommended Budget provides funding for mandated and essential services, County programs,
infrastructure and capital needs, equipment maintenance and replacement, increasing County
reserves, and maintaining a contingency fund; and adheres to the County Budget Act, County
Administrative Regulations, and the County's financial policies.
The General Fund budget, which encompasses the majority of County operations, totals $1.477 billion,
an increase of $13.3 million, or 1% over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. As noted above, estimated
carryover Fund Balance continues to be strong for FY 2016-17 at $35.5 million, which is available for
one-time expenditures and most importantly, covering the General Fund's NCC.
Countywide (discretionary) revenues total $257 million, a $41.3 million decrease from FY 2015-16.
The decrease is due to a change in State statute that no longer requires Health Realignment Vehicle
License Fees to be budgeted in the General Fund. When the statutory change in accounting is
factored in, estimated discretionary revenues increase $7.6 million, or 3% over last fiscal year. This is
important because Countywide revenue growth pays for increases in ongoing (structural) budgetary
increases such as salary adjustments and the addition of positions not paid for with third-party
(subvented) dollars. The increase of $7. 6 million covered salary restorations, the addition of 43
positions required under the Quentin Hall Settlement, adjustments to health insurance contributions
and monies dedicated to fiscal year negotiations with bargaining units not addressed in the last few
fiscal years.
The FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget included $28 million in one-time appropriations not included in
department budgets. The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget includes $25.9 million in one-time
appropriations not included in department budgets for the following:
$10 million for the Pension Obligation Bonds litigation
$5.6 million for the County's Proposition 42 commitment
$5 million for Capital Projects
$2.3 million increase in General Reserves
$1 million for Quentin Hall Settlement Americans with Disabilities Act improvements
$1 million for the replacement of communications infrastructure utilized by Public Safety and
Emergency Medical Services
$0.5 million for local match associated with the County's Office of Emergency Services
application for California Disaster Assistance Act for State tree mortality funding
$0.5 million for tree mortality issues at County owned facilities and parks
In conclusion, for FY 2016-17, the General Fund is continuing to see positive improvement after the
effects of the Great Recession of 2008. The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is structurally
balanced with conservative revenue estimates. With the apparent slowdown of the national and State
economies, the County needs to be very cautious in its recovery efforts so that budget restorations
made to this point are not undermined.
LIBRARY
The Library is working on a Request for Proposal to obtain services for a facilities needs assessment
to review all Library facilities along with the associated communities and population needs. When
completed, the Department will provide your Board with the completed assessment in addition to
recommendations for Library facilities.

The new Clovis Library Branch is projected for completion in 2018 at an estimated cost of $8 million.
The Library will return to the Board during FY 2016-17 with a City of Clovis agreement to provide the
details of the property title transfer, construction, and architectural coordination. In addition, when the
Department returns to your Board with the agreement additional appropriations will be sought to begin
the construction phase of the new facility. The new Reedley Library Branch is projected for completion
in 2019 at an estimate of $4 million.
NEW DRUG COURT
Due to the reclassification of most drug possession offenses from felonies to misdemeanors as a
result of the passage of Proposition 47: Criminal Sentences. Misdemeanor Penalties. Initiative Statute
on November 4, 2014, the Fresno Superior Court created a new Misdemeanor Drug Court in
September 2015. In January 2016, your Board approved a total of four positions for the District
Attorney- Public Administrator and the Public Defender to staff the new Drug Court. The FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget continues to fund these positions with one-time funding and NCC.
ASSEMBLY BILL 109
For FY 2016-17, the County's Assembly Bill 109 allocation rate increased approximately 5% over FY
2015-16. Fresno County is estimated to receive an allocation of $37.1 million in Assembly Bill 109
funding for FY 2016-17 as follows: base allocation $35 million and growth funds $2.1 million.
Assembly Bill 109 funding will continue to fund new or expansion of programs/services added during
mid-year FY 2015-16 as follows:
• Post Release Community Supervision ( P RCS) -as a result of the number of P RCS offenders
being consistently over State estimates for the County, the number of Deputy Probation Officers
was increased to bring the supervision ratios in the Assembly Bill 109 unit in line with the
supervision standards for both general and specialized supervision caseloads as included in the
Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) plan.
• Adult Compliance Team (ACT) Expansion -funding approved in FY 2015-16 to add two law
enforcement officers from rural County cities was allocated to Reedley and Selma. With this
expansion, the ACT team is comprised of sworn officers from the Sheriff's Office; the Fresno,
Clovis, Reedley, and Selma Police Departments; the Probation Department, and a District
Attorney Investigator. ACT adds an additional layer of offender supervision and public safety by
working as a cooperative unit to address public safety concerns and issues facing local law
enforcement in the County.
• Programs -contracts for evidence based Vocational Training and Family Violence Counseling
Services were approved mid-year during FY 2015-16 and funded with Assembly Bill 109 funds.
America Works administers the Vocational Training contract to provide re-entry employment
readiness. The Marjaree Mason Center administers the Family Violence Counseling Services
contract to provide family violence counseling services.
• Jail Staffing related to the Quentin Hall Settlement -the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget for the
Sheriff included $930,559 in Assembly Bill 109 funding to partially offset the costs associated
with 49 Correctional Officer and 2 Correctional Sergeant positions. The FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget for the Sheriff includes $1 ,999,557 in Assembly Bill 109 funding to
continue to partially offset the costs for the positions added in FY 2015-16 and an additional 43
Correctional Officer positions related to the Quentin Hall Settlement.

The WAJ project includes the construction of a new building adjacent to the existing North Annex Jail.
The building will have four floors, including a full basement level and will provide housing, program and
administrative space. The project will also include upgrades to the Central Plant. The project will be
funded by a State Senate Bill 1022: Correctional Facilities (Chapter 42, Statutes of 2012) grant of
$79,194,000 and $8,799,300 (10%) in matching funds from County sources.
The State has approved the County's Preliminary Plans. Final State approvals of the Construction
Documents are expected to be received in the Fall of 2016, which will allow the County to commence
the bidding process. The project is expected to be awarded in the First Quarter of 2017. Construction
is expected to be completed by late Summer of 2019, with full occupancy to occur in October of the
same year.
COUNTY CLERK - ELECTIONS
• Preparations for the Presidential Primary Election began in January 2016 and continue to
escalate through June 7, 2016.
• A Special Election for the State Assembly District 31 was called and conducted in April 2016,
which resulted in unanticipated, unbudgeted costs to the County estimated at over $500,000. A
letter was sent to Governor Brown requesting reimbursement for these costs and a response has
not been received to date. Additionally, letters were sent in support of Assembly Bills 120 and
2284 and Senate Bill 967, which also support the State funding Special Election costs due to
resignations prior to completion of terms.
• Simultaneously counties were advised that over 20 Statewide petitions vvould be filed and require
signature comparison betvveen April and July of 2016. Assembly Bill 120 was s igned by the
Governor providing some funding to offset costs of signature comparison of Statewide petitions
during the same timeframe as counties are focused on conducting the June 7, 2016 Presidential
Primary Election. These reimbursement funds will be available after August 1, 2016 and are
based on a formula to be provided by the Secretary of State, and are not included in the FY
2016-17 Recommended Budget.
• The Presidential Primary Election will take place on June 7, 2016; ballot processing continues
and will quickly be followed by the manual audit process. The deadline to certify the Election to
the Secretary of State's Office is July 7, 2016.
• The nomination period for the November 8, 2016 Presidential General Election opens on July 18,
2016. The voter turnout for the November election and associated workload for County ClerkElections
is expected to be higher than any Presidential election since 2008.
• The November 8, 2016 Presidential General Election is included in the FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget, budgeted at $1 ,976, 106 with offsetting revenues of 14%.
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Department of Social Services will implement the Continuum of Care Reform (CCR) in the Child
Welfare Services and Foster Care Programs and continue the implementation of the F air Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) in the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Program during FY 2016-17.
• The CCR effort began through adoption of Senate Bill 1013 (Chapter 35, Statutes of 2012) and
resulted in publication of the California Department of Social Services' 2015 report titled
California's Child Welfare Continuum of Care Report. The Report outlined a comprehensive
approach to improving the experiences and outcomes of children and youth in foster care. CCR

is scheduled to be implemented on January 1, 2017, and will significantly impact the
Department's workload as all children in foster care, approximately 2,664 children, would require
an initial assessment or reassessment to determine the appropriate placement type and needs
level. Additionally, the current foster care payment rate system would be revised to rate levels
that have not yet been established; thus, the cost impact to the County is not known at this time.
• The Department continues implementation of F LSA in the I HSS Program with new regulations
requiring compensation for overtime, travel time, and wait time for I HSS providers. The
Department is experiencing an increase in workload to monitor and evaluate any violations of
overtime policies, and exemptions to overtime restrictions for specific providers. Additionally, the
Case Management, Information and Payrolling System (CM IPS) has not yet been modified,
which has resulted in manual tracking of processed workload.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
The Department of Public Health is applying for $2 million in State financial assistance under the
California Disaster Assistance Act California Office of Emergency Services to mitigate Tree Mortality;
the County's match is 25% ($500,000) and is part of the $2 million application. The removal of dead
trees on mountain roads and near buildings is currently estimated to be over $100 million dollars.
DEPARTMENT OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
In December 2014, the Department of Behavioral Health received grant funding related to Senate Bill
82: Investment in Mental Health Wellness Act of 2013 (Chapter 34, Statutes of 2013) to create an
expanded crisis response system for the Fresno County Recovery Center. The Department is utilizing
this funding for the Adult Crisis Residential Treatment Facility to be built at the Kings Canyon Campus
near the Adult Psychiatric Health Facility. Construction of this facility is scheduled to begin in FY
2016-17.
The Department will bring an agreement with Community Medical Centers for the purchase of the
Sierra Community Health Center Building to your Board in June 2016. The Department will
consolidate business operations in this facility in FY 2016-17 and will begin clinical operation
transitions to this site prior to the end of FY 2016-17.
The Department continues to work collaboratively with justice partners on approaches to meet the
needs of clients with serious mental illness and/or substance use disorders involved in the justice
system. Approaches being considered include an expanded screening for linkage to services and
transition support from jail to the community. The Department is considering the development of a
forensically focused division to meet different needs which may result in a request for additional
appropriations and estimated revenues in FY 2016-17.
The Department continues to expand service integration for mental health, substance use disorder,
and primary medical care. It is anticipated that new integration models will be developed through a
competitive bidding process during FY 2016-17.
As part of the Bridge to Healthcare Reform 1115 (b) waiver expansion the Department is expecting to
produce a plan to participate in Drug Medi-Cal redesign. The plan will result in additional
appropriations and revenues for the Department.

A comprehensive housing assessment is also anticipated to be completed during the fiscal year with
resultant plans to utilize earmarked capital funding to develop housing opportunities for mental health
clients

The State Controller's Office, pursuant to Government Code, sections 29002, 30200 and 53065,
dictates the organization and structure of County budgets in order to ensure consistency and
comparability of data. For most of the departments and programs reported in this document, the
Recommended Budget includes the most recent prior fiscal years' activities for comparison. The
schedules in the front of the document are existing schedules recapping the budget by functional
categories across all funds. Individual fund recap schedules are added to increase clarity and to orient
the document on a fund basis as opposed to functional categories as required by the State Controller.
Consequently, the document is organized by fund type starting with the General Fund followed by the
Capital Projects Fund, Debt Service Fund, Internal Service Funds, Enterprise Funds and the Special
Revenue Funds.
The budget summary table provides information by appropriation object level and revenue sources.
The appropriation object levels are the departmental expenditures. The Salaries and Benefits
appropriation object level is a composite of all employee costs including Extra-Help and overtime
netted with a Vacancy Rate Discount, otherwise known as budgeted salary savings. The Services and
Supplies appropriation object level represents all operational costs such as office supplies and
professional services; it also includes the charges from the Internal Service Funds for facilities,
custodial, fleet, and other internal services. Capital Assets appropriation object level is for any asset
purchase of $5,000 or more. The Other Financing Uses appropriation object level is used for
operating transfers from one fund to another. The revenue sources are categorized primarily as
follows: taxes; licenses, permits and franchise fees; revenue from use of money (interest earnings);
intergovernmental revenue (State and Federal); charges for services; other financing sources;
miscellaneous revenue and intrafund revenue.
AKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It takes a lot of hard work, time, and dedication to complete a budget of this size and complexity for the
County of Fresno. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the department heads and their staff for
their collective cooperation during this budget process. In particular, I vvant to give special thanks to
my office staff: Jeannie Figueroa, Debbie Paolinelli, Charlotte Tilkes, John Hays, Samantha Buck,
Sonia De La Rosa, Ron Alexander, Gayle Johnson, and Natalie Ortiz for their hard work. Without their
long hours and dedication, the completion of the budget process would not have been possible. I
would also like to acknowledge the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer-Tax Collector, and the Human
Resources and Internal Services Department Directors and their staff, for their hard work and
assistance in this process.