Jail, will be funded with the Inmate Welfare Fund and current services and supplies costs
along with medical/mental health costs associated with operating the SAJ will be reallocated
to operate the West Annex Jail so additional net County cost will not be required.
Staff is proceeding with the required steps to successfully complete the processes
necessary for the receipt of State funds and the completion of the project with occupancy
expected in late 2019.
Acknowledgements
This document reflects the diligent efforts of many Fresno County employees, from
appointed and elected Department Heads, departmental business managers and budget
staff, program and operation staff, clerical support and others. Sincere thanks are due and
given to all, especially the departments of !he Auditor-Controller/Treasurer-Tax Collector
and Internal Services, who are essential partners in the production and distribution of this
budget material to the Board and to the public. Since December of 2013, the entire County
Administrative Office team, including all analysts and administrative support staff, has been
involved in planning, strategizing, instructing, coordinating, reviewing, balancing, formatting
and finalizing the documents that represent !he FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for
your consideration. Documents have been made available to the Board and to the public
well ahead of any required legal notification timelines in the interest of full transparency
and disclosure in this public process.
an addition of $700,000 to the designation for Sheriff Vehicle Replacement, ($600,000
was designated in the current year); and a budget mitigation fund of $6.5 million. As
previously directed, an increase to the General Reserve of $2.2 million is recommended
which brings the total to $18.7 million.
While the bottom line budget total may suggest to some that our growth is not
incremental, allow me to point out that we have begun budgeting for new Special
Revenue Funds based on Governmental Accounting Standards and a recommendation
from the County's external auditor as a best practice to enable the AuditorControllerrrreasurer-
Tax Collector to timely and accurately prepare year-end
documentation now required of the County. The reclassification of 211 Trust and
Agency type funds to new Special Revenue Funds is effective July 1, 2015. Almost
80% of the growth in the total budget, year-over-year, is directly attributable to that
accounting change. The new Special Revenue Funds were previously budgeted only
as revenue for certain department budgets, this change in essence double counts them,
once as they are collected and then again as they are transferred to departments as
revenue sources. The 211 new Special Revenue Funds do not represent new funding
sources.
As a member of the Statewide Realignment Allocation Committee, I participated in the
development of a new permanent formula for distribution of A B 109 funding. Consistent
with our goals, the permanent formula allocates funding to high caseload counties while
also taking into account other factors, such as the crime rate and poverty level, which
limit a county's ability to expend local resources to implement the necessary services
required by the realigned population. With these factors, the permanent formula is
beneficial to Fresno County and most San Joaquin Valley counties with Fresno
County's allocation rate increasing by 14% from FY 2014-15. For FY 2015-16, Fresno
County is estimated to receive $33.2 million as follows: base allocation ($31.3 million)
and growth funds ($1.9 million). The base allocation is estimated to increase to $35.1
million in FY 2016-17 (the growth estimate is pending).
AB 109 funding was used to provide new or expansion of programs/services as follows:
• Pre-Trial Program Expansion- will increase the number of individuals able to be
placed into the program from 100 to 240. It will also allow assessments and
recommendations to be available to the Court at arraignment so a decision
regarding release of the individual into the program can be made at that time,
which will result in further freeing up of jail bed space. The total number of
assessments and recommendations completed is estimated to increase from
approximately 30 per week to approximately 50 to 60 per day.

Proposition 47 (Prop 47) Case Processing Program - Prop 47 created a new
workload and long-term prosecution/defense obligations. As of January 31,
2015, the departments had processed over 1,100 Prop 47 cases each. It is also
estimated that the Court has approximately 3,000 cases pending with 9,000
(average of three per case) Prop 47 petitions/applications. The goal of AB 109 in
transferring responsibility of inmates from the State to the local level is impacted
by the Prop 47 population. With AB 109 funding, the District Attorney and Public
Defender were each able to add 3 positions to process Prop 47 cases efficiently
through the court system and help to address the impact of Prop 47 on the A B
109 population.
• Post Release Community Supervision (PRCS) - with the number of PRCS
offenders being consistently over state estimates for Fresno County, the number
of Deputy Probation Officers was increased to bring the supervision ratios in the
A B 109 unit in line with the supervision standards included in the Community
Corrections Partnership (CCP) plan.
• Adult Compliance Team (ACT) Expansion - funding was approved to add two
law enforcement officers from rural Fresno County cities to the existing Adult
Compliance Team, which is currently comprised of sworn officers from the
Fresno County Sheriff's Department, the Fresno Police Department, the Clovis
Police Department, the Fresno County Probation Department, and an
Investigator from the Fresno County District Attorney's Office. The purpose of
the ACT is to add an additional layer of offender supervision and public safety by
working as a cooperative unit capable of addressing public safety concerns and
issues facing local law enforcement in Fresno County.
• Jail Staffing related to Quentin Hall Settlement- the FY 2015-16 Recommended
Budget for the Sheriff includes $930,559 in AB 109 funding to partially offset the
costs for 49 Correctional Officer and 2 Correctional Sergeant positions related to
the Quentin Hall settlement negotiations. The CCP is scheduled to consider this
request at its May 29, 2015 meeting.
On March 24, 2015, the Sheriff presented to the Board of Supervisors the department's
Vehicle Replacement Plan. As part of that plan, the Board approved $1.2 million for the
purchase of patrol vehicles. With that funding, the Sheriff has ordered 33 patrol
vehicles to replace high mileage, maintenance prone vehicles. In addition, the FY
2015-16 Recommended Budget for the Sheriff includes $1.7 million for the purchase of
an estimated 45 patrol vehicles. As part of the annual budget process, the Sheriff will
continue to recommend allocating funding for the purchase of patrol vehicles. After the
department has made the first initial replacement of all 200+ patrol vehicles (seven year
schedule), the department will transition to replacement funding from the Vehicle
Replacement Designation previously mentioned.
On June 23, 2014 Corizon Health, Inc. started providing services in the County's Adult
Detention Facilities (Jail) and the Juvenile Justice Campus (JJC). Community Regional
Medical Center (CMC) will continue to provide emergency, inpatient hospitalization, and
outpatient specialty care services for the adult inmates and juvenile wards through the
Corizon Health, Inc. contract. The County of Fresno will no longer contract for these
services with CMC.
Responding to implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the corresponding
reduction in health realignment funding in California, the County ended its
comprehensive contract with CMC to provide medical services to indigent individuals in
the community. Staff from the Departments of Social Services and Public Health,
working closely with community based organizations, provided enrollment assistance to
individuals who qualified under the expanded healthcare program. Additionally $5.5
million dollars was made available by your Board to reimburse medical providers for
certain specialty healthcare services provided to the remaining uninsured in Fresno
County. Your Board has once again held the required public hearing and made the
required finding to transfer 10% of mental health realignment funding to Public Health to
restore and maintain basic public health services.
On January 16, 2014, the California Board of State and Community Corrections (BSCC)
approved Fresno County's application request of $79.2 million for the construction of the
West Annex Jail project (WAJ). The WAJ will be 3 floors with 300 medium/maximum
security beds and will be located west of the North Annex Jail. The WAJ will replace
outdated linear cells with new generation pods and allow for greater observation and
supervision of inmates. Of equal importance, it will provide necessary housing,
treatment, and program space for special needs inmates, specifically those with
behavioral health issues. Once the new WAJ is constructed and ready for occupancy,
which is projected to be in the spring of 2019, the vintage 1942 South Annex Jail will be
taken off line.
On May 12, 2015, during a public session representatives of the Sheriffs office reported
that since the County implemented the Medical Marijuana Ordinance over a year ago,
the department has noted a marked reduction in grow sites and related violence
throughout Fresno County. The following statistics were provided by the department.
In 2014, 347 grows represented a 37% reduction from the previous year with a noted
reduction in associated violence. Current statistics are trending toward another 20%
year-over-year reduction in grows year to date.
Acknowledgements
This document is the result of the combined and concentrated efforts of many dedicated
Fresno County employees, from appointed and elected Department Heads,
departmental business managers and budget staff, program and operations staff,
clerical support and others. Special recognition is due to the divisions of the AuditorControllerrrreasurer-
Tax Collector and Internal Services Department, who are essential
partners in the production and distribution of this budget material to the Board and to the
public. Beginning in December of 2014, the entire County Administrative Office,
including all analysts and administrative support staff, has been involved in planning,
strategizing, instructing, coordinating, reviewing, balancing, formatting and finalizing the
documents that represent the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for your
consideration. Once again, documents have been made available to the Board and to
the public well ahead of any required legal notification timelines in the interest of full
transparency and disclosure in this public process.