I am pleased to present Humboldt County’s proposed budget for Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13. I’d like to start by thanking County departments for their adaptability, perseverance and hard work in the process of developing the budget proposal before you today. I am consistently amazed by how department heads, managers and staff throughout the organization continue to find new ways of doing business to fulfill the commitment of developing a stable budget. I would like to thank our union partners for their willingness to make sacrifices for the long term sustainability of the County. I also want to thank the community and specifically the people that attended the budget workshops for their input and priorities as they relate to the County budget.
This year’s budget cover shows a simple field of flowers on a spring day in Humboldt County. This photo reminds me of the resilience and sustainability of nature, the re-growth that occurs in spring and the promise and
opportunity of the summer to come. These are all concepts that are applicable to the financial outlook of the County as we head into FY 2012-13.
Resilience and Sustainability
The field of flowers on the cover is an example of the resilience and sustainability of nature. The flowers are able to grow each year in an ongoing cycle of flower to seed, seed to flower. Their survival is dependant on their ability to adapt to changing resource and environments. The County must also adapt to changing resources to continue to provide the needed services and programs to our Community.
For FY 2011-12, the County’s strategy was to align expenditures with available ongoing revenues to create a sustainable budget by resetting the General Fund base to 92% of the previous year’s budget. Departments receiving General Fund allocations once again made difficult choices and sacrifices in an effort to achieve financial stability for the County.
Simplicity
Like the photo on the cover of a simple field of flowers, this budget is based on simplicity; ongoing revenues are balanced to ongoing expenditures. In past years the budget has been balanced utilizing various one-time fixes such as deferred costs, transfers, temporary loans and the use of fund balance. The FY 2012-13 budget is simply stated a status quo budget; there are no reductions to General Fund allocations proposed and there are very few augmentations.
Budget Proposal
The proposal before you now represents a County spending plan for FY 2012-13 totaling $280,701,188. This is an increase of $15,029,991, or 6%, from last year. Two funding sources contributed most significantly to this $15 million increase: the Department of Health and Human Services budget increased by $11 million due to increases in State and federal funding; the General Fund budget increased by $8.8 million due to increases in
grant programs, such as Proposition 84 implementation in the Natural Resources budget and Public Safety Realignment. These increases are balanced against two major decreases; the Roads Fund budget decreased by $2.4 million due to reductions in Proposition 1B, stimulus and bridge replacement/repair projects; and the Economic Development budget decreased by almost $5 million due to reductions in grant funding.
The County General Fund budget is increasing for the first time in three years. The proposed budget includes $94,959,332 in General Fund appropriations - an increase of $8,793,898, or 9.2%, from FY 2011-12. The General Fund is the County’s major source of local revenues available to be spent on your Board’s priority programs and projects. Of the total General Fund budget less than half or $45,924,967 is from discretionary funding sources.
The proposed number of allocated positions for FY 2012-13 is 2,148.54. Of these, 1,956.92 are proposed to be funded (an increase of 15.45 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions from FY 2011-12). This increased number of funded positions is offset by 15.5 FTE in previously frozen positions which are recommended to be disallocated.
Departments submitted over $3 million in supplemental requests. Unfortunately resources are available to fund only a small portion of these requests. After consultation with your Board’s Budget Subcommittee, I am recommending funding $230,475 in requests based on their alignment with the priorities of the community and the Board. This represents three requests: backfilling lost revenue in the Coroner’s Office to prevent a layoff, a recruitment and retention campaign for public safety employees and funding to support a facility improvement project for the Public Defender.
Re-Growing
The lupines in the cover photo show how wild flowers re-grow each year. Nature’s growth is bound by available resources, as is the County’s. The re-growth of wild flowers is dependent upon the amount of spring rain. The proposed budget demonstrates that we are ready to start re-growing our financial resources. Unfortunately, due to limited resources we are limited to slow growth for this budget year.
First and most importantly, this budget proposes to contribute $500,000 to our General Reserve. We reduced our
General Reserve from $3 million to $250,000 over two fiscal years starting in FY 2009-10. In FY 2011-12 we were able to stop reductions and as hoped we are now ready to start re-growing our General Reserves in FY 2012-13. In accordance with Board policy, I must disclose to you that this amount is just one-tenth of the amount that should be in our General Reserve. Per policy, this should be between $7.47 million and $9.34 million. Even with this contribution, however, the total will only be $750,000.
Second, this budget starts re-growing contributions to other County funds by $181,624. This represents one-half of the FY 2011-12 reductions and will support County programs and services provided by other funds. In some cases this will allow the County to claim additional funds from State and federal grants thus leveraging local dollars.
Third, this budget begins re-growing funding for facility related expenses and includes a contribution to the Deferred Maintenance trust fund of $153,650, which represents an increase of $77,321 from FY 2011-12. While this is still well below the policy level of $1.4 million, it does represent movement in a positive direction.
Fourth, the General Fund Contingency Reserve is proposed at $1 million, an increase of $150,000 from the adopted FY 2011-12 budget. Again, this is far lower than the policy level of $5.6 million.
I recognize departments’ desire for more re-growth; it was apparent in many of the objectives and supplemental funding requests that were submitted as part of the budget process. I wish I could offer more resources to departments to allow for increased services but unfortunately that is not an option at this time. The economic recovery has been very limited and revenue growth is anticipated to continue at a slow rate.
Opportunity & Promise
Spring is all about opportunity and promise. As the photo on the cover shows, it is a time when there is a mixture of rain and sun. Spring is when we can take a break from the bad weather and look forward to the warmer weather of summer. We are currently at a similar point in the economic cycle; things are better but not good. I would say that our employees are the opportunity and promise for the future for the County. Their willingness to
work diligently to serve this community is what has kept our programs and services going through these difficult times.
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my sincere appreciation to everyone that makes Humboldt County a special place to live. A special thank you, to your Board for your support, to our community for their interest and involvement and to department heads and staff for their extraordinary effort and sacrifices during these challenging financial times. I would also like to extend my thanks for the tireless effort spent in preparing this budget to the staff of the Auditor-Controller’s Office, and the Management & Budget Team of the County Administrative Office – Assistant County Administrative Officer Cheryl Dillingham, Administrative Services Manager Karen Clower, Executive Assistant Nanci Bryant and Fiscal Assistant Jim Hussey. Without them, this budget proposal simply could not have been completed.