Today I am pleased to present Humboldt County’s proposed budget for FY 2013-14. I would like to start by
thanking the community for their participation in the budget process, particularly the community members
who participated in the County’s first-ever live interactive, multi-site meeting held on February 28, 2013, across
all five supervisorial districts. I would also like to thank the Humboldt County Office of Education and Access
Humboldt for their assistance. I heard many comments that evening on priorities that should be built into the
FY 2013-14 budget including setting higher reserves and increasing funding for fire districts, and these priorities
are reflected as recommendations in this proposed FY 2013-14 budget. I look forward to continuing to
receive community input in the County’s budget process.
Over the past few years, we have developed a tradition of featuring a budget cover that reflects the overall
message of the County’s budget. This year’s budget cover is a picture of a grassy hill overlooking mountains
as the sun rises in the east, with our typical Humboldt County fog huddled in a valley. This photo says to me
that a new economic day is on the horizon, almost within our reach. We need to remain vigilant and keep
our eyes above the fog which threatens to encroach upon our view of the peaks and remove the feel of a
bright day from our skin. We also need to be aware of the fences and the barriers that they signify. If we stay
focused on the horizon we will see the sun and reap the rewards of prudent financial planning. These are all
concepts that are relevant to the financial outlook for FY 2013-14.
Understanding the View Before Us
The County, like other governmental entities, segments its money into "funds." Each fund can be thought of
as a checking account. The County has many different funds, from our largest joint checking account (the
General Fund), to very specific accounts that can only be used for a designated purpose. While one account
can either buy food (operating expense) or a new car (capital expense) money can only be moved
between funds by a specifically-authorized transfer.
In government, the only expenses that can be paid from a fund are those expenditures appropriated by your
Board. I am recommending a budget that
contains $303,147,212 in expenditure
appropriations; however this is spread across 17
funds.
Each fund must have income (we call this
revenue) and/or fund balance to cover
expenses. The good news is that our income is
growing. In the General Fund, projected
revenues for FY 2013-14 will be $103,983,362,
which is $10,574,017 or 11% higher than in FY
2012-13. This revenue increase is primarily due to
dedicated funding sources such as Proposition
172 sales tax receipts dedicated to public safety
and grant/bond funds to provide seismic
retrofits of County-owned facilities. Of the total

General Fund revenues, less than half, or $46,884,501, are available to be prioritized according to your Board’s
decision making.
Unfortunately, our expenses are growing even faster than our revenues. Today I am recommending that your
Board appropriate $106,923,261 in General Fund expenditures. This is an increase of $11,940,929, or 12.57%,
from last year. Adopted expenditures for FY 2012-13 were $94,982,332. Expenditure increases to the General
Fund are detailed in the chart on the previous page. This means that we have a current-year deficit of $2.9
million.
Why would I recommend spending more money than we are bringing in? Just as sometimes in our personal
life the timing of income and the need for a new car don't line up neatly and we must dip into savings, so too
in government occasionally circumstances require spending before we have the cash in hand. The chart
below details our current-year deficit.
What most concerns me, however, is that this
chart also demonstrates that we have an ongoing
structural deficit in the General Fund. That is, we
are using our savings (fund balance) to cover
ongoing operating expenses. This is a cause for
significant concern and contradicts the policy on
balanced budgeting adopted by your Board in
2008. That policy provides that fund balance shall
be limited to one-time expenditures and is
generally earmarked to support capital projects,
fixed asset purchases and the acquisition of
communications and computer systems. So
again, why would I recommend this?
As you can see from the chart $1 million of the
$1.2 million structural deficit is due to salary increases that your Board approved earlier this year. County
employees have not had salary adjustments in three years, and made significant concessions to help the
County weather the economic storms of the Great Recession and to position us for long-term fiscal health.
On January 22, 2013, my office presented a new financial projection document, known as the 5 Year
Financial Forecast (Forecast), to your Board to help keep our eyes focused on those peaks on the horizon and
help us better navigate the barriers in front of us. The Forecast estimates slow revenue growth in fiscal years
2014-15 and 2015-16 of $1.3 to $1.6 million each year, followed by improved revenue performance in fiscal
years 2016-17 and 2017-18 of $2.4 to $2.5 million each year. The value of long-range planning is that it lets us
know when it is acceptable to make a short-term sacrifice, such as proposing a budget with a $2.9 million
deficit that will leave an estimated $1.6 million in fund balance (savings) for available financing in FY 2014-15.
However I think it is important to note that there are risks with this choice. The Forecast mentions economic
uncertainties and notes that estimating revenues into the future is a difficult task and there likely will be
differences between projections and actual amounts. There is the chance that revenues will not grow at the
rates estimated which would result in the need for spending reductions.
The Immediate Landscape
The picture before us today represents a County spending plan for FY 2013-14 totaling $303,147,212. This is an
increase of $22,025,332 or 7.8%, from last year. Of this $22,025,332 increase, $11,940,929 is attributable to the
General Fund and was described previously. The remaining $10 million increase is contributed by other funds
and primarily due to State and federal funding sources. An overall $5.4 million increase for the Department of
Health and Human Services (DHHS) is primarily for a regional Call Center to serve new and existing Medi-Cal
clients, CalFresh eligibility, and County Medical Services Program benefits, all in concert with the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act. A $3.9 million increase for Economic Development is due to an
accounting change. Grants and loans from Headwaters will now be processed through the operating
budget unit versus the trust fund, thereby increasing the operating budget unit by $3.9 million but not the
overall grants and loans awarded. Also included is an increase of $700,000 for Roads projects in areas such as
McKinleyville’s School Road and the areas surrounding Redway Elementary School.
A New Dawn
For the past two years, your Board has provided a Strategic Framework to assist staff in directing our resources.
On May 3, 2013, your Board adopted Five Key Goals for 2013-14 that are new additions to this Strategic
Framework. The Goals state that FY 2013-14 is expected to be a year of slow growth in revenues, with growth
in necessary expenditures consuming nearly all new revenues. Your Board recognizes the need to continue
supporting core services, and despite slow revenue growth, this proposed budget purchases a significant
amount of services for our community.
What does a $303,147,212 County budget purchase for our community? This total represents approximately
2,000 jobs in our community, which in turn support many local privately owned businesses. This total
represents public safety in remote areas of our community with 61 Deputy Sheriffs helping keep us safe. Sheriff
services remain available in far corners of our County through the Garberville and Hoopa substations. This
also represents a Day Reporting Center for inmates newly released from State prisons as a result of 2011 Public
Safety Realignment which enforces laws and regulations to protect our residents. It represents 47 projects on
our County roadways which provide for and maintain our County infrastructure. This total includes services for
our most vulnerable populations which include foster children and the elderly. It means efficient valuation
and appraisal of real and personal property and then the collection of property taxes which fund our local
schools, cities, special districts, roads, libraries, and your County government. It also includes the protection of
our natural resources through the development and administration of programs for water resources,
environmental restoration, habitat conservation, and natural hazard mitigation. This budget provides support
to our local fire districts with an increased share of dedicated public safety revenues and subsidizing their
Workers’ Compensation insurance.
Where there are resources that may be either identified or made available, however, your Board wishes to
prioritize the allocation of resources using the following Five Goals:
1. In order to ensure the sustainability of County services, the Board of Supervisors will place a high priority
on rebuilding reserve and contingency accounts.
2. In order to ensure the sustainability of County services, the Board of Supervisors will be open to ideas
about downsizing the inventory of County properties (including raw land, buildings and fleet), where
appropriate, to levels that are easier to manage with current resources.
3. In order to ensure the sustainability of County services, the Board of Supervisors will consider investing in
increased internal capacity where this would minimize outside expenses.
4. In order to ensure the sustainability of County services, the Board of Supervisors will look favorably upon
opportunities to consolidate or share services.
The Board also recognizes that proactive decision-making and engaging and influencing issues of statewide
concern cannot be accomplished without a certain minimum level of investment. Therefore, the Board will
seek to support this level of investment by:
5. In order to build interjurisdictional and regional cooperation, engage in discussions of our regional
economic future and engage and influence issues of statewide concern, the Board will seek to
allocate resources to support travel, training and electronic meeting costs for staff and elected officials.
The 2013-14 Budget Proposal incorporates the Goals by proposing to contribute $250,000 to our General
Reserve. The County reduced our General Reserve from $3 million to $250,000 over two fiscal years starting in
FY 2009-10. In FY 2011-12 we were able to stop reductions to the General Reserve and in FY 2012-13 we added
$500,000. The current balance in the County’s General Reserve is $750,000. Even with the proposed
contribution, however, the total will only be $1,000,000, which is just over one-tenth of the amount that should
be in our General Reserve. Per policy, this should be between $7.47 million and $9.34 million. This budget also
proposes a General Fund Contingency Reserve at $1 million. Again, this is far lower than the policy level of
$6.2 million. However, the Roads Fund has increased contingencies from $780,000 to $1,250,000 for FY 2013-
14. Both this action and the increase in General Reserve are in accordance with your Board’s priority of
rebuilding reserve and contingency accounts.
The budget also proposes to increase contributions to other County funds by $174,532. This will return
contributions to pre-Great Recession levels and will support County programs and services provided by other
funds. The proposed budget also includes travel to engage in State-wide issues of concern, for example,
travel to Sacramento for Health Care Reform and Public Safety and Health Realignment meetings. The
proposed budget includes training for staff improvement for many County departments and also provides
funding for the paperless Board agenda system which supports travel, training and electronic meeting costs
for staff and elected officials.

The proposed budget and the Goals speak to a new day that is before us and on the horizon. With practical
financial planning we will remain above the fog. We will continue to look for opportunities to downsize the
inventory of County properties (including raw land, buildings and fleet) and to consolidate or share services
both internally and with other local governments by potentially sharing service costs with the cities and
exploring the consolidation of certain County departments.
Staying Out of the Fog Does Not Mean Position Growth
The recommended number of allocated positions for FY 2013-14 is 2,204.28. Of these, 2,006.96 are proposed
to be funded. This is a decrease in funded positions of 11.66, or 1%. Recommended frozen positions have
increased by 14.20 from 183.12 in FY 2012-13 to 197.32, or 9%. Despite the overall decrease in funded positions
some departments were able to increase positions. The majority of this position increase is attributable to
DHHS with a position increase of 6.40 full time equivalent (FTE). This overall increase is due to the 2011
Realignment programs which included Child Welfare Services, Foster Care, Adoptions, and Adult Protective
Services. Counties were given the option to contract back to the State to continue performing certain
services, including adoption services. Humboldt County chose to contract with the State to perform adoption
services. The position increase in DHHS is in order to perform these adoption services.
The Fence Reigns Us In
Departments submitted over $4.5 million in supplemental requests. Unfortunately, while the departmental
requests have merit, the County Administrative Office is proposing to direct the limited financial resources in
the General Fund to reserves in accordance with the Board’s articulated goals for FY 2013-14.
I recognize departments’ desire to return to pre-Great Recession levels; it was apparent in many of the
objectives and supplemental funding requests that were submitted as part of the budget process. I wish I
could offer more resources to departments to allow for a return to pre-Great Recession service levels but
unfortunately that is not an option at this time. The economic recovery has been very limited and revenue
growth is anticipated to continue at a slow rate. As shown on the cover photo our view to the mountains and
sun is obscured by fencing. This fencing represents barriers and our current barriers are slow revenue growth
and escalating expenditures. The peaks of the mountains are off in the distance and it will be some distance
into the future before we can return to service level seen before the Great Recession.
As The Sun Rises
A new day brings promise and an opportunity to start over again. As the cover photo shows, it is a time to
begin again and keep ourselves out of the fog and remain diligent in our efforts to safeguard the public’s trust
by managing our resources to ensure sustainability of services. It is a new day and by focusing on your
Board’s Five Key Goals we can remain in a positive financial position.
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my sincere appreciation to everyone that makes Humboldt
County a wonderful place to live. A special thank you, to your Board for your support, to our community for
their interest and involvement, and to department heads and staff for their effort and continued sacrifices as
we recover from these challenging financial times. I would also like to extend my thanks for the exhaustive
effort spent in preparing this budget to the staff of the Auditor-Controller’s Office, particularly Charlotte
Merkel, and the Management & Budget Team of the County Administrative Office – Assistant County
Administrative Officer Cheryl Dillingham, Deputy County Administrative Officer Amy Nilsen, Senior
Administrative Analyst Nicole Morrow, Administrative Services Manager Karen Clower, Public Information
Specialist Sean Quincey and Executive Assistant Nanci Bryant. Without them this budget proposal could not
have been completed.