INTRODUCTION
While folks may still be waiting for Quinn the Eskimo to get here, and there may be little in this year’s Budget that will give people reason to actually jump for joy, hopefully, the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 CAO Recommended Budget will allow ev’rybody to breathe just a little bit easier.
A few months ago, the approach to the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget could be described as being filled with trepidation and possibly even despair, and rightly so. Last year’s budget left many County departments and offices feeling like there was someone on ev’ryone’s toes, and the coming fiscal year promised another $1,000,000 in known General Fund cost increases. The size of these known personnel cost increases soon grew when the County learned that the California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) would charge Inyo County $407,724 in Fiscal Year 2015-2016 to cover unfunded liabilities in the pension fund for safety employees. And, CalPERS estimated these charges would total over $3,457,654 through the next five years.
Then, health care costs increased by 15%, adding another $160,000 (for seven months of billing) to the projected increase in personnel costs, and retiree health care cost increases added another $638,830. Suddenly, known cost increases in the General Fund were estimated to be approaching $2 Million, and this year’s budget process had barely begun.
However, as presented, the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget has been able to largely absorb or mitigate these personnel cost increases without drastic cuts to department budget requests. In fact, the CAO Recommended Budget is able to support many department requests for changes in staffing that will add capacity and improve services. The Budget also identifies over $365,784 in matching funds for anticipated grants for capital improvements at parks and airports; provides money for many deferred maintenance and equipment needs; and, supports initiatives that could provide greater budget stability. These initiatives include making contributions to pursue strategies to secure future infrastructure and economic development investments.
The decent outcome to this year’s budget process is a result of three factors:
	Most departments have been able and willing to maintain the savings achieved in last year’s Budget. The gains made through service redesign, and reducing the size of the County workforce are paying benefits. The benefits of last year’s Separation Incentive Plan, and the willingness to address increasing costs by reducing staff levels (usually through attrition instead of layoffs) cannot be overemphasized.
	Accrued savings have been deployed to off-set corresponding costs in department budgets. These are likely one-time opportunities that include a motor pool rate holiday and off-sets to dental and vision insurance costs.
	County revenues tied to the overall State economy are improving. These revenue all-stars include Unitary Property Tax, LADWP Secured Tax, Sales & Use Tax, and Transient Occupancy Tax.
These influences are described in greater detail throughout this Introduction and Summary.
However, while the budget picture looks better than it did last year, or even a couple months ago, now is not the time to jump for joy or wanna doze. Quinn the Eskimo is not here yet. It remains to be seen if increases in some general revenue categories represent long-term trends or just fortunate spikes. The State is changing the manner in which it allocates sales tax in-lieu of related to the end of the Triple Flip, (albeit hereto without clear explanations of how to track these changes) and this could result in overpayments, corrections or misallocations of funds that may not be known for another year. Furthermore, gains in State-calculated taxes like the unitary property tax and LADWP land valuation are being off-set by a leveling-off or decline in some locally assessed tax revenues.
In addition to uncertainty regarding the staying power of emergent revenue increases, there are other reasons to remain cautious about using this year’s Budget as an indicator of the future fiscal health of the County. Many of the trends reported in last year’s budget as reason for concern are continuing. Fewer positions, and more aggressive and successful recruitments means there continues to be less salary savings available to help balance the budget; both at the beginning of the fiscal year and as a component of Fund Balance. Some law enforcement costs continue to grow at a higher rate than the costs of other programs and services. And, this Budget continues the practice of drawing more money out of key trusts and funds - Geothermal Royalties, Criminal Justice Facilities, AB 443/Rural Sheriffs - than the applicable trust or fund receives in a year. If all of these budgeted operating transfers are actually spent, the practice will eventually become unsustainable and these trusts will at some point be depleted.
The Recommended Budget provides an opportunity for relief from some recent budget tempests. The next year could be very telling in terms of whether we are just experiencing a lull in the storm or some clearing skies. Rather than take a wait and see approach, your Board of Supervisors and County staff is encouraged to continue pursuing budgetary savings and increased efficiencies wherever they can be found. Toward this end, before concluding, this Introduction and Summary of the CAO Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-2016 provides a partial menu of opportunities that can be pursued to provide the County with greater budget stability in the future.
SUMMARY
As presented, the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended Budget is balanced as required by law. The Recommended Budget totals $93,590,304 in expenditures and $86,857,059 in revenues. The General Fund portion of the CAO Recommended Budget is $53,864,158 in expenditures and $50,334,369 in revenues, and is based on having $3,529,789 in Fund Balance available from Fiscal Year 2014-2015.
The amount of General Fund Balance being used to close the gap between revenues and expenses in this year’s Recommended Budget is the same amount of General Fund Balance ultimately used to balance last year’s Approved Budget, but $548,972 more than what was needed to balance last year’s CAO Recommended Budget.
The Auditor-Controller will certify Fiscal Year 2014-2015 General Fund Balance when Budget Hearings begin on September 2nd. If the certified Fund Balance turns out to be higher than the $3,529,789 relied upon to balance the Budget, your Board of Supervisors will have an opportunity to explore uses for the additional money in this year’s Budget. If the certified Fund Balance is less than $3,529,789, reductions will need to be made to the Recommended Budget.
The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Department Requested Budget, which is also presented here and based on budget requests submitted by departments, seeks $92,894,083 in expenditures against $85,161,927 in projected revenues. The General Fund component of this year’s Department Requested Budget seeks $54,456,170 in expenditures and projects $49,622,043 in revenues. The Department Requested Budget results in a $4,834,127 General Fund deficit; $1,304,338 more than the $3,529,789 General Fund Balance relied upon to close the gap between revenue and expenses in the CAO Recommended Budget. (Table 1.)
Table 1.
AT A GLANCE
The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended General Fund Budget is balanced by:
	Relying on $476,202 in General Fund Salary Savings, compared to the $531,462 in Salary Savings used in the Fiscal Year 20142015 Recommended/Approved Budget.
	Making $126,852 in non-personnel related reductions to the Department Requested General Fund Budget, compared to the $429,642 in non-personnel cuts made in last year’s CAO Recommended Budget.
	Utilizing $728,499 in Operating Transfers into the General Fund, compared to the $752,398 in Operating Transfer revenue needed to balance last year’s Budget.
	Projecting an overall increase of $540,789 in revenues in the General Revenues & Expenditures budget.
	Assuming General Fund Balance will be certified at or above $3,529,789.
As presented, this year’s Budget:
 Provides $40,302 in General Fund Contingencies.
 Makes changes to the authorized staffing by (1) eliminating 16.5 positions, 13.5 of which are vacant and unfunded, and (2) adding 10.5 new positions, of which 7.5 are funded.
 Identifies $310,784 in matching funds to support Federal Aviation Administration grants for improvements to the Bishop and Lone Pine airports.
 Reserves $35,000 for matching funds in support of $558,754 in State grant applications to build handicap accessible docks at Diaz Lake and Millpond Recreation Area.
 Makes a $55,500 Operating Transfer from the Inyo County General Fund to the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging to ensure that ESAAA has the matching funds required from Inyo and Mono counties to access State and Federal funding.
 Provides $498,489 in General Fund monies to continue operating the Inyo County Growing Older Living with Dignity (IC GOLD) program for senior citizens in Inyo County. This is in addition to providing matching funds for State and Federal to the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging budget.
 Increases the Assessor’s budget by $116,646 compared to last year’s Board Approved Budget in order to support the transition in office leadership.
 Funds the fourth year of debt-service on the County’s Property Tax Management System project.
 Identifies funding to make upgrades to the County’s financial system software (IFAS).
 Continues funding the Tech Refresh program at the budget unit level rather than relying on Computer System Fund Balance.
 Includes $228,200 in funding for Deferred Maintenance projects, through a combination of grants, the use of designated or categorical monies, and General Fund Operating Transfers. The budget also includes $193,400 in encumbrances to fund ongoing projects.
 Purchases 10 new patrol vehicles for the Sheriff’s Office from the Motor Pool budget.
 Provides a $212,920 General Fund Operating Transfer necessary to maintain Recycling and Waste Management service levels.
 Maintains last year’s funding levels for the County’s Grants-In- Support budget and Advertising County Resources budget, including the Community Project Sponsorship Program.
While this Budget has some highlights, it is important to also recognize that this Budget still leaves many County needs unfulfilled, and others only partially fulfilled. The Recommended Budget designates no money for a contribution to the Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust the County established 7 years ago to begin addressing unfunded retiree healthcare liabilities. Similarly, there is no money designated for General Reserves or the Economic Stabilization Fund.
In addition, there are trends associated with this year’s Budget - some reported last year, some newly emerging - that warrant noting:
	Retiree healthcare costs continue to grow. The County’s “pay-as- you-go” costs have increased from $1,624,095 last year to $1,979,047 this year. The Budget is sufficient to fund the pay-as- you-go amount without dipping into OPEB Trust. The balance in the OPEB Trust is $5,356,519 as of June 30, 2015.
	Employee pension benefit costs increased by $437,854. This includes $407,724 CalPERS is charging the County this year to begin paying for unfunded liabilities in the County’s safety pension.
	Non-General Fund budgets appear to be increasing use of their fund balances, and need to be carefully monitored. For example, the Water department has drawn down its fund balance from $782,046 to $236,730 since 2012.
	While some law enforcement costs are still growing faster than most other general fund budgets, other law enforcement costs, like Probation, are starting to decrease.
	The amount of Operating Transfers to the General Fund is about the same as last year, and the General Fund Budget is continuing to budget more revenue from key trusts than the trusts receive each year.
	Certain general revenues are increasing, including: the State- calculated unitary property tax and City of Los Angles land valuation; Transactions and Use Tax; and, Hotel Transient
Occupancy Tax. However, other sources of revenue, such a local secured and unsecured property taxes are not showing signs of significant increases.
Arriving at the Recommended Budget
As presented, this Budget document presents, and identifies the differences between the Department Requested Budget and CAO Recommended Budget for the Fiscal Year 2015-2016. It also describes the steps taken to ultimately submit a balanced Budget for consideration by your Board of Supervisors.
In any County Budget, the wants and needs of departments usually exceed what the County can afford, or the Budget Officer is comfortable recommending. This year is no different. The expenses in this year’s Department Requested General Fund Budget exceed projected revenues in the Department Requested Budget by $4,834,127. Expenses in the Department Requested General Fund Budget exceed revenues projected in the CAO Recommended Budget by $4,121,801. This difference reflects, primarily, the addition of Operating Transfers to the General Fund.
While the difference between the Department Requested Budget and CAO Recommended Budget may appear large, it is not unusual. Last year, the difference between revenues and expenses in the Department Requested General Fund Budget was $5,949,433. The difference between Department Requested expenses and CAO Recommended revenues was $4,871,387.
In reality, the gap between this year’s Department Requested Budget and the CAO Recommended Budget could easily have been much greater if departments did not strive to maintain the cost savings achieved in last year’s budget, including maintaining lower authorized staff levels and increased efficiencies. And, keep in mind, the savings achieved in last year’s Budget came on top of many successive years of budget belt tightening by many County departments.
In every budget process, there is a certain amount of inherent give-and-take. In contrast to last year, when the CAO Recommended Budget had to rely on taking, this year’s Budget has tried to avoid doing so. Again, this task was made easier by departments striving to maintain expenditures at or below last year’s levels. The CAO Recommended Budget reduces non-personnel costs in General Fund budgets by only $126,852 - not including salary savings, one-time reductions in dental and vision insurance costs, or the application of the motor pool rate holiday. This stands in contrast to last year when the CAO Recommended Budget reduced non-personnel costs in General Fund budgets by $429,642.
While adjustments to department budget requests are an integral part of the steps taken to arrive at a balanced Recommended Budget, the resulting savings are usually relatively modest - especially this year - and, on their own, do not result in achieving a balanced budget. Each year, the CAO Recommended Budget must rely on a combination of multiple actions - not just cutting department budget requests - that reduce or defer costs and, in some instances, identify alternative sources of revenue. Components of the CAO Recommended Budget which, with the exception of the use of salary savings, are not typically part of the Department Requested Budget include:
Fund Balance. Fund Balance is the amount of money remaining in a fund at the end of the fiscal year. Typically, Fund Balance refers to the Fund Balance in the County’s General Fund, and the County relies on this money to bridge the gap between projected revenues and expenses in the Department Requested and, ultimately, the CAO Recommended Budget. However, Non-General Fund Budgets, which by definition sit in their own fund, can also have fund balances and these, too, are sometimes used to bridge budget shortfalls in respective budgets.
Operating Transfers from Key Funds & Trusts. The Recommended Budget continues to benefit from the strategic use of Operating Transfers from key trusts to the General Fund, including the Geothermal Royalties Fund; the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust; the AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) Trust; and, the COPS Trust. The use of these Non-General Fund monies continues to be a critical means of increasing revenue in the General Fund to pay for specific projects and services that would otherwise have to be funded from General Fund revenues or deleted from the Budget. These funding sources are also sometimes used to fund specific budgets which would otherwise require an Operating Transfer from the General Fund.
Salary Savings. Positions in the authorized strength which are vacant after the beginning of the fiscal year, sometimes have salary and benefits expense removed (in monthly increments) as a means of reducing budget expense. Usually, this is done judiciously, taking only as much salary savings might accrue until the position is filled. Salary savings accrued during the year, through attrition, also contributes to Fund Balance.
This section goes on to describe these components of the budget balancing process in greater detail. The discussion of salary savings being applied to balance this year’s Budget occurs in the subsequent Personnel Actions section. And, in addition to these standard maneuvers, this year’s Recommended Budget benefits greatly from increases in some general revenues. These increases in certain revenue streams, and decreases in others, are discussed further below in the Fiscal Overview section. However, it is important to remember these revenue increases emerged during last fiscal year, and as such they also greatly benefit the projected General Fund Balance.
Fund Balance
The Auditor-Controller will certify the actual Fiscal Year 20142015 General Fund Balance on September 2nd. As noted during the Budget Update presented to your Board of Supervisors in August, pending certification by the Auditor-Controller, a placeholder estimate of about $3.5 Million has been used to prepare the Fiscal Year 20152016 Recommended Budget. This is the same amount of Fund Balance available and used to balance last year’s Board Approved Budget.
As part of your Board of Supervisors’ adoption of the Final County Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-2016, it is anticipated that the Auditor-Controller will certify the General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2015, as being at least $3,529,789. This is the amount of Fund Balance needed to fill the shortfall between projected income and projected expenses in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 CAO Recommended General Fund Budget, including providing $40,302 for General Fund Contingencies.
If the Auditor-Controller certifies Fund Balance in excess of $3,529,789, the additional money could be used to address some of the under-funded or unfunded needs identified in this Budget, such as making a contribution to the OPEB Trust, General Reserves, the Economic Stabilization Fund, or General Fund Contingencies. But, if the certified Fund Balance is lower than $3,529,789, it will be necessary to make cuts to the CAO Recommended Budget.
As frequent readers of Inyo County budgets already know, it is not unusual for the County to rely on using the prior year’s General Fund Balance to help balance the current year’s Budget. And, the existence of a prior year’s General Fund Balance, and using it to balance the Budget, is not necessarily a cause for concern.
The existence of General Fund Balance is an indicator that, overall, the County is living within the limits of its spending plan for that year (e.g., under-spending appropriations and/or over-achieving revenues). If General Fund Balance did not exist at the end of a fiscal year, it would mean that departments matched their budget projections exactly (which is very unlikely). And, if a negative General Fund Balance exists, it indicates that, as a whole, departments either over-spent appropriations, under-achieved revenues, or both - so, on its own, the existence of Fund Balance is a good thing.
It is typical for the County to rely on its prior year’s General Fund Balance to balance the Budget, and the Board Approved General Fund Budget in any given year is usually balanced to the amount of the available Fund Balance. Table 2. shows the amount of General Fund Balance used to balance the Budget the last six (6) years. As indicated, during this time, the year-ending General Fund Balance has fluctuated between $3,529,789 and $3,976,086.
Table 2.
As discussed in last year’s Budget, and emphasized again here, the County cannot rely on General Fund Balance increasing every year to cover expenses which often grown faster than revenues.
While many components, including accounts receivable, prior years’ encumbrances, and claims on cash, factor into the Fund Balance calculation, a simplified analysis shows the County’s General Fund Balance can usually be primarily attributed to salary savings that accrues after the Budget is approved; lower-than-anticipated expenditures in non-personnel expenses; and, achieving or exceeding budgeted revenues.
Although these elements have been described in previous years’ budget messages, for the benefit of the first-time or casual reader, this year’s Introduction & Summary of the Recommended Budget again describes the primary elements of Fund Balance in detail. While this year’s discussion has been updated to incorporate new trends affecting Fund Balance and the Budget, long-time readers, and students of prior years’ Budget Messages might prefer to read ahead to the Geothermal Royalties discussion beginning on page 19.)
Salary Savings as a component of Fund Balance
As noted above and discussed in more detail in the Personnel section below, use of anticipated (or, budgeted) salary and benefit savings, tied to currently vacant staff positions, is routinely employed as part of the budget process to reduce the size of the shortfall that exists between the Department Requested and CAO Recommended budgets.
However, because of the conservative approach usually taken when budgeting salary savings, there will almost always be additional salary savings in the Budget after it is adopted for two reasons. First, positions usually take longer to fill than the amount of salary savings was calculated on. For example, a position budgeted as providing three months of salary savings may actually take four or five, or even seven months to fill, thereby generating additional savings. Unless this savings is re-appropriated elsewhere in the department’s budget during the fiscal year - a practice discouraged by the County Administrator and Auditor-Controller (since salary savings is associated with on-going expense) - it will show up as part of the Fund Balance calculation at the end of the year.
In addition, there will also always be vacancies that arise later in the year; employee turnover is simply a reality of the workforce in most organizations. These vacancies, and the salary savings that comes with each one, simply cannot be anticipated at the time the Budget is prepared. While it is reasonable to anticipate that there will always be additional “unanticipated” or, perhaps more accurately, “unbudgeted” salary savings that accrue due to employee turnover throughout the year, it is not easy to anticipate what the amount of that savings might be, or in which department it might be realized. It is, therefore, neither practical nor prudent to, as some pundits have suggested, attempt to guess which departments might experience vacancies after the Budget is adopted, and then try to adjust their budgets accordingly in advance.
Again, because of these phenomenon, there will always be some unbudgeted salary savings in the County Budget at the end of the year that will contribute to Fund Balance - unless the savings is allowed to be spent elsewhere, or negated by not fully achieving revenue projections in the budget.
While the practices and realities described above explain how we arrive with salary savings at the end of a budget year, they do not necessarily explain why the dollar amount is so high. Not counting salary savings from Health & Human Services positions, unanticipated General Fund salary savings typically accounts for a slightly more than one million in year-end Fund Balance. In general, when contemplating the amount of money associated with salary savings, and all the variables at work, it is perhaps most useful to consider that the amount of money generated by salary savings is a direct reflection of the fact that personnel costs currently account for 67% (or, $36,230,821) of the County’s Recommended General Fund Budget.
It is important to stress that your Board’s continuation of the Authorized Position Review Process during the year continued to slow the County hiring process significantly. Without the Authorized Position Review Process, it is likely that the amount of additional salary savings contributing to Fund Balance could have been less.
Under-Expenditures as a component of Fund Balance
In addition to savings from position vacancies that arise during the year, under-expenditures in non-personnel categories of expenses also contribute to Fund Balance.
Based on past analysis, there is rarely a single budget, or a group of budgets that routinely budget far more than they actually spend (which would be to the detriment of tighter, ‘more realistic’ budgets). Rather, under-expenditures can generally be segregated into two categories. The first category is singular, high-priced expenditures - such as a capital improvement project, a consulting contract or a large, one-time purchase - that, for any number of reasons, do not materialize in the year in which they are budgeted. Underexpenditures in the first category are likely to show up again as expenses in the following year’s budget.
The second category of under-expenditures is comprised of budgets with small savings spread across multiple expense object codes that, when taken together, add up to significant savings. It is this second category of under-expenditure (small savings adding up to big dollars) that is usually more prevalent, and usually accounts for greater savings.
With very few exceptions, year-in and year-out, most departments manage their budgets effectively, and save money. The savings may not be a lot; a couple hundred dollars here, and a thousand dollars someplace else. But, considering that the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget included 138 budget units, even a savings of a thousand, or couple thousand dollars (in a budget of a few hundred thousand or even a million dollars) can quickly add-up to a large amount of money when the County Budget is considered as a whole. These “small but mighty” efforts need to be acknowledged and appreciated.
Unlike salary savings, in most years it is far less certain that the County can count on a lot of little savings adding up to big savings at the end of the year. And, reducing or at least freezing the budget for services and supplies compounds the likelihood there will be less under-expenditures at the end of the year for Fund Balance simply because there is less to wiggle room in the budgets. As noted above, this year the Recommended Budget only makes $126,852 in nonpersonnel cuts to the Department Requested General Fund budget ($302,790 less than last year). If this is an indication there is now simply less non-personnel expenses that can be reduced, it could foretell that there is even less for departments to save, and there will be less under-expenditures this year to contribute to year-end Fund Balance.
Revenue Realization as a component of Fund Balance
Realizing budgeted revenues is a critical factor in determining year-end Fund Balance that cannot be overemphasized. For every dollar of revenue that is budgeted, but not achieved, year-end Fund Balance is decreased by a dollar. Although the accrual period will not close until August 31st, it appears that in Fiscal Year 2014-2015, actual General Fund revenues - excluding Health & Human Services revenues - were approximately $1.4 Million more than the Board Approved Budget, and approximately $1.2 Million more than the Working Budget. This is a sign the departments are doing a good job achieving budgeted revenues, and that some general revenues - like the hotel bed tax and sales tax - continue to exceed intentionally- conservative projections in the General Revenues & Expenditures budget.
If Health & Human Services revenues are not excluded from the calculation, last year’s General Fund revenues were approximately $1.2 Million less than the Board Approved Budget, and approximately $1.6 Million less than the Working Budget. Although it appears that Health & Human Services revenues are falling short, this is not necessarily cause for concern. The accrual period will not end until August 31st and last year the department recognized over $700,000 in revenue on the last day of the accrual period. Additionally, revenue in HHS is usually tied to expenses and therefore, if revenue is under achieved there is usually off-setting savings in costs.
While departments continue, by-and-large, to do a commendable job in achieving budgeted revenue, remember that the overall figures benefit from the fact that under-realized revenues in some budgets are off-set, or masked by higher than anticipated revenues in other budgets. For example, for last fiscal year, the General Revenues & Expenditures budget realized $1.7 Million more than the Working Budget Projections. This makes up a significant portion of this year’s Fund Balance and includes:
	Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax (HTOT, or TOT) revenue appears to be about $678,930 higher than projected in the Board Approved Budget;
	Sales tax revenue is $237,053 higher than projected in the Board Approved Budget; and,
	Secured property tax roll revenue is $834,909 higher than projected in the Board Approved Budget; and,
Without this “extra” unbudgeted revenue, the revenue (excluding HHS revenue) in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Board Approved Budget would be under-achieved by $300,000; and, by $500,000 in the Working Budget.
In other words, the General Fund Balance available to use in this year’s budget could have been higher if all revenue projections in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Working Budget had been fully achieved, and much higher if revenue projections were met in addition to the receipt of additional, unbudgeted General Fund revenue.
This raises an important issue. A primary purpose of the County’s Mid-Year and Third Quarter Financial Review processes is to revise budget projections as necessary. When a department reports that it will not, or it becomes apparent that a department might not achieve budgeted revenues, the Working Budget should be amended to reflect the decrease in revenues AND, pursuant to the County’s Budget Control & Responsibility Policy expenditures need to be decreased accordingly. Failure to do both has the effect of doubling the impact the loss of revenue has on the bottom line.
Therefore, as always, a key factor to maintaining the integrity of the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget, and not eroding the year-end Fund Balance available for the Fiscal Year 2016-2017 Budget, is that departments must meet their budgeted revenue projections, and decrease their expenditures by a corresponding amount when they cannot meet revenue projections.
Revenue projections have typically been budgeted conservatively to guard against “Pollyanna spending,” and often provided “extra” revenue at the end of the year that masked under-achieved revenues elsewhere in the Budget. However, beginning with the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Budget, and continuing through last year, some projected revenues were bumped up to reflect recent trends; thereby leaving much less room for error, or opportunity for Fund Balance to benefit from unanticipated revenue. The above analysis indicates it is still prudent to budget conservatively. Had this year’s increases in general revenues been forecast and budgeted, the overall General Fund would have underachieved budgeted revenues by $500,000 budgeted revenues, and Fund Balance would be much less.
Operating Transfers from Key Funds & Trusts.
In addition to Fund Balance, the CAO Recommended Budget relies on use of Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund, Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, AB 443 Trust and some minor trusts to off-set General Fund expenses.
This year’s reliance on Operating Transfers to the General Fund is similar to last year. Operating Transfers into the General Fund have decreased by $23,899; from $752,398 in last year’s Budget to $728,499 this year. As reported last year, there continues cause for concern that, in most cases, the transfers from these trusts continue to exceed the prior year’s receipts. This results in diminishing fund balances for the trusts. For example:
	Geothermal Royalties Trust. The Recommended Budget relies on $393,639 in geothermal royalties funds ($310,291 benefits the General Fund, and $83,348 benefits Non-General Fund budgets). However, last year, the County received only $341,755 in royalties payments.
	AB 443 Trust. A total of $589,149 in AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) money is being used to balance the Recommended Budget. However, in Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the County only received $532,622 in AB 443 funds.
	Criminal Justice Facilities Trust. In Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the County received $58,870 in Criminal Justice Facilities payments associated with Court fines. Similar to recent years’ budgets, the Recommended Budget is relying on $81,909 in Criminal Justice Facilities monies, and of this $70,370 is for on-going maintenance expenses.
While these trends should be a cause for concern, the concern is, somewhat tempered by the realization that sometimes not all of the budgeted operating transfers occur in a year. This is usually because the projects for which the money is designated are delayed, or do not materialize.
Geothermal Royalties Fund
The use of Geothermal Royalties money to offset certain eligible expenses in General Fund budgets (and in Non-General Fund budgets that would otherwise require General Fund Operating Transfers) replaces funding that would otherwise need to be paid from the General Fund.
Pursuant to County policy, Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers are only made from revenue already received in the Geothermal Royalties Fund, and do not rely on geothermal royalty revenue that is expected, but has yet to be received this fiscal year. In Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the Geothermal Royalties Fund received $341,755 in new royalties payments, all which (and then some) are being appropriated in this year’s Budget. Table 3. shows the use of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers the past six (6) years.
The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 CAO Recommended Budget includes a total of $393,639 in Geothermal Royalties Fund Operating Transfers. These are used to off-set $310,291 eligible projects in the General Fund Budget, and $83,348 in the Non-General Fund Budget.

Geothermal Operating Transfer History
The Recommended Budget again proposes the use of a Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer to the Assessor budget, to fund a portion of the annual mining and geothermal assessment contract with Harold Bertholf and Associates. This funds the amount, $69,649, which is attributable to preparation of the annual tax assessment for the Coso Geothermal Power Plant.
The Recommended Budget does not include funding for consultants to respond to any assessment appeals that might be filed for the Coso Geothermal Plant. When needed, the cost of these contracts are usually budgeted in the CAO budget, and funded with additional Geothermal Operating Transfers. Since we are unaware of any appeals, there is not a need to use Geothermal Royalties funds for this purpose and this makes more Geothermal Royalties money available to off-set other costs.
The projects and other costs being funded with Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund are identified on Table
4.	This includes $58,348 in County matching funds for two airport improvement grants, but note that the cost of meeting $302,436 in matching requirements for Bishop Airport Improvements grant are being funded through both Geothermal and Accumulated Capital Outlay budgets.
If not for the availability of the Geothermal Royalties money, the General Fund might have been required to fund all of these costs; something that might not be possible without reductions to other areas recommended for funding in this Budget.
The amount of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers used to balance this year’s Budget leaves $440,698 in the Geothermal Royalties Fund. However, the remaining Fund Balance would be lower except that not all of the Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers included in last year’s Budget materialized, thereby bolstering the amount of Geothermal Royalties Fund Balance available for this year’s Budget.
The wisdom of budgeting only Geothermal Royalties funds accrued in the Geothermal Royalties Fund - and not budgeting projected Geothermal Royalties revenues expected to be received in the current year - has served the County very well. In recent year’s geothermal royalties payments to the County have become less stable. Table 5. shows the amount of Geothermal Royalties payments the County has received in each of the last six (6) fiscal years.

Geothermal Royalties Received
In addition to being directly affected by the amount of production at the Coso Geothermal Power Plant (which, in turn, affects the plant’s payment of royalties to the Bureau of Land Management),
this critical revenue source has been subject to a host of political machinations at the federal and state level. For example, there have been several attempts in recent years to completely eliminate Federal geothermal royalties payments to counties.
Criminal Justice Facilities Trust
The Inyo County Board of Supervisor’s created the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, by resolution, in 1982 for the purpose of acquiring, rehabilitating, constructing, financing and leasing suitable criminal justice facilities, including all facilities necessary or incidental to the operation of such criminal justice facilities. The Criminal Justice Facilities Trust should not be confused with the Courthouse Construction Trust that exists to provide funding for the acquisition, rehabilitation, construction and financing of court facilities and, due to recent legislation, falls under the control of the State Judicial Council.
The Trust currently holds approximately $803,768, including $58,870 in new revenue received in Fiscal Year 2014-2015. Table 6. shows the revenue history for this trust.

Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Funds Received
In recent budgets, this trust provided the primary means of funding the new Sheriff’s Sub-Station in Lone Pine. And, if the proposed Consolidated Office Building Project moves forward, Criminal Justice Facilities monies are identified as one of the sources of funding to help pay for a portion of the cost of the Sherriff, District Attorney, and Probation offices in the facility.
This year’s Budget relies on using $81,909 in Operating Transfers from the County’s Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to the General Fund to balance the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 County Budget. This is $47,156 less than the $129,065 in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers necessary to balance the Fiscal Year 20142015 County Budget. Last year’s Budget used Criminal Justice Facilities Trust money to fund several deferred maintenance projects and complete the Lone Pine Sub-Station. Table 7. shows the uses of this year’s recommended Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers.

While the Recommended Budget proposes using $47,156 less in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers compared to last year’s Budget, there is still more money leaving the trust than coming in. While the Fund Balance remains robust, as noted above, in Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust only received $58,870 in new revenue. This contrasts with the $81,909 in Operating Transfer being budgeted from the trust, of which $70,370 is for ongoing expenses.
AB 443 Trust
The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 CAO Recommended Budget includes the use of $589,149 from the AB 443 Trust. The Sheriff again supports the recommendation for a $300,000 Operating Transfer from the AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) Trust to off-set departmental costs. This Operating Transfer will only be made to the extent it is needed to ensure the Net County Cost for the Sheriffs budgets does not increase during the fiscal year.
Also, as originally agreed upon in the Fiscal Year 2007-2008 Budget, both the Requested and Recommended budgets provide for continuing the use of AB 443 Funds to fund the five (5) additional Correctional Officer positions added to the Sheriff’s Authorized Staffing in 2007, which provided greater operational flexibility, and placed more deputies on the street. The Sheriff has elected to leave two of these positions vacant, so AB 443 funds are only being used to pay for the cost of three (3) Correctional Officer positions at $266,019.
In total, the Recommended Budget recognizes $589,149 in AB 443 funds. However, in contrast, last year the County only collected $532,622 in AB 443 funds.
In past years, the County has been conservative in its use of AB 443 funding because, like other State public safety subventions, the reliability of this funding was very volatile and subject to political whimsy in Sacramento. However, now this critical funding is part of 2011 Criminal Justice Realignment and much more stable.
Fortunately, the Sheriff and Board of Supervisors have worked in concert to conserve and not become overly-reliant on these funds, and the Recommended Budget still leaves a balance of $1,924,595 in the County’s AB 443 Trust. And, another $532,622 is expected to be received in the trust this year. While fund balance in the AB 443 Trust does not lessen concerns about ongoing and escalating costs, this money could become an essential bridge in maintaining appropriate levels of law enforcement services if the need to significantly reduce future County budgets materializes. Furthermore, these funds are available to fund other public safety-related initiatives, such as costs from the Consolidated Office Building project that could be assigned to the Sheriff’s office if it is approved.
COPS Trust
The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget recognizes $100,000 in COPS funding for equipment and supplies in the Sheriff’s requested budget. Similar to last year, the entire Community Oriented Policing Servicing allocation is being budgeted, whereas, in the past the Sheriff’s budget only recognized a portion of the available funding, and appropriated the rest during the year. There is currently, $196,364 in the COPS Trust, and the trust will receive monthly allocations throughout the year. This change in budgeting results in only COPS funding that has been received bring expended, similar to how geothermal royalties monies are budgeted.
PERSONNEL ACTIONS
Position Adjustments
As a result of changes negotiated in collective bargaining agreements two years ago, most position adjustments that used to be regulated to approval through the budget process are now, instead, performance based. As a result, this Budget does not contemplate position adjustments such as career ladders (e.g., movements going from a I to a II, or from a II to III), equity adjustments, or reclassifications. career ladder movements are now based on merit, and departments are responsible for budgeting for career ladders for those employees who may be eligible, based on performance, during the coming fiscal year. Changing the classification and/or compensation of positions requires separate action by the Board of supervisors outside of the budget process. Examining classification and compensation issues for positions, and making adjustments as warranted, is addressed primarily through a review of the classification Plan every five to seven years; although a process and criteria are in place to allow reclassification and associated compensation issues to be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Changes in Authorized Staffing
The county of Inyo Manpower Report (Attachment c) identifies, by department, authorized staffing levels (full-time and B-PAR employees) as of July 2, 2015. (Note: The Manpower Report identifies authorized staffing at the department-level, but not yet at the budget unit level.) Because the Health and Human Services department has numerous employees spread across multiple budgets, a table showing the department’s authorized full-time and B-PAR staff, and how they are allocated among various programs, is also provided (Attachment D) to guide your Board of supervisors in its review of the Health and Human Services budgets.
This Budget recommends changes to the authorized staffing for several departments and offices; including deleting positions and supporting some new position requests.
Agricultural Commissioner (Mosquito Abatement). A Mosquito Technician III position (Range 60) is included in the Recommended
Budget and funded for six (6) months, beginning in January 2016. The department previously platooned staff from the Agricultural Commissioner’s office to the Mosquito Abatement Program, but is requesting to cease the practice on the basis there is enough work in the office to fund the entirety of the Weights & Measures Inspector’s salary through corresponding increases in revenue, and reimbursements from Mono County beginning next fiscal year. The new Mosquito Technician III position will provide the department with maximum flexibility to deploy staff resources and the funding could be used instead to hire seasonal or part-time staff as conditions warrant.
Assessor. The Recommended Budget replaces the Office Technician I position (Range 55) currently shared between the Assessor’s office and Clerk-Recorder’s office, with an Office Tech position that will be shared between the Assessor’s office and the County Administrator’s department. However, if the shared position becomes vacant, the Budget supports the Assessor’s office having the option to fill the vacancy with a part-time (B-Par) Office Technician I budgeted at 29-hours per week, and the authorized staffing would be changed accordingly (from shared full-time Office Technician I to a B- Par Office Technician). The cost difference between the shared position and the part time Office Technician I is $1,226 per year; a minor savings.
Auditor-Controller. Last year’s Budget changed the authorized staffing in the Auditor-Controller’s Office from an Office Clerk to an Office Technician, with the new position being shared with the County Administrator’s department. This shared position was never filled due to growing budget uncertainty and the need to save money.
The Recommended Budget changes this shared position back to an Office Clerk in the Auditor-Controller’s budget, with the position now being shared with the Clerk-Recorder’s office as indicated below. The shared-full time position may be filled by two, part-time (B-Par) positions and, if this occurs, both departments’ authorized staffing levels will be adjusted accordingly.
Clerk-Recorder. In addition to the department head and Assistant Clerk-Recorder, the office is currently comprised of a fulltime Office Clerk II (Range 50) and shared Office Technician I (Range 55). The Department Requested Budget seeks to change the office’s authorized staffing by adding a full-time Office Technician I (Range 55) and sharing an Office Clerk II position (Range 50). The Recommended Budget supports this request, with the full-time Office Technician I position being filled by a closed recruitment.
Furthermore, whereas the office formerly shared staff with the Assessor’s Office, it is now recommended that the Office Clerk position be shared instead with the Auditor-Controller’s office. Both the Clerk- Recorder and Auditor-Controller, have requested that the position be recruited first as two, part-time (B-Par) positions (the cost is $1,999 less to hire two B-Par Office Clerks compared to one full-time Office Clerk). If the recruitment for the two full-time positions is successful, the departments’ authorized staff will be reduced from a shared fulltime Office Clerk position to two, part-time (B-Par) Office Clerks.
District Attorney. The Recommended Budget reflects deletion of two (2) full-time positions created with grant funding because the grant funding has disappeared: a Legal Secretary III (Range 64) and a Victim Witness Coordinator (Range (60). Both positions have been vacant since the cessation of grant funding.
These positions are two (2) of the 2.5 FTEs (full-time equivalents) reported as being reduced in the authorized staffing in the District Attorney’s office. The .5 FTE reflects a part-time (B-Par) Legal Secretary I (Range 56) deleted in last year’s budget. However, in July, with support from Administration, the District Attorney requested that a vacant Office Clerk position be deleted and replaced with a parttime Legal Secretary I on a pilot basis. With the exception of this .5 FTE, any reductions in the office’s staff have been positions created with grant funding that no longer exists.
The Legal Secretary III position and an Investigator position were both added to the office’s authorized staffing when the office first received the Drug Suppression Task Force grant that was used to create and fund the INET Program. Over the years, the INET grant funding declined. Rather than lay-off one or both of these grant-funded positions, the General Fund began paying for the entire cost of the previously grant-funded Investigator, and the Legal Secretary III was the only position funded with the grant. Last year, the District Attorney’s office learned it would no longer receive the Drug Suppression Task Force grant, and the person filling the Legal Secretary position retired June 30th.
The District Attorney’s budget now supports three (3) Investigators, even though the grant funding that was used to create one of the Investigator positions no longer exists. The CAO Recommended Budget funds all three (3) of these positions. However, if it becomes necessary to reduce costs in future budgets, one of the ways this could be accomplished is by transferring one of the Investigator positions to the Sheriff’s office if vacancies exist at the time.
Environmental Health. In light of challenges filling the vacant REHS II position (Range 75) assigned to manage the County’s Certified Unified Program Agency, the Recommended Budget removes this position from the department’s authorized staffing and creates and adds a Hazardous Materials Program Manager / Senior Hazardous Materials Program Manager - REHS III position (Range 78 / 84). The Senior Hazardous Materials Program Manager must be an experienced REHS and, in addition to managing the CUPA Program will be assigned work in other areas of departmental responsibility. It is hoped that the CUPA Program management services can be contracted out to neighboring counties to offset costs through bolstered department revenues.
FIRST Program. The Recommended Budget supports adding two (2) new positions to the authorized staffing for the proposed FIRST Program. However, the Recommended Budget leaves the positions unfunded pending evaluation of results from a pilot program, and the creation and adoption of a standalone budget for FIRST Program.
The recommended positions are a Social Worker IV (Range 73) and a FIRST Supervisor / Senior FIRST Supervisor (Range 78 / 81). The FIRST Supervisor is a Social Worker Supervisor II (Range 78). The Senior FIRST Supervisor position can only be filled by a licensed Psychologist (Range 81).
Information Services. The Recommended Budget supports adding one (l) Senior Programmer Analyst position (Range 84), and one (l) Senior Network Analyst (Range 84) to the departments authorized staffing, and deletes one Programmer Analyst position (Range 79) that is currently vacant, and one (l) Network Analyst position (Range 79) from the authorized staffing. The Network Analyst position will be deleted once one of the Senior Analysts positions is filled through an internal recruitment, the other Senior Analyst position will be filled through an open recruitment. This change in authorized staffing is a necessary first step to address the emergency staffing situation in Information Services that your Board was apprised of last fiscal year.
The Recommended Budget also adds a Deputy Information Services Director position to the department’s authorized staffing but does not fund the position. Not filling the recommended Deputy Director position, combined with recommended salary savings for the other vacancies, will result in a savings of $10,643 in the Information Services budget compared to the cost of the current authorized staffing level.
Juvenile Institutions. The Recommended Budget supports your Board’s direction to close the kitchen in the Juvenile Hall and use the kitchen in the jail to prepare meals for Juvenile Hall patrons and staff. Accordingly, the Recommended Budget deletes one full-time Cook position (Range 51) and one part-time (B-Par) Cook position from the Probation department’s authorized staffing effective October 8th. Pursuant to the County’s lay-off policy, the full-time personnel currently assigned to the Juvenile Hall Cook position will be transferred, with all benefits and seniority, to a vacant Cook position in the Jail.
The Probation department and Sheriff’s Office have proposed sharing a full-time Office Technician position (Range 59) currently authorized full-time in the Juvenile Institutions budget. The shared position will be funded half time in and assigned to work half time in the Sheriff’s Lone Pine sub-station and budgeted in place of a full-time, vacant Office Technician I position (Range 55) currently authorized in the Sheriff’s budget. The Recommended Budget supports this cost savings measure, and deletes the full-time Office Technician position replacing it with a shared position.
Library. The Library and Museum managers have proposed adding and sharing a part-time (B-Par) Library-Museum Specialist (Range 48) with funding that was added to both budgets in the CAO Recommended Budget last year. This year’s Recommended Budget supports the proposal.
As recommended, the Budget reinstates funding for a countywide Librarian I position (Range 54) that has been vacant since
Fiscal Year 2012-2013, and which was not funded in last year’s Budget. The Recommended Budget also deletes three (3) part-time Library Specialist positions and one full-time Library Specialist position (Range 46). The full-time position and three (3) of the parttime positions have been vacant since Fiscal Year 2012-2013, and were not funded in last year’s Budget.
Motor Pool. A part-time (B-Par) Office Clerk position (Range 50) is being added to the Motor Pool budget. Cost savings measures in the Motor Pool program result in adequate funding to pay for this position while still lowering Motor Pool rates charged to County departments. Adding this position will allow administrative staff currently assigned to Motor Pool, Recycling and Waste Management, and Parks & Recreation to allocate more time to the latter two programs without incurring the costs that would otherwise be associated with adding staff to the a General Fund budget (Parks & Recreation) and a NonGeneral Fund budget that already requires Operating Transfers from the General Fund (Recycling and Waste Management).
Museum. As noted above, the Museum and Library have proposed adding and sharing a part-time (B-Par) Library-Museum Specialist with funding that was added in the CAO Recommended Budget last year. The Recommended Budget supports this request.
Public Works - Building & Safety. The Department Requested Budget includes a request to create a Chief Building Official position in anticipation of staff obtaining accreditation necessary to assume associated job responsibilities. While Building Official duties are part of the job description for the Public Works Director, historically, and when the County employed two full-time Senior Building Inspectors, this role was been filled by the Deputy Public Works Director. Changes in the department’s staff configuration, culminating in last year’s Separation Incentive Plan, recommends considering this request. The Recommended Budget reconciles and supports the request by recommending the position of Associate Building Official (Range 80) be added to the Department’s authorized strength in anticipation of staff obtaining a California building official certificate and moving into this position and assuming associated responsibilities. If the position is filled, a Senior Building Inspector position would be deleted from the department’s authorized staffing.
Sheriff. As noted above, the Sheriff’s Office and Probation department have proposed sharing a full-time Office Technician II position (Range 59) currently authorized full-time in the Juvenile Probation budget. The shared position will be funded half time and assigned to work half time in the Sheriff’s Lone Pine sub-station and budgeted in place of a full-time, vacant Office Technician I position (Range 55) currently authorized in the Sheriff’s budget. The Recommended Budget supports this cost savings measure, and deletes the full time Office Technician I in the Sheriff’s Budget and replaces it with a shared Office Technician II position.
Treasurer-Tax Collector. The Treasurer-Tax Collector has requested that an Administrative Analyst position (Range 70) be added to the office’s authorized staffing in exchange for the currently vacant Assistant Treasurer Tax Collector position to be suspended and left unfunded. This is similar to an arrangement made a few years ago in the Auditor-Controller’s office where a Management Analyst position was added to the Authorized strength instead of filling a vacancy in the Assistant Auditor position. This is an “either or” arrangement where both positions will never be filled at the same time and, if the Treasurer, with Board approval, later decides to fill the Assistant Treasure position the Administrative Analyst position will be deleted.
Salary Savings
The use of salary saving to balance the CAO Recommended Budget continues to decline. Table 8. provides the trend of General Fund salary savings used balance the Budget over the past six (6) years.

Budgeted Salary Savings History
There are fewer vacant positions on which to draw salary savings. This speaks to the recent success the County has had in filling vacant positions with qualified individuals, many of which were internal County recruitments. However, it also highlights that as the
County shrinks the size of its workforce - through attrition, separation incentive programs, and an increased reliance on shared positions - there will be less salary savings available to balance the Budget at the beginning of the year, and contribute to Fund Balance at the end of the year.
Additionally, similar to last year, some departments have preemptively proposed using salary savings associated with vacant staff positions in their Department Requested budgets; meaning these positions are not available to close the gap between the expense in the Department Requested Budget and projected revenues in the CAO Recommended Budget.
The CAO Recommended Budget, however, still includes recommendations for $476,202 in additional General Fund salary savings (excluding HHS). The Position Vacancy/S alary Savings Table (Attachment B) identifies salary savings by department and staff position, and includes the earliest date that the position can be filled to realize the anticipated salary savings.
Almost all of the salary savings being recommended by the CAO occurs in the General Fund; $111,033 comes from Health & Human Services budgets (not included in the calculation of General Fund salary savings); and only $6,014 in salary savings is recognized in NonGeneral Fund budgets.
As mentioned above, the calculation of CAO Recommended salary savings is usually intentionally conservative. The fact that this year’s recommended General Fund salary savings (excluding HHS) is $55,260 less than the amount used to balance last year’s Budget (which was $408,623 less than the amount of salary savings used to balance the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Budget) signals that - due to the elimination of positions, and departments being more aggressive in filling their vacant positions - salary savings could continue to be less of a tool for balancing budgets in future years.
The use of salary savings to help balance the Budget is assumed to be preferred to eliminating filled positions. However, over the long term, taking salary savings from whichever positions happen to be vacant, forgoes performing any strategic analysis of which positions are the most critical to meeting the service priorities established by your Board of Supervisors.
The Budget does delete 16.5 positions shown in Attachment E. All but 3 of these positions are vacant; there is a lay-off of a part-time Cook and a full-time Cook in the Juvenile Institutions budget, and the three filled positions will only be eliminated if they are vacated through an internal recruitment. However, eliminating these position does not result in salary savings for the Budget unless funding for the positions was included in the respective departments’ budget requests. Furthermore, it means that these positions will no longer be available to generate possible salary savings in future years’ budgets.
FISCAL OVERVIEW
The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 CAO Recommended Budget projects an overall increase in revenues of $1,758,567; from $85,098,492 in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Board Approved Budget to $86,857,059 in this year’s Recommended Budget.
Unlike last year, the increase in revenue is being driven by General Fund budgets rather than the Non-General Fund budgets. This is unusual. Last year’s Budget included funding for several large one-time projects, including the Agricultural warehouse, Animal Shelter, Great Basin Grants budget, and $ 4.8 Million in new State Funded Roads projects. This year, most of the revenue growth is attributable to the net increase in general revenues; a good thing considering the cost increases affecting the General Fund.
This year, Highway Users Tax Allocation (HUTA) in the Road budget is down $1,188,871 due to the State’s over-estimation of prior year’s HUTA revenues and reduced gas prices. To compensate for the loss of revenue, the Road department is relying on $352,844 in fund balance this year. This was accompanied by an $809,591 reduction in expenditures from last year’s Board Approved Budget.
The State Funded Road budgets also realizes a $344,599 reduction in State and Federal funding, however, this is just the normal course of projects being completing from the prior year and is no reason for concern.
Despite the lack of revenues for one-time projects in the NonGeneral Fund budgets - Overall, revenue in Non-General Fund budgets is down $390,447 compared to last year’ Board Approved Non General Fund Budget. The amount of the decrease would be even more if not for recognizing almost $5.1 Million in anticipated airport improvement grants. However, despite the lack of revenue from onetime projects, expenses are $924,712 higher than last year’s Board Approved Non General Fund Budget, which indicated that Non General Fund budgets are funding these appropriations with their respective fund balances. This is not necessarily cause for alarm.
An analysis shows, for example, that $300,000 in fund balance from the Computer System Fund is being budgeted for critical upgrades to the County’s financial software (IFAS). The Tech Refresh Program is using $128,000 from its fund balance; and this program now appears to be self-funding (like motor pool). The Motor Pool Replacement Fund is being drawn down by $280,000 to support vehicles purchases and fund the rate holiday. The Great Basin Grant budget uses almost $600,000 in fund balance accrued when the grant was received last year.
The Recommended General Fund Budget projects revenues increasing by $2,149,014 or 4.5%; from $48,185,355 in last year’s Budget to $50,334,369 in projected General Fund revenue in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended Budget. This increase includes $728,499 in Operating Transfers into the General Fund.
When Operating Transfers into the General Fund are subtracted from both years’ revenue projections, projected revenues have increased from last year’s Board Approved General Fund Budget by $2,172,913. (There were $752,398 in Operating Transfers to the General Fund in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Board Approved Budget and there are $728,499 in Operating Transfers to the General Fund in this year’s Recommended Budget.) This contrasts positively with last year when the same analysis showed a $1,084,602 increase in General Fund revenues (after Operating Transfers into the General Fund were backed out).
This year, most of the increase in projected General Fund revenue can be attributed to increases in general revenues.
The City of Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP) property tax payment is calculated using the constitutionally prescribed Phillips formula, and accounts for about 48% of the County’s secured property tax roll. Based on State calculations, this year the LADWP tax payment is increasing by 5.8%. This follows a 4.04% increase last year.
Excluding the LADWP increase from the secured property tax roll shows, the rest of the secured roll is growing by $1.5% — slightly less than the allowable CPI-increase of 1.54% allowed under Proposition 13.
The total secured tax roll increase of 4.82% or $1,716,253. In addition to LADWP, this includes a 27% increase in the unitary tax roll prepared by the State. The County’s share of the increase in the secured roll is expected to be $497,713. Last year, the secured property tax roll increased by 1.24%. Without the increase in LADWP valuation and unitary tax, there would be minimal increase in property tax revenue.
While there is more certainty around revenues and expenses associated with the Coso property tax assessment process, the power plant property continues to decline in value; a decline which continues to have consequences for County General Fund revenues. The County’s share of the assessed value of Coso this year (barring appeals) is $998,791 compared to $1,030,019 last year; a 3% reduction. In addition, the County has accepted a partial tax payment from C.R. Briggs gold mine in anticipation of a reduced assessment of the second largest taxpayer on the unsecured tax roll. And, there are an unknown number of assessments still being worked on which could further reduce the tax rolls.
In addition Federal Payment In Lieu of Taxes funding declined by $160,000 this year and there is ongoing uncertainty around the future of PILT funding.
These factors, however, remain largely beyond the control of this Budget and your Board of Supervisors, and the situation provides little that can be proactively accomplished to guard against negative potentialities.
Although sales tax revenue began increasing last year, the Budget projects no change in sales tax revenues. A review of sales tax drivers shows new vectors which need to be further analyzed to make sure they are not flukes. In addition, changes in the way the State is apportioning sales tax following the end of the triple-flip makes it advisable to take a wait and see approach regarding future sales tax revenues.
In Fiscal Year 2014-2015, Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue exceeded projections by $678,930. Since bed tax revenue exceeded the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Board Approved Budget by 11.9%, HTOT projections for Fiscal Year 2015-2016 are being increased 5%. This is consistent with the intentionally conservative past practice of budgeting HTOT revenue at least 5% below the prior year’s actuals. As in year’s past, the County’s HTOT revenues will be linked to economic stability or instability in Europe and the strength of the euro, as well as weather conditions. Due to these factors, it is recommended that your Board continue to allow any revenue in excess of projections to remain unbudgeted as a way of bolstering Fund Balance.
Many of the other assumptions associated with this year’s revenue projections remain similar to previous years’ Budgets and include:
No additional adverse property tax appeals or settlements.
Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue remaining strong.
Vehicle License Fee revenue remaining unchanged.
Sales tax revenue remaining constant and probably increasing.
No revenue being received from the sale of County-owned property.
Continued strategic use of Realignment funds to provide maximum benefit to the County.
No future geothermal royalties payments have been projected in the Recommended Budget. Pursuant to current County policy, any geothermal royalty payments that may be received in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 will be treated as unanticipated revenue and not be budgeted.
The sheer number of Operating Transfers that have been made in and out of the General Fund in recent years makes a comparison of changes in revenues and expenditures from one fiscal year to the next very difficult. This year, increases in expenditures are being off-set by increases in some revenue rather than decreases in discretionary expense. However, the reality is that the County can hardly count on increases in revenues to offset increased costs, nor can it continue to rely on reductions in discretionary expenses to maintain fiscal solvency, and costs beyond the control of departments continue to rise.
Changes in General Fund expense categories between Fiscal Year 2014-2015 and costs in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended Budget, are shown in Table 9.
.
CAO Recommended Budget
The total Fiscal Year 2015-2016 CAO Recommended Budget is $93,420,304 and represents a $3,073,726, or a 3.4% increase from the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Board Approved Budget of $90,346,578.
The following graph, Total County Expenditures, Figure 2., below, demonstrates the categorical division of the Budget, as recommended. 
The Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Recommended Non-General Fund Budget totals $39,726,146 in expenditures and $36,522,690 in revenues. The deficit in Non-General Fund budgets is $3,203,456; $1,485,159 more than last year’s Non-General Fund funding gap. Including recommended Operating Transfers, there is sufficient Fund Balance in these budgets to cover the gap between revenues and expenditures. As discussed above, and unlike last year, fund balances - not increasing revenue - are being relied upon to fund expenses that remain high in Non-General Fund budgets. Table 10. shows the Operating Transfers being recommended for Non-General Fund budgets.

General Fund Budget
The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended General Fund Budget totals $53,864,158 in expenditures and $50,334,369 in revenues. General Fund expenditures represent an increase of $2,149,014, or 4.2% over the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Board Approved General Fund Budget of $51,715,144.
The Auditor-Controller is expected to certify the Fund Balance in the General Fund for the year-ending June 30, 2015, on September 3rd. For purposes of preparing the Recommended Budget, General Fund Balance is being estimated as $3,529,789, and this amount is used to balance the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended General Fund Budget.
The following graph, General Fund Expenditures by Function, Figure 3. demonstrates the categorical division of the General Fund Budget, as recommended. 
RECOMMENDED CHANGES TO DEPARTMENT REQUESTED BUDGETS
In addition to the differences already discussed, the CAO Recommended Budget differs from the Department Requested Budget as follows. This section of the Recommended Budget will also be used to identify key issues in certain budgets that have not already been discussed.
Common to all budgets with motor pool and personnel expense, the Recommend Budget reduces costs by applying a motor pool rate holiday and making one time reductions to dental and vision insurance costs.
The motor pool rate holiday is funded through savings achieved in the Motor pool budgets as a result of cost-savings associated with the Enterprise lease agreement and departments driving vehicles well- after the vehicle’s replacement cost had been funded. The rate holiday accounts for a $233,983 savings in the Recommended Budget.
The dental and vision insurance cost reductions are made possible due to an analysis of these self-funded trusts and making adjustments to maintain prudent reserves. This had resulted in a onetime savings of $165,858 for General Fund budgets, and $53,316 in savings in Non-General Fund budgets in the CAO Recommended Budget. The County’s cost for vision and dental insurance remain roughly the same.
Non -General Fund Budgets
Bishop Airport
The Recommended Budget increases revenue in sales of aviation gas by $13,230 to more accurately reflect the revenue received in prior fiscal years. There is a corresponding increase of $13,230 in the fuel, oil, and water for resale object code.
Bishop Airport Improvement Projects
Operating Transfers totaling $302,436 are recommended to fund the expected County share of matching funds required for $4,468,830 in FAA grants that have been applied for. The Recommended Budget proposes transferring $50,000 from the Geothermal Royalties Trust and the remaining $252,436 from the CAO-Accumulated Capital Outlay budget.
CAO-Accumulated Capital Outlay
An Operating Transfer of $252,436 is being recommended from this budget to the Bishop Airport Improvement Projects budget to cover the County’s match requirement for the State and Federal funding. The Recommended Budget also supports a $150,000 Operating Transfer from the General Fund to continue supporting other capital projects being funded from this budget.
Child Support Services
The Recommended Budget decreases the family support reimbursement - state revenue code by $4,458, and the family support admin reimbursements revenue code by $10,023. The total decrease in revenue is $14,481. Additionally, revenues in the donations object code is being increased by $500, with a corresponding increase expenses in the general operating object code by $500, to recognize a donation received that will allow the department to implement a back to school project this year. These changes were made in part at the request of the department, and to reflect the change noted below.
The Recommended Budget removes $20,000 from the external charges object code. The department budgeted these funds in hopes of buying into a new case management system being acquired by the District Attorney’s office, and offset some of the associated costs. However, the District Attorney has indicated it may not be feasible to accommodate Child Support Services access to the new system.
The Recommended Budget also decreases motor pool expense by $960 as a result of the one-time rate holiday.
Deferred. Maintenance — Public Works
Several of the deferred maintenance projects approved by your Board of Supervisors in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget are ongoing. The funds for these projects have been encumbered to retain funding to complete these projects this year. In light of the project back log and other uses for potential funding, the Recommended Budget supports fewer new deferred maintenance projects for funding in this year’s Budget. As these projects are completed, the Budget may be amended to add additional projects.
New projects which are recommended for funding include:
	Phase II of the Jail HVAC Project funded with a $50,600 Operating Transfer from the General Fund.
	Grove Street ADA Compliance funded with a $5,300 Operating Transfer from HHS’ Mental Health budget;
	Tecopa Community Center HVAC funded with a $22,000 Operating Transfer from HHS’ CBCAP budget; and,
	Floor tile replacement, including asbestos abatement, in the Courthouse Annex funded with a $150,000 General Fund Operating Transfer.
	Purchase of a new walk-in refrigerator and walk-in freezer for the Jail facility funded with a $22,000 General Fund Operating Transfer.
In addition to deferred maintenance projects being funded through the Great Basin budget, the ongoing projects supported by this budget include:
Big Pine Town Hall Paint Interior/Exterior ($19,100)
Big Pine Town Hall Roof ($22,300)
Jail Fire Sprinkler Phase 1 ($31,300)
Statham Hall Doors = ($4,300)
Statham Hall Paint = ($7,800)
Courthouse Interior Paint ($11,800)
ADA Transition Plan ($15,900)
Lone Pine Library Upgrades ($10,000)
Indy HHS ADA Compliance ($5,000)
Indy Legion Hall Roof ($65,900)
Encumbered Projects Total = $193,400
ESAAA
The Recommended Budget provides an Operating Transfer In of $55,500 from the General Revenue & Expenditures budget for the required match for the State and Federal funds in this budget.
FIRST Program.
The proposed FIRST Program needs a stand-alone budget unit. As presented to your Board of Supervisors on August 25th, the proposed FIRST Program is intended to provide intensive in-home family support services tailored to individual family needs. FIRST will use and expand intervention strategies employed as part of the WRAP program, but use multiple funding sources with an intent of reducing barriers to entry.
Because of the FIRST Program’s reliance on varied and complex funding sources, a stand-alone budget unit is recommended to better track program performance and how services are being accessed (e.g. through which funding sources). The Department Requested Budget proposes funding five (5) staff positions at a cost of $503,704. This would require two new positions - which are recommended but not funded in this Budget - at a cost of $245,037. Due in part to cost, and due in part to the need to track how the program is being accessed (e.g., how the actual funding matrix compares to the funding matrix in the department’s request), it is recommended that, in addition to establishing a separate budget, the Program first be implemented on a pilot basis with existing staff.
Prior to adding additional staff funding to the Program budget, a fiscal analysis needs to be performed that includes an evaluation of whether the program can be funded with its proposed funding sources, or if the Program could result in drawing down 1991 Realignment funds, in excess of the base + growth, which could be used for other social services programs including senior services and other juvenile justice programs.
First Five
Salary and benefits costs associated with the portion of the two (2) new FIRST positions allocated to this budget have been eliminated. While the Recommended Budget supports adding a Social Worker IV (Range 73) and a FIRST Supervisor/Senior FIRST Supervisor (Range 78/81) to the authorized staffing, it leaves both positions unfunded pending: creation of a separate FIRST budget; demonstrated success of the pilot program; and analysis of funding streams and sustainability.
Independence Airport Improvement Projects
The Recommended Budget recognizes a $26,780 Operating Transfer In from the Independence Airport Special budget to provide matching funds for a grant for pavement repair and rehabilitation.
Independence Airport - Special
As indicated above, the Recommended Budget supports a $26,780 Operating Transfer Out to the Independence Airport Improvement Projects budget to provide matching funds for a grant.
Lone Pine Airport Improvement
The Recommended Budget provides an $8,348 Operating Transfer In from the Geothermal Royalties Trust for matching funds for a FAA grant.
Mosquito Abatement
Abatement fees are being increased by $10,000 based on the prior two years actual revenues received. The Recommended Budget also increases salaries and benefits expense by $43,774 to fund six months of the new Field Technician III position, and to recognize administrative expenses by spreading some Agricultural Commissioner salaries to this budget.
The equipment object code is being increased to have the budget reimburse Motor Pool for a quad that was purchased through the Motor Pool program last year as part of discussion to have the Mosquito Program beginning acquiring and funding ATV equipment through the Motor Pool process.
Motor Pool Operating
Operating Transfer In, from the Motor Pool Replacement budget are being increased by $205,000, for normal operating costs and to purchase 4 additional patrol vehicles for the Sheriffs Office (six patrol vehicles were allocated in the Requested budget). Overall, Motor Pool is seeking appropriations to purchase 10 new vehicles this year. As a result of the new leasing program with Enterprise, most motor pool vehicles will now be leased instead of purchased. This year, 24 new vehicles will be added through the lease program and 48 County- owned vehicles will be disposed of to maximize resale value. Patrol vehicles are not eligible for the Enterprise lease program. The savings being generated through the lease allow Motor Pool to work with the Sheriff’s Office to purchase additional patrol vehicles which the Sheriff has indicated get the patrol fleet “caught up”. Future patrol vehicles purchases should be in the range of 8 to 10 per year, with most vehicles being replaced at 120,000 miles or every 5 years.
In addition to adding $205,000 to the vehicles object code to purchase the vehicles described above, the leases of equipment object code needs to be increased by $5,000 in order to fully fund the lease agreement with Enterprise for this fiscal year. And, in addition to increasing salaries and benefits costs associated with the recommended B-Par position, insurance payments are being increased by $40,000. There is also a reduction of $1,920 in motor pool object code to reflect rate holiday savings in this budget.
Revenue for motor pool charges is reduced by $156,799. This is the amount of money being credited to departmental motor pool budgets as a result of the application of the motor pool rate holiday. The reduction of costs in motor pool object codes shows up as a reduction in revenue in the Motor Pool Operating and Motor Pool Replacement budgets. A premise of the motor pool rate holiday is that there is sufficient fund balance to cover this intentional reduction in revenue.
Motor Pool Replacement
Similar to the Motor Pool Operating budget, revenue for motor pool charges is also reduced by $77,184 in this budget. Again, this is the amount of money being credited to departmental motor pool budgets as a result of the application of the motor pool rate holiday.
Also, the Recommended Budget reflects the additional $205,000 Operating Transfer Out to the Motor Pool Operating budget.
Natural Resource Development
The Budget supports a $25,000 Operating Transfer In from the Geothermal Royalties Trust to this budget for natural resource planning efforts.
Office of Emergency Services — Victim. Witness Assistance Council (District Attorney)
Working with the District Attorney’s office, salaries and benefits costs are being increased by $5,407 to spread some staff costs out of the District Attorney budget to this grant to fund allowable administrative costs. To keep the budget balanced, general operating expense is reduced by $5,222.
Recorders Micrograhic/Svstem.
The Recommended Budget increases salaries and benefits expense by $6,108 to fund a portion of the BPAR Office Clerk position requested by the department (which would otherwise be a shared positon with the Auditor’s office).
Recycling & Waste Management
The Recommended Budget again endorses using the County’s share of Transaction and Use Tax (TUT) proceeds - a general tax estimated at $1,350,000 - to offset the cost of the County complying with recycling and solid waste disposal mandates. The Budget also increases commercial trash collection payments revenue by $20,000, and increases solid waste fees revenue by $25,000 to more accurately reflect actual revenues that were received in Fiscal Year 2014-2015.
The Budget includes an Operating Transfer In of $138,609 from the Great Basin Grant budget to partially pay for a new bulldozer at the Bishop Landfill, and to fully pay for a chipper at the Lone Pine landfill. The Great Basin Grant budget reflects the correlating Operating Transfer Out.
Additionally, the Budget relies on a $212,920 General Fund Operating Transfer In. However, if not for available Fund Balance resulting from deferring some work and purchases in last year’s Budget, the amount of the General Fund Operating Transfer In needed to bridge the deficit between projected program revenues and expenses would be $778,273.
The professional services object code is being decreased by $85,188 based on further departmental analysis. General operating expenses are being decreased by $14,690 to more closely reflect the actual expenditures from previous fiscal years. The Budget also decreases the principal on notes payable object code by $115,746, and the interest on notes object code by $34,000 to accurately represent the amounts currently owed this fiscal year for last year’s new equipment lease-purchases. Additionally, the Recommended Budget increases equipment by $451,529 which allows for the purchase of the bulldozer and chipper mentioned above.
The motor pool object code shows a $1,280 reduction due to the application of the motor pool rate holiday.
Substance Use Disorders
Salary and benefits costs associated with the portion of the two (2) new FIRST positions allocated to this budget have been eliminated. While the Recommended Budget supports adding a Social Worker IV (Range 73) and a FIRST Supervisor/Senior FIRST Supervisor (Range 78/81) to the authorized staffing, it leaves both positions unfunded pending: creation of a separate FIRST budget; demonstrated success of the pilot program; and analysis of funding streams and sustainability.
Corresponding revenue in the Realignment - 2011 revenue code has also been reduced.
Water
The Recommended Budget decreases the contribution from DWP revenue code by $12,730 to reflect the actual funding amount that will be received. Additionally there is a decrease of $15,308 in Operating Transfers In to match the amount left in the Owens Valley Cooperative Studies Trust. Operating Transfers Out has been increased by $6,474 to finalize the closeout of the Wildlife Conservation Grant. There is a correlating Operating Transfer In to the Wildlife Conservation Grant budget. The professional services object code has been reduced by the corresponding $15,308. The motor pool object code is decreased by $5,120 to recognize the rate holiday savings.
General Fund Budgets
Agricultural Commissioner
The Recommended Budget increases revenue in the fees for continuing education revenue by $374 to more accurately reflect the revenues received in prior fiscal years. Additionally, the Budget increases aid from Mono County by $44,931 to recognize the actual amount that Mono County will be charged this fiscal year.
Salaries and benefits costs are being reduced by $27,541 to reflect spreading a portion of administrative staff salaries to the Mosquito Abatement budget. The motor pool object code is being reduced by $4,000 to better approximate last year’s motor pool charge and includes application of the rate holiday being applied to all budgets.
Animal. Control
The Recommended Budget decreases overtime by $18,338 based on last year’s actual overtime costs. There could be greater savings as a result of the program being fully staffed this year. Standby costs are being decreased by $2,000, and the general operating object code is being reduced by $4,300 based on previous expenditures. Reductions to the motor pool object code, $8,415, reflect application of the rate holiday after the line item was adjusted based on last year’s actual mileage.
Assessor
The Budget includes a Geothermal Operating Transfer In of $69,649 to pay for the portion of the Assessor’s contract with Harold W. Bertholf, Inc. associated with the Coso Geothermal Operating Company property tax assessment process. (Note: This is distinguished from the separate contract with Harold W. Bertholf, Inc. that is occasionally funded in the County Administrator budget for work assisting the County with property tax appeals made by Coso Geothermal Operating Company.)
The Recommended Budget adds $75,000 to the contingencies object code in this budget. This is to support the recommendation stemming from the evaluation of the Assessor’s office commissioned last year, and presented to your Board of Supervisors on August 18th, that the County contract for “Chief Appraiser” services for 12 to 24 months to perform Chief Appraiser duties and support the Assessor as he transitions into office. To date, the Assessor has indicated he prefers to try to save money, and believes he can obtain the support he needs by working with other County Assessors.
The Recommended Budget also supports the Assessor’s request for an $11,224 increase in the office’s travel and motor pool budget to gain experience by spending time in Assessor’s offices in other counties. Should the Assessor want to contract for Chief Appraisal services at a later date, the contingencies funding will be available and can be combined with salary savings (which was deliberately left in this budget) and, if needed, General Fund Contingencies, to fund the associated contract.
The decrease in the motor pool object code of $1,087 reflects application of the rate holiday.
Board of Supervisors
The Recommended Budget restores funding to several object codes to better approximate last year’s actual costs, while still recognizing a nearly $2,600 reduction from last year’s Board Approved Budget.
Building & Safety
Funding has been added to this budget for training expenses. The budget also benefits by from application of the motor pool rate holiday.
Contingencies
The Recommended Budget includes $40,302 in General Fund Contingencies. Certainly, a more substantial sum is preferable. Last year’s Budget was approved with $210,794 in Contingencies, but previous years’ budgeted Contingencies have been as low as $13,000.
Typically, Contingencies are budgeted for unknown expenses that might arise during the fiscal year, and sometimes for expenses which can - at least reasonably - be anticipated. Examples where use of Contingencies funding may be needed later this fiscal year include contracting for Chief Appraiser services, or funding additional communications site maintenance in the Sheriff’s budget.
Use of Contingencies funding requires a 4/5ths vote of your Board of Supervisors.
Coroner
The Recommended Budget does not support the Coroner’s request for increases in the amount of the contracts for his deputies. The contracts expire in December and the requests for increases in compensation can be considered by your Board of Supervisors when it considers the new contracts. It is inadvisable to include cost increases for these contract positions when the County is in, and will be entering active contract negotiations with bargaining units.
County Clerk - General
The Recommended Budget increases real property transfer tax revenue by $7,000, and increases the recording fees revenue code by $1,000 to more accurately reflect last year’s actuals.
County Counsel
The Recommended Budget reduces salaries and benefits to reflect a decrease in the number of hours for the part-time (A-Par) Office Clerk from 19-hours per week to 15-hours per week based on last year’s Budget. Additionally, the Budget relies on three-months of salary savings associated with this positon. The total savings is $7,765.
The Budget also recognizes $1,965 in savings associated with the motor pool rate holiday.
Coun ty Library
The Budget increases Operating Transfer In by $700 and increases professional services by $700 to recognize funding from the Bishop Library Trust to complete a project at the Library.
The Recommended Budget removes funding for a temporary (A- Par) Automation Librarian I. This position would be funded with a donation of automation funds from the Friends of the Bishop Library, but the Friends group is unable to make the donation at this time so there is no corresponding revenue to fund the position. The Assistant CAO will work with the Library Director and the Friends of the Bishop Library to resolve the funding mechanism. Once this occurs, a budget amendment for the associated revenue and expense will be prepared for consideration by your Board of Supervisors.
The Recommended Budget supports several requested and recommended changes to the Library’s authorized stalling. The Budget also provides funding for a new part-time (A-Par) Library-Museum Specialist position, albeit not as much as requested. The Budget includes funding to have the position work 5-hours per week as a floating position to ensure better coverage during staff absences. The Requested Budget sought funding for this substitute position to work 20-hours per week.
District Attorney - General
The Budget reflects a savings of $5,406 in salaries and benefits costs as a result of spreading some administrative salaries to the Victim Witness budget.
The professional and special services object code is being reduced by $2,500 based on last year’s actuals, and the miscellaneous nature of the department’s request. Travel expense is being reduced by $6,500, to $11,800, which is the same amount as last year and still provides more money for travel than prior years’ actuals.
The Recommended Budget reduces motor pool by $9,176 based on last year’s actuals and application of the rate holiday.
D.A. - Safety
The department’s overtime budget is being reduced by $12,817 based actual expenses. Additionally, retirement and social security are being increased by $3,855 based on actual costs.
Disaster Services - CAO
The Budget again supports continuing to provide funding to send up to four (4) County employees assigned to Section Chief roles in the Emergency Operations Center to intensive, out-of-county training opportunities.
Economic Development-CAO
Funding other needs in this budget necessitates recommending deferring the hiring of the vacant Deputy County Administrator position for at least nine-months.
Elections
The Recommended Budget shows a salary and benefits savings of $12,036 due to the personnel actions discussed above, including funding some of the part-time Office Clerk position through the Recorder’s Micrograhic/System budget.
Environmental Health
The Recommended Budget reduces the intra county charges object code by $6,808. The department was charging other General Fund departments for water sampling and food permits. Generally, the Budget discourages charges between General Fund departments.
There is a corresponding decrease in internal charges in the General Fund budgets that were being charged.
The Budget also increases well permits revenue by $3,500, and increases the food establishment permits revenue by $2,260 to more accurately reflect the revenues that have been achieved in prior fiscal years (without charging County General Fund departments). Additionally, the water samples revenue code is being increased by $21,800 with corresponding increases medical, dental & lab supplies expenses to more closely reflect last year’s actuals.
Motor pool costs are being reduced by $5,120, based on last year’s actuals and application of the rate holiday.
Health
The Recommended Budget moves funding intended to offset Personnel costs from salaries and benefits to Operating Transfers Out.
IC GOLD
Other current charges revenue is being increased by $7,979 to more closely represent actual revenues received last fiscal year.
Jail - CAD/RMS
An Operating Transfer In of $24,066 from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust is being recommended to fund the cost of the RIMS Maintenance Contract in lieu of using General Fund monies for this purpose. Additionally, a second Operating Transfer from the Warrant Trust of $1,785 is being used to provide connectivity to the Superior Court’s JALAN criminal justice case management system. Five years ago, 911 Trust Funds were available for this contract, but those funds have been expended. The 911 Trust will be monitored for ability to resume funding these costs in the future.
Jail - General
All Jail kitchen related expenses, formerly included in this budget, have been removed from this budget and identified in the new Kitchen Services budget discussed below.
As noted above, the Budget includes a $22,284 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund Jail facility operations associated with the Siemen’s maintenance contract. There is an additional Operating Transfer In of $11,539 to cover the cost of emergency repairs at the Jail this summer. Total Criminal Justice Facilities Trust transfers to this budget amount to $33,823.
Based on prior years’ actuals and conversations with the department, personal & safety equipment costs are being reduced by $2,040; inmate clothing costs are being lowered by $5,000; general operating expense is being reduced by $1,205; and, law enforcement special costs are being adjusted by $5,700. The Budget is increasing the rents & leases of equipment object code by $5,000 to cover the expense of the rental of a refrigeration truck while the Jail walk-in freezer was being repaired. And, the internal charges object code is being reduced by $190 to reflect Environmental health not charging the Jail for its food permit since these are both General Fund Departments.
The Department Requested Budget included $47,493 for travel expense. The Recommended Budget reduces travel expense associated with the Jail by $6,168. Additionally, the Budget moves $18,185 of the requested funding for mandatory STC training into the Jail STC budget to show the full cost of this required training. And, the Budget reclassifies $7,547 of the requested travel to a new expenses code designated for required training expense. This allows for better tracking of mandatory and required training costs and reimbursements.
Jail - Security
The Recommended Budget supports an AB 443 Trust Operating Transfer In, requested by the Sheriff, to fund $23,130 in annual Jail security system costs.
Jail - STC
The Auditor-Controller recommends separately budgeting the full request for mandatory STC training and travel costs previously identified in the Jail General budgets. This will facilitate funding and tracking of mandatory and required training costs as well as associated reimbursements.
To effect this change, $18,185 of the $47,493 requested for travel in the Jail General budget has been moved to this budget. This budget now will show a general fund cost because the reimbursement from the State is far less than the actual cost.
Juvenile Institutions
The Recommended Budget includes a $7,020 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to pay for the cost of the Juvenile Hall fire suppression maintenance contract.
In addition, the Recommended Budget moves 1991 Realignment Funds for juvenile justice programs from the Probation budget to the Juvenile Institutions budget. In addition, the amount of 1991 Social Services Realignment funding has been increased by $42,432, from $34,003 to $76,435. This increase recognizes the growth in the juvenile justice portion of the 1991 Social services Realignment base amounts, rather than simply transferring the base amount arrived at in 1991 (without growth) as has been the past budget practice.
Realignment 2011 revenue has also been increased by $17,578 to recognize funding for the Group Home allocation in the amount of $7,578, and the Child Welfare Services Outcome Improvement Project allocation in the amount of $10,000.
The Recommended Budget reduces the food and household supplies object code by $26,250 to recognize the savings from closing the kitchen in Juvenile hall and moving the kitchen functions over to the jail, and the personnel actions involved in that move.
The Budget moves $2,500 from the personal and safety equipment object code to the inmate clothing object code, and reduces the personal and safety equipment object code by another $2,500 based on prior years’ actual expenses. Inmate clothing is also being reduced by $500 in keeping with last year’s actual costs.
The Budget also reduces general operating expense by $1,000, and travel expense is being reduced by $9,864 to more closely represent the actual expenditures in past fiscal years. Internal charges is being reduced by $190 to represent the removal of Environmental Health charges, as there is seldom a good reason for one General Fund department to charge another General Fund department.
The Budget reduces motor pool by $17,240 based on last year’s actuals, and application of the motor pool rate holiday.
Kitchen Services
This is a new budget unit assigned to the Sheriffs office to facilitate the recommended closing of the Juvenile Hall kitchen, and assumption of Juvenile Hall meal preparation in the Jail kitchen. This budget is being created to separate intra-departmental kitchen costs from the Jail budget, which has traditionally included Jail kitchen costs.
Costs previously budgeted in the Jail budget have been moved to this budget which will support both jail and Juvenile Hall meal preparation. The Department Requested Budget reflects those costs that the department requested in the Jail budget, as well as portions of administrative staff time and cleaning supplies costs that department staff indicated would be more appropriately charged to this budget.
The Recommended Budget adds $10,000 to office and other equipment to fund the cost of equipment needed to transport meals from the jail kitchen to the Juvenile Hall.
Maintenance — Building & Grounds
It is recommended this budget receive a $17,000 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust; $10,000 for ongoing facilities expenses at the Jail, and $7,000 for facilities expense at the Juvenile Hall.
The Recommended Budget also reflects twelve-months of savings for a vacant Custodian position. However, funding for a seasonal position was added back to insure that the department has the ability to add extra staffing met during the busier summer months. The total savings between the two positions is $41,880.
The Budget also increases the professional services object code by $14,500 in support of requests from the department.
The principle on notes object code is decreased by $388, and the interest on notes was decreased by $55 to precisely reflect the debt service payments for the photovoltaic project. The straight dollar-to- dollar electrical savings associated with the PV system last year (not factoring additional costs the County would have incurred if had not built the system) totals over $54,000 and, depending on the system, ranges between 13 and 53-percent.
The Budget also decreases motor pool costs by $14,356 based on last year’s actuals and application of the rate holiday.
Mental Health
Salary and benefits costs associated with the portion of the two (2) new positions requested for the FIRST program allocated to this budget have been eliminated. While the Recommended Budget supports adding a Social Worker IV (Range 73) and a FIRST Supervisor/Senior FIRST Supervisor (Range 78/81) to the authorized staffing, it leaves both positions unfunded pending: creation of a separate FIRST budget; demonstrated success of the pilot program; and analysis of funding streams and sustainability.
The Recommended Budget moves funding intended to offset Personnel costs from salaries and benefits to Operating Transfers Out. The Budget also increases Operating Transfers Out by an additional $5,300 to cover the expense to complete the ADA Compliance work needed at Grove Street.
Mental Health Realignment and Realignment - 2011 have been reduced to insure that the bottom line of this budget maintains the required maintenance of effort.
Museum
The Budget increases the donations by $1,500 based on historical trends.
Parks
The Recommended Budget proposes a $215,642 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer In to support eligible parks projects, including providing matching funds for grants submitted to construct launch facilities for disabled boaters at Diaz Lake and Millpond Recreation Area. The Budget also adds a $684 Operating Transfer In from the Auditor Controller Off Highway budget to be used to support other Parks & Recreation activities.
Schober Lane - Campground revenue is being increased by $14,700 to more closely represent the revenues achieved in Fiscal Year 2014-2015 as a result of the new concessionaire agreement.
Glitches in the new pay stations have been resolved and, as a result, the budget is comfortable supporting that these revenues be increased above last year’s actuals.
The Budget decreases miscellaneous revenues from the sale of firewood, ice, pumping, etc. by $12,000 to avoid over-projecting how successful this new venture will be. This is a pilot program, and it will take a year to review performance relative to revenues and costs.
The reduction in salaries and benefits costs reflects spreading department personnel to other budgets to more closely reflect the work that is being done across the department’s programs. This shift generated a savings of $16,109.
The Budget also decreases the office and other equipment object code by $6,000, but increases professional services expense by $1,590 to fund a grant proposal for funding additional staff for quagga mussel inspections at Diaz Lake.
Similar to other budgets, internal charges expense is being reduced by $6,000 associated with Environmental Health water sampling. Since both departments are General Fund departments, there is no reason for this transaction.
In addition to providing $35,000 in matching funds for the dock projects, as recommended the Budget also provides an additional $43,900 in infrastructure appropriations to complete the well projects at four (4) of the campgrounds that were started last year. The Budget also supports additional modules for the new campground pay stations. These modules will allow the machines to start accepting cash in addition to the credit cards currently being accepted.
Motor pool expenses are reduced by $8,151 based on last year’s actuals and application of the rate holiday. 
The Recommended Budget adds $93,690 to Operating Transfers In to recognize funding that Health and Human Services department budgets may provide to defer staff expenses in Personnel.
Planning
The Budget recommends a $25,000 Operating Transfer In from the Geothermal Royalties Trust. $10,000 will be used for planning contracts, and $15,000 will be used towards the North Sierra Highway planning process.
The Budget decreases personnel expenses by $7,394, as an Associate Planner is retiring in December, 2015 and could be replaced by an Assistant Planner at a lower salary range, starting in January, 2016. There is additionally an opportunity to explore this position also conducting mining assessments for the Assessor’s office instead of the Assessor contracting for these services.
The Budget decreases internal charges by $150 as the charges from Environmental Health were removed and decreases motor pool expenses by $2,576 based on last year’s actuals and application of the rate holiday.
Probation
The Recommended Budget decreases the social services realignment revenue code by $34,003, as these funds are part of 1991 Realignment and are more appropriately budgeted in the Juvenile Probation budget to support the juvenile justice programs. There is also a decrease of $15,000 in the state-public safety services revenue code to more closely reflect the actual revenues received in prior fiscal years.
The Budget reflects three-months of salary savings associated with a vacant Deputy Probation Officer in salaries and benefits, for a total savings of $19,205. The Budget also decreases general operating expense by $2,000, and requested travel expense by $5,400 to bring both appropriations in line with prior years’ actual costs. 
The Recommended Budget decreases motor pool by $11,904 based on last year’s actuals; anticipation of less commuting between Bishop and Independence; and, application of the rate holiday.
Public Works
The Recommended Budget increases requested revenues in the external charges revenue code by $20,000 based on the prior two years’ actual received revenue.
In addition to showing recommended salary savings based on vacant positions, the Budget also reflects application of the rate holiday which saves $400 in the motor pool object code.
Sheriff — General
Similar to the previous three years, the Sheriff supports the use of AB 443 (Rural Sheriff’s) funds to offset department expenses that might otherwise not be funded. Accordingly, the Recommended Budget includes a $300,000 Operating Transfer In from the AB 443 Trust. As in year’s past, this funding will only be transferred into the budget as necessary to meet revenue projections in relation to actual expenditures (e.g., maintain Net County Cost).
Based on last year’s actuals, it is recommended that gun permits revenue be increased by $1,000 and criminal fines revenue be bumped up $500. Similar to the Probation budget, the Budget reduces state- public safety services revenue by $20,000 in line with last year’s actuals. Additionally, there is an increase of $800 in civil fines revenue to recognize eligible reimbursements for certain budgeted expenses. The Budget also accelerates recognition of $100,000 in COPS funding from the COPS Trust.
As noted in the Salary Savings Table (Attachment B), the Budget relies on very little salary savings in the Sheriff’s budgets to ensure vacant positions can be filled as quickly as possible. Additionally, overtime expense is also only slightly reduced in this budget, by $3,469, to more closely match last year’s Board Approved amount for this budget. Overall, overtime in all of the requested Sheriff’s budgets totals $508,046, the Recommended Budget includes $506,239. Last year’s total Board Approved overtime expense was $426,568, and actuals was $517,742.
Personal & safety equipment expense is being reduced by $3,800 based on last year’s actuals, and sufficient funding remains to fund all life and safety equipment requests.
As requested, the maintenance of equipment object code includes $25,000 for radio maintenance costs associated with a contract with the State of California for “as needed” repairs to radio communications sites. Similar to last year, the recommendation is to reduce this amount by $15,000; acknowledging that these funds may need to be appropriated later in the year if actual radio maintenance costs charged to this contract exceed $10,000 this fiscal year. Additionally, the Budget reduces this object code by an additional $8,943. The $20,000 recommended for maintenance of equipment expense is still $3,512 higher than last year’s actual expenses.
Additionally, expenses in the maintenance of equipment - materials object code are being reduced by $1,000 based on historical actuals. Similarly, based on last year’s actuals, it is recommended that expenses in the office and other equipment costing less than $5,000 object code be reduced by $3,345; professional and special services expenses be reduced by $3,000 (this will still provide funds in excess of last year’s actuals); the general operating expense object code is reduced by $10,000; the law enforcement special object code is reduced by $5,565; and, the utilities object code is reduced by $6,466.
This year, the Budget reduces travel expense by $12,116 and reclassifies $69,938 to a new expense code that will be used to track required and mandated travel expenses.
Motor pool expenses are reduced by $122,735 based on last year’s actuals and application of the rate holiday.
Social Services
Salary and benefits costs associated with the portion of the two (2) new positions requested for the FIRST program allocated to this budget have been eliminated. A corresponding reduction was made in Social Services Realignment revenues. While the Recommended Budget supports adding a Social Worker IV (Range 73) and a FIRST Supervisor/Senior FIRST Supervisor (Range 78/81) to the authorized staffing to support possible expansion of the FIRST program in the future, it leaves both positions unfunded pending: creation of a separate FIRST budget; demonstrated success of the pilot program; and analysis of funding streams and sustainability.
The Budget also moves funding intended to offset Personnel costs from salaries and benefits to Operating Transfers Out.
The Recommended Budget takes modest salary savings, $111,033, to keep the budget at its estimated base amount pending further analysis. This taking of salary savings does not materially affect department operations since the majority of savings comes from taking 12-months of savings from one position that not been filled in years. It is necessary to ensure that the budget does not budget ongoing expenses in excess of on-going revenues, even when a fund balance exists. Additionally, as noted later, the Recommend Budget proposes reviewing and analyzing use of all 1991 Realignment funds. This is advisable for several reasons, including that, in the past year, there have been funding “shifts” that occurred in 1991 Realignment at the State level. These need to be evaluated before ongoing expenses are increased.
RESERVES, OPEB TRUST, DEBT SERVICE, AND CONTINGENCIES
As discussed above, the CAO Recommended Budget does not
allocate any contributions to the General Reserve Fund or Economic Stabilization Fund; make any OPEB Trust contribution for future retiree health costs; nor does it achieve the Utopian ideal of providing budget to reserve former debt-service payments. Ideally, the Budget should provide allocations for all of these uses. Furthermore, General Fund Contingencies are only $40,302, and a higher amount is certainly desirable.
Depending on the Fund Balance certified by the Auditor- Controller on September 3rd and/or how Budget Hearing deliberations progress, your Board of Supervisors may choose to increase contributions to one or more of these purposes as part of its adoption of the Final Budget. And, depending on the ultimate cost of some of initiatives funded in this Budget, it may be possible to increase contributions to one or more of these uses through budget amendments later in the Fiscal Year.
ASSUMPTIONS, KNOWN CHANGES, AND OUTSTANDING ISSUES
Assumptions
The Recommended Budget is not without certain risks, and many of the assumptions which it is based remain unchanged from last year.
Balancing this Budget relied on the following assumptions:
	The Auditor-Controller will certify Fiscal year 2014-2015 General Fund Balance at or above $3,529,789 Million.
	No new reductions in State or Federal funding.
	No significant downturn (or upturn) in the economy that could affect economically-sensitive revenues, especially those projected as increasing.
	No drastic reduction in tourism visitation adversely affecting Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax and campground fee revenues.
	No adverse settlements to the Tecopa Sewage Lagoon project dispute exceeding the Tecopa Sewage Lagoon Fund Balance.
	No appeal of the 2015 Coso Geothermal Power Plant property tax assessment.
	Changes to the Community Corrections Partnership implementation plan, developed to enable the County to meet the goals of Criminal Justice Realignment, will: (1) adhere to the County’s AB 109 principles adopted in previous years’ budgets and recommended again here; and (2) continue to live within its means - which are limited to State funding allocations - and not rely on contributions from other County funding sources.
	Other costs associated with Public Safety Realignment being adequately funded by the State, or absorbed into existing budgets.
	Public safety subventions being funded at the levels budgeted.
	State Airport Improvement Program (AIP) Matching Grants fund being available to off-set a portion of the County’s match requirements for FAA grants included in this Budget.
	No further impacts to this year’s budget from additional decreases in Highway Users Tax Account (HUTA) or other Road revenues from the State.
	No litigation decisions, including payments of attorney’s fees, adverse to Inyo County.
	Departments will meet or exceed their revenue projections, and manage their expenditures within the appropriation limits established by your Board.
	Receiving no new geothermal royalty payments.
	Receiving no positive adjustments to sales tax and Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenues as a result of audits.
	The Authorized Position Review Process will remain in effect, and vacant positions will not be filled prior to the identified fill date to achieve the recommended salary savings (Attachment B) or the savings associated with last year’s Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan.
	Department heads will carefully monitor their Board Approved budgets, and State and Federal budget actions - including realignment proposals - and promptly inform your Board and the County Administrator of reductions, or anticipated reductions in revenues, and propose implementing corresponding reductions in expenditures.
	Continuing to pay a disproportionate amount of undesignated court fee revenue to the State.
	No new revenue streams being created. (This Budget does not rely on increases to solid waste disposal fees, new film permit revenue, or any other increases in fees or charges not already approved by your Board of Supervisors.)
	No loss of grant funding for existing projects.
 Receiving no Indian Gaming Special Distribution Fund grant revenue.
Known Changes
Following are potential changes that have been identified as possibly being made in the Final County Budget presented for adoption by your Board or, more likely, shortly thereafter as amendments to the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Board Approved Budget. If other changes are identified, they may the subject of an addendum to the Budget, or “walked on” during Budget Hearings or your Board of Supervisors’ adoption of the Final Budget.
FIRST Program.
As noted above, it is recommended that the FIRST Program be funded in a stand-alone budget. While this could be done to represent expenses with the staffing currently authorized and budgeted for the pilot program, creating the stand-alone budget and other associated budget amendments could wait until accessed funding sources are analyzed and it is appropriate to consider funding the two (2) new positions authorized in support of this program.
Jail - General
In creating the new Kitchen Services budget, all kitchen-related costs - including $20,000 in requested overtime was - moved to the new budget unit. However, a corresponding amount of overtime was not removed from the Jail - General budget. So, the overtime in the Jail - General budget is currently $20,000 higher than intended for recommendation. This correction should be made in the Final Budget presented to your Board for approval.
Fund Balance
During Budget Hearings on September 3rd, the Auditor- Controller will certify General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2015. If certified Fund Balance is below the $3,529,789 relied upon to prepare the Recommended Budget, your Board of Supervisors will need to make corresponding reduction in expenses, or increases in revenue, to adopt a balanced budget.
If the Fund Balance certified by the Auditor-Controller exceeds $3,529,789, it is recommended that your Board of Supervisors consider appropriating the additional funds to one or more of the following needs:
	General Fund Contingencies
	OPEB Trust contribution (for retiree healthcare costs)
	Economic Stabilization Fund
	General Reserve Fund
	Accumulated Capital Outlay (e.g., reserve former debt-service payments for future capital projects)
	Computer System Fund
It is also recommended that your Board of Supervisors refrain from using any additional General Fund Balance that may materialize to enhance funding for ongoing costs, or de facto on-ongoing costs in the County Budget. This would have the effect of needing the same (higher) amount of Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 2016
-	or some combination of increased revenues or decreased expenditures
-	to simply maintain this year’s spending plan.
Outstanding Issues
This year’s Budget addresses many County needs and department requests intended to better serve the community. However, there are still many outstanding issues in addition to those already discussed above that need to be kept in mind relative to this and future years’ budgets:
	The potential for ongoing economic instability still exists.
	Labor negotiations with the Law Enforcement Administrators Association (LEAA) are ongoing, and new contract negotiations will begin later this fiscal year with the Inyo County Employees Association, the Deputy Sheriffs Association, and other bargaining units.
	Savings from the photovoltaic electricity project installed at County buildings in Independence notwithstanding, uncertainty over fuel and utility costs continue to have the potential to adversely affect revenues (e.g., airport fuel costs) and expenses planned for in the Recommended Budget.
	If the Consolidated County Office Building project does not proceed, other means of addressing long-term County office space needs, and associated costs will need to be pursued.
	The County’s outdated, unsupported, and failing telephone system needs to be replaced with Voice Over Internet Protocol, or some other technology.
	The District Attorney’s office and Probation department have been working with Information Services to upgrade their criminal justice case management systems. The new systems will provide greater functionality and capability for both departments. However, because it has been necessary to upgrade the systems independently of one another and the Superior Court’s new JALAN software system, there could be lapses in integration between the three case management systems, and increases in costs.
	Both the Road department and Recycling and Waste Management program need to continue to replace aging equipment to comply with CARB regulations.
	The new, higher, baselines for certain revenue streams, such as Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax receipts, contained in this year’s Budget means there continues to be less room for error in revenue projections and attainment. This could also result in less “unanticipated” revenue available at the end of the year to make up for shortfalls stemming from under-achieved revenue in other areas of the Budget.
	The County needs to continue to develop and implement strategies to reduce the amount of future General Fund monies that are, or may be required to support the Recycling and Waste Management program.
	Federal PILT and Secure Rural School funding is basically year- to-year.
	This year’s HUTA reduction, combined with the end of Prop 1B road monies, intensifies the need for the Public Works department monitor its Road Fund Balance, and manage the Road budget with an awareness of potential implications on Fund Balance and cash flow.
	It is unlikely that Indian Gaming Special Distribution Funds will be available from the State this year.
	Policy issues and impacts of suspended State mandates still need to be evaluated on a department-by-department basis in discussions with your Board. To date, only the Clerk-Recorder has brought such an item forward. Depending on your Board’s disposition toward these suspended mandates, there could be some budgetary savings if your Board elects to forego maintaining compliance with the former mandates.
	As State and Federal funding becomes more scarce, and costs continue to increase, the County needs to continue to revisit its own schedule of fees - preferably in a comprehensive manner - to ensure that the fees cover a reasonable portion of the cost of providing services.
	As departments continue to apply for various grants, it is important to emphasize that these new grants be used to off-set ongoing costs, or reduce the cost of implementing one-time projects whenever possible.
LOOKING AHEAD
Similar to last year, in addition to the Outstanding Issues described above, there are two specific issues that require your Board of Supervisors’ ongoing consideration:
Fiscal Year 2016-2017Budget
The relatively generous tone and increased revenues associated with Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended Budget make this an ideal time to begin to address, or at least be prepared to respond to lingering issues and trends that are not as positive and could impact the next year’s Budget, including:
 PILT permanency
	Continued reliance on the entire General Fund Balance
	Unsustainable reliance on Operating Transfers from key trusts
	Fewer vacancies available to generate salary savings
	Disproportionate increases in some law enforcement costs
	Greater reliance on fund balances by Non-General Fund budgets.
Criminal Justice Realignment
The impacts of Criminal Justice Realignment (AB 109) continue to present significant fiscal, public safety, and even social challenges, as well as opportunities, to the County and the community we serve. Last year, the State established a more permanent AB 109 allocation formula, and funding levels counties will receive for realigned criminal justice programs are now known. It is critical that these limited and insufficient resources are maximized.
Accordingly, the Criminal Justice Realignment principles adopted as part of the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget, and reaffirmed in each subsequent year’s Board Approved Budget, should be revisited and reaffirmed again as part of adopting this, and future years’ Budgets. These principles include:
	Future modifications and amendments to the Community Corrections Plan must be implemented within Criminal Justice Realignment funding constructs; otherwise Criminal Justice Realignment risks becoming, essentially, to some degree an unfunded State mandate that could require your Board of Supervisors to consider taking money away from other County needs.
	Reject any Community Corrections Plan (4/5ths vote required) that cannot be implemented (e.g., demonstrate adequate budget) with public safety realignment funding provided by the State, or County monies your Board is willing to reappropriate from other programs.
	Require County public safety and human services departments to absorb costs associated with implementing public safety realignment within their existing budgets. If we are really talking about changing the way we conduct the business of criminal justice and rehabilitation, and not simply expanding the criminal justice industrial complex, then costs associated with old programming methodologies should give way to new ones. If your Board of Supervisors accepts community corrections plans that simply add layers of new infrastructure instead of re-structuring and reintegrating existing infrastructure, there will never be enough money to fund this endeavor.
	Continue to utilize a centralized budget (as is again included in the year’s Budget) and/or cost centers to manage funds; consider having involved departments submit quarterly billings for pre-approved costs as opposed to simply transferring funds into those departments’ budgets.
OUTSTANDING OPPORTUNITIES
As we look ahead, it is worth recognizing that, in addition to pleasantly positive revenue trends, this year’s Recommended Budget benefits greatly from the service re-design work that was a critical component in balancing last year’s budget. The work undertaken in Fiscal Year 2013-2014, and implemented as part of the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget is continuing to pay dividends. The costs savings and efficiencies associated with initiatives such as revamping management of the town water systems, implementing a Voluntary Separation Incentive Plan, beginning to change Recycling and Waste Management operations, and modifying the senior meal program (to name a few) continue to generate savings used to balance this year’s Budget.
The Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended Budget also benefits from similar work undertaken in the last year, such as purchasing bell provers for the Weights & Measures program instead of contracting for services, and consolidating meal preparation for the Jail and Juvenile Hall in the Jail kitchen.
Preparation of this year’s Budget recalled several service redesign ideas that may still provide opportunities for maintaining services and enhancing efficiencies, and identified new opportunities to be explored. The ideas presented below are certainly not exhaustive, nor are they absolute in their promise of generating additional budgetary savings or efficiencies; they may, however, serve as additional building blocks on which to construct future County budgets. Your Board of Supervisors is asked to continue to encourage the pursuit of these and other service redesign opportunities. Things worth looking at include, but are not limited to:
	Review and revise the County Vehicle Policy.
	Review and revise the County Travel Policy.
	Examine long-standing grants with an eye toward offsetting General Fund expense.
	Continuing seeking alternatives to contract laundry services; including dispersed on-site laundry facilities, or expanding the Jail laundry to provide centralized services.
	As Eastern Sierra Weed Management Area program funding dwindles, reexamine the possibility of the program providing contract services to Inyo and Mono counties’ Road departments.
	Continue to analyze ways to increase efficiencies and reduce costs in County-operated kitchens by evaluating opportunities to coordinate menus; consolidate purchasing to increase buying power; and, integrate the use of staff and kitchen resources.
	Monitor performance measures and identify opportunities for aligning Criminal Justice Realignment objectives with other County service needs.
	Review and analyze uses of 1991 Realignment funds to benefit General Fund programs. Realignment funds already support portions of various General Fund services ranging from County Counsel to Information Services and Personnel. In addition, Health Realignment funds are apportioned to the Animal Services and Environmental Health budgets, and 1991 Social Services Realignment includes an allocation to juvenile justice programs in the Probation department. Are the uses of Realignment funds being maximized? What other opportunities exist?
	Seek means to integrate Health and Human Services programs with Probation programs to maximize funding, reduce costs, and improve services.
	Examine cost/benefits of operating Juvenile Hall relative to other opportunities to improve juvenile justice outcomes and address the needs of adult populations. Can and should additional HHS Social Services funding be directed to support Juvenile Hall operations? Can (and should) money currently budgeted for the Juvenile Hal be better leveraged by using it to support other juvenile justice programs?
Again, these are only suggestions and other opportunities certainly exist and new ones will emerge.
CONCLUSION
This year’s Budget provides welcome relief from the strain and strife associated with last year’s budget. It could be viewed as an eddy in a rushing stream; and, it should be viewed as an occasion to pursue refined service redesign opportunities, including but certainly not limited to those identified in the preceding pages.
If these opportunities are pursued in the next six months with sincerity and cooperation, and some are deemed meritorious and implemented, and if the positive revenue trends identified in this Budget stay strong and, hopefully increase; the possibility exists for next year’s County Budget to place the County on the best financial footing it has seen in years. Heck, Quinn the Eskimo might even show up.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
As discussed above, but probably not sufficiently, this Budget would have been much more difficult to prepare if not for departments that endeavored to maintain and build upon the cost savings and efficiencies generated in last year’s Budget. The Recommended Budget, hopefully, recognizes what is possible when people work together.
In the addition to the efforts of County department heads and their staff, the year’s budget also reflects the leadership and hard work of the County Budget Analyst, Denelle Carrington, Information Services Director Brandon Shults; and, Programmer Analyst, Mike Baffrey, to revamp and - like Dylan in ‘65 - electrify this year’s budget process. 
The work of bringing it all back home fell to Denelle and our Auditor-Controller, Amy Shepherd. This budget simply would not be possible without their dedication and commitment, with support from Kelley Williams and all the staff in the County Administrator’s department.
This Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Recommended Budget marks my tenth anniversary of preparing the Inyo County Budget, and I can easily say this year’s preparation has been marked by the most teamwork and least stress of any year to date. Thank you.
I want to close by encouraging your Board of Supervisors to adopt the CAO Recommended Budget, which is balanced, strives to maintain all of the Board of Supervisors’ priorities, and responds to more department requests than might have been thought possible just three months ago. 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
	Adopt the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget as Recommended by the County Administrator, including the recommendations presented herein.
	Provide direction with regard to the use of Fund Balance the Auditor-Controller may certify below or in excess of $3,529,789.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize and direct the County Administrator and Auditor Controller to approve and make payments, greater than $10,000 to Inter-Agency Visitor Center, Cal Expo Exhibit and Tri-County Fairgrounds as provided for in the Advertising County Resources budget.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize and direct the County Administrator to develop and execute contracts with all Grants- In-Support program funding recipients identified in the Grants- In-Support Budget.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize the County Administrator to proceed with hiring requests by departments for the new positions added to the authorized staffing, and funded, in accordance with the Final Budget without requiring the departments to return before the Board of Supervisors to follow the authorized position review process.
	Set adoption of the Final Budget for September 8, 2015, or September 15, 2015, depending on when Budget Hearings conclude.
(Note: The date for approval of the County Budget is dependent on completion of the Budget Hearings and staffs ability to incorporate any changes directed by your Board into the Final Budget Agenda Request Form. If Budget Hearings last longer, or result in substantial changes that need to be implemented, the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 County Budget may need to be adopted at a Special Meeting of the Board of Supervisors before october 2nd.

