INTRODUCTION
Han Shan (aka Cold Mountain) strikes me as a fellow who knew that, when between a rock and a hard place, it’s best to make yourself skinny. Some of his less pointed observations, then, seem appropriate companions to Inyo County’s Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Budget
The Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended Budget is certainly devoid of dust and, arguably, fat; although, as alluded to in stanza 120, some grain always escapes the miller. Thank goodness! Similarly, grains are still falling to the County from the State and Federal budget processes, and these sources of revenue make-up 53.6% of this proposed $76,933,477 County Budget. In contrast, locally- generated taxes - property tax, sales tax, and hotel tax - account for only 21%, or $16,246,807, of this year’s Recommended Budget.
This year’s receipt of Federal Fiscal Year 2013 $1,673,865 in Payment In Lieu of Taxes (PILT) funding, despite the Federal Budget Sequestration, helps to demonstrate just how dependent County operations are on State and Federal funding (and why the County must be diligent in urging Congress to reauthorize the PILT Secure Rural Schools funding programs). The PILT funding directly supports the operations of County General Fund departments. Without these critical revenues, it is clear the County would have to severely reduce the already basic programs and services it provides to Inyo County residents and businesses.
Pondering the County’s reliance on PILT funding leads to consideration of those revenues the County Budget relies on from the City of Los Angeles. Whereas, the Federal government is paying Inyo County $1,673,865 in lieu of taxes for the 5,949,300-acres of publicly- owned land it manages in Inyo County, the constitutionally-prescribed Phillips Formula will result in the City of Los Angeles paying the County $4,799,218 in property taxes for the 202,929-acres of land it owns in Inyo County. Additionally, general financial assistance payments and parks operation and maintenance payments negotiated between Inyo County and the City of Los Angeles years ago as part of the Long-Term Water Agreement total $3,347,763 in this year’s Budget. These are General Fund revenues, separate from the $1,395,007 Los Angeles will pay the County for water-related activities and the $70,106 it will pay for the salt cedar eradication in support of the Inyo County Water Department. Again, the County Budget, and the programs and services it supports - ranging from the Sheriffs
Office to libraries - would be greatly diminished without these critical revenues.
Like the “frequent guest” referenced in the first stanza, recent Inyo County budgets are well acquainted with what it means to be lean. However, it’s difficult to imagine a County Budget so lean as to not attract “distant kin” or the advances of other governments and organizations seeking County support. Fortunately, this year’s Recommended Budget generally maintains the County’s ability to support services to other local government entities, and provide direct funding to non-profit partners the County works with to serve the community and its visitors. Additionally, this year’s Budget seeks to avoid hardships that “part flesh and blood” by providing for specific classification equity adjustments as well as salary and benefit increases for County employees as a result of labor negotiations. In these, and many other respects, the Recommended Budget is still shining and full of light.
Allegories aside, this year’s Recommended Budget is, in many ways, the most difficult I’ve prepared in the past eight years; not so much because of what it includes or does not include for this year’s spending program, but because of what it portends for next year’s budget and the foreseeable future.
The Recommended Budget is balanced (remember, it has to be) based on the presumption that this year’s General Fund Balance (which will not be certified by the Auditor-Controller until the beginning of Budget Hearings on September 9th) will be the same as last year’s- $3,833,348. It also relies on using Fund Balances from Non- General Funds to a greater extent than might be preferable, and continues to judiciously, but none-the-less aggressively rely on Operating Transfers to and from the General Fund. It makes deeper cuts than I would prefer (and deeper cuts than some departments may be able understand) to Department Requested budgets, and leaves some desirable positions and initiatives unfunded. Should the Auditor- Controller certify a Fund Balance greater than $3,833,348, the Recommended Budget includes recommendations on how your Board might choose to use these additional revenues.
Increased personnel costs are driving additional expenses in this year’s Budget, while revenues, with a few notable decreases, are remaining fairly constant. The overall impact of the cost increases in this year’s Budget are somewhat masked when compared to the bottom line to last year’s Budget, because last year’s Budget included several large, one-time expenditures, including $1.2 Million in Proposition IB funding and another $1.2 Million for the Property Tax Management System project as well as expenses associated with the Tech Refresh program. In contrast, there are not as many large one-time expenditures in this year’s Budget. Yet, this year’s Recommended Budget is only $1,147,174 less than last year’s budgeted expense in the Approved Budget. A portion of the large one-time costs in last year’s Budget have, in effect, been replaced with increased and on-going labor costs, including:
	A $486,788 increase in Sheriffs department personnel costs compared to last year’s Board-Approved Budget;
	An estimated increase of $648,675 in health insurance premium costs, of which the County could fund as much as $394,525 (if new labor contracts are agreed upon) as a result of loosening the hard-cap on health care cost increases in favour of sharing health care premium costs with employees on an 80/20 split;
	Retirement benefit cost increases, beyond the County’s control, of $174,357;
	Anticipating a new labor contract with the Inyo County Employees Association with an estimated cost of $235,391 this fiscal year.
All of these costs (as well as the cost of any additional labor contracts that are approved this year) will be compounded in next year’s Budget if additional increases in salary and benefits costs materialize. However, while it is important to recognize these cost increases and their impact on this and future County Budgets, it is equally important to recognize their necessity. These expenses represent “the cost of doing business” and providing services to the public. It is critical that the County provide its employees a fair salary and benefit package. Reasonable compensation is essential to attracting and retaining qualified staff, and will become more important as County employees are increasingly called upon to do more with less. Last year, labor costs accounted for 51% of the County’s $82,594,627 Budget; so, even a relatively small percentage increase in costs can have significant impacts on the County Budget in terms of actual dollars. For years the County has done a good job of balancing personnel costs that are within its control and maintaining the provision of services and programs to the public at a relatively constant level. However, if County revenues continue to remain more- or-less stagnant, the level of programs and services - and jobs - the County provides will need to be adjusted to what the Budget can support. 
As forecasted in last year’s Budget Introduction and Summary, unsecured property tax revenue from the Coso geothermal power plant continues to decline; resulting in a $138,999, or 11.05% reduction in unsecured property tax revenue. Other declines in key General Fund revenue codes include^
	Justice Court Fine revenues have decreased 22%, or $55,000;
	Court Realignment Fines have decreased $210,000; and,
	County Cost Plan revenues are decreasing by $209,505 when compared to last year’s Board Approved Budget
Fortunately other General Fund revenues, such as sales and property taxes, are remaining relatively stable, or increasing slightly; just not enough to overcome these decreases in revenue or the aforementioned increases in expense.
Many of the variations in revenues and expenses affecting the Budget are beyond the County’s control; especially considering that 53.6% of County revenues come from State and Federal sources, usually with corresponding mandates. Therefore, in preparing the County Budget, efforts are made to ensure State and Federally- mandated programs, as well as Non-General Fund budgets, live within their means. While direct correlations between “moneyin and money- out” exist in budgets that support State and Federal programs (e.g., Roads, many Health and Human Services budget units, etc.) as well as enterprise programs, correlations between revenue and expense are not as easy to identify for many other costs, including most General Fund budgets. Still, in preparing the County Budget, efforts are also made, with varying degrees of success, to consider sources of revenue relative to areas of expense. Whenever possible, one-time revenues are aligned with one-time costs and, similarly, it is preferable to fund ongoing costs with more assured sources of revenue.
These tenets are at play throughout this Recommended Budget, and are important principles to keep in mind in considering this, as well as future year’s budgets. However, these considerations are also precisely what make budgets in general, and particularly this year’s Budget and its implications for future budgets, challenging. For example:
 This year, many vacant General Fund positions (mainly in
Administration) are being left unfunded for the entire year. This
is an effort to generate salary and benefits cost savings to help
balance the Budget. In effect, money that could be used to fund
one set of ongoing expenses (vacant positions) is being used to offset increases in costs for another set of ongoing expenses (increased labor costs associated with filled positions). This assumes that it is better to eliminate personnel costs associated with vacant positions instead of eliminating funding for filled positions without attempting to compare the relative value or importance the vacant positions relative to the filled positions. The use of salary savings to balance the budget is discussed in greater detail later in this Introduction & Summary. For now, the point is that as the availability of salary savings to balance the Budget diminishes, so too will the ability to use ongoing cost- savings to fund on-going expense, and it may be necessary to take a closer look at right-sizing the County workforce. In recent years, this has been accomplished primarily through attrition (in the past 3 years 23 vacant positions have eliminated from the County Budget, and five vacant positions are proposed for deletion this year). It is recommended that, in the coming year, your Board consider using the Authorized Position Review process as a tool for generating labor cost savings. Inherent in this recommendation is the recognition that reducing the size of the County workforce when vacancies arise will likely result in departments having to scale back programs and services.
 For years, County Budgets have maintained a primal reliance on General Fund Balance to balance the County Budget and pay for on-going expenses. General Fund Balance is integrated into the Budget and used to fund General Fund operations, and support the General Fund’s ability to make Operating Transfers to important Non-General Fund budgets, like the Eastern Sierra Agency on Aging and Solid Waste. However, General Fund Balance is a one-time revenue source; once it is budgeted, it has been authorized for expenditure and there is no assurance that it will materialize at the same levels next year. Fund Balance is discussed in greater detail later in this Introduction & Summary. While this year’s Recommended Budget relies on the same Fund Balance amount available for last year’s Board Approved budget, $3,833,348, keep in mind that last year’s Recommended Budget was balanced based on having $3,663,108 in General Fund Balance available from Fiscal Year 2011-2012. The additional $170,240 in Fund Balance between the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Recommended and Board Approved budgets resulted from the Auditor-Controller certifying the higher fund balance ($3,883,348) which was in turn incorporated into the Budget. 
Using the principles outlined above to provide for greater fiscal stability in the County Budget need not and, in reahty, cannot be accomplished all at once. Rather, it is more imperative to seek and act upon opportunities to align revenues and expenses, control costs, and generate revenue as they present themselves. This year’s Budget, as well as other initiatives under consideration, provides ample examples.
The use of Operating Transfers from Geothermal Royalties Trust and Criminal Justice Facilities Trust is again recommended to pay for certain one-time costs, thereby freeing up General Fund revenue for other uses. The availability and use of these funds is a year-to-year proposition. However, the one-time nature of these key revenue sources, and their use to generate General Fund savings for on-going expenses, is somewhat mitigated by only budgeting these revenues in arrears (e.g., from the respective Fund Balances) rather than projecting and using the revenues in the same fiscal year. This provides at least some ability to plan for the availability of these funds in the next year’s budgets.
Initiatives, like the Tech Refresh program, seek to provide ongoing funding (similar to the Motor Pool program) to offset the periodic costs associated with replacing computers. Although the Tech Refresh program imposes a new internal charge in General Fund budget units, budgeting for this cost on an ongoing basis is deemed preferable to not doing so and, instead, having to identify previously unbudgeted revenues to buy new computers every few years. Although a longer term proposition, the proposal to build a Consolidated Office Building is based on the same principle: making fixed payments for a fixed duration of time is preferable to having to budget for annually fluctuating rents as a never ending expense. Similarly, the recently installed photovoltaic electric system for the County’s Independence campus is another demonstration of an effort to control ongoing costs by using fixed expenses for a fixed duration of time to save on existing energy costs and hedge against future cost increases. In the case of the solar project, cost-savings are expected to be sufficient to pay for the debt service that will be owed beginning in next year’s budget.
In more ways than one, the Budget remains a balancing act between funding ongoing costs, meeting one-time needs, and planning for the future. Hopefully, this is accomplished with an eye toward reducing costs, improving service or both. This Recommended Budget is balanced, and charts a course for funding immediate needs as well some, but not all, longer term costs. However, unless the County’s revenue situation improves dramatically, next year’s Budget will certainly be more challenging. Ultimately, it is your Board of Supervisors that must strike the right balance between providing funding for on-going costs while still planning for the future and deciding which projects should be invested in and when. For example, perhaps it is better to defer the General Fund expense associated with implementing the Tech Refresh program, and use these monies to fund increasing labor expense, and defer the cost of purchasing new computers? Maybe it’s appropriate to use the one-time money identified to provide base funding for a new animal shelter to fund ongoing expenses this year knowing that similar funds may not be available next year? Returning to the allegory, there are various combinations of straw (for the horses) and pints of chaff (although wheat would certainly be preferable!) to eat that are capable of delivering the traveler to his destination.
Fortunately, for now, while the soles on this Budget may not be as thick as we would like, there’s still enough tread to make a walk down the street worthwhile.
There it is, take it
Wiltiam Mulholland Novembers, 1913
The Cascades, Los Angeles, California
SUMMARY
As recommended by the County Administrator, the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 County Budget is balanced (as required by law). The Recommended Budget totals $81,447,453 in expenditures and $76,933,477 in revenues. The General Fund portion of the CAO Recommended Budget is $50,192,503 in expenditures and $46,359,155 in revenues, and is based on having $3,833,348 in Fund Balance available from Fiscal Year 2012-2013.
The Auditor-Controller will certify Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Fund Balance when Budget Hearings begin on September 9th. If the certified Fund Balance turns out to be higher than the projected $3,833,348, your Board of Supervisors will have an opportunity to explore uses for the additional money in this year’s Budget. As discussed later in this section, there are many unmet needs in the Recommended Budget - such as no contribution to the Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust (e.g, retiree healthcare costs); no Operating Transfers in to the Economic Stabilization or General Reserve budgets; and, less- than-desirable General Fund Contingencies (to name just a few) - that could be lessened through the use of additional General Fund Balance. However, if the Auditor-Controller certifies Fund Balance lower than the projected $3,833,348 your Board of Supervisors will then need to consider making reductions to the CAO Recommended Budget.
In contrast to the CAO Recommended Budget, the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Department Requested Budget - based on department budget requests that are also presented here - seeks $81,635,437 in expenditures against $74,763,298 in revenues, with a General Fund component of $51,230,542 in expenditures and $45,281,109 in revenues. The Department Requested Budget results in a $5,949,433 General Fund deficit; $2,116,085 more than the projected General Fund Balance. (Table 1.)

The Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended County Budget is sufficient to*
 Provide core County services and programs, and avoid significant reductions to, or the outright elimination of other services and programs.
 Establish a $375,000 budget for construction of a new County Animal Shelter, which hopefully can be matched by community donations to build more than a bare-bones facility.
 Identify $97,456 in matching funds to support seven grant applications that the Public Works department has submitted to the Federal Aviation Administration for improvements to County airports.
 Fund the second year of debt-service on the County’s Property Tax Management System project. 
 Begin funding the Tech Refresh program at the budget unit level rather than relying on Computer System Fund Balance.
^ Ensure the flow of State and Federal funding for Eastern Sierra senior citizen services continues by providing a $54,363 Operating Transfer from the Inyo County General Fund to the Eastern Sierra Area Agency on Aging. This Operating Transfer is necessary to ensure that ESAAA has the matching funds required from Inyo and Mono counties to access State and Federal funding, and is therefore able to continue implementing senior services on a regional basis. This is in addition to the $595,998 spent to fund to Inyo County Growing Old Living with Dignity (IC GOLD) program.
 Continue to operate the Inyo County Growing Older Living with Dignity (IC GOLD) program for senior citizens in Inyo County with $650,361 in General Fund monies; a decrease of $7,693 from last year’s Budget. IC GOLD maintains the County’s longstanding commitment to serving its older residents by supplementing and enhancing the core senior services paid for with State and Federal monies through the historically underfunded Inyo-Mono Area Agency on Aging (formerly IMAAA) program.
 To fund this year’s costs of the labor agreement, tentatively agreed to, with the Inyo County Employees Association should the union vote to approve the contract.
 Support limited new position requests, and departmental reorganizations to enhance capacity or reduce costs.
 Fund $669,716 in Deferred Maintenance projects, including the Independence campus photovoltaic project, through the use of designated or categorical monies and Fund Balance;
 Provide General Fund Operating Transfers necessary to maintain services provided by key enterprise fund programs, such as the Integrated Waste Management Program, and the Laws Water System.
 Absorb a $1,658 increase in retiree healthcare costs, and continue funding the County’s “pay-as-you-go” costs without dipping into the Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust  
the County established in Fiscal Year 2009-2010. The balance in the OPEB Trust is $4,435,356 as of June 30, 2013.
 Cover $174,357 in increases for employee pension benefit costs that are beyond the County’s control.
 Implement the employee Classification and Compensation Study, as currently configured and pending approval by affected bargaining groups, at an annual cost to the General Fund of $650,000.
 Reserve over $438,515 in Personnel Contingencies toward the cost to the General Fund of funding any labor contracts that may be approved this fiscal year.
 Continue funding for the County’s Grants-In-Support budget and Advertising County Resources budget, including the Community Project Sponsorship Grants program, at Fiscal Year 2012-2013 levels.
 Prevent employee lay-offs.
 Provide $13,090 in General Fund Contingencies.
It is, however, also important to recognize that this Budget leaves many County needs unfulfilled, and others only partially fulfilled. Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge that the Recommended Budget does not:
	Include additional funding to repair road infrastructure damaged as a result of the Gully Washer emergency.
	Contemplate that County long distance telephone costs could increase by 1200% as suggested by recent billings which Information Services staff hope have been resolved.
	Identify funds that may be necessary to reimburse CalPERS for retiree healthcare costs (once CalPERS billing errors to the County and its retirees are resolved). As a result, it may be necessary to increase the County’s “pay-as-you-go” costs for retiree healthcare more than the $1,658 increase cited above.
	Set aside funding for a protracted legal challenge, should it materialize, to the City of Los Angles’ proposed Solar Ranch power project.
	Preserve funding necessary to accomplish the hoped-for reorganization of Administration to enhance staff capacity in Information Services and create a Natural Resources/Economic Development staff position. As a result, this Budget does not recommend creating a severely needed Assistant Information Services Director position, or the much hoped for positions of Deputy County Administrator - Natural Resources and Economic Development Analyst.
	Make any contribution to the County Economic Stabilization Fund or the General Reserve Fund, which are relied on to help smooth-out unexpected decreases in revenues and/or increases in expenditures that cannot be absorbed with budgeted appropriations.
	Deposit additional funds in the Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust the County established to begin addressing unfunded retiree healthcare liabilities. Last year’s budget made a $150,000 contribution to the OPEB Trust, there was a $500,000 contribution in Fiscal Year 2011-2012, and $1,000,000 was deposited in Fiscal Year 2010*2011.
	Attempt to reserve historical debt service payments as a means of saving funds for future capital expenses.
	Begin to address the many departmental needs, identified in the Statements of Underfunding submitted with this year’s budget narratives but not included in the Department Requested budgets.
	Provide an adequate level of General Fund Contingencies considering ongoing revenue uncertainties, and the need to hedge against the possibility that at least some of the department expenses that have been cut in the Recommended Budget could materialize later in the year.
	Contribute additional funding that can be set aside in the Computer System Fund to address more of the County’s critical technology needs, including replacing the County’s telephone system and accelerating the Tech Refresh program.
	Identify funding for more than $430,000 in salary and benefits cost increases that may result from labor negotiations underway with the Elected Officials Assistant Association (EOAA); the Inyo County Probation Peace Officers Association (ICPPOA); the Inyo County Correctional Officers Association (ICCOA); or, the Law Enforcement Administrators’ Association (LEAA). However, neither does this Budget anticipate or rely on cost decreases that may result from these negotiations.
	Identify sufficient staff or fiscal resources to aggressively pursue projects not associated with core County services.
ARRIVING AT THE RECOMMENDED BUDGET
As presented, this Budget document presents, and identifies the differences between the Department Requested Budget and CAO Recommended Budget for the Fiscal Year 2013-2014. It also describes the steps taken to ultimately submit a balanced Budget for consideration by your Board of Supervisors.
While a certain amount of give-and-take is inherent in any budget process, and the wants and needs of departments usually exceed what the Budget Officer is comfortable recommending the County can afford, ultimately it is your County departments - the staff and department managers - that make this Budget possible. County departments need to be acknowledged for their efforts to comply with this year’s Budget Parameters that, in part, once again called for no increase in Net County Cost compared to last year's Board Approved Budget. While not many departments were able to maintain costs at or below last year’s levels, many departments were once again able to at least minimize increases to the Net County Cost in their budget(s). The sacrifices involved in doing so should not be overlooked, or underestimated when considering this year’s Budget.
With very few exceptions, departments refrained from asking for significant increases to expenses in their Department Requested budgets, and continued to accept most CAO Recommended changes to their budgets with understanding, or at least a modicum of resignation. It is also important to recognize that, as part of the departmental budget meetings, many elected and appointed  
department heads agreed to make reductions to their original Department Requested budgets. While certainly not required, these voluntary changes are not atypical, and have the effect of reducing the gap between income and expense in the Department Requested Budget. This, correspondingly, reduced the amount of additional cuts and/or Operating Transfers necessary to balance the CAO Recommended Budget.
In recognition of the ongoing efforts of many departments to contain costs in their budget requests, this year’s CAO Recommended Budget once again endeavors, with varying success, to avoid making the small reductions - e.g., a $500 cut to a relatively small department budget - that have been used in the past as a way to add up to large savings in CAO Recommended Budgets. Recommended modifications to Department Requested expenses, primarily in the services and supplies object category, have instead focused on larger department budgets; particularly those that, for a variety of reasons, found it necessary to seek significant increases in their Net County Cost.
As described in greater detail below, the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended Budget is balanced by the combination of several actions that reduce or defer costs and, in some instances, identify alternative sources of revenue. As in past years, these actions include using a combination of Fund Balance, Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund and Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, and savings associated with recommending limited personnel actions. Unlike previous years, however, this year’s budget recommends leaving many positions (primarily in Administration) unfunded for the entire year to generate salary and benefit savings similar to last year. The lack of vacant positions on which to draw reasonable amounts of salary savings, speaks to the recent success the County has had in filling vacant positions with qualified individuals.
This year’s Recommended Budget again identifies certain funding requests which are being reduced or eliminated - not because they are unwarranted, but because it is not feasible to fund all of the requests within the budget priorities being proposed in this Budget - but which may be the subject of future funding requests and budget amendments considered on a case-by-case basis later in the fiscal year. These are projects and costs which, if they materialize later in the year, will either need to be, or should be considered for funding; but for which the immediate need for funding is not certain. These recommended reductions are identified along with possible sources of funding later in this Introduction and Summary. Basically, the County might be able to afford some, but not all of these initiatives in the Recommended Budget as presented. However, it would be possible to fund some of the requests. Backing these requests out of the Recommended Budget, and identifying possible sources of future funding, is premised on the potentiality that some but not all of these costs will materialize this fiscal year. Those needs that are confirmed later this year can then be considered and funded by your Board of Supervisors in the context of the County’s fiscal position at the time of the request, and other possible needs for the funds.
The Introduction & Summary of the Fiscal Year 2013*2014 Recommended Budget continues to provide additional detail, where appropriate, to changes the Recommended Budget is making to specific departmental budget requests. This is intended to provide, perhaps, more of the thinking behind the recommended changes, and the expanded narrative also serves to alert your Board of Supervisors to outstanding issues and potential policy considerations.
The Recommended Budget benefits greatly from the Sheriffs willingness to support the recommendation for a $300,000 Operating Transfer from the AB 443 Trust to off-set increasing departmental costs and maintain training levels at higher than historic levels. Also, as originally agreed upon in the Fiscal Year 2007-2008 Budget, both the Requested and Recommended budgets provide for continuing the use of AB 443 Funds for funding the additional Correctional Officer positions added to the Sheriffs Authorized Staffing, in 2007, to provide greater operational flexibility, and place more deputies on the street.
Otherwise, the Recommended Budget seeks, to every extent possible, to preserve the balances in the AB 443 and COPS Trusts. These and other public safety funds from the State are more stable than they have been in years due to protections afforded through Criminal Justice Realignment. In recent years, when the State’s fiscal outlook was less certain, public safety funds - particularly our Rural Sheriffs (AB 443) funds - were routinely viewed as low-hanging fruit when it came to State budget debates. Now that these funds have become more reliable as a result of Criminal Justice Realignment, the County’s AB 443 Trust and, to a lesser extent, the COPS Trust - which the County and Sheriff have built up by working together and exercising fiscal prudence through the years - may be critical in staving off future reductions to local public safety services if the County’s revenue situation does not improve in future budgets. 
In summary, the actions taken to balance the Fiscal Year 2013- 2014 Recommended Budget include^
	Using Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund and Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to off-set specific, one-time General Fund costs, as well as certain ongoing costs, and to reduce the amount of General Fund Operating Transfers that would otherwise be necessary for Non*General Fund budgets.
	Relying on $940,085 in General Fund salary savings based on current vacancies. This amounts to a $131,684 increase from the $808,401 in General Fund salary savings used to balance last year’s Budget. However, due to fewer vacant General Fund positions, this year’s salary savings had to be generated by leaving positions vacant longer than would typically be recommended; in many cases for the entire year.
	Realizing $170,182 in General Fund savings associated with not considering most of the personnel actions included in Department Requested budgets. However, many of these personnel actions will be addressed through the job Classification and Compensation Study, for which funding is included in this year’s Budget, should it be approved by the affected bargaining units.
	Reducing services and supplies costs, and other non-personnel costs included in Department Requested General Fund budgets by $127,913. In comparison, $179,239 in reductions to departmental budgets requests was used to balance last year’s General Fund Budget.
The Auditor-Controller will certify the actual Fiscal Year 2012- 2013 General Fund Balance on September 9th. As noted earlier, the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Recommended Budget is balanced by assuming $3,833,348 in projected Fund Balance compared to the $3,663,108 relied upon in last year’s Recommended Budget. (Ultimately, when the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Fund Balance was certified as $3,833,348, the entire Fund Balance was utilized in the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Board Approved Budget.) Essentially, this year’s Recommended Budget is relying on $170,000 in additional Fund Balance than was necessary to balance last year’s Recommended Budget. The recommended use of General Fund Balance eliminates the shortfall that remains between projected General Fund income and expenses after the above actions  
are applied in the Fiscal Year 2013*2014 CAO Recommended General Fund Budget.
Fund Balance
As part of your Board of Supervisors’ adoption of the Final County Budget for Fiscal Year 2013*2014, it is anticipated that the Auditor-Controller will certify the General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2013, as being at least $3,833,348. This is the amount of Fund Balance being used to fill the shortfall between projected income and projected expenses in the Fiscal Year 2013*2014 CAO Recommended General Fund Budget, including providing $13,090 for General Fund Contingencies. As noted above, this leaves many legitimate needs unfunded. If the Auditor*Controller should certify a higher Fund Balance, your Board of Supervisors’ can use the difference to address some of the under-funded or unfunded needs identified in this Budget. But, if the certified Fund Balance is lower than projected here, it will be necessary to make cuts to the CAO Recommended Budget.
As ardent and accustomed readers of County budgets already know, it is not unusual for the County to rely on using the prior year’s General Fund Balance to help balance the current year’s budget. And, the existence of a prior year’s General Fund Balance is, on its own, not a cause for concern. The existence of General Fund Balance is an indicator that, overall, the County is living within the limits of its spending plan for that year (e.g., under-spending appropriations and/or over-achieving revenues). If General Fund Balance did not exist at the end of a fiscal year, it would mean that departments matched their budget projections exactly (which is very unlikely). And, if a negative General Fund Balance exists, it indicates that, as a whole, departments either over-spent appropriations, under-achieved revenues, or both - so, on its own, the existence of Fund Balance is a good thing. Applying prior year’s Fund Balance to the current year’s budget is simply taking savings from one year’s budget and applying it to the next. In Non-General Fund budgets, which reside in their own Funds (as opposed to the General Fund), it is common to have Fund Balance and use it to fund appropriations in that budget. So, in addition to using General Fund Balance to balance General Fund budgets, it is also not unusual to use Fund Balance from Non-General Fund budgets to balance those budgets.
As recommended, this year's estimated General Fund Balance is the same as the $3,833,348 used to balance the County's Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Board Approved General Fund Budget, but $170,000 more than last year's Recommended Budget. It is $16,453 more than the $3,816,895 Fund Balance used to balance the County's Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Board Approved Budget, however, it is $239,574 more than the $3,593,774 relied upon to balance the Fiscal Year 2011*2012 Recommended Budget. The Fund Balance being used to balance this year’s Recommended Budget is $98,064 higher than the $3,735,284 used to balance the Fiscal Year 2010-2011 General Fund Budget. (In Fiscal Year 2009-2010, $3,880,409 in General Fund Balance was used to balance the budget. And, in Fiscal Year 2008*2009, $3,510,346 in Fund Balance was used to balance the budget.)
Among the reasons that General Fund Balance remains relatively high is that - even without the Extraordinary Budget Control Policies enacted by the Board of Supervisors in January 2009 (which remain in effect today) - many departments simply continue to restrict spending. Also, the Authorized Position Review Process, which remains in effect, still serves to slow down the hiring process; thereby preserving more salary savings than might otherwise have been realized. However, as discussed throughout this Introduction & Summary, there are now fewer vacancies on which to draw salary savings for preparation of this year’s Budget. This could be an indication that the retarding effects of the Authorized Position Review Process may be waning, and it may need to be replaced with a hard hiring freeze if the County is going to continue to rely on vacant positions to fund on-going costs.
Another factor contributing to the high Fund Balance is the fact that Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue - which is always budgeted conservatively - once again exceeded Fiscal Year 2012*2013 projections by almost $500,000 despite an overall decline in TOT of 2.41%, or $68,280, compared to Fiscal Year 2011*2012 actuals. In preparing the Fiscal Year 2012*2013 Budget, the $500,000 gap between projected and actual TOT revenues in the Fiscal Year 2011- 2012 Budget was thought to be inflated by a one-time truing-up payment of $250,000. This is significant because, if so, it would indicate that true*up aside, TOT revenue is continuing to grow.
While many components, including accounts receivable, prior years' encumbrances, and claims on cash, factor into the Fund Balance calculation, a simplified analysis shows the County's General Fund Balance can usually be primarily attributed to salary savings that accrues after the Budget is approved; lower-than-anticipated expenditures in other categories of expenses; and, achieving budgeted revenues. Although described in previous years’ budget messages, for the benefit of the first-time or casual reader, this year’s Introduction & Summary of the Recommended Budget again describes these elements of Fund Balance in detail. Long-time readers, and students of prior years’ Budget Messages might notice that this year’s discussion has been updated to incorporate new trends affecting Fund Balance and the Budget, particularly with respect to salary savings. Otherwise, those not inclined to study these nuances, may find their time and attention better served by skipping ahead to the Geothermal Royalties discussion on page 26.)
Salary Sa vings
Use of anticipated salary and benefit savings, tied to currently vacant staff positions, is routinely employed as part of the budget process to reduce the size of the shortfall that exists between the Department Requested and CAO Recommended budgets. This year, the CAO Recommended Budget relies on $940,085 in General Fund salary savings to reduce the expense associated with the Department Requested Budget. This is a $131,684 increase from last year’s use of salary savings. However, generation of the salary savings relied upon by this year’s Recommended Budget requires leaving many positions unfunded for an entire year; a stark contrast to the three to six months of salary savings sufficient to generate the same number last year.
The use of salary savings in the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Budget represented a $314,897 increase from the $493,504 in salary savings used to balance the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget. In Fiscal Year 2010-2011, $576,219 in General Fund salary savings was used to balance the Recommended Budget (exclusive of Health and Human Services salary savings recommended due to the threat of cuts in State HHS program funding) and, in Fiscal Year 2009-2010, $569,308 was used to balance the budget; in Fiscal Year 2008-2009, the figure was $392,164.
This ongoing, higher-than-usual reliance on salary savings to prepare this and last years’ budgets may be cause for alarm; particularly since generation of this year’s salary savings comes at the expense of being able to fill many vacant positions until next fiscal year. It is indicative that the ‘lift’ required to balance this year’s Budget is again a little higher and a little heavier than the year before. Also, as forecasted last year with respect to salary savings available for  
this year’s Budget, the greater reliance on salary savings may reduce the amount of salary and benefits cost savings available at the end of the year to contribute to Fund Balance that will be needed for the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget. The current Position Vacancy Report/Salary Savings Table is included as Attachment ? to this report.
Until this year, by design, determining the amount of salary savings to include in the CAO Recommended Budget was usually a relatively conservative process. Ideally, in evaluating current vacancies, recruitment experience and trends are considered on a position-by-position basis to determine a reasonable period of time that the position is likely to remain vacant. Unless fiscal conditions dictate otherwise (as is the case this year), positions are usually not required to be kept vacant for a longer period of time than is anticipated as being necessary to successfully recruit a well-qualified candidate. This is especially true with respect to public safety positions, such a Deputy Sheriffs and Correctional Officers, for which the taking of salary savings is intentionally kept to a bare minimum. (Note: This year, the Sheriff - through his Department Requested Budget - has again voluntarily requested that one (l) Deputy Sheriff and (2) Correctional Officer positions be kept vacant all year.)
Because of the conservative approach usually taken when budgeting salary savings, there will almost always be additional salary savings in the Budget after it is adopted. For example, a position budgeted as providing three months of salary savings may actually take four or five, or even seven months to fill, thereby generating additional savings. Unless this savings is re-appropriated elsewhere in the department’s budget during the fiscal year - a practice discouraged by the County Administrator and Auditor-Controller (since salary savings is associated with on-going expense) - it will show up as part of the Fund Balance calculation at the end of the year. However, it is important to recognize that the improved recruitment environment for most County job openings the past three years, coupled with the elimination of additional positions in recent years’ budgets, have combined to reduce the amount of salary savings that would otherwise be available at the end of the coming fiscal year. This trend will be amplified by this year’s Budget taking, up front, an entire year in salary savings for several positions.
However, there will always be vacancies that arise later in the year that simply cannot be anticipated at the time the Budget is prepared; employee turnover is simply a reality of the workforce in most organizations. While it is reasonable to anticipate that there will always be additional “unanticipated” or, perhaps more accurately, “unbudgeted” salary savings that accrue due to employee turnover throughout the year, it is not easy to anticipate what the amount of that savings might be, or in which department it might be realized. It is neither practical nor prudent to attempt to guess which departments might experience vacancies after the Budget is adopted and then try to adjust their budgets accordingly in advance. Again, because of this phenomenon, there will always be some unbudgeted salary savings in the County Budget at the end of the year to contribute to Fund Balance - unless the savings is re-appropriated to other expense categories in departments’ budgets. The matter of whether this unanticipated salary savings ultimately shows up as Fund Balance is largely dependent on whether departments avoid over-spending their budgets and achieve all of their budgeted revenues.
The General Fund Balance being used to balance this year’s Budget benefits from approximately $2 Million in salary and benefit savings realized during Fiscal Year 2012-2013, after budget adoption. This can be compared to the $2.1 Million in additional salary saving that accrued in Fiscal Year 2011-2012 and Fiscal Year 2010-2011; the $2.69 Million generated in Fiscal Year 2009-2010; the $2.37 Million in Fiscal Year 2008-2009; and, the $2.8 Million in salary savings realized in Fiscal Year 2007-2008.
While the practices and realities described above explain how we arrive with salary savings at the end of a budget year, they do not necessarily explain why the dollar amount is so high. In general, when contemplating the amount of money associated with salary savings, and all the variables at work, it is perhaps most useful to consider that the amount of money generated by salary savings is a direct reflection of the fact that personnel costs currently account for 66.5% (or, $33,395,802) of the County’s General Fund Budget. Furthermore, with respect to the amount of salary savings generated in Fiscal Year 2012- 2013, it is important to stress that your Board’s continuation of the Authorized Position Review Process during the year continued to slow the County hiring process significantly, albeit not to the degree of years past. Without the Authorized Position Review Process, it is likely that the amount of additional salary savings contributing to Fund Balance would have been less.
Under-Expenditures
In addition to savings from position vacancies that arise during the year, under-expenditures in non-personnel categories of expenses also contribute to Fund Balance. Based on past analysis, there is rarely a single budget, or a group of budgets that routinely budget far more than they actually spend (which would be to the detriment of tighter, ‘more realistic’ budgets). Rather, analysis continues to reveal that under-expenditures can generally be segregated into two categories^ one category being singular, high-priced expenditures - such as a capital improvement project, a consulting contract or a large, one-time purchase - that, for any number of reasons, do not materialize in the year in which they are budgeted; and, the second category being budgets with small savings spread across multiple expense object codes that, when taken together, add up to significant savings. Under-expenditures in the first category are likely to show up again in the following year’s budget.
However, it is the second category of under-expenditure (small savings adding up to big dollars) that is usually more prevalent, and usually accounts for greater savings. With very few exceptions, year-in and year-out, most departments manage their budgets effectively, and save money wherever they can. The savings may not be a lot; a couple hundred dollars here, and a thousand dollars someplace else. But, considering that the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Budget included 136 budget units, even a savings of a thousand, or couple thousand dollars (in a budget of a few hundred thousand or even a million dollars) can quickly add-up to a large amount of money when the County Budget is considered as a whole.
As always, these “small but mighty” efforts need to be acknowledged and appreciated, however, (outside of failing to fully realize revenues, or a series of large, unexpected and compulsory expenses) it is this category of under-expenditure that may have the greatest potential to shrink the size of Fund Balance in future years. Unlike salary savings, in most years it is far less certain that the County can always count on a lot of little savings adding up to big savings at the end of the year. Departments continue to operate on very lean budgets, particularly in the services and supplies cost category. In general, there is not much, if anything left to cut.

This is a conclusion once again evidenced by the fact that the CAO Recommended Budget only reduces Department Requested nonpersonnel expenditures in the General Fund (which total $16,463,911) 
by $127,913; or, a little less than 1%. (In comparison, and further evidence of how tight the departments’ non-personnel budgets are, last year’s CAO Recommended reductions in the General Fund Budget totaled $179,239. In Fiscal Year 2011-2012 the cuts totaled only $150,422; and, just $139,391 in Fiscal Year 2010-2011.) While services and supplies expenditures are not being substantially reduced, neither are they being significantly increased. As a result, without reasonable increases in services and supplies budgets, departments are finding it increasingly difficult, if not impossible to continue generating the small savings that add up to such a significant portion of Fund Balance.
Revenue Realization
Realizing budgeted revenues is a critical factor in determining year-end Fund Balance that cannot be overemphasized. For every dollar of revenue that is budgeted, but not achieved, year-end Fund Balance is decreased by a dollar. Although the accrual period will not close until August 31st, it appears that in Fiscal Year 2012-2013, actual General Fund revenues were approximately $688,000 less than the Board Approved Budget, and approximately $1,588,000 less than the Working Budget. This “higher-than-approved” but “lower-than- amended” trend is fairly typical.
While departments continued, byand-large, to do a commendable job in achieving budgeted revenue, the overall figures benefit from the fact that under-realized revenues in some budgets are off-set, or masked by higher than anticipated revenues in other budgets. For example, this year Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax (HTOT, or TOT) revenue appears to be about $390,000 higher than projected in the Board Approved Budget. Without this “extra” TOT revenue, revenue in the Fiscal Year 2012*2013 Board Approved Budget would be under-achieved by $1,081,286, and by $1,981,247 in the Working Budget.
In other words, the General Fund Balance available to use in this year’s budget could have been even higher if all revenue projections in the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Working Budget had been fully achieved, and much higher if revenue projections were met in addition to the receipt of additional, unbudgeted General Fund revenue. This raises an important issue. A primary purpose of the County’s Mid-Year and Third Quarter Financial Review processes is to revise budget projections as necessary. When a department reports that it will not, or it becomes apparent that a department might not achieve budgeted revenues, the Working Budget should be amended to reflect the decrease in revenues AND, pursuant to the County’s Budget Control & Responsibility Policy, expenditures need to be decreased accordingly. Failure to do both has the effect of doubling the impact the loss of revenue has on the bottom line.
Based on the data provided above, it appears that, collectively, not only are departments failing to report decreases in revenue projections during the Mid-Year and Third Quarter Financial Review processes, but departments are increasing revenues throughout the fiscal year even when original revenue projections cannot be met. While this may be more a collective phenomenon, and might have less to do with individual budgets increasing revenues when they should be decreasing revenues, the fact remains that total revenue is, ultimately, being under-achieved.
Therefore, as always, a key factor to maintaining the integrity of the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Budget, and not eroding the year-end Fund Balance available for the Fiscal Year 2014*2015 Budget, is that departments must meet their budgeted revenue projections, and decrease their expenditures bv a corresponding amount when they cannot meet revenue projections.
The need to attain budgeted revenues is more critical than ever due to the Budget continuing to rely on slightly less conservative revenue projections than years past. Revenue projections have typically been budgeted conservatively to guard against “Pollyanna spending,” and often provided “extra” revenue at the end of the year that masked under-achieved revenues elsewhere in the budget. However, beginning in last year’s Budget, and continuing again this year, some projected revenues are being bumped up to reflect recent trends. For example, despite actual HTOT revenues being 2.41% lower in Fiscal Year 2012-2013 compared to Fiscal Year 2011-2012, because actual HTOT revenue has exceed budgeted HTOT revenue by $393,000 last year, and $499,004 in Fiscal Year 2011-2012, this year’s Budget recommends increasing HTOT revenue by $165,000, which is only 8% lower than this year’s actuals. It would be preferable to be more conservative in budgeting this potentially volatile revenue source.
Basically, there continues to be fewer sources of “extra” revenue to provide a cushion that can be counted upon to offset lower-than- budgeted revenue realization in other budgets at the end of the year. And, as a result, revenue attainment becomes even more critical.
Geothermal Royalties
Besides Fund Balance, the CAO Recommended Budget also relies on use of Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Fund and Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to off-set General Fund expenses.
The use of Geothermal Royalties money to offset certain eligible expenses in General Fund budgets (and in Non-General Fund budgets that would otherwise require General Fund Operating Transfers) replaces funding that would otherwise need to be paid from the General Fund.
Pursuant to County policy, Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers are only made from revenue already received in the Geothermal Royalties Fund, and do not rely on geothermal royalty revenue that is expected, but has yet to be received this fiscal year. In Fiscal Year 2012-2013, the Geothermal Royalties Fund received $338,296 in new royalties payments, most of which is being appropriated in this year's Budget.
The Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended Budget includes a total of $550,816 in Geothermal Royalties Fund Operating Transfers. These are used to off-set $353,360 eligible expenses in the General Fund Budget, and $197,456 in the Non-General Fund Budget. This amount is $111,571 higher than the $439,245 in Geothermal Royalties Fund Operating Transfers used to balance last year's budget, and $104,571 more than the $446,245 used to balance the Fiscal Year 2011- 2012 Budget. It is significantly more than the $232,248 in geothermal royalty money used to balance the Fiscal Year 2010-2011 Budget. In Fiscal Year 2009-2010, $558,644 in geothermal monies was needed to balance the budget.
The Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Recommended Budget again proposes the use of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers to the Assessor budget, $69,660, to fund the portion of the annual mining and geothermal assessment contract with Harold Bertholf and Associates attributable to preparation of the annual tax assessment for the Coso geothermal power plant. However, fortunately, the settlement of Coso’s appeals of its tax assessments for 2010, 2011, and 2012 earlier this year, and hopefully agreement between the Assessor and company concerning its 2013 assessment, means that it does not appear necessary to budget for additional assessment and legal contracts to represent the Assessor in Coso geothermal tax assessment appeal  
proceedings. Last Fiscal Year, a $370,745 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer was budgeted in to the County Administrator budget to continue to pay for the Assessor’s consultant expenses associated with the Coso Operating Company geothermal property tax assessment and appeals processes.
Not having to fund geothermal property tax appeal costs in this year’s Budget means that the Geothermal Royalties funds are available to fund other critical needs, including identifying $97,456 in County matching funds for the seven airport improvement grants that have been applied for this year, and are included in this Recommended Budget. The Recommended Budget also supports $100,000 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer to the Natural Resources budget to continue to support the County’s natural resources planning initiatives relative to federal land use planning and renewable energy development. As currently configured and recommended, it would be difficult for this year’s County Budget to support these Non-General Fund activities with General Fund revenues.
Similarly, Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers are being recommended to support various initiatives in General Fund budgets that would otherwise have to rely on General Fund financing at the expense of other programs and services, be modified in scope and ambition, or eliminated all-together. In addition to the Assessor’s geothermal property tax consultant contract noted above, the Recommend Budget includes the use of $153,700 in geothermal monies to support operating costs in the Parks & Recreation budget. Additionally, geothermal funds are being used to fund two contracts, totaling $55,000, in the Planning budget: one for the update to the General Plan Housing Element; and, the other to continue assisting the Planning department in coordinating Federal planning processes such as the Inyo National Forest’s Forest Management Plan revision. (See Table 2.) 
If not for the availability of the Geothermal Royalties money, the General Fund might have been required to fund all of these costs; something that might not be possible without reductions to other areas recommended for funding in this Budget.
The amount of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers used to balance this year’s Budget leaves only $179,753 in the Geothermal Royalties Fund. However, the remaining Fund Balance would be lower except that not all of the Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers included in last year’s Budget materialized, thereby bolstering the amount of Geothermal Royalties Fund Balance available for this year’s Budget.
The wisdom of budgeting only Geothermal Royalties funds accrued in the Geothermal Royalties Fund - and not budgeting projected Geothermal Royalties revenues expected to be received in the current year - has served the County very well. In recent year’s Geothermal royalties payments to the County have become unreliable. Although the Geothermal Royalties Trust accrued $338,296 last year, in Fiscal Year 2011-2012 the County only received $267,517 in geothermal royalty payments from the Federal and State governments. In Fiscal year 2010*2011, the amount was $356,278. Presently, as of June, the geothermal royalties payments have been subject to a 5.1% “sequester reduction.”
In addition to being directly affected by the amount of production at the Coso geothermal power plant (which, in turn, affects the plant’s payment of royalties to the Bureau of Land Management), this critical revenue source has been subject to a host of hostile political machinations. There have been several attempts in the last recent years to completely eliminate Federal geothermal royalty payments to counties.
	A third of the way through Fiscal Year 2009-2010, the County learned that an 11th hour legislative maneuver eliminated the payment of geothermal royalties to counties in the Federal Fiscal Year 2010 Department of Interior Appropriations Act. As a result, the County was notified that it would need to return over $66,000 in federal disbursements already received, and no federal payments were received for the remainder of the County’s fiscal year. (The County did, however, continue to receive its share of the State’s federal geothermal royalties payments from the State of California.)
	In August 2011, Congress passed and the President signed the 2010 Supplemental Appropriations Act that restored federal geothermal royalty revenue sharing with counties and, as a result, the County received all back payments previously withheld, and going forward in Federal Fiscal Year 2010. However, ongoing budget fights in Washington surrounding the Federal Fiscal Year 2011 Federal Budget, combined with continued efforts inside the beltway to eliminate this critical funding stream to counties that host geothermal facilities located on federally-managed lands, resulted in again delaying Geothermal Royalties payments and creating the impression, (and rightfully so) that this funding was much less stable than the 2010 Supplemental Appropriations Act would suggest.
The need for caution relative to being reliant on the use of Geothermal Operating Transfers to balance the budget is still well illustrated by the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget and how the events described above created potential fiscal havoc. The Fiscal Year 2011- 2012 County Budget left a relatively low Fund Balance of $51,970 in the Geothermal Royalties Fund. However, at the time, the County expected that
“this number is anticipated to grow as owed back payments are reconciled by the Federal Government, and as Federal Fiscal Year 2012 royalties payments are received (unless the revenue sharing provisions of Energy Policy Act of 2005 are again suspended as part of the Federal Budget debate). Therefore, there should be 
Geothermal Royalties to offset additional eligible General
Fund expenses if needed la ter in Fiscal Year 2011 ’2012. "
While the geothermal funds used in the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget were replaced by new payments to the County, the Geothermal Royalties Fund did not grow to the extent that was hoped for due to the aforementioned political maneuvering in Washington and declining production at Coso.
Therefore, the use of Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfers in this year’s budget is not recommended casually. The watchwords for this critical source of funding continue to be 'diligence" and “don't spend what you don't have" and “ when it's gone, it's gone."
Criminal Justice Facilities Trust
The Inyo County Board of Supervisor’s created the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, by resolution, in 1982 for the purpose of acquiring, rehabilitating, constructing, financing and leasing suitable criminal justice facilities, including all facilities necessary or incidental to the operation of such criminal justice facilities. The Trust currently holds approximately $872,311, including $60,749 in new revenue received in Fiscal Year 2012-2013. (Last year’s contribution was down from the $78,648 received in the Trust in Fiscal Year 2011-2012.) Current law (California Government Code Section 76103) permits the funds to be used for “county criminal justice facilities” which “includes, but is not limited t,n. jails, women’s centers, detention facilities, juvenile halls, and courtrooms. (Emphasis added.)” The Sheriffs Lone Pine Sub-Station falls within this definition. The Criminal Justice Facilities Trust should not be confused with the Courthouse Construction Trust that exists to provide funding for the acquisition, rehabilitation, construction and financing of court facilities and, due to recent legislation, falls under the control of the State Administrative Office of the Court.
This year’s Budget relies on using $167,888 in Operating Transfers from the County’s Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to balance the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 County Budget. This is $205,230 less than the $373,118 Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers necessary to balance the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 County Budget, and largely due to substantial progress made last year in completing the Lone Pine Sheriffs Sub-Station project at lower than budgeted costs. This year’s Recommended Budget includes $17,990, estimated by Public Works as necessary to complete the Sub Station project. Recall that, in previous years’ budgets, the use of Criminal Justice Facilities Trust money to pay for the Lone Pine Sub-Station was linked to recommendations to also recognize an additional $100,000 in AB 443 Trust revenue in the Sheriff - Safety budget. These “trade-offs” stemmed from the reality that, without the use of Criminal Justice Facilities Trust funding to pay for the Lone Pine Sub- Station, AB 443 funding would be required to pay for the facility or, unless other General Fund money could be identified, the project would need to be postponed. However, this year, the use of Criminal Justice Facility Trust money is being recommended without requesting use of additional AB 443 funds as an offset.
Additionally, $51,202 in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers to the Deferred Maintenance budget are recommended to complete replacement of the driveit expansion joints at the Jail, and fire suppression system work in the Jail and Juvenile Hall. In addition to these one-time costs, the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust is also being relied upon to fund $98,696 in on-going costs related to maintenance and operations at the Jail and Juvenile Hall. Similar to last year, a $17,200 Operating Transfer is recommended from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust into the Public Works department’s Maintenance of Building & Grounds budget to pay for the cost of budgeted maintenance activities at the Jail and Juvenile Hall. An $18,317 Operating Transfer to the Juvenile Institutions budget, and a $42,216 Operating Transfer to the Jail - General budget are recommended to fund the facility operational costs, such as the maintenance contracts with Siemens. Trust Funds are also being used to fund $20,963 in on-going costs associated with the CAD/RMS software system for the Jail.
While the Recommended Budget proposes using $205,230 less in Criminal Justice Facilities Trust Operating Transfers compared to last year’s Budget, the use of $98,696 of these funds is for ongoing expenses needs to be contrasted with the revenues coming into the Trust. While the Fund Balance remains robust, as noted above, in Fiscal Year 2012* 2013, the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust only received $60,749 in new revenue.

This year’s Budget again seeks to minimize the use of Criminal Justice Facility Trust since these designated funds could be an obvious source of funding the prorated share of costs for Sheriffs Bishop Sub- Station, as well as District Attorney and Probation offices, if your Board of Supervisors elect to proceed with the Consolidated Office
Building Project. However, your Board of Supervisors could be asked to consider using more of these funds later in the year to fund criminal justice related costs not included in the Recommended Budget.
AB 443 Trust
The Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Department Requested Budget and CAO Recommended Budget both include the use $248,302 from the AB 443 Trust to continue funding the cost of three (3) of the five (5) Correctional Officer positions added in Fiscal Year 2007-2008 when the Sheriff agreed to pledge these funds, on an ongoing basis, to facilitate the transitioning of five (5) Sheriffs Deputies from the Jail to patrol duties. The reason only three (3) Correctional Officer positions are funded with AB 443 monies in this year’s Budget is because the Sheriff is leaving two (2) C.O. positions vacant (and unfunded) all year.
With the Sheriffs endorsement, this year’s Recommended Budget also proposes using an additional $300,000 in AB 443 funding to offset cost increases in the Sheriffs budgets. These costs include ongoing travel and training costs that are higher than historical averages (e.g., in Fiscal Year 2009-2010 training-related expenses were about $58,000).
In past years, the Budget has been conservative in its use of AB 443 funding because, like other State public safety subventions, the reliability of this funding was very volatile and subject to political whimsy in Sacramento. The reliability of this critical funding source has improved significantly with protections afforded through Criminal Justice Realignment; one of the few true silver linings, thus far, in this landmark State initiative. However, the AB 443 Trust receives $500,000 a year in fixed revenue supplements, and it’s obvious that this year’s reliance on AB 443 funding - to the tune of $571,432 - is unsustainable over the long term. Similar to other key Trusts and Funds being relied upon to balance this year’s Budget, the use of AB 443 monies must be viewed judiciously, on a year-by*year basis.
Fortunately, as a result of the Sheriffs stewardship, and the Sheriff and Board of Supervisors working in concert not to become overly-reliant on these funds, the Recommended Budget still leaves a balance of over $1,506,264 in the County’s AB 443 Trust - not factoring money that should be received this year. And, while the AB 443 funds should not be relied upon as a panacea for ongoing and escalating costs in the Sheriffs department, this reserve, as well as  
annual AB 443 payments, could become an essential bridge to maintain public safety services if, as this Budget foretells, the need to significantly reduce future County budgets materializes.
COPS Trust
The Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Budget does not utilize any funds from the Sheriffs COPS Trust. Similar to the use of the AB 443 funds, every effort is being made to preserve the Sheriffs COPS Trust funds for future needs which could include funding equipment and supplies eliminated from this year’s Requested Budget.
Personnel Actions
As proposed, the Budget again recommends no personnel adjustments - career ladders, equity adjustments, or reclassifications - that may have been requested by departments. However, the Recommended Budget does provide funding to implement the Classification and Compensation Equity project begun two years ago which, if approved by the affected employee bargaining groups, will address many of the personnel actions included in this year’s Departmental Requested budget. Also, in contrast to recent years’ budgets, this year’s Budget does recommend a limited number of new positions, but not all of the new positions sought by departments.
When the salary savings in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended Budget, and position adjustments not being recommended in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended Budget are combined, the resulting savings in General Fund expenses is $1,038,039 compared to the Department Requested Budget.
Position Adjustments
Similar to recent County Budgets, departments were apprised that no personnel adjustments would be considered in the CAO Recommended Budget during this year’s Budget Kickoff Meeting. To the extent that some department heads have included personnel adjustments and new position requests in their Department Requested budgets, as they are permitted to do under the Budget Act, their budget narratives - and not this Introduction - should be relied upon to identify the requested personnel adjustments and new position requests not being funded.
As noted above, this year’s Budget again includes $650,000 in funding to implement the General Fund portion of costs associated with the Classification and Compensation Equity project if it is approved by the affected bargaining groups. The project comprehensively evaluates classification equity issues across all County job classifications (as opposed to exacerbating existing inequities by considering personnel actions on a department-by- department or employee-by-employee basis). If implemented, the Classification and Compensation Equity project will address many of the personnel actions included in the Department Requested Budget but not included in the CAO Recommended Budget. Approval of the Classification and Compensation Equity project will also result in personnel adjustments not requested by departments but nevertheless deemed necessary and fair as a result of this comprehensive analysis.
Unlike the personnel adjustments sought in some of the departmental budget requests - which are made under the auspices of current labor contracts and the existing Personnel Rules - the Classification and Compensation Equity project proposes certain changes to the Personnel Rules to improve the current personnel adjustment process to the benefit of both the County and its employees. These include^
 Prescribing timelines for regularly conducting comprehensive classification reviews in the future, and specific processes for reclassification requests outside of the classification studies, that are independent of the budget process. If approved, this change should provide greater consistency and reliability in the consideration of job classification/reclassification requests. The current process relies on departments including reclassification requests in their Department Requested budgets (some do, some don’t), and the County Administrator and Board of Supervisors considering the requests as part of the budget process, independent of the impact of granting the requests on similar positions for which no movement has been requested or recommended. In recent years, the inequities created by the process itself, combined with the County’s fiscal constraints, have precluded any position adjustments from being endorsed in the CAO Recommended Budgets.
	Career ladder advancements will be based on merit as opposed to the process. Currently, advancing from a II to III in job classifications relies upon the same inequities described above: inclusion in department budget requests; adequate funding, etc. Basing career ladders (as well as merit step increases) on merit also eliminates the tendency to automatically award career ladders across a classification as opposed to examining individual employee performance.
	Making equity adjustments through the uniform classification and re-classification processes and analyses as opposed to relying on irregular departmental budget requests and available funding in the Budget.
The benefits associated with the Personnel Rule changes proposed as part of the Classification and Compensation Equity project stand in contrast to the current budget-driven process identified in the Rules. Arguably, the current process of considering reclassifications, career ladders (II to III), and equity adjustments as part of the annual budget process probably resulted in creating many of the current classification issues and perceived inequities the Classification and Compensation Equity project will comprehensively address. The Recommended Budget supports comprehensive adjustments across classifications that will be longer lasting as a result of being anchored by more uniform processes applied consistently across all departments. Neither this Budget, nor future budgets can afford to promulgate the current, inadequate process by considering personnel actions on a piecemeal, department-by-department budget request basis that retains and re-enforces the overarching systemic flaws that promote inequities.
New Position Requests
The County of Inyo Manpower Report (Attachment C) identifies, by department, authorized staffing levels (full-time and B-PAR employees) as of July 1, 2013. (Note: The Manpower Report identifies authorized staffing at the department-level, but not yet at the budget unit level.) Because the Health and Human Services department has numerous employees spread across multiple budgets, a table showing the Department’s Authorized full-time and B-PAR staff, and how they are allocated among various programs, is also provided (Attachment D) to guide your Board of Supervisors in its review of the Health and Human Services budgets. 
In contrast to recent Budgets, this year's Budget recommends some, but not all of new positions included in the departmental budget requests. In addition to supporting Health and Human Services positions recently requested of, and approved by your Board of Supervisors as part of departmental restructuring - adding a Prevention Specialist to Health Services; replacing a Case Manager II with a Social worker IV or Psychotherapist position in Behavioral Health; and, changing a ?-Par Health and Human Services Specialist position to a ?-Par Case Manager I, II, III - the CAO Recommended Budget endorses adding the following positions^
Research Assistant (Range 60) to the Water department's authorized staffing. This position will be funded entirely from the Water Fund and will assist with field research during the summer months and assist the Salt Cedar Program in the winter months. If additional grant funding is not obtained for the Salt Cedar program after the current Wildlife Conservation Board grant funds are expended next year (Fiscal Year 2014- 2015), this position will provide the department greater operational flexibility with regard to how it staffs a significantly scaled-down Salt Cedar program which might need to operate on as little as $70,000 per year. (Note* while the Recommended Budget adds this position to the department’s authorized staffing, the department still needs to work with Personnel to develop the appropriate job description and, at the time your Board of Supervisors is asked to approve the job description it will also be asked to amend the department’s budget to provide funding for the position.)
Community Corrections Partnership Addictions Counselor (Range 60) to the Health and Human Services department's authorized strength. This position will be funded through Criminal Justice Realignment funds in the Community Corrections budget and, as such, it will be a grant funded position dependent on the continued support from these funds. The permanent Criminal Justice Realignment funding formula will not be finalized until next year, and dedicating a portion of these limited funds to new ongoing staff expense admittedly diminishes the amount of money available for other programs and services that will be necessary to succeed where the State has failed in terms of rehabilitating offenders. So, creating any new positions with Criminal Justice Realignment funds is not to be taken lightly. However, this position is endorsed by the Community Corrections Partnership, and it will add new resource to support the Community Corrections Plan. It may be helpful to consider this position in relation to one of the primary principles for Criminal Justice Realignment affirmed in the last two Board Approved County Budgets'-
Require County public safety departments to absorb costs associated with implementing public safety realignment within their existing budgets. If we are really talking about changing the way we conduct the business of criminal justice and rehabilitation, and not simply expanding the criminal justice industrial complex, then costs associated with old programming methodologies should give way to new ones. If your Board accepts community corrections plans that simply add layers of new infrastructure instead of re-structuring and reintegrating existing infrastructure, there will never be enough money to fund this endeavor.
(Note: while the Recommended Budget adds this position to the department’s authorized staffing, before the position can be filled, the department still needs to work with Personnel to develop the appropriate job description, and the Community Corrections Partnership budget and HHS Substance Use Disorder budget needs to be amended by your Board of Supervisors.)
Lead Equipment Operator Mechanic (Range 66) position in the Solid Waste program’s authorized strength. This designation will result in deleting a vacant Integrated Waste Management Supervisor position and reclassifying the current Equipment Operator Mechanic position, thereby saving the department budget about $70,000 a year.
The Recommended Budget does not support a request by the District Attorney to add a Deputy District Attorney IV to the department’s authorized staffing.
Salary Sa vines
Some departments have proposed some salary savings, associated with vacant staff positions, in their Department Requested budgets. Additionally, the CAO Recommended Budget includes recommendations for additional salary savings. Almost all of the salary savings being recommended by the CAO, $940,085, occurs in the General Fundi only $162,646 in salary savings is recognized in Non- General Fund budgets. The Non-General Fund salary savings is primarily associated with the recommendation to delete the vacant Integrated Waste Management Supervisor position, and three General Fund positions with salaries spread into Non-General Fund budget units.
For comparison, last year’s Recommended Budget relied on $808,401 in General Fund salary savings. However, the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 CAO Recommended Budget only utilized $493,504 in General Fund salary savings. The Fiscal Year 2010-2011 CAO Recommended Budget utilized $576,219 in General Fund salary savings! the Fiscal Year 2009-2010 CAO Recommended Budget relied on $569,308 (excluding HHS vacancies) in General Fund salary savings, and embraced $6,711 in salary savings in Non-General Fund budgets (again, excluding HHS).
As noted above, the calculation of CAO Recommended salary savings is usually intentionally conservative. The need to continue utilizing salary savings, and in higher and higher amounts than has historically been required to balance the budget is indicative and directly attributable to this year’s ongoing fiscal challenges. The fact that this year’s recommended salary savings is $131,684 higher than the amount used to balance last year’s budget should be cause for at least mild alarm. To generate the salary savings necessary to balance this year’s Budget, several of the positions have been left vacant for the entire fiscal year. A balanced budget notwithstanding, this has a double-negative effect of diminishing service capacities in this year’s and eroding Fund Balance that will be available to balance next year’s budget.
The Budget also recommends deleting five vacant positions shown in Attachment E. However, eliminating these position does not result in salary savings for the Budget since funding for the positions was not included in the respective departments’ budget requests.
The use of salary savings to help balance the budget is assumed to be preferred to eliminating filled positions. However, over the long term, taking salary savings from whichever positions happen to be vacant, forgoes performing any strategic analysis of which positions are the most critical to meeting the service priorities established by your Board of Supervisors. 
Much of the General Fund salary savings is realized by leaving positions vacant in the County Administrator’s authorized staffing. As a result, the ability to utilize some of these vacant positions to restructure the department to provide for a critically needed Assistant Information Services Director, as well as dedicated natural resources and economic development staff does not exist. Similarly, a host of vacancies in the Library budget has provided an opportunity to realize salary saving while using temporary workers to maintain library hours through March 2014. By then, the Library is expected to present a recommendation to restructure its staffing levels to maintain hours of operation within its remaining salaries and benefits budget, otherwise hours may need to be reduced or new partnerships identified.
The Position Vacancy/Salary Savings Table (Attachment B) identifies salary savings by department and staff position, and includes the earliest date that the position can be filled to realize the anticipated salary savings.
As always, however, a caveat is offered that, if viable candidates for certain critical positions, such as the vacant Deputy Agricultural Position (with a salary savings fill date of July 1, 2014), are identified prior to the fill date, your Board will be asked to consider appropriating the necessary additional funding. In the case of the Agricultural department, this would be necessary to help the County meet its Maintenance of Effort obligations to ensure continued receipt of un-refunded gas tax revenues. However, in the absence of a viable candidate, there is little point in funding a position that will take up dollars in the budget that can be used elsewhere since the ??? calculation is based on actual expenditures and not budget.
FISCAL OVERVIEW
The Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended Budget projects an overall increase in revenues of $379,827, from $76,553,650 in the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Board Approved Budget to $76,933,477 in this year’s Recommended Budget. The projected revenues once again approach the County’s high-water mark for revenue; $77,880,299 in the Fiscal Year 2008-2009 Board Approved Budget.
However, last year, the Fiscal Year 2012-2103 Budget reflected revenues associated with the inclusion of approximately $1.2 Million in
Proposition IB Road funds, $1.2 Million in funding associated with the Property Tax Management System project, start-up proceeds for the Tech Refresh program, and the new Criminal Justice Realignment budget. This year, the only large one-time revenue source in the Recommended Budget is associated with the inclusion of $2,232,608 in loan and rebate revenue to fund the photovoltaic electric system project being installed at the County’s Independence campus. Rather, this year’s Budget is topped off by relying more heavily than ever on limited or ‘one-time’ revenue sources such as increased use of Operating Transfers from the Geothermal Royalties Trust and AB 443 Trust. And, it could arguably be construed that at least one of these one-time sources of revenue are being used to keep up with increases in ongoing expenses.
The Recommended General Fund Budget projects an increase in revenues of $40,352 (0.09%); from $46,318,803 in projected General Fund revenue in the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Board Approved Budget to $46,359,155 in projected General Fund revenue in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Recommended Budget. When Operating Transfers into the General Fund are subtracted from both years’ revenue projections - there were $1,216,932 in Operating Transfers to the General Fund in the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Board Approved Budget and there are $958,102 in Operating Transfers to the General Fund in this year’s Recommended Budget - projected revenues have increased from last year’s Board Approved General Fund Budget by $299,182. This contrasts with last year when the same analysis showed a $617,682 increase in General Fund revenues (after Operating Transfers into the General Fund were backed out).
The City of Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP) property tax payment - which is calculated using the constitutionally prescribed Phillips formula, and accounts for about 48% of the County’s secured property tax roll - is up 0.45% (compared to 3.75% last year), and the remaining secured tax roll is up about 0.79% for a total increase of 1.24% or $409,000. The County’s share of this is expected to be $118,610. Last year, the secure tax roll increased by 1.10%, meaning that housing values may, finally, have stabilized and are beginning to rebound.
There is no change in projected revenue from unsecured property tax in this year’s Budget. This is because last year’s Budget decreased projected unsecured property tax revenue by $228,000, or 15% (compared to the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Working Budget), due, primarily to uncertainty surrounding the outstanding Coso property tax appeals. Actual unsecured property tax revenues, however, exceeded projections by $317,517. So, even though proceeds to the County from Coso’s unsecured property tax assessment for 2013 have decreased by $139,000, there is no need to make further reductions to this projected revenue.
Like unsecured property tax revenue projections, supplemental taxes are also expected to remain the same. This revenue source may be stabilizing after spikes (upward and downward) attributed to high profile property sales, like the Coso geothermal plant and Briggs goldmine.
This year’s Budget benefits from the resolution of 2010, 2011, and 2012 Coso property tax appeals (which resulted in the County making refunds from disputed taxes the Auditor-Controller impounded but, significantly, not having to ‘take back’ money from other taxing agencies or the County General Fund). In addition to providing certainty with regard to what, if any refunds, the County and other agencies might have owed the taxpayer - certainty which did not exist last year - this year’s Budget does not have to identify the almost $400,000 included in last year’s Budget to pay for consultant costs associated with assessing the geothermal plant, and then defending the appeals of those assessment.
While there is more certainty around revenues and expenses associated with the Coso property tax assessment process, the fact is the power plant property continues to decline in value; a decline which continues to have dire consequences for County General Fund revenues. The County’s share of the assessed value of Coso this year (barring appeals) is $1,119,061 compared to $1,258,060 last year. (On the bright side, however, it is worth recalling that the higher Coso property tax values of yesteryear provided a cushion for the County Budget during the severe economic downturn that started in 2008.)
The Coso plant still has enormous and critical influence on the County Budget. With the possible exception of Federal PILT funding, the combination of geothermal royalties payments and geothermal revenues and expenses associated with Coso property tax assessments continue to represent the single greatest ‘local’ variables, and pose the most substantial threat to future County budgets. These factors, however, remain largely beyond the control of this Budget and your Board of Supervisors, and the situation provides little that can be proactively accomplished to guard against negative potentialities. 
Vehicle License Fee (VLF) revenue is expected to decrease by $275,000 compared to last year’s Board Approved Budget. This is not encouraging considering that the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget reported that VLF revenue had been decreased by $615,000 in the last three Recommended budgets. (Last year was the only year in the past five years that VLF revenue showed an increase, and then only of $50,000.)
Generally, sales tax is projected to remain stable with a relatively small increase (e.g., $20,000) being recommended. However, some additional increases may occur during the year as a direct result of the sales and use tax audits being performed by Muni Services. The fee for this audit is 25% of the additional sales tax revenue collected for the County. This additional revenue and related expense is not accounted for in this Budget, and appropriation changes and budget amendments will be requested as needed.
In Fiscal Year 2012-2013, Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue exceeded projections once again, by $393,000 - but not quite to the degree of Fiscal Year 2011*2012 when actuals exceeded projections by nearly $500,000. In fact, for the first time in recent memory, HTOT revenue actually declined, by 2.41%, compared to last year’s actuals. However, the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 actuals were influenced by a onetime true-up of approximately a quarter-million dollars. So, while this Budget recommends increasing projected HTOT revenue, it does not do so lightly. Increasing HTOT revenue projections by $165,000, to $2,650,000 still allows for an 8% decline from this year’s actual HTOT revenue. Nevertheless, this is still a less conservative approach to revenue forecasts than has been the hallmark of past budgets, and it is not without certain risks; the least of which will be to lower the amount of Fund Balance that would otherwise be available to help balance next year’s Budget. As in year’s past, the County’s HTOT revenues will be linked to economic stability or instability in Europe and the strength of the euro.
Many of the other assumptions associated with this year’s revenue projections remain similar to previous years’ Budgets and include^
	No additional adverse property tax appeals or settlements.
	Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenue remaining relatively
constant.
	Vehicle License Fee revenue decreasing significantly.
	Public Safety Augmentation Fund (PSAF, or Proposition 172) revenue increasing by $141,730 based on prior year actual receipts, indicating that the 2012*2013 budget was, once again, too low.
	Sales tax revenue remaining stable.
	No revenue being received from the sale of County-owned property.
	Continued strategic use of realignment funds to provide maximum benefit to the County.
	No future geothermal royalty payments have been projected in the Recommended Budget. Pursuant to current County policy, any geothermal royalty payments that may be received in Fiscal Year 2013-2014 will be treated as unanticipated revenue.
The sheer number of Operating Transfers that have been made in and out of the General Fund in recent years makes a comparison of changes in revenues and expenditures from one fiscal year to the next very difficult. A cursory review seems to indicate that, over the years, decreases in revenues are being relatively matched by decreases, or only slight increases in spending. However, the realities continue to be that the County cannot continue to rely on reductions in discretionary expenses to maintain fiscal solvency, and costs beyond the control of departments continue to rise.
When changes in Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Board Approved General Fund expenses are compared to this year’s Recommended General Fund expenses, the increase in costs appears to be about .08% (inclusive of Operating Transfers out of the General Fund). When an effort is made to exclude Operating Transfers out from the calculation, it appears that expenses in this year’s Recommended Budget have increased by than less than 2% from Fiscal Year 2012*2013. However, even this figure is somewhat misleading since this year’s General Revenues and Expenditures budget includes $150,000 less in other agency contributions expense due to no contribution to the OPEB Trust.
Changes in General Fund expense categories between Fiscal Year 2012-2013 and costs in the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Recommended Budget, are shown in Table 3.
 
CAO Recommended Budget
The total Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended Budget is $81,447,453 and represents a $1,147,174, or a 1.3% decrease from the Fiscal Year 2012*2013 Board Approved Budget of $82,594,627. However, again, much of last year’s increase was due to the inclusion of Proposition IB Road expenses; the Property Tax Management System project; the Tech Refresh program; more deferred maintenance appropriations; a new Wildlife Conservation Board grant budget; and the new Criminal Justice Realignment budget. This year’s Recommended Budget does not contain as much one-time costs, and reflects increases in ongoing expenses.
The Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Recommended Non-General Fund Budget totals $31,254,950 in expenditures and $30,574,322 in revenues. The deficit in Non-General Fund budgets is $680,628; $1,527,001 less than last year’s Non-General Fund funding gap. Including recommended Operating Transfers, there is sufficient Fund Balance in these budgets to cover the gap between revenues and expenditures. Table 4 shows the Operating Transfers being recommended for Non-General Fund budgets.
General Fund Budget
The Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Recommended General Fund Budget totals $50,192,503 in expenditures and $46,359,155 in revenues. General Fund expenditures represent an increase of $40,352, or 0.08% over the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Board Approved General Fund Budget of $50,152,151.
The Auditor-Controller is expected to certify the Fund Balance in the General Fund for the year-ending June 30, 2013, on September 9th. For purposes of preparing the Recommended Budget, General Fund Balance is being estimated as $3,833,348, and this amount is used to balance the Fiscal Year 2012-2013 Recommended General Fund Budget.
The following graph, General Fund Expenditures by Function, Figure 3., demonstrates the categorical division of the General Fund Budget, as recommended. 
RECOMMENDED CHANGES TO DEPARTMENT REQUESTED BUDGETS
In addition to the differences already discussed, the CAO Recommended Budget differs from the Department Requested Budget 
as follows. This section of the Recommended Budget will also be used to identify key issues in certain budgets that have not already been discussed.
Note: the County’s retirement contribution rates for CalPERS have increased effective July 1, 2013. Contributions for Miscellaneous employees increased from 13.938% to 14.874% of payroll, and the contribution for Safety employees increased from 34.325% to 36.294% of payroll. Salary and Benefits object codes have been revised accordingly in both the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Department Requested, as well as the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended budgets.
Non -General Fund Budgets
Animal Shelter
This is a new budget unit being established to budget funds for the construction of a new County Animal Shelter. As committed to during Financial Advisory Committee last year, the CAO Recommended Budget identifies and commits $375,000 toward the construction of a new facility. This funding includes Operating Transfers from the CAO - Accumulated Capital Outlay budget ($200,000) and the Sheriffs Animal Shelter Donation Trust ($175,000). It is hoped that this amount can be matched or exceeded through fundraising efforts already underway in our community.
CA?-Accumulated Capital Outlay
Last year, revenue and expense for the photovoltaic project being installed at County buildings in Independence was budgeted in the Deferred Maintenance budget. This year, the revenue and expense is recognized in the CAO-ACO budget to ensure that extra rebate proceeds are available for funding other capital improvement projects (as directed by your Board of Supervisors when the project was approved), such as the Animal Shelter described above, and not used for ongoing costs in other parts of the Budget.
Deferred Maintenance — Public Works
The Department Requested budget includes $5,000 in revenue from Mental Health budget to fund fire suppression system repairs at Progress House, and $1,013,074 from the CAOACO budget to fund the completion of the photovoltaic project on the County’s campus in Independence.
The CAO Recommended Budget adds a $25,000 Operating Transfer from the Tecopa Hot Springs Fund into the Deferred Maintenance budget. This is to fund drain and electrical system repairs (including a new emergency generator) at the Tecopa Bath House. An additional Operating Transfer ($17,000) from the Water Department budget is recommended to facilitate the completion of the HVAC Project.
The Recommended Budget also provides a $51,202 Operating Transfer from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund replacement of the driveit expansion joints at the Jail ($28,500), fire suppression system repairs at the Jail and Juvenile Hall ($18,000) and the Jail vegetable steamer replacement ($4,702).
Several projects slated to be completed during the first quarter, will be funded with available Fund Balance. These projects include^
	completing the Clean Air Projects Program (CAPP) Block Grant funds approved by your Board during Fiscal Year 2012-2013;
	repairing the elevator in the Independence Annex Building ($24,500)
	preparing a new ADA Transition Plan ($15,000);
	exterior painting and floor refinishing at the Big Pine Town Hall ($28,000);
	replacing carpeting in the Historic Courthouse; and,
	exterior painting and window replacement at the Independence Legion Hall ($24,000).
Eastern Sierra Regional Airport
The structural deficit in this year’s Eastern Sierra Regional Airport budget is $28,115. However, a General Fund Operating Transfer is not required to address this shortfall in the Recommended Budget because of the utilization of the entire $75,507 General Fund Operating Transfer budgeted in Fiscal Year 2012-2013, combined with some timely increases in fuel sales, created a Fund Balance to offset this year’s operating deficit. 
Eastern Sierra Regional Airport Improvement
At the request of the Public Works department, $77,702 in revenue is being recognized in the Recommended Budget for the completion of the Bishop Segmented Circle Project. Expenditures are currently encumbered and will roll over into the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Working Budget upon adoption of the Budget.
Laws Water System
The Laws Water System budget requires a $254 General Fund Operating Transfer to cover a projected operating shortfall in this year’s Requested and Recommended budgets. Last year’s Operating Transfer was $1,945.
Lone Pine Lighting
In consultation with the Public Works department, the Recommended Budget increases equipment expense by $10,000 to facilitate a new streetlight along the northern edge of town.
Natural Resource Development
The CAO Recommended Budget adds a $100,000 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer to this budget for natural resource planning efforts. The Recommended Budget also increases professional services by $40,000 for anticipated work required of Gruen Gruen + Associates relative to critical habitat designation and Forest Plan Update engagements.
Road
The Recommended Budget includes an external charge expense ($53,000) that will be paid to Public Works in anticipation of utilizing Public Works staff for Road department work rather than replacing a retiring Road department employee.
Solid Waste
The structural deficit in this year’s Solid Waste budget is $625,617. The amount of the General Fund contribution needed to address this shortfall in the Recommended Budget is reduced to $316,612 only because of utilizing the entire $213,892 General Fund Operating Transfer budgeted in Fiscal Year 2012-2013, combined with slightly higher than projected (as revised) revenues, created a Fund Balance to offset this year’s costs. The amount of this year’s Operating Transfer is sufficient to fund cost estimates for implementing Phase I of the Corrective Action Plan approved by Lahontan Regional Water Quality Control Board for the Bishop Sunland Landfill.
Water
As noted in the Deferred Maintenance discussion, the CAO Recommended Budget includes an Operating Transfer out of $17,000 to complete the HVAC project at the Water Department facility in Independence.
General Fund Budgets
Agricultural Commissioner
With departmental concurrence, the Recommended Budget again recognizes a $7,501 Operating Transfer from the Agricultural Commissioner Building Trust to pay for remaining improvements for the new Agricultural warehouse property in Bishop.
As discussed above, the Recommended Budget deletes salary and benefits costs for the Deputy Agricultural Commissioner for the entire year. However, the recruitment for this position is underway and, if a viable candidate is identified through this process, your Board will be asked to reinstate funding for the position with a Budget amendment.
The Recommended Budget reduces expenses by a total of $1,350 to more closely approximate historical actuals. 
Assessor
The Recommended Budget includes a Geothermal Operating Transfer of $69,660 to pay for the portion of the Assessor's contract with Harold W. Bertholf, Inc. associated with the Coso Operating Company property tax assessment process. This is distinguished from the separate contract with Harold W. Bertholf, Inc., that used to be funded in the CAO budget that was included in last year's Budget (but not this Budget) for work assisting the County with property tax appeals made by Coso Operating Company.
With department concurrence, the Recommended Budget reduces salaries and benefits costs by $59,197 associated with eliminating the vacant Assessment Clerk from the department's authorized staffing. The Recommended Budget also reduces the travel expense $1,500 based on previous years’ actuals.
Auditor-Controller - General
The Recommended Budget increases revenue by $20,000 in the sales tax revenue based on last year’s actuals. The Budget also reduces expense for professional and special services costs by $20,000 reflecting a decision to provide outside fraud prevention and detection training next fiscal year. In addition, it is recommended the vacant Management Analyst position in this budget be deleted since the Auditor has filled her Assistant Auditor-Controller position and the Management Analyst position was originally authorized based on leaving the Assistant position vacant.
Auditor-Controller - General Revenues and Expenditures
Even though Fiscal Year 2012-2013 actuals indicate that Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax decreased by 2.41% compared to Fiscal year 2011-2012 actuals (which included a one-time payment of almost $250,000), this revenue code is being increased by $165,000, which is still 8% lower than last year’s actuals. The Recommended Budget also increases Current Secured Taxes by $100,000 based on two years worth of trends. Similarly, Trial Court MOU expenses have been decreased by $105,000, and the OPEB Trust funding contribution has been removed. If the Auditor-Controller certifies that the year-ending General Fund Balance is higher than the $3,833,348 being relied upon to balance the budget, your Board of Supervisors may wish to consider using the ‘extra’ Fund Balance to make another contribution to this Trust.
Board of Supervisors
The Recommended Budget reinstates $3,993 for computer purchases.
Buildinsr & Safety
The Recommended Budget reduces the department’s requested motor pool expense by $6,060 in recognition that over $15,000 of the requested cost is associated with the Deputy Director position. This position is currently vacant and, when filled, may or may not be assigned a vehicle. Even with the reduction, motor pool expense is still almost $5,000 more than last year’s actuals, and recognizes increased trips department staff will make to the Charleston View area in conjunction with on-going and anticipated construction.
It should be noted that the demand, or lack thereof for building inspection services continues to make it difficult to justify the current level of staffing in this budget unit. Personnel costs alone exceed projected construction permit revenue by 150%. Reducing personnel, however, would dramatically impact current service levels and inspection turnaround times. Alternately, your Board could, later this year, consider adjusting the department’s fee schedule. For example, travel expense to the southeast part of the County (estimated at more than $10,000 this year) could be off-set by a surcharge.
Contingencies
The Recommended Budget includes $13,090 in General Fund Contingencies. Certainly, a more substantial sum is preferable. Typically, Contingencies are budgeted for unknown expenses that might arise during the fiscal year. This year, however, the Recommended Budget once again makes reductions to specific expenses in certain General Fund budget units which can, at least reasonably, be anticipated as possibly being necessary later in the year. These reductions, such as taking a full-year’s salary savings for the Deputy Agricultural Commissioner, are identified elsewhere in this report.
Your Board is reminded that subsequent expenditure of these funds requires separate Board approval. Similar to last year, this pre- identification of possible uses for Contingencies funds departs from the prior practice of budgeting Contingencies on a “what’s reasonably available?’ basis. This year’s figure has been calculated by making strategic cuts to various General Fund budgets, which could leave less funding available for unanticipated costs that could and will likely arise later in the year.
CAO
The Recommended Budget adds $35,000 to the professional and special service object code to fund the cost of a Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax audit and, possibly, amending the County’s HTOT ordinance.
County Counsel
As noted above, the Recommended Budget includes recognizing additional expense associated with the County Counsel’s retirement, and the cost of the new County Counsel. Additionally, the Recommended Budget eliminates $20,000 in contract costs based on historical trends.
County Library
As noted above, this budget provides substantial salaries and benefits savings, $192,166, due to recent retirements and departures. There is sufficient funding to allow the Library to maintain current operating hours using temporary employees through March 2014 in order for the Library to evaluate restructuring opportunities and other cost-savings or revenue enhancements. Additionally, the Recommended Budget reduces professional and special services by $2,000, and maintenance of equipment costs by $500 based on last year’s actuals.
District Attorney - General
As noted previously, the Recommended Budget does not support the department’s request to add a fifth attorney to the department’s  
authorized staff. The only other reduction is $5,000 in travel expense based on historical usage.
D.A. - Safety
The department’s overtime budgets being reduced by $10,000 based on recent actual expenses.
Disaster Services — CAP
The Recommended Budget again supports the Requested Budget in continuing to cover the cost of sending four (4) County employees assigned to Section Chief roles in the Emergency Operations Center to intensive, out-of-county training opportunities.
Economic Development-CAO
The Recommended Budget reluctantly proposes generating salary savings by deferring the hiring of the vacant Deputy County Administrator for the entire year.
General Relief
The Recommended Budget reduces support and care of persons expense by $10,000 based on actual costs the past two years. This is another budget that may require the use of General Fund Contingencies later this Fiscal Year.
Grants-In -Support
The Recommended Budget makes no change to the Department Request for $115,000 to fund this long-standing program. Recall, however, that last year the Recommended Budget proposed, and the Board of Supervisors approved, changing how this funding is allocated. Instead of accepting applications, the program now supports line-item awards to each of the entities with which the County has had an established and ongoing GIS funding relationship, in the same amount each organization received in the previous years.
This change recognized that in recent years, the County’s budget constraints have precluded providing additional funding to the Grants- In-Support Program. As a result, while recognizing the value of the services provided by both long-term GIS grant recipients and new grant applicants, the County has repeatedly found it necessary to make the decision to only fund its historical partners, and not make new grant awards to new organizations. By not funding new applications and, instead, concentrating the County’s limited funds on those agencies providing quasi-governmental services, with which the County has an ongoing relationship, the County has avoided further diluting the pool of available funds to the detriment of agencies that have come to rely on this funding to provide public services. Essentially, in past budgets, the County made the decision to avoid taking funding away from one organization to fund another organization. And, in years when it has been necessary to reduce GIS Program funding, funding reductions have been applied equally to all established grant recipients by reducing each organization’s grant award by a proportional share of its total funding.
Since the County’s ability to consider funding new GIS Program grant applications was, and is not expected to improve in the foreseeable future, the GIS program has been changed to make specific, line-item awards to each of the entities with which the County has an established and ongoing GIS funding relationship in the same amount each organization received the previous year. (If reductions in funding are necessary, or increases in funding possible, these changes would be applied on a pro-rata basis.) With this approach, funding for each entity will still be contingent on your Board of Supervisors approving funding allocations through the budget process, and the funds are still conveyed through a contract between the County and the respective organization for its usual scope of work (consistent with all County requirements such as providing the requisite insurance coverages, and being current on all tax assessments). The grant application process, however, has been eliminated.
Dispensing with the grant application process provides greater funding certainty to the County’s historic GIS partners in the community; reduces the need for these organizations to complete a less-than* streamlined	13-page grant application; eliminates
expectations the County has been unable to meet among new grant applicants; and, reduces staff costs associated with the preparation and publication of grants applications, and reviewing and recommending applications to your Board of Supervisors.
This year’s funding recommendations are the same as last
year’s:
	California Indian Legal Services; $8,000.
	Community Connections for Child Care; $10,000.
	Eastern Sierra Avalanche Center; $5,000.
	Friends of Mount Whitney Fish Hatchery; $10,000.
	Inyo Council for the Arts; $39,129.
	Laws Railroad Museum; $25,807.
	Ombudsman; $2,200.
	Wild Iris; $14,864.
Insurance
The Recommended Budget reduces general operating expense by $5,000 based on two year trends.
Jail - CAD/RMS
An Operating Transfer of $20,963 from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust is recommended to fund the cost of the RIMS Maintenance Contract in lieu of using General Fund monies for this purpose. Additionally, a second Operating Transfer from the Warrant Trust of $1,700 is being used to provide connectivity to the Superior Court’s JALAN criminal justice case management system. Three years ago, 911 Trust Funds were available for this contract, but those funds have been expended. The 911 Trust will be monitored for ability to resume funding these costs in the future.
Jail - General
As discussed above, the Recommended Budget again includes a $42,216 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund the Jail facility operations, including the $22,216 maintenance contract with Siemens originally funded through the Department Requested Budget.
The CAO Recommended Budget eliminates $2,500 in general operating expense based on prior year’s actuals. Not requested are funds for two new ovens. The purchase of the ovens may need to be revisited later this fiscal year, at which time alternate funding sources to the General Fund, such as the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust, could be considered.
Jail - Security
The Recommended Budget supports an AB 443 Trust Operating Transfer, requested by the Sheriff, to fund $21,330 in annual Jail security system costs.
Jail - STC
Standards and Training for Correctional Officers funds provide reimbursements for State-mandate peace officer training. The Recommended Budget decreases travel expense by $27,881, so that expenses match the funding available for reimbursement.
Juvenile Institutions
The Recommended Budget includes a $18,317 Operating Transfer In from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund the cost of the Juvenile Hall maintenance contract with Siemens and annual costs for the new security system. The Recommended Budget also reduces food and household supplies expense by $8,000 in keeping with the historical average expense.
Lone Pine Substation
The Recommended Budget again proposes using Criminal Justice Facilities Trust monies, in the form of a $17,990 Operating Transfer in, to finish the project this fiscal year. This saves the use of AB 443 (Rural Sheriff) Trust for other law enforcement needs.
Maintenance - Building & Grounds
In addition to the inclusion of a $17,200 Operating Transfer from the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust to fund maintenance of the Jail ($10,000) and Juvenile Hall ($7,200), the Recommended Budget also differs from the Department Requested Budget with respect to reducing standby time expense $3,000. 
Museum
The Recommended Budget reduces services and supplies expense by $200 based on actuals and in a show of solidarity for other budget units incurring greater cuts.
Parks
The Recommended Budget provides for a $153,700 Geothermal Royalties Operating Transfer to support parks maintenance and operation costs. Additionally, the Recommended Budget reflects 12- months of salary savings of 50% of the salary and benefits cost of the Parks/Motor Pool Supervisor.
Personnel
The Recommended Budget reduces professional and special services expenses by an additional $35,000 based on re-examining Willdan contract costs in relation to contract encumbrances and projected use. The Recommended Budget also takes 12-months of salary savings associated with a vacant Personnel Analyst position.
As noted throughout this Introduction & Summary, this budget unit also reflects the Recommendation that $438,515 be added to the department’s contingencies expense to fund new General Fund costs associated with any new labor contracts that may be ratified this year.
Planning
The Recommended Budget features a $55,000 Operating Transfer from the Geothermal Royalties Trust to defer planning expenses associated with the department’s Willdan contract and Housing Element update. With departmental concurrence, the Recommended Budget increases services and fees revenue by $10,000.
Probation
The Recommended Budget reduces expense for overtime by $5,000; general operating expense by $4,000, and travel by $3,000 based on prior years’ actuals. Additionally, the Recommended Budget uses 12-month of salary savings associated with a Probation Officer position that has been vacant for several years.
Public Defender
The Recommended Budget increases state public safety revenue by $25,000 based on prior two years’ actuals. Additionally, due to better configuration of work assignments around contract attorney services, it appears that costs can be reduced by $50,000.
Public Works
The Recommended Budget increases revenue by $53,000 for anticipated reimbursement of staff time that will be dedicated to Road department activities instead of filling a Road department vacancy created by a retirement. The Recommended Budget makes the following reductions^ standby time expense by $1,8901 internal charges expense by $15,000; public liability expense by $14,797; and, operating transfers out by $171,088. Motor pool expense is recommended to be increased by $10,000. Additionally, the Recommended Budget utilizes $160,366 in salary savings associated with leaving several vacant positions, or positions that will soon become vacant for the remainder of the year, as identified in Attachment B.
Sheriff - General
Similar to the previous two years, when the Sheriff consented to the use of in AB 443 (Rural Sheriffs) funds to offset a one-time spike in travel expense, the Recommended Budget reflects the Sheriffs willingness to again use AB 443 monies to offset departmental cost increases, including training and travel costs that continue to be significantly higher than historical levels (e.g., actual training expense was just $58,517 in Fiscal Year 2009-2010 compared to the $127,081 being requested this year). Accordingly, the Recommended Budget includes a $300,000 Operating Transfer in from the AB 443 Trust. As in year’s past, this funding will only be transferred into the budget as necessary to meet revenue projections in relation to actual expenditures (e.g., maintain Net County Cost). The budget also benefits from a recommendation to use $10,000 Operating Transfer from the Emergency Response budget to purchase a new plotter for Search and Rescue. In addition, the Recommended Budget proposes reducing requested travel expense by $17,081; to $110,000. While this is higher than the prior two years’ actuals, it provides for anticipated full staffing in the department.
Based on analysis, overtime expense is being reduced by $8,000; maintenance of equipment expense is being reduced by $6,570; office space and site rental expense is being reduced by $8,000; and, equipment - fixed assets expense is being reduced by $28,000 since this equipment will now be purchased through homeland security grant funds.
RESERVES, OPEB TRUST, DEBT SERVICE, AND CONTINGENCIES
As discussed above, the CAO Recommended Budget does not allocate any contributions to the General Reserve Fund or Economic Stabilization Fund; make any OPEB Trust contribution for future retiree health costs; nor does it budget to reserve former debt-service payments. Ideally, the Budget should provide allocations for all of these uses. Furthermore, General Fund Contingencies are only $13,090, and a higher amount is certainly desirable.
Depending on the Fund Balance certified by the Auditor- Controller on September 9th and/or how Budget Hearing deliberations progress, your Board of Supervisors may be able to increase contributions to one or more of these purposes as part of its adoption of the Final Budget. And, depending on the ultimate cost of some of initiatives funded in this Budget, it may be possible to increase contributions to one or more of these uses through budget amendments later in the fiscal year.
ASSUMPTIONS, KNOWN CHANGES, AND OUTSTANDING ISSUES
Similar to previous years, the Recommended Budget is based on certain assumptions and not without certain risks.
Assumptions
Balancing this Budget relied on the following assumptions'
	No new reductions in State or Federal funding as a result of Federal Budget sequestration. The Budget does attempt to anticipate and account for the impacts of sequestration when identified. The ongoing budget stalemate in Washington could result in additional State and Federal funding reductions not contemplated in this Budget.
	No “new” realignment of State programs, cuts in State funding, or other amendments to the State Budget adverse to the County. Should any such changes in State funding materialize, affected departments are expected to promptly bring budget amendments forward to your Board to ensure the County Budget remains balanced.
	No significant downturn (or upturn) in the economy that could affect economically-sensitive revenues.
	No drastic reduction in tourism visitation adversely affecting Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax and campground fee revenues.
	Solid waste disposal fees meeting revenue projections, which have been lowered from the amount included in last year’s Board Approved budget by $129,536 based on last year’s actuals.
	The $430,000 budgeted in Personnel Contingencies being sufficient to pay for any additional salaries and benefits cost increases resulting from ongoing labor negotiations that will hopefully be concluded this year.
	Any increased personnel costs in Non-General Fund and HHS budget units resulting from new labor contracts or implementation of the Classification and Compensation Equity Study can be absorbed by the respective budgets.
	No adverse settlements to the Tecopa Sewage Lagoon project dispute.
	No appeal of the 2013 Coso property tax assessment.
	Changes to the Community Corrections Partnership implementation plan, developed to enable the County to meet 
the goals of Criminal Justice Realignment, will- (l) adhere to the County’s AB 109 principles adopted in previous year’s budgets; and (2) continue to live within its means - which are limited to State funding allocations - and not rely on contributions from other County funding sources.
	Other costs associated with public safety realignment being adequately funded by the State, or absorbed into existing budgets.
	Public safety subventions being funded at the levels being reported by the recipient departments.
	State Airport Improvement Program (AIP) Matching Grants fund being available to off-set a portion of the County’s match requirements for FAA grants included in this Budget.
	No additional decreases in Highway Users Tax Account (HUTA) or other Road revenues from the State.
	No litigation decisions, including payments of attorney’s fees, adverse to Inyo County.
	Departments will meet or exceed their revenue projections, and manage their expenditures within the appropriation limits established by your Board.
	Receiving no new geothermal royalty payments.
	Receiving no positive adjustments to sales tax and Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax revenues as a result of planned audits.
	The Authorized Position Review Process will remain in effect, and vacant positions will not be filled prior to the identified fill date (Attachment B) to achieve the recommended savings.
	Department heads will carefully monitor their Board Approved budgets, and State and Federal budget actions, and promptly inform your Board and the County Administrator of reductions, or anticipated reductions in revenues, and propose implementing corresponding reductions in expenditures.
	Continuing to pay a disproportionate amount of undesignated court fee revenue to the State.
	No new revenue streams being created (This Budget does not rely on increases to solid waste disposal fees, new film permit revenue, or any other increases in fees or charges not already approved by your Board of Supervisors.)
	No loss of grant funding for existing projects.
	Receiving no Indian Gaming Special Distribution Fund grant revenue.
Known Changes
Following are potential changes that have been identified as possibly being made in the Final County Budget adopted by your Board or, more likely, shortly thereafter as amendments to the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Board Approved Budget.
Criminal Justice Realignment
The Criminal Justice Realignment budget unit included in the Recommended Budget is based on the budget to fund the Community Corrections Plan approved by your Board last year. To the extent that the Community Corrections Plan is modified or amended by the Community Corrections Partnership (and not rejected by your Board of Supervisors by a 4/5ths vote) your Board of Supervisors will have the opportunity to consider amending the Criminal Justice Realignment budget in order to provide funding to implement the updated Plan. As indicated above, one of the anticipated modifications to the Plan is to support funding a new CCP Addictions Counselor position in the HHS Substance Use Disorder budget.
District Attorney - Victim Witness
The District Attorney’s office has provided indication that it might apply for a new Victim Witness program grant that could require up to a $25,986 County match should your Board of supervisors approve the grant application and resulting agreement. 
FAA Grants
Federal Aviation Administration staff indicates that the agency may not fund all of the seven FAA grant applications that the County has submitted this year for improvements at County airports. These grant applications are currently anticipated in the Recommended Budget, including the requisite matching funds. While no final funding decision has been made, any FAA grant awards not received will result in needing to adjust budget units in which respective grant revenues and expenses are accounted for.
Fund Balance
During Budget Hearings on September 9th, the Auditor* Controller will certify General Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 2013. If certified Fund Balance is below the $3,833,348 relied upon to prepare the Recommended Budget, your Board of Supervisors will need to make corresponding reduction in expenses, or increases in revenue, to adopt a balanced budget.
If the Fund Balance certified by the Auditor-Controller exceeds $3,833,348, it is recommended that your Board of Supervisors appropriate the additional funds to one or more of the following needs-
	OPEB Trust contribution (for retiree healthcare costs);
	General Reserve Fund;
	Economic Stabilization Fund;
	Accumulated Capital Outlay (e.g., reserve former debt-service
payments for capital projects); and/or,
	Computer System Fund
	General Fund Contingencies.
It is recommended your Board of Supervisors refrain from using any additional General Fund Balance that may materialize to enhance the ongoing costs, or de facto on-ongoing costs in the County Budget. This would have the effect of needing the same (higher) amount of Fund Balance for the Fiscal Year ending June 2014 - or some combination of increased revenues or decreased expenditures — to simply maintain this year’s spending plan. As noted throughout the Introduction & Summary, next year’s Budget is already expected to be significantly higher than this year’s Recommended Budget.
HHS Substance Abuse Disorders
If the Community Corrections Partnership votes to update the Community Corrections Plan to support funding a new CCP Addictions Counselor position, and the budget for the new Plan is approved by your Board of Supervisors, the HHS Substance Use Disorder budget will need to be amended to provide funding for the position. As noted above, this Recommended Budget supports increasing the department’s authorized staffing to create this position in anticipation of these budget amendments.
JALAN Criminal Justice Records Software
The Superior Court has informed the County that it has onetime funding to upgrade the JALAN software system used by the Court (as well as the Probation department and District Attorney’s office) to manage criminal justice cases, and has signed a contract with a vendor to accomplish this. To ensure continued integrated criminal justice case management database functionality, it is preferred that the County negotiate, execute and implement a contract with the same vendor to upgrade the JALAN software for the Probation department and District Attorney’s office. In addition to impacting already overly- subscribed staff resources, there are no funds identified to accomplish this in the Recommended Budget. Staff from Information Services, the Probation department, and District Attorney’s office will be meeting with the Court and its vendors to discuss a timeline, funding and staff resources necessary to upgrade the County’s portion of the system simultaneously. Once these issues have been addressed, and a contract negotiated, the budget will need to be amended to fund the cost of the conversion.
State Funded Roads
The Stated Funded Roads budget does not include grants the department anticipates applying for and receiving but which, at this time, are not “funding certain.” As these grants materialize, the budget will need to be amended, and matching funds may need to be identified.
Telephone System Replacement Project
As noted above, the CAO Recommended Budget does not add funding to the Computer System Fund, which is currently being used to budget this year’s appropriations for the Property Tax Management System project. However, this Fund was established to provide a source of funding for a host of other technological initiatives (or other projects). During the year, it may be necessary to consider using this Fund to pay for the cost of replacing the County’s outdated, unsupported, and failing telephone system (with Voice Over Internet Protocol, or some other technology) or other County needs.
Water
As noted above, once the Water department works with Personnel to create a new Research Assistant job description, the Water department budget will need to be amended to fund the position. The Recommended Budget supports increasing the department’s authorized staffing to create this position contingent on financing.
Outstanding Issues
In addition to the usual pitfalls and landmines that can positively or negatively impact any budget, there are several specific issues your Board of Supervisors is urged be remain cognizant about relative to the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Budget as well as future County Budgets:
	The new, higher, baselines for certain revenue streams, including Hotel Transient Occupancy Tax receipts, included in this year’s Budget continue to mean there is less room for error in revenue projections and attainment. There could be less additional “unanticipated” revenue available at the end of the year to make up for shortfalls stemming from under-achieved revenue in other areas of the Budget. This could affect Fund Balance available to balance next year’s Budget.
	The potential for ongoing economic instability still exists.
	The County needs to develop and implement strategies to reduce the amount of future General Fund monies that are, or may be  
required to support its enterprise funds and programs funded with categorical monies, such as the Town Water Systems, the Solid Waste program, and the Bishop Airport. While not easy, making these programs self-sustaining is, perhaps, the primary aspect of this and future budgets over which your Board of Supervisors has the greatest ability to positively affect General Fund expenses and for future budget stability.
	The County is in labor contract negotiations with the Inyo County Employees Association (ICEA) Law Enforcement Administrators Association (LEAA), Elected Official Assistants Association (EOAA), Inyo County Probation Peace Officers Association (ICPPOA), and Inyo County Correctional Officers Association (ICCOA). While the Recommended Budget makes no provisions for decreases in the amounts associated with these contracts, it only identifies $438,515 to fund General Fund cost increases associated with implementing any new contracts that get approved this year.
	Proposition IB road funds were, as required, expended by the end of last Fiscal Year. Since their receipt, these funds have been used to help cash flow other County road projects. Without these funds, it will be necessary to rely on Road Fund Balance to cash flow all County projects in the future. As such, it is critical that the Public Works department monitor its Road Fund Balance, and manage the Road budget with an awareness of potential implications on Fund Balance and cash flow.
	Due to its funding dilemmas faced by the Superior Court of Inyo County, the Court is in the process of re-negotiating its current Memorandum of Understanding with the County to reduce, or cap the Court’s reimbursement of services the County provides to the Court. Most notably, this process could affect the funding the Sheriff receives for providing mandated Court security (e.g., bailiffs) services, but could also affect revenues the County receives for providing payroll services, custodial services, some personnel and benefits administration services.
Additionally, the State Administrative Office of the Courts (AOC) and the Public Works department need to develop a new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for the provision of maintenance services for Court operations in the Historic Courthouse. There is currently no MOU in place, and the County is essentially providing services to the State (which is responsible for all Court operations) for free. Execution of the Maintenance MOU could result in the County realizing additional revenues consistent with the actual costs of providing maintenance services to the Courts, and offset General Fund expense in the Maintenance - Building & Grounds budget. No revenues from these maintenance services are presently included in the Recommended Budget.
	While mitigated somewhat by the new photovoltaic electricity project installed at County buildings in Independence, uncertainty over fuel and utility costs continue to have the potential to adversely affect revenues (e.g., airport fuel costs) and expenses planned for in the Recommended Budget.
	It is likely that Indian Gaming Special Distribution Funds will again be made available from the State and, if so, might be obtained to offset costs already budgeted and attributable to Indian gaming or other Tribal impacts. In Fiscal Year 2012- 2013, the Sheriff’s budget benefitted from an additional $49,167 from the Indian Gaming grant, funded by the Paiute Palace Casino, recognized during the Third Quarter Financial Review. No SDF revenue is currently included in the Recommended Budget and, if it is received, every effort should be made to use these funds to off-set current, eligible expenses before appropriating it for new expenses.
	Policy issues and impacts of suspended State mandates still need to be evaluated on a department-by-department basis in discussions with your Board. To date, only the Clerk-Recorder has brought such an item forward. Depending on your Board’s disposition toward these suspended mandates, there could be some budgetary savings if your Board elects to forego maintaining compliance with the former mandates.
	As departments continue to apply for various grants, it is important to emphasize that these new grants be used to off-set ongoing costs or reduce the cost of implementing one-time projects whenever possible.
	As State and Federal funding becomes more scarce, and costs continue to increase, the County needs to continue to revisit its own schedule of fees - preferably in a comprehensive manner - to ensure that they cover a reasonable portion of the cost of providing services.
	The Environmental Health department will lose $20,000 in EPA grant funding relied upon to off-set General Fund expense in this year’s Budget, and fund other initiatives. If new grant funds do not materialize this will impact the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget.
	As highlighted last year by the proposed Hidden Hills Solar Electric Generating System project, ongoing issues related to the use of Inyo County’s natural resources - ranging from renewable energy facility siting to the Inyo National Forest Management Plan Update; from critical habitat designations to water export; from Wilderness designations to other federal land use decisions - will continue to require a dedication of time and resources this Budget may or may not be able to fully support.
LOOKING AHEAD
In addition to the Outstanding Issues described above, there are two specific issues that require your Board of Supervisors’ ongoing consideration^
Criminal Justice Realignment
The impacts of Criminal Justice Realignment (AB 109) continue to present significant fiscal, public safety, and even social challenges, as well as opportunities, to the County and the community we serve. This year, the State will establish the permanent AB 109 allocation formula the will determine the permanent funding levels counties will receive, beginning in Fiscal Year 2014-2015, for funding realigned criminal justice programs. It is critical that the County, to the extent practical, fully participate in, and advocate for its interest during the development of the permanent allocation formula. This will require a concerted effort by your Board, working with affected County departments - Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney, Health & Human Services, and Administration - as well as community partners including the Court, City of Bishop, local Tribes, and contract public defenders.
Additionally, the Criminal Justice Realignment principles adopted as part of the Fiscal Year 2011-2012 Budget, and reaffirmed in last year’s Board Approved Budget, should be revisited and reaffirmed  
again as part of adopting this and future years’ Budgets. These principles include-
	Future modifications and amendments to the Community Corrections Plan must he implemented within Criminal Justice Realignment funding constructs; otherwise Criminal Justice Realignment risks becoming, essentially, to some degree an unfunded State mandate that could require your Board of Supervisors to consider taking money away from other County needs.
	Reject any Community Corrections Plan (4/5thsvote required) that cannot be implemented (e.g., demonstrate adequate budget) with public safety realignment funding provided by the State, or County monies your Board is willing to re- appropriate from other programs.
	Require County public safety and human services departments to absorb costs associated with implementing public safety realignment within their existing budgets. If we are really talking about changing the way we conduct the business of criminal justice and rehabilitation, and not simply expanding the criminal justice industrial complex, then costs associated with old programming methodologies should give way to new ones. If your Board of Supervisors accepts community corrections plans that simply add layers of new infrastructure instead of re - structuring and re - integrating existing infrastructure, there will never be enough money to fund this endeavor.
	Continue to utilize a centralized budget (as is again included in the year’s Budget) and/or cost centers to manage funds; consider having involved departments submit quarterly billings for pre-approved costs as opposed to simply transferring funds into those departments’ budgets.
Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget
Balancing the Fiscal year 2013-2014 CAO Recommended Budget relies on $3,833,348 in General Fund Balance; possibly an all- time high of $940,085 in General Fund salary savings; aggressive use of key Trusts, including AB 443 and Geothermal Royalties funds to offset expenses that would otherwise burden the General Fund; and,  
less conservative revenue projections than relied upon in past budgets. The County is fortunate to have these fiscal options as a means to continue funding core County services and programs embodied by this spending plan. However, even without inevitable cost increases, reliance on these sources is not sustainable. And, cost increases are inevitable.
This year’s Budget includes $438,515 in contingency funding to pay for increases in salaries and benefits costs that could result from current negotiations with five employee bargaining units. This amount should be sufficient if any new labor contracts result in similar terms for cost-of-living-adjustments and healthcare cost sharing to those featured in the Memorandum of Understanding recently agreed to with the Deputy Sheriffs’ Associations, and the contracts are implemented at intervals between October 1st and January 1st.
However, while these potential labor cost increases are accounted for in this year’s Budget, the same assumptions will result in a $1,885,392 increase in General Fund expense in the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 Budget, and a $4,511,791 General Fund cost increase in the Fiscal Year 2015-2016 Budget. The cost calculations for these outlying years include the costs of the already approved DSA contract, but do not attempt to project increases in employment retirement costs (which, by the way, will need to begin being reported as a liability similar to retiree healthcare costs). Hopefully, it is obvious that the means used to balance this year’s Budget cannot to be duplicated to cover these expenses without significantly increased revenues and/or reductions in costs.
CONCLUSION
Preparing the County Budget is a long and, sometimes, arduous process. Challenging decisions have to be made. Submitting a balanced County Budget could not be accomplished without the support, cooperation, and understanding of all County departments, and especially not without the untiring and dedicated work of the CAO’s Budget Analyst, Randi Chegwidden, as well as the assistance provided by the County’s new Auditor-Controller, Amy Shepherd, her staff, and staff in the County Administrator’s Office; particularly Kelley Williams and Brandon Shults. Thank you.
I want to close by encouraging the Board to adopt the CAO Recommended Budget, which is balanced, strives to maintain all of the Board of Supervisors’ priorities, does not result in any layoffs, and supports existing service levels in core programs.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
	Adopt the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Budget as Recommended by the County Administrator and presented herein.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize and direct the County Administrator and Auditor Controller to approve and make payments, greater than $10,000 to Inter-Agency Visitor Center, Cal Expo Exhibit and Tri-County Fairgrounds as provided for in the Advertising County Resources budget.
	In adopting the Final Budget, authorize and direct the County Administrator to develop and execute contracts with all Grants* In-Support program funding recipients identified in the Grants* In-Support Budget.
	Set adoption of the Final Budget for September 17, 2013.
(Note: The September 17, 2013, date for approval of the County Budget is dependent on completion of the Budget Hearings by September 11th and staffs ability to incorporate any changes directed by your Board into the Final Budget Agenda Request Form. If Budget Hearings last longer, or result in substantial changes that need to be implemented, the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 County Budget will need to be adopted at the Board of Supervisors meeting on September 24th or October 1st.


