The proposed FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget is submitted for your consideration. The recommended
budget represents the deliberation of impacts, consequences and alternatives by departmental and County
Administrative Office staff. The budget was prepared in accordance with the Board's approved budget
development guidelines and with consideration of the County's vision "to create and maintain a customercentered
County government designed to garner the confidence, support and trust of the people we serve."
This document includes the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budgets for the County, Board Governed Special
Districts and Other Agencies governed by the Board of Supervisors. The County departments have
provided performance measures based on goals and objectives identified in the County's Strategic Plan.
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget of $2. 7 billion is balanced and is consistent with policy direction
received from the Board of Supervisors. Carefully planned, controlled expenditures and the set-aside of
one-time funds for future use over several years have enabled the County to respond to economic
instability and unforeseen major fiscal impacts such as a new Animal Services facility and operational
shortfalls at the Kern Medical Center. As a result, the County continues to be in a stable fiscal condition.
However, the years ahead will be challenging as the County budget must absorb increased retirement
costs and new jail facility staffing.
The primary goal in developing the recommended budget has been to: 1) keep most discretionary and
public protection programs as intact as possible; 2) appropriate resources to quality of life programs; 3)
provide funding to prevent further deterioration of the physical infrastructure on which many services
depend, and 4) maintain reserves that meet the County's known cost increases and liabilities. Achieving
this balance continues to be a challenge. Almost without exception, the budget and staffing levels
recommended by the County Administrative Office are consistent with the relative budget priorities
identified by the department heads. County department heads, appointed and elected alike, have worked
diligently and cooperatively with County Administrative Office staff in a team effort to forge a balanced
budget that minimizes adverse impacts on direct services to the public.
THE BUDGET IN BRIEF
The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget for all funds totals $2.7 billion, an increase of $87.1 million, or
3.3% from the FY 2013-14 Adopted Budget. The General Fund, which funds most County operations,
totals $780.7 million, an increase of $.2 million, or .03%. The budget supports a workforce of almost
9, 142 authorized positions and reflects a net increase of 14 positions.
The recommended budget includes funding to provide mandated and essential services, meet debt service
obligations, maintain a minimum level of infrastructure and capital funding, and adhere to the Board’s
financial management policies. The budget again seeks to balance spending between services and capital
needs and was developed with emphasis on isolating one-time resources for application to one-time
expenditures or reserves wherever possible to promote long-term fiscal stability.
COUNTYWIDE DISCRETIONARY RESOURCES
Countywide discretionary revenue for the General Fund is budgeted at $391 million, which is $12.3
million or 3.2% more than the FY 2013-14 Adjusted Budget. A significant portion of discretionary
revenue is comprised of property taxes and sales and use taxes.
Total property tax assessments increased by 5.6% from FY 2013-14 contributing to an increase in
property related revenue of $12.4 million. Sales and use tax and sales tax/property tax swap base revenue
estimates for FY 2014-15 total $45 million which is $4 million less than the FY 2013-14 Adjusted
Budget. The County received approximately $4 million in unanticipated sales tax last fiscal year primarily
generated by one-time construction of major wind energy and solar projects. As anticipated, this
construction activity has substantially slowed and revenues are stabilizing to normal levels. Petroleum
products and equipment, in addition to automobile sales, continue to produce strong base receipts for the
County.
Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds have significantly increased since FY 2012-13 from one-time
construction activity as well, as this revenue source is generated by a half-cent sales tax. This revenue
continues to be pivotal in meeting the increased budget requests from public safety departments. In FY
2014-15, public safety departments are estimated to receive $77 million which is $2.6 million more than
in FY 2013-14. The increase in allocation is associated to one-time carry forward from FY 2013-14. The
revenue levels for this funding source are anticipated to stabilize to normal levels over the next two years.
A portion of the one-time fund balance carry-forward at June 30, 2014 for this fund was recommended to
be set-aside to mitigate the anticipated decline in future revenue.
The General Fund’s fund balance carry-forward available from the fiscal year ending June 30, 2014 was
$37.2 million which is nearly $27 million less than the prior fiscal year. The net fund balance carryforward,
which excludes the re-budget of Budget Incentive Savings credits and capital and major
maintenance projects, was $25.3 million. As fund balance carry-forward is a one-time source, these funds
were recommended for one-time projects and specific purpose designations.
NET COUNTY COST
For FY 2014-15, departments that receive an allocation of Net County Cost were requested to submit
budgets with up to a 5% reduction of Net County Cost from FY 2013-14 to mitigate an anticipated new
ongoing operational County contribution to the Kern Medical Center of at least $10 million. The
reduction of allocations to departments generated $9.3 million, or 2.4% in savings that was re-allocated to
Kern Medical Center.
Reserves, designations and contingencies are a vital component of Net County Cost to mitigate future
known and unknown liabilities and capital needs. The recommended budget for the General Fund isolates
approximately $8.3 million in the Appropriation for Contingencies to earmark funds against unexpected
future costs or costs that are identified after the County budget is adopted. In addition, $33 million in
contributions to reserves and designations brings General Fund reserve balances to nearly $111 million.
The most significant contribution to a designation is $20.3 million for the KMC Working Capital to set
aside funds for the total amount of an outstanding liability to the State owed by the hospital. Other
contributions towards reserves and designations are as follows:
Designation for Department of Human Services: $16.5 million ($998,848 increase) — The
designation for the Department of Human Services (DHS) sets aside funds to stabilize future
contributions to DHS that fund mandated local match and serve as working capital for an ongoing
cash advance from the General Fund due to time lags of State and federal receipts. With this
contribution, the balance is $16,452,848.
Designation for Retirement Contributions: $9.7 million ($1.6 million increase) — This reserve
earmarks funds to mitigate known increases to the County’s retirement contribution for
employees including pension obligation bond payments in future years. The projected increase in
County retirement contribution for FY 2015-16 is $16.8 million.
Designation for Information Technology Projects $5.4 million ($5 million increase) — This
designation earmarks funds for information technology projects such as the Criminal Justice
Information System, Financial Management System and several others.
Designation for Infrastructure Replacement $9.7 million ($4.4 million increase) — This
designation earmarks funds for capital asset replacement and was established primarily with onetime
construction sales tax receipts in FY 2012-13. In addition, 50% of the increment from
property taxes attributable to wind energy property valuations is deposited to this account
annually.
Designation for East Kern Revitalization Area $352,289 ($346,982 increase) — This
designation supports the Renewable Energy Neighborhood Enhancement Wind Business
Investment Zone (RENEWBIZ) approved by the Board in December 2012. The program is
intended to encourage and promote economic reinvestment and revitalization in communities
within the Second District impacted by wind energy property. The program is funded through the
set aside of a percentage of property tax increment generated from the wind energy properties.
Designation for Blight Remediation $1.2 million ($1.2 million increase) — This designation is
intended to assist communities with addressing blight through projects recommended by the Code
Enforcement Department. The program is funded through the set aside of a percentage of
property tax increment generated from the wind energy properties.
WORKFORCE CHANGES AND EMPLOYEE COSTS
Budgeted staffing recommended for FY 2014-15 is 9,142, an increase of 14 positions from the FY 2013-
14 Adjusted Budget. General Fund staffing is decreasing by six positions primarily due to departments
deleting positions that have been vacant and unfunded for the past several years. This decrease is offset by
a total of 20 positions to be added for Child Support Services, Aging and Adult Services, and the Fire
Department that are not in the General Fund. The General Fund budget does include five new positions
for the Coroner and Public Administrator functions of the Sheriff Department. The County’s overall cost
for employees’ salaries and benefits is projected to be $1.027 billion which is a decrease of approximately
$9 million from the FY 2013-14 Adjusted Budget and is reflected in each department’s budget. The
decrease is primarily the result of General Fund departments holding positions vacant and unfunded to
achieve reductions in Net County Cost.
KERN MEDICAL CENTER
Kern Medical Center (KMC) posed significant challenges for the General Fund in FY 2013-14. The
hospital ended the year with a $26.7 million deficit, of which $25.8 million was resolved through two
separate contributions from the General Fund ($13 million in October 2013 and $12.8 million in June
2014). The remaining shortfall of approximately $930,000 is included in the Net County Cost allocation
for the hospital in FY 2014-15. In addition to the General Fund contributions for operational shortfalls at
the medical center, $24.9 million of KMC’s General Fund loan balance was deemed non-spendable in FY
2013-14 and $3.8 million of the loan was written off. The outstanding General Fund loan to the hospital
enterprise fund as of June 30, 2014 was $61.3 million, a decrease of $24.1 million from the prior year.
In FY 2014-15 the County General Fund is making a contribution to Kern Medical Center to support the
hospital’s routine operations, fund several capital projects deemed critical to the medical center’s future
success, and true up the hospital’s losses for the months of May and June in FY 2013-14. In total, $13.4
million will be allocated to the hospital with $10 million earmarked to fund day-to-day operations and
approximately $2.6 million set aside for the seismic reclassification project, G-Wing decommissioning
project, pediatric remodel, medical records improvement, and Phase I of the information systems rewire
and nurse call system. The remaining funds of approximately $930,000 will cover the hospital’s prior
year losses in May and June 2014.
Additionally, using one-time resources in the General Fund, $20.3 million is set-aside in the KMC
Working Capital designation of the General Fund in FY 2014-15 for payments owed to the State for prior
year Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) overpayments made to the medical center. The set-aside of
these funds was intended to minimize the potential future budgetary impacts on other County departments
due to this liability.
STATE BUDGET IMPACT
On June 20, 2014 Governor Brown signed his $156 billion FY 2014-15 budget, which includes $107.8
billion in State General Fund expenditures, a 7% increase over last year, and a $2.1 billion reserve. The
budget represents a modest surplus that allows for some restoration of prior year reductions and early loan
repayment opportunities.
The Governor's budget plan contains a statewide reduction of $87.2 million in AB 109 Public Safety
Realignment funding available to county Community Correction Partnerships in FY 2014-15. This
includes a reduction to the AB 109 base allocation and an assumed AB 109 growth projection that is less
than the amount received in FY 2013-14. Based on the current methodology, this will result in a reduction of $1.8 million in base funding and $2.3 million in growth funding available to the County in
FY 2014-15.
The State budget addresses the continued implementation of Federal Health Care Reform and its impact
on 1991 Realignment funding and the County health care programs. 1991 Health Realignment funding
has been impacted with the State implementation of the optional Medi-Cal expansion under the federal
Affordable Care Act. Health Realignment allocations will be reduced since the State assumes counties
will achieve savings from the expanded eligibility. In FY 2013-14, the State reduced the County's Health
Realignment by $4.3 million. In FY 2014-15, the reduction will only be $3 million. The recommended
budget includes sufficient resources to carry out the health programs and services for County residents.
The budget includes a scheduled decrease in the gasoline tax rate beginning July 1, 2014. Based on this
decreased rate, the County stands to lose $780,000 in funds available for the Roads Fund. The
department has indicated that there are no significant service level impacts for FY 2014-15 but anticipates
fewer transportation projects will be funded in future budgets.
Finally, the State budget includes repayment to local agencies towards amounts owed for mandated
services performed prior to 2004. Of the $900 million in statewide pre-2004 mandate obligations, the
County is owed $12.4 million of which it is anticipated the County will receive $1.2 million in FY 2014-
15.
FEDERAL BUDGET IMPACT
The County receives revenue from the federal government’s Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT) program.
The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-343) enacted on October 3, 2008
authorized full funding of the PILT program from 2008 through 2012, and the Moving Ahead for
Progress in the 21st Century Act (Public Law 112-141) provided funding for 2013. The program was
funded under the Agriculture Act of 2014 (Public Law 113-79) for FY 2013-14, which generated
approximately $2.4 million in PILT payments to the County. Although scheduled to end in 2013, the
President’s fiscal year 2015 budget proposes to extend mandatory full funding level for PILT for another
year while a sustainable long-term funding solution is developed.
MAJOR PROGRAM HIGHLIGHTS
Despite Net County Cost reductions for most General Fund departments, the recommended budget does
not propose layoffs or significant program reductions. The highlights of departmental budgets by
functional area are discussed below.
Public Protection
Protecting public safety remains the top priority of the recommended budget for the County. Budgets for
public protection departments total $895.6 million, or 33.5% of the County’s total budget and receive
nearly 54% of the total Net County Cost allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for public
protection departments total $405 million, or 65.4% of total General Fund spending authority. Staffing for
these departments total 3,437, a net increase of 13 positions from FY 2013-14.
The Sheriff’s budget is recommended at a $2.2 million increase in Net County Cost from the FY 2013-14
Adjusted Budget while most other County departments incurred reductions. The primary issue for this
department was the loss of two program funding streams; $654,000 in revenue from federal prisoners and
$2.3 million in grant funding for Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS). The allocation of
additional ongoing Discretionary General Funding is recommended to maintain the current level of law
enforcement services provided by the department. The budget also includes the addition of five new positions for the Coroner and Public Administrator functions the Sheriff deems mission critical for an
ongoing cost of $442,230 and $1 million for the purchase of up to 20 patrol vehicles to maintain its fleet.
The Probation Department also incurred a major program revenue loss, specifically related to Title VI –E
foster care revenue totaling $3 million. To mitigate the loss and manage to the Net County Cost reduction,
the department received an increase of Prop 172 funding and was able to identify reductions in salary and
benefits appropriation by not funding vacant positions resulting in no significant service level impacts for
FY 2014-15.
The District Attorney – Forensic Sciences Division budget is recommended at a $357,335 increase in Net
County Cost from the FY 2013-14 Adjusted Budget. The department indicated major service level
impacts at the proposed 5% reduction of Net County Cost which would have resulted in one layoff and
holding several other mission critical positions vacant. The allocation of additional ongoing Discretionary
General Funding is recommended to maintain the current level of laboratory services provided by the
department.
The Fire Department’s recommended budget will allow the department to maintain staffing levels and to
purchase $3 million in equipment. A higher than anticipated fund balance available within the Fire Fund
at fiscal year-end and an increase in property tax revenue estimates have enabled the department to absorb
the 5% reduction in Net County Cost without service impacts. The recommended budget provides
sufficient funding for the department to enhance administrative staffing by adding three new positions, in
addition to continuing three-person staffing at County fire stations. The department was able to absorb the
loss of Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant funding of $3.5 million to
continue to support the 30 additional staff added in FY 2012-13.
Public Assistance
Budgets for public assistance departments total $538.4 million, or 20.1% of the County’s total budget and
receive nearly 4% of the total Net County Cost allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for
public assistance departments total $14 million, or 2.2% of total General Fund spending authority.
Staffing for these departments total 1,794, a net increase of 7 positions from FY 2013-14.
The Department of Human Services (DHS) comprises the largest budget for the public assistance
functional area at $196 million for Administration and $205 million for Direct Aid. The recommended
budget for DHS - Administration includes an increase in other charges of $5.8 million due primarily to
the launch of the Expanded Subsidized Employment Program. The budget continues to include$560,000
funding for expanded Phase 1 Differential Response services provided by the Kern County Network for
Children. The recommended budget for DHS – Direct Aid includes a $12.6 million increase in
expenditures over FY 2013-14 as a result of the ongoing 5% increase in CalWORKs grant funding which
began March 1, 2014 that will help to mitigate the cost impact of Assembly Bill 12 (AB 12), which
extends foster care services to transitional youth to age 21.
Health and Sanitation
Budgets for health and sanitation departments total $734 million, or 27.4% of the County’s total budget
and receive nearly 10% of the total Net County Cost allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations
for health and sanitation departments total $45 million, or 7.1% of total General Fund spending authority.
Staffing for these departments total 1,794, a net increase of 7 positions from FY 2013-14.
The Kern Medical Center enterprise fund is the largest health and sanitation department with a spending
plan of $329 million. The fund is recommended to receive a new ongoing County contribution of $10
million for operations and one-time funding for identified capital needs of $2.2 million. This fund
continues to have a major impact on the resources of the General Fund as discussed under the Kern
Medical Center section of this message.
Education, Recreation and Community Programs
The Library’s recommended funding level allows the department to maintain current levels of service,
including an additional allocation of Net County Cost of $200,000 for the continuance of an extra one day
of operation at each library facility. The budget includes $258,000 for books and materials which is
$25,000 more than last fiscal year.
The Parks and Recreation recommended funding level allows the department to maintain current levels of
service to maintain eight regional and forty neighborhood parks with recreational facilities that include
lakes, campgrounds, group picnic areas, playgrounds, bike trails and ball fields. To mitigate the 5%
reduction of Net County Cost, the department reduced appropriation for the potential privatization
projects in outlying areas that were not yet finalized. Therefore, there are no service level impacts at this
time.
Several contributions to community programs are included in the recommended budget. The Special
Services’ budget provides funding totaling $730,000 to organizations, such as the Volunteer Center of
Kern County, Arts Council of Kern, Bakersfield Museum of Art, Bakersfield Symphony, Center for Blind
and Visually Impaired, China Lake Alliance, Community Action Partnership of Kern County (CAPK),
Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA), Southwest Defense Alliance, Valley Fever Vaccine Project,
Greater Antelope Valley Economic Alliance, Kern Adult Literacy Council, and the California State
University, Bakersfield – Small Business Development Center.
RENEWING INFRASTRUCTURE IN AN ERA OF FISCAL CONSTRAINT
Equipment and infrastructure are essential to the long-term quality of services to the people of Kern
County. The County Administrative Office prioritizes requests for capital projects and equipment in the
following order: legally mandated, health and safety, preventive maintenance, cost reduction, and extent
of direct public use or benefit. Fiscal constraints over the past several years have forced the County to
defer many pressing capital and maintenance needs for roads, parks, fire protection, and other important
services to the public.
As part of the County’s long-term fiscal plan, one-time sources such as fund balance carry-forward is
isolated to capital and major maintenance projects and reserve or designation. In addition, the Board of
Supervisors approved the ongoing set-aside of 50% of property tax increment generated from wind
energy properties for infrastructure replacement for both the General and Fire Funds. The balance of the
Infrastructure Replacement designation in the General Fund is $9.4 million.
The recommended budget includes five new capital projects and four re-budgeted projects totaling $15.5
million and 34 new major maintenance projects such as the reroof or paving of several County facilities
totaling $8 million. Several projects have revenue sources resulting in a Net County Cost of $5 million
for all projects in FY 2014-15.
MITIGATING FUTURE CHALLENGES
The past several years have challenged your Board's ability to achieve fiscal sustainability and provide for
the increasing demand for public services. While countywide discretionary revenue is improving, the
County is facing retirement cost increases, the loss of public safety funding, fiscal uncertainty related to
the Kern Medical Center and future costs related to staffing a new jail facility. In the coming years, the
County faces the challenge of continuing to provide quality services to its residents while managing the
impacts of revenues not increasing sufficiently to cover increased costs. Accordingly, we look to avoid
one-time funding solutions and steer a course that leads the County toward ongoing revenues that adequately fund needed services while setting aside reserves for addressing deferred infrastructure
maintenance, future economic downturns and other unexpected costs.
Retirement Costs
Retirement costs are anticipated to increase due to amortization of the unfunded actuarial accrued liability
as a result of market losses incurred by the County’s pension system. The County’s five year forecast
also anticipates an increase in the average employer contribution rate as a result of recently approved
actuarial assumption changes that include changing investment return assumption from 7.75% to 7.5%,
updating the mortality table and the introduction explicit administrative expenses. These changes result in
additional ongoing costs of $22 million. In addition, the debt service payments for the County’s Pension
Obligation Bonds are scheduled to escalate through FY 2021-22, when one of the Pension Obligation
Bonds will be fully paid. In anticipation of the budgetary impact from the escalating bond payments, the
County has set aside a designation for retirement with a current balance of $9.7 million that could be used
towards mitigating General Fund departmental budget impacts in the future. In addition to use of the
designation for retirement, it is anticipated that General Fund departments will have to absorb cost
increases that may result in service level impacts.
New Jail Facility
In FY 2017-18, the County anticipates funding the staff necessary to operate a new jail facility. The
Sheriff has indicated that the staffing costs estimated at $27.5 million could be mitigated by temporarily
moving current staff from certain areas of the Lerdo Minimum jail facility to reduce some of the cost until
the Lerdo facility is remodeled, which would generate an estimated $7 million in savings for a net initial
cost of $20.5 million. The County is also analyzing the prospect of up to a half-cent sales tax increase to
help mitigate this cost. If no other resources are identified, it is anticipated that a reduction of 7% - 10%
of Net County Cost allocation to other County departments including front-line law enforcement would
be necessary.
Loss of Public Safety Funding
In FY 2014-15, the cumulative loss of federal and grant funding for three public safety departments total
$9.5 million annually. The Community Oriented Policing Services grant funding of $2.3 million and the
federal prisoner funding of $654,000 for the Sheriff, the Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency
Response grant funding of $3.5 million for the Fire Department and the federal Title IV-E funding of $3
million for Probation fund numerous safety positions that are ongoing costs for the County. The loss of
these resources was partially offset in FY 2014-15 by an increase in allocation of Proposition 172 funding
that are unlikely to be sustainable. If the positions associated to the limited term grant funding and federal
funding are retained and no other resources are identified, it is anticipated that a reduction of Net County
Cost allocation to other County departments may be necessary in the future.
Sales Tax Volatility
Historically it has been assumed that counties are more reliant on relatively stable property taxes for the
provision of services, however, with the realignment of many State services, counties have become
increasingly dependent on sales tax revenue. When combining 1991 and 2011 Realignment revenues,
which are primarily funded with sales tax ($255 million), County sales tax ($45 million) and Proposition
172 half cent sales taxes ($77 million), the portion of budget requirements funded primarily with sales tax
represents 13.79% of the County budget. Approximately $179 million of this revenue is allocated to
services specifically in the General Fund which equates to 23% of the General Fund’s budget. While sales
taxes are not projected to decrease in FY 2014-15, they tend to be much more volatile and more
responsive to economic changes, resulting in a higher risk of losses in future years.
Conclusion
The County must again seek to balance the allocation of resources between ongoing service needs, quality of life programs and the maintenance and renewal of facilities and equipment that support those services. The FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget is balanced within available resources and reflects a collective sustainable approach to providing services in the future. The budget meets the most important needs of the people of Kern County and fulfills the County’s legal mandate to protect public health and safety. As you conduct public hearings and deliberate on the FY 2014-15 Recommended Budget, your Board’s leadership and strong fiscal management will assist the County in once again maintaining that critical balance between service demands and limited financial resources.
At the August Budget Hearings, members of the public are invited to comment to your Board on the budget recommendations presented here. The County Administrative Office will work closely with your Board and with County departments to resolve budget issues and to enact a budget that meets the County’s legal obligations and the needs of the people of Kern County.