The proposed FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is submitted for your consideration. The recommended
budget is the product of thorough deliberation by the County's department and Administrative Office staff
regarding the impacts, consequences and alternatives of various budgetary actions. The budget was
prepared in accordance with statutory requirements of the County Budget Act, the Board's approved
budget development guidelines and with consideration of the County's vision '"to create and maintain a
customer-centered County government designed to gamer the confidence, support and trust of the people
we serve." The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is submitted balanced and is consistent with the
strategic budget plan approved by your Board.
This document includes the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budgets for the County, Board Governed Special
Districts and Other Agencies governed by the Board of Supervisors. County departments have provided
performance measures based on goals and objectives identified in the County's Strategic Plan.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget of $2.5 billion is balanced and is consistent with policy direction
received from the Board of Supervisors. Carefully planned and controlled expenditures as well as setasides
of one-time funds for future use over several years have enabled the County to limit service
reductions to the public despite economic instability and unforeseen major fiscal impacts. The years
ahead will continue to challenge the County budget, which must absorb the loss of property tax revenue
from oil and gas properties, increased retirement costs and new jail facility staffing.
The primary goals in developing the recommended budget have been to: 1) maintain public protection as
a priority; 2) appropriate resources to quality of life programs; 3) provide funding to prevent further
deterioration of the physical infrastructure on which many services depend, and 4) maintain reserves that
meet the County's known cost increases and liabilities. Although achieving this balance continues to be a
challenge, the budget and staffing levels recommended by the County Administrative Office are
consistent with the budget priorities identified by the department heads. County department heads, both
appointed and elected alike, have worked diligently and cooperatively with County Administrative Office
staff to forge a balanced budget that minimizes adverse impacts on direct services to the public. The
Sheriffs Office and the District Attorney are requesting consideration of additional funding above the
recommended funding level. The Sheriffs Office requests funding to hold a training academy for Sheriff
Deputy Trainees for a cost of $1.3 million and an additional allocation of $3 million to mitigate service
level impacts. The District Attorney's Office is requesting funding to fill three Deputy District Attorney I
positions to prosecute misdemeanor cases for a cost of $360,000. These departments will be presenting
their requests at the budget hearings.
THE BUDGET IN BRIEF

The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for all funds totals $2.5 billion, a decrease of $545.2 million, or 17.82% from the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget. The General Fund, which funds many County operations, totals $787 million, a decrease of $121.9 million, or 13.41%. The budget in total supports a workforce of 7,682 authorized positions and reflects a net decrease of 1,693 positions. A majority of the change in budget and positions is related to the transition of the County hospital to a separate legal entity.
The recommended budget includes funding to provide mandated and essential services, meet debt service obligations, maintain a minimum level of infrastructure and capital funding, and adhere to the Board’s financial management policies.	,

Countywide discretionary Resources

Countywide discretionary revenue for the General Fund is budgeted at $334 million, which is $38.8 million or 11.65% less than the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget. A significant portion of discretionary revenue is comprised of property taxes and sales and use taxes.

Total property tax assessments decreased by 4.3% from FY 2015-16 contributing to a decrease in property related revenue of $29.4 million. The reduction is the result of a decline in assessed value of oil and gas properties associated with the decline of the market price of oil. Sales and use tax base revenue estimates for FY 2016-17 total $39.7 million, which is $5.5 million less than the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget. Petroleum products and equipment, in addition to automobile sales, continue to produce strong base receipts for the County; however, the local economy is depressed due to job losses in the petroleum industry.

Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds have increased since FY 2012-13 primarily from wind and solar construction activity. This revenue, generated by a statewide half-cent sales tax, continues to be pivotal in meeting the increased budget requests from public safety departments. However, as wind and solar construction slows, this revenue source is anticipated to decline. In FY 2016-17, public safety departments are estimated to receive $78.7 million in Proposition 172 revenues, which is $800,000 less than in FY 2015-16. A portion of the one-time fund balance carry-forward at June 30, 2016 for this fund is recommended to be set aside to mitigate the anticipated decline in future revenue.
The General Fund’s fund balance carry-forward available from the fiscal year ending June 30, 2016 was $41.7 million, which is $35.8 million less than the prior fiscal year. Included in the fund balance carryforward is a set-aside of $3 million of non-spendable fund balance associated with a cash advance to the new jail project during construction necessitated by delays in reimbursement from the State. The net General Fund fund balance carry-forward, which excludes the re-budget of Budget Incentive Savings credits and capital and major maintenance projects, was $23.6 million. The fund balance carry-forward, is a one-time source that is typically recommended for one-time projects and specific purpose designations. However, for FY 2016-17 this resource was allocated to operations to minimize service level impacts under a multi-year deficit mitigation plan.

County Fiscal Plan

Since FY 2014-15, the County has lost a total of $77 million in property tax revenue caused by the depressed market price of oil, resulting in budget deficits of $44.5 million for the General Fund and $17.5 million for the Fire Fund in FY 2016-17. Resolving these shortfalls and balancing the budgets would require 15% cuts for General Fund departments (assuming all departments received an equal cut) and a 7.2% cut for the Fire Department. The service level impacts of achieving the cost reductions in one year would be daunting for departments and the public. Therefore, the recommended budget proposes phasing in the reductions over a four-year period to allow management time to identify cost saving measures, including use of position attritions to minimize or avoid layoffs and, where possible, finding other revenue sources such as grants or improved formula driven State and federal allocations. The Four-Year Deficit Mitigation Plan calls for the temporary use of fund balance carry-forward and reserves in addition to the step-down of department Net County Cost allocations to bridge budget gaps. The plan results in a stable budget environment with no reliance on one-time resources for operations after four years.

The Board of Supervisors has been prudent in setting aside $83 million in reserves and designations over the past five years that will be instrumental in the ability to phase in spending reductions. The challenge looking forward will be the difficult task of prioritizing County services and programs for reduction or deletion to achieve fiscal sustainability. The County Administrative Office will continue working with departments to prioritize discretionary programs for consideration of reduced funding and identify areas where savings could be achieved countywide as the next fiscal year budget is developed. A strategic approach to future reductions will be necessary to best sustain the Board’s priorities, goals and objectives.

Net county cost

For FY 2016-17, departments that receive an allocation of Net County Cost were requested to submit budgets with up to a 5.0% reduction of Net County Cost from FY 2015-16 in order to mitigate a reduction in property tax revenue from the decline in oil and gas property assessments. These net adjustments to allocations to departments generated $15.3 million in savings that helped balance the budget.

Reserves, designations and contingencies are a vital component of Net County Cost that mitigates future known and unknown liabilities and capital needs. The recommended budget for the General Fund isolates approximately $9.4 million in the Appropriation for Contingencies to earmark funds against unexpected future costs or costs that are identified after the County budget is adopted. In addition, $6.4 million in contributions to reserves and designations brings General Fund reserve balances to nearly $145 million.

The most significant contribution to a designation is $6 million for the Department of Human Services (DHS) Working Capital to set aside funds for the ongoing cash flow needs of the department. The only other contribution increase is for the Designation for Road Improvement related to a mitigation agreement with Clean Harbors, Inc. It requires $400,000 of Hazardous Waste taxes that are paid by the business to be used for designated road improvements in a specific area until the improvements are complete. With the County facing a deficit budget, no other contributions to reserves are recommended.

Workforce changes and Employee Costs

Budgeted staffing recommended for FY 2016-17 is 7,682 positions, a decrease of 1,693 positions from the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget. The decrease results primarily from the transition of Kern Medical Center from a County Enterprise Fund to a separate legal entity known as the Kern County Flospital Authority. The transition included a transfer of 1,756 positions to the hospital authority. General Fund staffing is decreasing by 73 positions, primarily resulting from the transfer of 56 positions in the Environmental Health Services Division to a new special revenue fund. The County’s overall cost for employees’ salaries and benefits is projected to be $895 million, a decrease of approximately $189 million from the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget that is reflected in each department’s budget. The decrease is primarily a result of the Kern Medical Center transition, including Correctional Medicine.

Kern Medical Center

The County owned and operated Kern Medical Center for the past 149 years. Under the new Kern Medical Center leadership and in collaboration with multiple County departments the hospital was transferred to the Kern County Hospital Authority (Hospital Authority) July 1, 2016. 1,756 County employees transferred to this new legal entity as well. It is anticipated that under this new governance the hospital will continue to see operational and financial improvements that began in FY 2014-15 as a result of changes in payer mix spurred by expanded Medi-Cal eligibility under the Affordable Care Act, streamlined revenue cycle processes yielding enhanced patient cash collections, labor expense reductions and resizing of the hospital's labor force to match Kern Medical Center's fluctuating patient census.

The Hospital Authority was created after Governor Brown approved Assembly Bill 2546 which gave the County the authority to establish by ordinance, the Hospital Authority to manage, administer and control Kern Medical Center. The County will continue to retain ultimate responsibility for indigent medical care under Section 17000 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. The Hospital Authority will provide or arrange for health care services; the County is providing $4.6 million to cover the anticipated costs. The hospital will continue to provide the health care for the adult and juvenile inmates. A General Fund contribution of $23.6 million is included in the recommended budget.

State Budget Impact

The adopted FY 2016-17 State Budget projects the state will spend $166.5 billion on mandated programs and debt service with only $3.5 billion allocated for discretionary use. Early estimates suggest state revenue will be a combined $2.3 billion less in FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 due to decreasing personal income tax receipts and weaker sales tax collections. Proposition 30, the sales and income tax increase initiative approved by voters in 2012, is on the ballot again this November and voters will be given the choice to extend the Proposition 30 income tax rates for another 12 years.

Based on the state’s economic forecasts, a recession seems probable within the next few years. The State’s Budget, deposits $2 billion into the Rainy Day Fund; however, the fund will only reach 54% of its constitutional target this year. Without a Proposition 30 tax extension, California will have less ongoing tax revenue to support its current fixed commitments, meaning that a strong Rainy Day Fund will be a significant bulwark against devastating cuts if the state economy slides into a recession.

Over the next ten years, the state will implement a $36 billion transportation package of which $13.5 billion will be set aside for local roads. Although the transportation package will impose a new $65 Road Improvement Charge on all vehicles and stabilize the gasoline excise tax at 18 cents and adjust annually
for inflation to maintain purchasing power, the California State Association of Counties suggests city and county roads statewide will continue to deteriorate and the maintenance backlog will continue to grow unless an additional $3 billion in new funding is allocated to local streets and roads.

In FY 2016-17 the Governor also proposes to spend $3.1 billion from cap-and-trade auction revenue derived from the purchase of greenhouse gas emissions credits under Assembly Bill 32. Of that amount, approximately $1.2 billion is continuously appropriated to support public transit ($300 million), sustainable communities ($400 million), and high-speed rail ($500 million).

The Governor’s budget increases state general funds by $1 million for the Department of Water Resources to support local public agencies with facilitation services as they implement the Groundwater Act. Successful implementation depends on how well local public agencies coordinate and develop governance structures to meet the requirements of the Act. In addition, the budget increases state general funds by $1 million to support the use of remote sensing technology to establish statewide agricultural land use data aimed at supporting groundwater agencies in developing water budgets that ultimately balance water supply and use within basins.

Finally, the Governor’s budget includes funding for the latest iteration of the Section 1115 Waiver, known as “Medi-Cal 2020”. Over the next five years, the following core elements of the Waiver agreement include: Public Hospital Redesign and Incentives (PRIME) that will draw down $3.27 billion for designated public hospitals over the five year waiver; Global Payment Program (GPP) for designated public hospitals to serve the remaining uninsured valued at $ 1.2 billion over the five year waiver; Dental Transformation Initiative (DTI) to provide dental care to low income children valued at $750 million; and, Whole Person Care (WPC) allowing county-based pilot programs to provide coordinated care for high-utilizing Medi-Cal recipients valued at $1.5 billion over the fiver year waiver. A portion of these funds will now flow to the Kern County Hospital Authority.

Federal budget impact

The County receives revenue from the federal government’s Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT) program. PILT program eligibility is reserved to local governments that contain non-taxable federal lands and provide vital services, such as public safety, housing, social services and transportation. Using a formula provided by statute, the annual PILT payments to local governments are computed based on the number of acres of federal entitlement land within each county or jurisdiction and the population of that county or jurisdiction. The funding for this program is considered each year within the federal budget. The County has received about $2.5 million each year from this program since 2008. The County expects to receive a similar amount in FY 2016-17.

Major Program Highlights

The recommended budget categorizes departments into functional areas by the services that they perform. Most departments are funded through direct program revenues, such as State and federal aid or fees, and/or an allocation of Net County Cost (NCC). Countywide discretionary resources, comprised mainly of property taxes and sales and use taxes, funds NCC. As NCC is a limited resource, it is helpful to put into prospective the budget for these functional areas as compared to the County’s total budget of $2.5 billion and the General Fund budget of $787 million.

The highlights of departmental budgets by functional area are discussed on the next page.
General Government

Budgets for general government departments total $326.7 million, or 13.3% of the County’s total budget, and they receive 14.6% of the total Net County Cost allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for general government departments total $109 million, or 14% of the General Fund budget. Staffing for these departments totals 589 positions, a net decrease of three positions from FY 2015-16. Board of Supervisor District 4, the Auditor-Controller, and County Counsel are each deleting one position.

General government departments handle the administration of the government and include departments such as the Board of Supervisors, County Administrative Office, Clerk of the Board, Human Resources, Auditor-Controller-County Clerk, Treasurer-Tax Collector, Assessor-Recorder, etc.

Public Protection

Protecting public safety remains the top priority of the recommended budget for the County. Budgets for public protection departments total $790 million and they receive nearly 56.1% of the total Net County Cost allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for public protection departments total $430 million, or 55% of the General Fund budget. Staffing for these departments totals 3,386 positions, a net decrease of three positions from FY 2015-16.

The Sheriffs budget is recommended for a 5%, or $6.7 million, decrease in Net County Cost from the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget. This includes $2.6 million in prior year carry-forward appropriation related to capital assets in FY 2015-16 as well as the county-wide 5% reduction of $5.9 million in Net County Cost offset with a $2.5 million contribution for pension cost escalation for a net reduction of 3.4% of Net County Cost from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. The reduction will result in significant service level impacts including, but not limited to, the unfunding of 155 positions, the consolidation of sub-stations in outlying areas, the reassignment of existing staff and elimination or downsizing of certain units, reduction of flight hours and the partial closure of the Central Receiving Facility.

The Probation Department is also recommended to receive a decrease in Net County Cost from the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget of $1.3 million as a result of the 5% reduction in Net County Cost. The department will have no significant impacts to service levels; however, the department will continue to deal with large caseloads.

The District Attorney - Criminal Division budget is recommended for a $271,974 decrease in Net County Cost from the FY 2015-16 Adjusted Budget. The department indicated there are service level impacts resulting from the proposed 5% reduction of Net County Cost. The department will exhaust most of the Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits from its budget units to avoid potential layoffs. Layoffs are also mitigated by holding five positions vacant and not replacing aged vehicles.

The Fire Department’s recommended budget will allow the department to maintain staffing levels and mitigate any layoffs resulting from a $17.5 million deficit due to the loss of property tax revenue. Despite receiving $7.84 million General Fund contribution as part of a four-year deficit mitigation plan, the Fire Department will experience significant service level impacts including, but not limited to, the depletion of Fire Fund reserves and designations, reduction in services and supplies, reassignment of staff, downsizing of certain units, and exploration of alternative revenue streams.

The recommended budget for Animal Services allows the department to maintain services at a relatively status quo level and will continue to provide the resources necessary to maintain a high level of care for County animals.
Public Ways and Facilities

Budgets for public ways and facilities departments total $173 million, or 7.1% of the County’s total budget, and they receive 1.4% of the total NGFC allocation. Staffing for these departments totals 479 positions, a net increase of six positions from FY 2015-16.

The Public Works Department has commenced its second fiscal year since merging six departments into a single Internal Service Fund. The recommended budget for Public Works is $62.1 million, 81% of which is related to staffing. The recommended budget for the Airport Enterprise Fund is $24.5 million, the department has budgeted to utilize $ 15 million in capital improvement funds toward the second phase of the Meadows Field runway rehabilitation project, which is 90% federally reimbursed.

Public Assistance

Budgets for public assistance departments total $640.8 million, or 26.2% of the County’s total budget, and they receive 6.6% of the total Net County Cost allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for public assistance departments total $17.7 million, or 2.2% of the General Fund budget. Staffing for these departments totals 1,942 positions with no change from FY 2015-16 staffing levels.

The Department of Human Services (DHS) comprises the largest budget for the public assistance functional area at $206 million for Administration and $224 million for Direct Aid. The recommended budget for both these funds includes a decrease in Net County Cost totaling $13.3 million resulting primarily from a one-time contribution in FY 2015-16 of $14 million to backfill a fund balance shortfall caused by increased costs for foster care and adoptions assistance payments and direct services. In order to meet the FY 2016-17 Net County Cost, the department will be required to hold 28 positions vacant, 19 of which are social workers in the Child Protective Services Bureau. Holding these specific positions vacant will have significant service level impacts including challenges in meeting State regulations regarding visits with children and caregivers, impaired reasonable services due to workload increases, possibility of the court making a "no reasonable services" finding and difficulty providing thorough assessments of children's living situations, which would increase foster care entry rates. All impacts have the potential to increase Net County Cost in Human Services Direct Aid. The recommended budget for DHS - Direct Aid includes a $1 million increase in expenditures over FY 2015-16 as a result of anticipated increases in Foster Care and Adoptions caseloads and aid payments.

The budget for DHS - Administration continues to include funding for expanded Phase 1 Differential Response services provided by the Kern County Network for Children in the amount of $504,000, which is 10% less than was provided in FY 2015-16.

Health and Sanitation

Budgets for health and sanitation departments total $456 million, or 19% of the County’s total budget and they receive nearly 10% of the total Net County Cost allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for health and sanitation departments total $71 million, or 9% of the General Fund budget. Staffing for these departments totals 1,074 positions, a net decrease of 1,684 positions from FY 2015-16.

The most significant change for this group is the transition of the Kem Medical Center to a separate hospital authority. The transition reduces the County budget by $381 million and 1,756 positions. The Kem County Hospital Authority will receive payments to reimburse the costs of indigent healthcare and correctional medicine. This contribution is recommended at $30.5 million and includes $2.3 million from 1991 Health Realignment funds to offset indigent care costs.

Education, Recreation and Community Programs

The Library’s recommended funding level allows the department to maintain current levels of service and continue to meet its mission with no change in hours of operation. The budget includes $389,205 for books and materials, which is equivalent to FY 2015-16. The department absorbed the 5% reduction in Net County Cost by not funding previously funded vacant positions and utilizing its Budget Savings Incentive (BSI) credits.

The Parks and Recreation recommended funding level allows the department to maintain current levels of service in operating eight regional and 40 neighborhood parks with recreational facilities that include lakes, campgrounds, group picnic areas, playgrounds, bike trails and ball fields. The budget continues to include funding for privatization services in Phase III areas (Frazier Park, Ford City, Valley Acres, Derby Acres, and Fellows). The department absorbed the 5% reduction in Net County Cost by not funding previously funded vacant positions, resulting in no significant service level impacts for FY 2016-17.

Several contributions to community programs are included in the recommended budget. The Special Services’ budget provides funding totaling $294,303 to organizations, such as the Volunteer Center of Kern County, Alzheimer’s Disease Association of Kern County, Arts Council of Kern, Bakersfield Museum of Art, Bakersfield Symphony, Center for Blind and Visually Impaired, Community Action Partnership of Kern County (CAPK), Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA), Valley Fever Vaccine Project, and Kern Adult Literacy Council. Given the budgetary constraints affecting the County, contributions are recommended at a 50% reduction from FY 2015-16 funding levels.

Renewing Infrastructure in an Era of Fiscal Constraint

Equipment and infrastructure are essential to the long-term quality of services to the people of Kern County. The County Administrative Office prioritizes requests for capital projects and equipment in the following order: legally mandated, health and safety, preventive maintenance, cost reduction, and extent of direct public use or benefit. Fiscal constraints over the past several years have forced the County to defer many pressing capital and maintenance needs for roads, parks, fire protection, and other important services to the public.

As part of the County’s long-term fiscal plan, the use of one-time sources such as fund balance carryforward is typically isolated to capital and major maintenance projects and reserves or designations. In consideration of budget constraints, no funds were set aside for infrastructure replacement in FY 2016-17. The Board of Supervisors has previously set aside funds for this purpose and the balance of the Infrastructure Replacement designation in the General Fund is $9.2 million.

The recommended budget includes 23 major maintenance projects totaling $6.4 million. Projects include various painting, paving, roofing and FTVAC projects that were determined to be most critical to maintain. Several projects have revenue sources resulting in a Net County Cost of only $277,999 for all projects.

MITIGATING FUTURE CHALLENGES

The past several years have challenged your Board's ability to achieve fiscal sustainability and meet the increasing demand for public services. In addition to a decline in countywide discretionary revenue, the County is facing retirement cost increases, fiscal uncertainty related economic challenges and future costs related to staffing a new jail facility. In the coming years, the County faces the challenge of continuing to provide quality services to its residents while managing the impacts of revenues that are not expected to increase sufficiently to cover increased costs. Accordingly, the County Administrative Office seeks to avoid one-time funding solutions and steer a course that keeps the County within expected ongoing revenues that adequately fund needed services while setting aside reserves to address deferred infrastructure maintenance, future economic downturns, and other unexpected costs.
Re-Affirm Declaration of Fiscal Emergency

The County declared a fiscal emergency in January 2015 as a proactive budgetary measure in preparation of absorbing a $50 million loss of property tax revenue as a result of a decline in the assessed value of oil and gas properties caused by the falling market value of oil. The declaration allowed access to the County’s General Reserve and provided flexibility to modify staffing for the Fire Department if necessary. With immediate accompanying actions taken in FY 2014-15 and again in FY 2015-16 that included mid-year reductions to preserve resources and implementation of two long-term fiscal strategies, the General Fund budget was balanced without significant service level impacts to the community.

The loss of property taxes has now grown to $77 million over two years, resulting in significant budget deficits for both the General and Fire Funds. Through the development of a strategic approach and disciplined implementation of budgetary restrictions, the deficits have been mitigated through a Four-Year Deficit Mitigation Plan which requires the use of fund balance carry-forward and reserves for a temporary period and a 5% reduction in Net County Cost allocations for FY 2016-17. However, the County must reduce costs significantly over the next three budget cycles to achieve fiscal sustainability. All General Fund department services are anticipated to be impacted to some level including those of public safety departments. The Fire Department is also working under a mitigation plan that includes budget reductions up to 7.2% over the four-year period. At this time, it is recommended that the Declaration of Fiscal Emergency be re-affirmed for the FY 2016-17 budgetary cycle.

Retirement Costs

Retirement costs are anticipated to increase as a result of the amortization of the unfunded actuarial accrued liability. The County’s five-year forecast also anticipates an increase in the average employer contribution rate as a result of lower investment returns coupled with approved actuarial assumption changes in FY 2015-16 that included changing investment return assumption from 7.75% to 7.5%, updating the mortality table and the introduction of explicit administrative expenses. In addition, debt service payments for the County’s Pension Obligation Bonds are scheduled to escalate through FY 202122. The combined ongoing pension cost escalation was nearly $27 million for all funds in FY 2015-16. In anticipation of the budgetary impact from the escalating bond payments, the County has set aside a designation for retirement with a current balance of $12.8 million. The Board of Supervisors approved a fiscal strategy in January 2015 for pension cost escalation requiring the use of funds set aside in the designation for retirement over the next seven years to cover pension escalation for General Fund departments through FY 2021-22, when one of the Pension Obligation Bonds will be fully repaid. Retirement costs will significantly decline in FY 2022-23, which will alleviate.the budgetary pressure for departments.

In FY 2015-16, the Kern County Employees’ Retirement Association (KCERA) initiated a phase-out of the County’s option to prepay the retirement contribution that had generated $8 million annually in interest resources for the General Fund for the past 15 years. With prepayment phasing out, the General Fund will lose approximately $4 million in FY 2016-17 and then an additional $4 million in FY 2017-18. Additionally, KCERA will conduct a 3-year experience study that could lead to a reduction in the assumed rate of investment return which would result in retirement cost increases starting in FY 2018-19.

Economic Challenges

The County’s Five-Year Financial Forecast covers July 2016 through June 2021 and includes slight growth in major revenue streams throughout the period. Not included in the forecast are the impacts of a potential recession or the unknown economic impacts of the coming statewide $15 minimum wage. The forecast does include an expectation to assist the Road Fund with the loss of nearly $10 million in Highway User Tax Account (HUTA) revenues for road maintenance by at least $5 million.
New Jail Facility

In FY 2017-18, the County anticipates funding the staff necessary to operate a new jail facility. The Sheriff has indicated that these staffing costs, estimated at $27.5 million, could be mitigated by temporarily moving current staff from certain areas of the Lerdo Minimum jail facility to reduce some of the cost until the Lerdo facility is remodeled, which would generate an estimated $7 million in savings for a net initial cost of $20.5 million. The Board of Supervisors approved a fiscal strategy in January 2015 to identify an ongoing source to fund the operations of the new jail. The strategy includes isolating Net County Cost of $4 million, or 1.4% each year over the next five years, to achieve an ongoing source of $20.5 million. Through the strategy, $7.5 million was set aside in a designation for jail operations in FY 2015-16. However, as the County faces major budget reductions related to the loss of property tax revenue, the Sheriff has since proposed that existing staff could meet the initial staffing of the facility to negate the need for the jail strategy prospectively. Based on the Sheriffs conclusion, the Board of Supervisors cancelled the fiscal strategy reductions. It is expected that the County will incur medical and mental health costs of up to $5 million annually if all the new jail beds are filled. These assumptions have been incorporated into the County’s fiscal forecast.

Sales Tax Volatility

Historically, counties relied on relatively stable property taxes for the provision of services; however, with the realignment of many State services, counties have become increasingly dependent on sales tax revenue. When combining 1991 and 2011 Realignment revenues, which are primarily funded with sales tax ($255 million), with County sales and use taxes ($40 million) and Proposition 172 half-cent sales taxes ($76 million), the portion of budget requirements funded primarily with sales tax revenue represents 15% of the County budget. Approximately $141.1 million of this revenue is allocated to services specifically in the General Fund that comprise 18% of the General Fund’s budget. Revenue from sales taxes is projected to decline slightly in FY 2016-17, lending to the concern that these revenues tend to be much more volatile and more responsive to economic changes, resulting in a higher risk of losses in future years.
Conclusion

The County must again seek to balance the allocation of resources between ongoing service needs, quality of life programs and the maintenance and renewal of facilities and equipment that support those services. The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is balanced within available resources and takes into consideration known future fiscal concerns. It is important that the County take action to resolve the long-term loss of property tax revenue associated with oil and gas assessments. The deficit mitigation plan allows for flexibility should the revenues based on assessed value projected be higher than anticipated and moves the County down the path towards fiscal sustainability.

The budget meets the most important needs of the people of Kern County and fulfills the County’s legal mandate to protect public health and safety. As you conduct public hearings and deliberate on the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget, your Board’s leadership and strong fiscal management will assist the County in once again maintaining the critical balance between service demands and limited financial resources.
At the Budget Hearings that begin August 23, 2016, members of the public are invited to comment to your Board on the budget recommendations presented here. The County Administrative Office will work closely with your Board and with County departments to resolve budget issues and to enact a budget that meets the County’s legal obligations and the needs of the people of Kern County.
