The proposed FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget is submitted for your consideration. The recommended
budget is the product of thorough deliberation by the County's department and Administrative Office staff
regarding the impacts, consequences and alternatives of various budgetary actions. The budget was
prepared in accordance with statutory requirements of the County Budget Act, the Board's approved
budget development guidelines and with consideration of the County's vision "to create and maintain a
customer-centered County government designed to gamer the confidence, support and trust of the people
we serve." The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget is submitted balanced with concurrence from
department heads and is consistent with the strategic budget plan.approved by your Board.
This document includes the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budgets for the County, Board Governed Special
Districts and Other Agencies governed by the Board of Supervisors. The County departments have
provided performance measures based on goals and objectives identified in the County's Strategic Plan.
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget of $2.87 billion is balanced and is consistent with policy
direction received from the Board of Supervisors. Carefully planned and controlled expenditures as well
as set-asides of one-time funds for future use over several years have enabled the County to maintain
services to the public despite economic instability and unforeseen major fiscal impacts. The years ahead
will continue to challenge the County budget, which must absorb the loss of property tax revenue from oil
and gas properties, increased retirement costs and new jail facility staffing.
The primary goals in developing the recommended budget have been to: I) keep most discretionary and
public protection programs as intact as possible; 2) appropriate resources to quality of life programs; 3)
provide funding to prevent further deterioration of the physical infrastructure on which many services
depend, and 4) maintain reserves that meet the County's known cost increases and liabilities. Although
achieving this balance continues to be a challenge, the budget and staffing levels recommended by the
County Administrative Office are consistent with the relative budget priorities identified by the
department heads. County department heads, both appointed and elected alike, have worked diligently
and cooperatively with County Administrative Office staff to forge a balanced budget that minimizes
adverse impacts on direct services to the public.
THE BUDGET IN BRIEF
The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget for all funds totals $2.87 billion, a decrease of $61.5 million, or
2.14% from the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. The General Fund, which funds many County operations,
totals $858.4 million, an increase of $3.3 million, or .38%. The budget in total supports a workforce of
9,303 authorized positions and reflects a net increase of eight positions.
The recommended budget includes funding to provide mandated and essential services, meet debt service
obligations, maintain a minimum level of infrastructure and capital funding, and adhere to the Board’s
financial management policies. The budget seeks to balance spending between services and capital needs
and was developed with emphasis on isolating one-time resources for application to one-time
expenditures or reserves wherever possible to promote long-term fiscal stability.
COUNTYWIDE DISCRETIONARY RESOURCES
Countywide discretionary revenue for the General Fund is budgeted at $372 million, which is $26.9
million or 7.23% less than the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. A significant portion of discretionary
revenue is comprised of property taxes and sales and use taxes.
Total property tax assessments decreased by 8.9% from FY 2014-15 contributing to a decrease in
property related revenue of $18.3 million. The reduction is the result of a decline in assessed value of oil
and gas properties associated with the decline of the market price of oil. Sales and use tax and sales
tax/property tax swap base revenue estimates for FY 2015-16 total $44.3 million, which is $8 million less
than the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. The County received approximately $6 million in unanticipated
one-time use taxes last fiscal year, generated primarily by the construction of major wind energy and solar
projects. As anticipated, this construction activity has substantially slowed and revenues are stabilizing to
normal levels. Petroleum products and equipment, in addition to automobile sales, continue to produce
strong base receipts for the County; however, the local economy is anticipated to be negatively impacted
by job losses in the petroleum industry.
Proposition 172 Local Public Safety Funds have significantly increased since FY 2012-13 from
construction activity as well, as this revenue source is generated by a statewide half-cent sales tax. This
revenue continues to be pivotal in meeting the increased budget requests from public safety departments.
In FY 2015-16, public safety departments are estimated to receive $79.5 million, which is $2.6 million
more than in FY 2014-15. The increase in allocation is attributable to one-time carry-forward from FY
2014-15. The revenue levels for this funding source are anticipated to return to normal levels over the
next two years. A portion of the one-time fund balance carry-forward at June 30, 2015 for this fund was
recommended to be set aside to mitigate the anticipated decline in future revenue.
The General Fund’s fund balance carry-forward available from the fiscal year ending June 30, 2015 was
$77.4 million, which is $40 million more than the prior fiscal year. Included in the fund balance carryforward
is a release of $23 million of non-spendable fund balance associated with the Kern Medical fund balance carry-forward, which excludes the re-budget of Budget Incentive Savings credits and capital
and major maintenance projects, was $55.3 million. As fund balance carry-forward is a one-time source,
these funds were recommended for one-time projects and specific purpose designations.
NET COUNTY COST
For FY 2015-16, departments that receive an allocation of Net County Cost were requested to submit
budgets with up to a 2.4% reduction of Net County Cost from FY 2014-15 in order to mitigate a reduction
in property tax revenue from the decline in oil and gas property assessments and to set aside funds for the
operation of the new jail facility as part of a fiscal strategy approved by the Board of Supervisors in
January 2015. These net adjustments to allocations to departments generated $6.1 million in savings that
helped balance the budget.
Reserves, designations and contingencies are a vital component of Net County Cost that mitigate future
known and unknown liabilities and capital needs. The recommended budget for the General Fund isolates
approximately $7.7 million in the Appropriation for Contingencies to earmark funds against unexpected
future costs or costs that are identified after the County budget is adopted. In addition, $30 million in
contributions to reserves and designations brings General Fund reserve balances to nearly $159 million.
The most significant contribution to a designation is $14.6 million for the KMC Working Capital to set
aside funds for the ongoing cash flow needs of the hospital. Other contributions towards reserves and
designations are as follows:
Reserve for Tax Litigation: $6.6 million ($1 million increase) — The County maintains a
reserve for tax litigation associated with contingent liability for assessment appeals. The reserve
sets aside 10% of the most recent contingent liability calculation. At June 30, 2014, the liability
identified was $66.2 million. The current balance in the reserve is $5.6 million. Increasing the
reserve by $1 million for a new balance of $6.6 million achieves a 10% reserve target.
Designation for Department of Human Services: $20.4 million ($4 million increase) — The
designation for the Department of Human Services (DHS) sets aside funds to stabilize future
contributions to DHS that cover mandated local matching funds and serve as working capital for
an ongoing cash advance from the General Fund due to time lags of State and federal receipts.
With this contribution, the balance is $20.4 million.
Designation for Retirement Contributions: $17.6 million ($1.2 million decrease) — This
reserve earmarks funds to mitigate known increases to the County’s retirement contribution for
employees including pension obligation bond payments in future years. The Board of Supervisors
approved a fiscal strategy in January 2015 to fund 60% of pension escalation through this
designation. The projected increase in pension costs for General Fund departments for FY 2015-
16 is $13.4 million.
Designation for East Kern Revitalization Area $1.5 million ($1.1 million increase) — This
designation supports the Renewable Energy Neighborhood Enhancement Wind Business
Investment Zone (RENEWBIZ) approved by the Board in December 2012. The program is
intended to encourage and promote economic reinvestment and revitalization in communities
within the Second Supervisorial District impacted by wind energy property. The program is
funded through the set-aside of a percentage of property tax increment generated from the wind
energy properties.
Designation for Countywide Blight Remediation $1.2 million ($328,000 increase) — This
designation supports costs associated with the County-wide Blight Remediation Program
performed by the Code Compliance Department to assist communities with addressing blight and
the associated problems that are a result of deteriorated and abandoned properties. The Board of
Supervisors approved the designation of $1.2 million annually for this program. The amount of
$328,000 added to the current balance of the account accommodates the funding need.
Designation for Infrastructure Replacement $16.4 million ($2.5 million increase) — This
designation earmarks funds for capital asset replacement and was established primarily with the
temporary rise in construction sales tax receipts in FY 2012-13. In addition, 50% of the increment
from property taxes attributable to wind energy property valuations is deposited to this account
annually.
Designation for Road Improvements $400,000 ($400,000 increase) — This designation was
established to set aside funds for road improvements as part of a mitigation agreement with Clean
Harbors, Inc. It requires that $400,000 of Hazardous Waste taxes that are paid by the business be
used for designated road improvements in a specific area until the improvements are complete.
Designation for Lost Hills Economic Opportunity Area $125,000 ($125,000 increase) — This
designation was established to set aside funds for the Lost Hills EOA to encourage and promote
economic reinvestment and revitalization by providing needed resources for ongoing maintenance
of improvements within the EOA boundary, assist in funding capital projects and potentially help
support local community programs. The designation is limited to an annual maximum of
$500,000. With this set-aside, the balance of the designation will be $125,000.
Designation for WESTARZ Economic Opportunity Area $147,705 ($101,705 increase) — This
designation was established to set aside funds for the Westside Economic Stability and Tourism
Area Reinvestment Zone (WESTARZ) EOA to promote economic stability and growth in the
specific area. The zone is funded by the entire property tax and sales tax increments in the
specified area for a ten year period which ends in FY 2024-25. With this set-aside, the balance of
the designation will be $147,705.
Designation for New Jail Operations $7.5 million ($6 million increase) — A designation of $6
million is recommended as part of the fiscal strategy to fund the operations of the new jail in FY
2017-18. This is the first year of a five-year plan to set aside ongoing Net County Cost to achieve
the $20.5 million necessary to staff and operate the facility. With this set-aside, the balance of the
designation will be $7.5 million.
WORKFORCE CHANGES AND EMPLOYEE COSTS
Budgeted staffing recommended for FY 2015-16 is 9,303 positions, an increase of eight positions from
the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. General Fund staffing is decreasing by 11 positions, primarily because
departments are deleting positions that have been vacant and unfunded for the past several years. This
decrease is offset by a total of 19 positions that result primarily from the Aging and Adult Services
Department reclassifying previously temporary positions to permanent positions. The General Fund
budget includes seven new positions for various departments under the General Government function.
The County’s overall cost for employees’ salaries and benefits is projected to be $1.1 billion, an increase
of approximately $71 million from the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget that is reflected in each department’s
budget. The increase is comprised of multiple components: $21 million in salaries and benefits for Kern
Medical Center funded through various non-General Fund sources; $4 million in salaries and benefits for
Mental Health funded through State Aid; $12.4 million in salaries and benefits for the Department of Human Services funded through State/federal Aid; and the remaining $34 million is primarily increases in
pension and health benefit costs across other departments. The position changes tied to the salaries and
benefits increase for Mental Health (44 positions) and Department of Human Services (89 positions) were
approved in FY 2014-15.
KERN MEDICAL CENTER
KMC experienced significant operational and financial changes in FY 2014-15 due to improvements in
payer mix spurred by expanded Medi-Cal eligibility under the Affordable Care Act, streamlined revenue
cycle processes yielding enhanced patient cash collections, and labor expense reductions stemming from
daily monitoring and resizing of the hospital’s labor force to match fluctuating patient census. The need
for cash advances from the General Fund has declined. The outstanding General Fund loan to the hospital
enterprise fund as of June 30, 2015 was $5.8 million, a decrease of $55.5 million from the prior year.
Despite these changes, it is anticipated that KMC will continue to need cash advances in FY 2015-16 if
the State and federal government do not agree to extend or approve a new Section 1115 Waiver. In
addition, it is anticipated that KMC will need to pay approximately $52 million in Disproportionate Share
Hospital overpayments and other funding sources in future years.
In FY 2015-16, the County General Fund will contribute $7.4 million to Kern Medical Center to support
the hospital’s day-to-day operations and capital needs. By comparison, KMC received a $9.9 million
contribution to fund day-to-day operations in FY 2014-15. The FY 2015-16 General Fund contribution is
reduced by 2.4% as a result of the NGFC reduction for all departments and is further offset by the
unexpected retention of approximately $2.3 million in 1991 Health Realignment funds derived from sales
taxes and vehicle license fees. In total, $9.7 million in revenue is recommended in FY 2015-16 to support
the hospital's day-to-day operations. Finally, the recommended budget includes approximately $2 million
in capital project re-budgets and $2.4 million to cover the 2006-07 Disproportionate Share Hospital
Safety Net Care Pool payment to the State.
STATE BUDGET IMPACT
On June 24, 2015 Governor Brown signed a $167.5 billion FY 2015-16 budget, which includes $107.8
billion in State General Fund expenditures, a 7% increase over last year, and a $2 billion reserve. The
budget represents a modest surplus that allows for some restoration of prior year reductions and further
loan repayment opportunities as well as payment of longstanding mandate reimbursements owed to
counties.
The Governor's budget plan contains an estimated statewide increase of $127.6 million in Assembly Bill
(AB) 109 Public Safety Realignment base funding available to county Community Correction
Partnerships in FY 2015-16. Also available to counties is an estimated $54.6 increase in growth funding
which will be allocated during FY 2015-16. Based on the current methodology, the County's FY 2015-16
share of AB 109 funding will increase by nearly $3 million in base funding and $3.6 million in growth
funding. In addition, the County's SB 678 incentive funding for reducing recidivism will grow by
$596,000.
State implementation of the optional Medi-Cal expansion under the federal Affordable Care Act will
further reduce Health Realignment allocations since the State assumes counties will achieve savings from
the expanded eligibility. In FY 2014-15, the State reduced the County's Health Realignment by $3
million. In FY 2015-16, the reduction will be $13 million. The reduction reflects the efforts of Kern
Medical Center, the Department of Human Services and other local entities to enroll newly eligible
individuals in Medi-Cal. The recommended budget includes sufficient resources to carry out health programs and services for County residents, including state resources to fund the state-mandated
expansion of full-scope Medi-Cal services to the children of undocumented adults.
The State budget includes a one-time $3 million augmentation for veterans’ services to the $2.6 million
that was in the Governor’s January Budget, resulting in $5.6 million total funding for county veterans’
service offices. This will yield an additional $94,000 for Kern County veteran outreach services.
The budget reflects a continued decline in state gasoline taxes. Based on this decreased rate, the County
stands to lose $3.5 million in funds available for the Roads Fund. The department has indicated that it
anticipates fewer transportation projects will be completed in FY 2015-16.
An additional $1.8 billion in one-time resources is included in the State budget to continue the State's
response to drought impacts. This includes $783 million for projects to prevent or cleanup contamination
of potable groundwater, $175 million for safe drinking water projects, primarily in smaller disadvantaged
communities, and $158 million for small communities such as South Shafter to upgrade wastewater
systems.
Finally, the State budget includes full repayment to local agencies of remaining amounts owed for
mandated services performed prior to 2004. Of the remaining $765 million in statewide pre-2004
mandate obligations, the County received more than $9.8 million in late June 2015. The County General
Fund was reimbursed $4 million that is being used to fund FY 2015-16 Net General Fund Cost. The
balance of $5.8 million was allocated as direct program revenue to other funds that incurred the costs.
FEDERAL BUDGET IMPACT
The County receives revenue from the federal government’s Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT) program.
PILT program eligibility is reserved to local governments that contain non-taxable federal lands and
provide vital services, such as public safety, housing, social services and transportation. Using a formula
provided by statute, the annual PILT payments to local governments are computed based on the number
of acres of federal entitlement land within each county or jurisdiction and the population of that county or
jurisdiction. The funding for this program is considered each year within the federal budget. The County
has received about $2.4 million each year from this program since 2008. However, due to fiscal
constraints at the federal level, this funding is projected to decline. The County expects to receive a small
payment in October 2015 that was designated in the FY2015 federal budget, but a FY2016 allocation has
not yet been authorized.
MAJOR PROGRAM HIGHLIGHTS
The recommended budget categorizes departments into functional areas by the services that they perform.
Most departments are funded through direct program revenues, such as State and federal aid or fees,
and/or an allocation of Net General Fund Cost (NGFC). Countywide discretionary resources, comprised
mainly of property taxes and sales and use taxes, funds NGFC. As NGFC is a limited resource, it is
helpful to put into prospective the budget for these functional areas as compared to the County’s total
budget of $2.87 billion and the General Fund budget of $858 million.
The highlights of departmental budgets by functional area are discussed below.
General Government
Budgets for general government departments total $336 million, or 12% of the County’s total budget, and
they receive 18% of the total NGFC allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for general
government departments total $129 million, or 19.3% of the General Fund budget. Staffing for these departments totals 590 positions, a net increase of seven positions from FY 2014-15. Three of the seven
positions are for the Human Resources Division, two positions are for Information Technology Services
and the County Administrative Office and County Counsel are each adding one position.
General government departments handle the administration of the government and include departments
such as the Board of Supervisors, County Administrative Office, Clerk of the Board, Human Resources,
Auditor-Controller-County Clerk, Treasurer-Tax Collector, Assessor-Recorder, etc. The FY 2015-16
Recommended Budget includes the re-organization of the Human Resources Division under the County
Administrative Office. The reorganization includes transferring some positions that perform health
benefits and employee relation activities from the County Administrative Office budget to the Human
Resources Division budget.
Public Protection
Protecting public safety remains the top priority of the recommended budget for the County. Budgets for
public protection departments total $809.5 million, or 28.2% of the County’s total budget, and they
receive nearly 47.6% of the total NGFC allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for public
protection departments total $424 million, or 63.5% of the General Fund budget. Staffing for these
departments totals 3,381 positions, a net decrease of 11 positions from FY 2014-15.
The Sheriff’s budget is recommended for a $2.9 million increase in Net County Cost from the FY 2014-
15 Adjusted Budget to maintain status quo operations. A majority of this increase is associated with the
strategic plan to cover 60% of pension cost escalation. The allocation of additional ongoing Discretionary
General Funding is recommended to maintain the current level of law enforcement services provided by
the department. The budget also includes funding to staff the Rural Crime Unit and to continue operating
the Ridgecrest Jail facility.
The Probation Department is also recommended to receive an increase in Net County Cost from the FY
2014-15 Adjusted Budget of $1.2 million as a result of the pension escalation cost strategic plan. The
department absorbed the 2.4% reduction in Net County Cost by not funding vacant positions, resulting in
no significant service level impacts for FY 2015-16.
The District Attorney – Criminal Division budget is recommended for an $859,671 increase in Net
County Cost from the FY 2014-15 Adjusted Budget. The department indicated that no major service
level impacts would result from the proposed 2.4% reduction of Net County Cost.
The Fire Department’s recommended budget will allow the department to maintain staffing levels and to
purchase $1.2 million in equipment. A higher than anticipated fund balance available within the Fire
Fund at fiscal year-end and an increase in property tax revenue estimates have enabled the department to
absorb a decline in oil and gas property tax revenue of more than $15 million. The recommended budget
provides sufficient funding to continue three-person staffing at County fire stations. However, the budget
relies on the expected award of a $4.5 million Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response
(SAFER) grant to continue to support the 30 additional staff added in FY 2012-13.
The recommended budget for Animal Services allows the department to maintain status quo staffing
levels and will continue to provide the resources necessary to maintain a high level of care for County
animals. The budget also includes the completion of a surgical suite capital project at the Fruitvale facility
and $250,000 in appropriation for spay and neuter activities.
Public Ways and Facilities
Budgets for public ways and facilities departments total $177 million, or 6.3% of the County’s total
budget, and they receive nearly 1.5% of the total NGFC allocation. Staffing for these departments totals
478 positions, a net increase of one position from FY 2014-15.
Public ways and facilities incorporate the reorganization of the Roads, Kern Regional Transit, Waste
Management, Engineering, Surveying and Permit Services, Code Compliance and Building Inspections
into a single Public Works Department. The reorganization is intended to consolidate activities in order to
provide public infrastructure and services to protect and enhance the daily lives of County residents.
Services include planning, design, engineering, construction, project management, operation and
maintenance of roads, flood control, promotion of safe building construction, and other public services
such as solid waste.
Public Assistance
Budgets for public assistance departments total $644.4 million, or 22.5% of the County’s total budget,
and they receive 8.1% of the total NGFC allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for public
assistance departments total $15.8 million, or 2.4% of the General Fund budget. Staffing for these
departments totals 1,919 positions, a net increase of 31 positions from FY 2014-15.
The Department of Human Services (DHS) comprises the largest budget for the public assistance
functional area at $211 million for Administration and $213 million for Direct Aid. The recommended
budget for both these funds includes an increase in Net County Cost totaling $18.6 million resulting from
an over-accrual of revenue from FY 2013-14 contributing to a one-time $14 million allocation and $4.6
million in ongoing contribution for increased costs for foster care and general assistance aid activity. The
recommended budget for DHS – Direct Aid includes a $9.1 million increase in expenditures over FY
2014-15 as a result of anticipated increases in CalWORKs assistance payments, an increased general
assistance grant amount approved in FY 2013-14, and an increase in Foster Care payments due to
increased rates to be paid to foster family agencies as prescribed by the federal government.
The budget for DHS - Administration continues to include $560,000 funding for expanded Phase 1
Differential Response services provided by the Kern County Network for Children.
Health and Sanitation
Budgets for health and sanitation departments total $776 million, or 27% of the County’s total budget and
they receive nearly 10% of the total NGFC allocation. Within the General Fund, appropriations for health
and sanitation departments total $47 million, or 7% of the General Fund budget. Staffing for these
departments totals 2,714 positions, a net decrease of 20 positions from FY 2014-15.
The Kern Medical Center enterprise fund is the largest health and sanitation department with a spending
plan of $335 million. The fund is recommended to receive a total of $9.7 million comprised of a County
contribution of $7.4 million and $2.3 million from 1991 Health Realignment for operations. Additionally,
$1.9 million is anticipated from the Kern Health Systems excess reserve to cover the startup cost of the
new Ambulatory Surgery Center.
Education, Recreation and Community Programs
The Library’s recommended funding level allows the department to maintain current levels of service,
including an additional allocation of NGFC of $167,167 to provide Wi-Fi services at all branches and
fund additional book materials. The Library also plans to open the Beale Branch Library one extra day per
week. The budget includes $389,205 for books and materials, which is $131,205 more than last fiscal
year.
The Parks and Recreation recommended funding level allows the department to maintain current levels of
service to maintain eight regional and 40 neighborhood parks with recreational facilities that include
lakes, campgrounds, group picnic areas, playgrounds, bike trails and ball fields. Additionally, the budget
allows for an increase in the level of service to the public through the privatization of services in Phase III
areas (Frazier Park, Ford City, Valley Acres, Derby Acres, and Fellows).
Several contributions to community programs are included in the recommended budget. The Special
Services’ budget provides funding totaling $702,070 to organizations, such as the Volunteer Center of
Kern County, Arts Council of Kern, Bakersfield Museum of Art, Bakersfield Symphony, Center for Blind
and Visually Impaired, China Lake Alliance, Community Action Partnership of Kern County (CAPK),
Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA), Southwest Defense Alliance, Valley Fever Vaccine Project,
Greater Antelope Valley Economic Alliance, Kern Adult Literacy Council, and the California State
University, Bakersfield – Small Business Development Center.
RENEWING INFRASTRUCTURE IN AN ERA OF FISCAL CONSTRAINT
Equipment and infrastructure are essential to the long-term quality of services to the people of Kern
County. The County Administrative Office prioritizes requests for capital projects and equipment in the
following order: legally mandated, health and safety, preventive maintenance, cost reduction, and extent
of direct public use or benefit. Fiscal constraints over the past several years have forced the County to
defer many pressing capital and maintenance needs for roads, parks, fire protection, and other important
services to the public.
As part of the County’s long-term fiscal plan, the use of one-time sources such as fund balance carryforward
is isolated to capital and major maintenance projects and reserves or designations. In addition, the
Board of Supervisors approved the ongoing set-aside of 50% of property tax increment generated from
wind energy properties for infrastructure replacement for both the General and Fire Funds. The balance
of the Infrastructure Replacement designation in the General Fund is $16.4 million.
The recommended budget includes ten capital projects totaling $6.5 million and 50 new major
maintenance projects such as the reroofing or paving of several County facilities totaling $16.7 million.
Several projects have revenue sources resulting in a Net County Cost of $13.7 million for all new projects
in FY 2015-16.
MITIGATING FUTURE CHALLENGES
The past several years have challenged your Board's ability to achieve fiscal sustainability and meet the
increasing demand for public services. In addition to a decline in countywide discretionary revenue, the
County is facing retirement cost increases, fiscal uncertainty related to Kern Medical Center and future
costs related to staffing a new jail facility. In the coming years, the County faces the challenge of
continuing to provide quality services to its residents while managing the impacts of revenues that are not
expected to increase sufficiently to cover increased costs. Accordingly, the County Administrative Office
seeks to avoid one-time funding solutions and steer a course that leads the County toward ongoing
revenues that adequately fund needed services while setting aside reserves for addressing deferred
infrastructure maintenance, future economic downturns, and other unexpected costs.
Declaration of Fiscal Emergency
The County declared a fiscal emergency in January 2015 as a proactive budgetary measure in preparation
of absorbing a $50 million loss of property tax revenue as a result of a decline in the assessed value of oil
and gas properties caused by the falling market value of oil. The declaration allowed access to the
County’s General Reserve and provided flexibility to modify staffing for the Fire Department if
necessary. With the immediate action taken in FY 2014-15 that included mid-year reductions to preserve
resources and implementation of two long-term fiscal strategies, the budget for the General Fund has been
balanced without significant service level impacts to the community. Through the development of a
strategic approach and disciplined implementation of budgetary restrictions, the original causes for the
declaration of fiscal emergency for FY 2015-16 have been mitigated. However, the County is still beset
with uncertainties related to the Fire Fund. The FY 2015-16 budget for the Fire Fund in balanced with one-time resources and a revenue estimate for the SAFER grant that has not yet been awarded to the
County. Furthermore, the Fire Department has yet to complete a long-term fiscal plan for its fund that is
forecasted to have annual deficits up to $8 million over the next five years.
The County is also challenged with new issues that are currently being reviewed for fiscal impact. New
assessment appeals for supplemental property taxes associated with the valuation of new wells for
petroleum properties have once again been submitted by property owners despite that the premise for the
claims was denied review by the California Supreme Court in January 2015. While the court has ruled in
favor of the County on this issue in the past, there continues to be an estimated $15 million potential
liability for the County and additional attorney fees will be incurred. The Administrative Office has also
recently been advised by Toyon and Associates, Inc. that Kern Medical Center’s potential liability to the
State has grown from an estimated $21 million last fiscal year to as much as $52 million. The
recommended budget includes a set-aside of General Fund cash to cover the initial estimate of $21
million, but a funding source for the additional $31 million will need to be identified if the State issues an
invoice for these funds. Finally, the for these reasons, it is recommended that the declaration for fiscal
emergency continue until January 2016 at which time the Administrative Office will provide a mid-year
status report to the Board of Supervisors.
Retirement Costs
Retirement costs are anticipated to increase as a result of the amortization of the unfunded actuarial
accrued liability. The County’s five-year forecast also anticipates an increase in the average employer
contribution rate as a result of recently approved actuarial assumption changes that include changing
investment return assumption from 7.75% to 7.5%, updating the mortality table and the introduction of
explicit administrative expenses. In addition, debt service payments for the County’s Pension Obligation
Bonds are scheduled to escalate through FY 2021-22. The combined ongoing pension cost escalation is
projected to be $27 million for all funds in FY 2015-16. In anticipation of the budgetary impact from the
escalating bond payments, the County has set aside a designation for retirement with a current balance of
$17.6 million. The Board of Supervisors approved a fiscal strategy in January 2015 for pension cost
escalation that requires the set-aside of one-time fund balance carry-forward of $7 million annually in the
designation for retirement over the next seven years to be used towards a plan to cover 60% of pension
escalation for General Fund departments through FY 2021-22 when one of the Pension Obligation Bonds
will be fully repaid. Retirement costs will significantly decline in FY 2022-23, which will alleviate the
budgetary pressure for departments.
The County was also informed by the Kern County Employees’ Retirement Association (KCERA) that
beginning in FY 2015-16, it will begin a three-year phase out of the County’s option to prepay the
retirement contribution that has generated $8 million annually in interest resources for the General Fund
for the past 15 years. The General Fund will lose approximately $5 million in FY 2016-17 and then an
additional $3 million in FY 2017-18.
New Jail Facility
In FY 2017-18, the County anticipates funding the staff necessary to operate a new jail facility. The
Sheriff has indicated that these staffing costs, estimated at $27.5 million, could be mitigated by
temporarily moving current staff from certain areas of the Lerdo Minimum jail facility to reduce some of
the cost until the Lerdo facility is remodeled, which would generate an estimated $7 million in savings for
a net initial cost of $20.5 million. The Board of Supervisors approved a fiscal strategy in January 2015 to
identify an ongoing source to fund the operations of the new jail. The strategy includes isolating Net
County Cost of $4 million, or 1.4% each year over the next five years to achieve an ongoing source of
$20.5 million. Initially, this source is proposed through the reduction of allocations to other departments,
but it is anticipated that any new growth in discretionary revenue may also be an alternative source in lieu of department reductions. The accumulation of Net County Cost resource will be set aside in the designation for new jail operations until FY 2017-18.
With the passage of Senate Bill 863 up to $500 million in State bond funding for the acquisition, design, and construction of jail facilities will become available for California counties. The County is exploring potential funding, through efforts spearheaded by the Sheriffs Office, for a $43 million dollar minimum security jail project that would replace two existing barracks and add program and administrative space. The County's responsibility would be a 10% match for construction, or $4.3 million, and would require the County to provide staffing during the entire term of the bond financing, approximately 25-35 years. The Sheriffs Office has crafted a staffing plan to meet the funding requirements with existing staff and does not anticipate this project will require the addition of any permanent staff.
Sales Tax Volatility
Historically, it has been assumed that counties are more reliant on relatively stable property taxes for the provision of services; however, with the realignment of many State services, counties have become increasingly dependent on sales tax revenue. When combining 1991 and 2011 Realignment revenues, which are primarily funded with sales tax ($255 million), County sales tax ($44 million) and Proposition 172 half cent sales taxes ($79 million), the portion of budget requirements funded primarily with sales tax represents 13.21% of the County budget. Approximately $154 million of this revenue is allocated to services specifically in the General Fund which equates to 18% of the General Fund’s budget. Revenue from sales taxes is projected to decline slightly in FY 2015-16, lending to the concern that these revenues tend to be much more volatile and more responsive to economic changes, resulting in a higher risk of losses in future years.
Conclusion
The County must again seek to balance the allocation of resources between ongoing service needs, quality of life programs and the maintenance and renewal of facilities and equipment that support those services. The FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget is balanced within available resources and reflects a sustainable approach to providing services in the future. The budget meets the most important needs of the people of Kern County and fulfills the County’s legal mandate to protect public health and safety. As you conduct public hearings and deliberate on the FY 2015-16 Recommended Budget, your Board’s leadership and strong fiscal management will assist the County in once again maintaining the critical balance between service demands and limited financial resources.
At the Budget Hearings that begin August 18, 2015, members of the public are invited to comment to your Board on the budget recommendations presented here. The County Administrative Office will work closely with your Board and with County departments to resolve budget issues and to enact a budget that meets the County’s legal obligations and the needs of the people of Kern County.

