2012-13 will be the first full fiscal year with "Realignment 2011" in effect. This version
of shifting responsibilities for costs and functions previously handled by the state to
counties includes the incarceration and treatment of so-called low-level offenders that
historically have gone to state prison. These are now called the "non-non-nons," which is
shorthand for non-serious, non-violent, non-sexual offenders. This portion of
Realignment 2011 began in October, 2011 and as a result, in just eleven months the
Sheriff has had to release early a dramatically higher number of inmates than in the
previous year, due to the obviously significant increase in inmates.
In order to at least partially handle this influx of inmates, the County should receive
slightly more than $6 million in 2012-13. This has resulted in over 40 new positions, in
the 2011-12 and 2012-13 budgets combined, primarily in the Sheriffs Office and
Probation. Significant funds will also be set aside for drug and alcohol treatment services
as there is an agreement among all involved that services in this arena, as well as mental
health programs, job training, anger management, and other such services, need to be
expanded if the revolving door of repeat offenders, otherwise known as recidivism, is to
be reduced.
Other programs included in Realignment 2011 include: Court security, public safety
grants, such as COPS and JJCP A, Mental Health Managed Care, Early and Periodic
Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT), Drug and Alcohol programs, Foster Care
and Child Welfare Services, and Adult Protective Services. All of these programs have
new sharing ratios between the state and counties.
Last year, your Board will recall that Governor Brown was proposing to fund
Realignment 2011 with a temporary extension of the income and sales tax rates that had
previously been increased, but were set to expire on June 30, 2011. He was unsuccessful
in getting enough votes to get his proposal on the ballot before the voters. Failing that, he
proposed and the legislature approved, a shift of existing state revenues. This approach
had no "Constitutional guarantee," which the Governor had proposed to include in the tax
extension to be approved by the electorate. Therefore, though the Governor has included
"carved out" revenues in the state budget, the ongoing certainty of these revenues to fund
Realignment 2011 is tied to his latest attempt to increase taxes, which will now appear on
the ballot as an initiative in November, 2012. So, like it or not, the ongoing revenues and
the Constitutional protection to ensure they will be available in the future are inextricably
tied together in the Governor's initiative to temporarily increase income and sales tax.
- Redevelopment, Successor Agencies, Oversight Boards
Late in 2011, the State Supreme Court upheld AB 1X26 and overturned AB 1X27,
which together were included in the 2011-12 Budget as a mechanism to have
redevelopment agencies pay the state to assist with its budget difficulties. The result was
the end of redevelopment and the establishment of successor agencies to "unwind" all
redevelopment agencies, paying off all of their respective obligations and dispersing their
assets to all remaining participating taxing agencies. This process is to be approved over
time by an oversight board that is designed to watch over the activities of each successor
agency. So, in the case of Kings County, there are five successor agencies, one for each
city and one for the County. Each of these are the respective city councils and is the
Board of Supervisors for the County. For each of these there is also an established
oversight board. All of the identified obligations submitted by the successor agencies,
with the blessing of their respective oversight board, must then be approved by the State
Department of Finance.
How this affects Kings County's Budget is basically in two ways. First, with the
dissolution of the County's Redevelopment Agency, which is contiguous with the
boundaries of the Kettleman City Community Services District, questions have been
raised regarding the County's loan to the Redevelopment Agency, which in turn was
loaned to the Kettleman City Community Services District to assist in addressing its
water quality and quantity issues. To date, all approvals have been obtained through the
level of the State Controller's Office, which will recognize the legitimacy of this
arrangement so the project can stay on track.
Second, with the dissolving of the other agencies in the four cities; A venal, Corcoran,
Hanford, and Lemoore, it would appear that the County, together with other local tax
sharing entities, will likely see additional property tax revenues being passed through on
an ongoing basis. The actual amount to be passed through is still uncertain, as much
depends on the approvals from the state.
-AB 900 Expansion of the Kings County Jail
Through the process established by AB 900, Kings County has been awarded a grant of
$33 million to add another housing unit onto the County Jail. This is of utmost
importance to the County, given the impacts of Realignment 2011 described above.
In order to do the project correctly, in a fashion that will add enough capacity for several
years, the overall project is anticipated to cost approximately $43 million. The required
match for the $33 million state grant is $4 million, which the County has available
through impact fees and identified soft match, but that leaves $6 million in "overmatch"
which is presently unavailable in the County Treasury. Staff is proposing to finance this
overmatch over a 20 year period through tax-exempt debt, or private placement
financing, whichever is most cost-effective. It is anticipated that funds will be earmarked
to make the first installment in 2012-13, utilizing a portion of the replacement funds for
the Williamson Act Subvention. This is consistent with these monies being utilized for
capital projects for several years running, going back to when the County was actually
receiving its full Williamson Act and Farmland Security Zone Subventions.
- $16 Billion State Budget Deficit
Once again, the state tackled a chronic budget deficit, which was pegged at $16 billion
heading into the 2012-13 budget year, according to the Governor's May Revise. As
described above, the Governor will attempt again to fill a portion of this deficit with
temporary tax increases. On top of that, the State Budget contained reductions to a
number of grants, including Medi-Cal, CalWORKS, and In-Home Supportive Services.
In addition to that, concessions were negotiated for state employees that resulted in a 5%
reduction in compensation. Finally, the Budged imposed additional cuts to education
and particularly the judiciary, with the usual internal borrowing to address cash flow.
- Budget Triggers
The State Budget as enacted by the state, once again has "triggers" in it. These are cuts
that are proposed to automatically happen on January 1, 2013 if the Governor's proposed
tax increases do not pass in November. The proposed total is $6.1 billion, with $5.5
billion being cut for K-14 schools and $250 million each for the UC and CSU systems.
The balance of $100 million would come from cuts to park rangers, game wardens, and
lifeguards. Grants to Jaw enforcement for water safety patrol would be reduced. This
would be a direct cut to the Sheriffs Department in Kings County. State Fire protection
capabilities would be cut as well as flood control programs in the Department of Water
Resources.
- Federal Budget Sequestration
All of the state budget issues described above are happening against a backdrop of a
massive federal budget deficit with no real identified, agreed-upon course of action to deal with it prior to the National Elections in November, 2012. The only approach in
place, which came about as a result of Congress's inability to agree on a course of action,
is what is known as sequestration.
Essentially this is where budget cuts will occur automatically, much like what the state
calls triggers. As of now, barring any additional action by Congress and the President
prior to January 1, 2013, there will be massive cuts to both domestic and defense
spending. There is no way this can be accomplished without having some impact,
potentially devastating, on the County. This is due to the fact that so many programs that
are carried out by the County on behalf of the state, includes a lot of federal funding.
Such programs are found in Human Services, Health, Child Support, and Job Training to
name just a few. Additionally, defense spending cuts could negatively impact Lemoore
Naval Air Station, which is well known as a major factor in the well-being of Kings
County's economy. It is likely that the results of federal budget sequestration could
require mid-year budget adjustments.
- Increased Costs, Flat Revenues
These terms could be applied to every level of government, but we will only address how
they affect Kings County's Budget here.
Essentially, with the exception of the Proposed Jail Expansion and the impacts of
Realignment 2011, the Final 2012-13 spending plan is a "status quo" budget, whereby
we're just trying to maintain existing minimum levels of service. The difficulty in
accomplishing this is due to increased costs, many of which are beyond our direct
control, such as retirement rates and insurance, and flat revenues, primarily in the
discretionary category, led by property taxes.
The Department Heads in Kings County continue to work tremendously with your
Board's staff to seek reductions over time, now going on five years. It should be noted,
however, that there is increasing frustration with our inability to move forward with
significant adjustments, including in the form of compensation for County employees.
Several departments this year have requested compensation reviews or classification
studies due to changes in duties or compaction or organizational issues. However, due to
the structural deficit in the county budget and the uncertainty of the state's financial
situation, Administration recommended and your Board agreed to hold off on any studies
at this time, and to revisit these requests no sooner than January 2013 after several issues
are worked out, not the least of which is the outcome of the November State and Federal
elections.
Budget Totals
The overall Final Budget totals $267,3 86,361, or about $46.6 million more than last
year's Adopted Final Budget. Changes occur throughout the Budget, but it's fairly clear
that this large increase is primarily related to the proposed Jail Project and increased AB
109 allocations.
The General Fund Budget is $167,361,731 or approximately $4.5 million (2.8%) more
than last year's budget of $162.8 million. This is primarily due to increases in costs,
mostly outside direct control.
Total allocated positions are 1,283.03 full-time equivalents (FTE' s), which is a net
increase of 16.5 FTE's more than adopted in 2011-12. Most of these positions, as with
those added last year, are directly tied to realignment.
Overview by Function
Given the assumptions described above, together with more detailed assumptions
described in the narratives for each department, the Final Budget can be broadly outlined
by function as described below:
 General Government
County Departments that are described as General Government functions include the
Board of Supervisors, Administration, Department of Finance, Assessor, County
Counsel, Human Resources, Elections, Radio Communications, Insurance, and
Support of Organizations. Also included in this functional group is the General Fund
Contribution to Other Funds, such as Building Maintenance and Surveyor.
The General Government function totals $17.5 million, approximately 2.0 million
over last year. This increase is due to a $1.0 million allocation to the Workers'
Compensation Self-Insurance Fund and a 1.0 million contribution to the Liability
Self-Insurance Fund. This is to increase the reserves in each fund and was made
possible due to a higher than anticipated fund balance. Insurance premiums are up
over $150,000. Other departments in the General Government function are either
slightly up or down, reflecting our efforts to maintain status-quo. More detail is
contained in the narrative for each budget unit in this category.
 Public Safety
Public Safety departments are divided into three categories: 1) Criminal Justice
Departments, including the District Attorney, Sheriff, Probation, and the various
divisions they run, such as the Victim-Witness Program, Jails, Juvenile Center, and
Boot Camps; others in this category include costs related to the Courts, such as
Defense of the Indigent Accused in the Consolidated Courts Budget, and the Court
Reporter. Also within the Criminal Justice category are Child Support and the
Minors Advocacy Unit. 2) Other Protective Services, such as Ag
Commissioner/Sealer, Planning and Building Inspection, Public Guardian, and
Recorder, and 3) Fire.
These budgets total $70.0 million, up approximately $6.3 million from 2011-12. This
increase can be tied to the increased responsibilities associated with housing the socalled
non-non-nons, utilizing the state revenues allocated to Kings County to attempt
to pay for them.
The Fire Fund is budgeted higher but one major change should be noted - Hazardous
Waste taxes have been removed from this budget, as it continues to erode as a
funding source, and a portion of the Open Space Subvention Act replacement funds
have been utilized to backfill this loss. What little remains of Hazardous Waste
Taxes have been programmed for capital outlay. In addition, $700,000 of funding
from the Mitigation Agreement with the Tachi Y okut Tribe is appropriated to Fire,
while $200,000 of funding is allocated to the Sheriff's Department. This Mitigation
Agreement is set to expire in 2020, but we would anticipate a new agreement going
forward.
 Roads
The Roads budget totals $5 .9 million, which is $4.5 million lower than last year.
Once again, statewide allocations for road projects appear to be out of the contentious
budget debates in Sacramento, at least for now. As a result, the Public Works
Department is anticipating utilizing a variety of sources to complete projects in 2012-
13, including remaining Prop. 1 B monies. Although the budget appears to be
significantly lower, it should be noted that contingencies are very healthy and can and
will be appropriated in future years to assist with badly needed infrastructure repair.
 Health
The Health function includes the Public Health Department and all of its divisions,
Behavioral Health and Alcohol and Other Drug Programs Administration, and the
First Five Commission.
The Health Department is essentially unchanged from last year, and utilizes the same
maintenance of effort provisions that have been in place for several years, therefore
requiring no new discretionary funds.
Behavioral Health programs are down slightly from last year at $13.8 million, once
again reflecting the ongoing implementation of programs funded by the Mental
Health Services Act (MHSA).
The First Five Budget, at $1.8 million, reflects what was approved by the First Five
Commission, which has spending authority over this program. This is down nearly
$800,000 from last year reflecting a major reduction due to dwindling revenues.
 Welfare
The Welfare function includes Human Services Administration, Categorical Aid,
Child Abuse Prevention and the Job Training Office.
A total appropriation for Human Services, including Categorical Aid, is $58.7
million, easily the largest department in the County. This is down approximately $2.5
million from last year. Of course, this is the total appropriations, of which the vast
majority is offset by revenue from the state and federal government. It should be noted that the sharing ratio of these programs between Kings County and the state has
changed under Realignment 2011, as described above.
For 2012-13, the Board authorized the continued shift of existing Realignment
Program Funds from Health to Human Services and Behavioral Health Services. The
County is also anticipating higher receipts in sales tax dedicated to the existing
Realignment Program, which is true of sales tax estimates seen elsewhere in the
budget and in other jurisdictions.
The Job Training Office is up approximately $350,000 reflecting anticipated
adjustments in federal funds supporting these programs. This may change due to
sequestration as described above, but not likely until January, 2013.
 Education
The Education function includes the Library and Cooperative Extension programs.
The combined Final Budget for these in 2012-13 is approximately $2.4 million, up
slightly over last year.
The Library Fund continues to live within its means, and the Cooperative Extension
program has been temporarily reorganized together with the Tulare County program.
 Recreation
The Parks Division of Public Works is the only budget unit in this function. It is
budgeted at $2.0 million, about $350,000 over last year. This reflects higher costs of
doing business but also includes a position paid for with Realignment 2011 funds to
oversee inmates on work programs helping in the parks. Kingston Park, however, will
continue to stay closed.
 Capital Outlay
The Final Budget for Capital Outlay is $48.0 million. By far the largest project is the
Jail Expansion as described above.
Other project details can be found in Budget Unit 700000.
 Debt Service
Debt Service covers payment on debt in two areas- Pension Obligation Bonds, which
are accounted for in a separate fund; and Construction Debt, which accounts for
payments on the Cogeneration Plant, payment on the Revenue Bonds, issued to
finance the construction of the first phase of the new Jail, payment on debt issued for
the expansion of the Central Plant, and for fire engines.
Pension Obligation Bonds are budgeted at a cost of approximately $1.3 million, offset
by charges to the Criminal Justice Departments in the retirement appropriations. This
will be the eighth year of payments on the variable portion of these bonds. The decision to finance half of the cost of these bonds with variable rate instruments has
turned out to generate significant savings to the County, as these rates over the last
few years have dipped well below 1.0%. This continues to be one of the reasons that
Kings County does not have an unfunded liability for safety pensions as high as many
other agencies.
The revenues to pay for the Cogeneration Plant, Central Plant upgrade, and now the
solar projects are incorporated into the utilities charges for all the County
departments. No noticeable changes in those appropriations will be detected, as
utility savings as a result of these projects will offset the cost of financing them. The
original financed fire engines were paid off in 2011-12 and the Board authorized the
purchase of two new trucks to replace engines that are past their useful life, that are
now newly financed.
 Internal Service Funds
This functional category includes Information Technology, Motor Pool Services,
Public Works, Liability Self-Insurance, and Workers' Compensation. The cost of
these departments is applied to operational departments and is therefore reflected in
the appropriations for other functions. Workers' Compensation costs continue to be
essentially flat, while insurance costs are up. Not all departments, however, will
reflect flat Workers' Compensation charges. Changes, up or down, are a reflection of
claims and exposure in each department.
Information Technology charges to departments overall reflect a higher cost for 2012-
13. Individual departments may not be necessarily up or down, however, as several
projects are currently underway directly impacting their I.T. Charges. The I.T.
Internal Service Fund also includes the Purchasing, Record Storage/Microfilm,
Central Services, and Telecommunications functions.
Recognition
I would like to extend my appreciation to my staff and others who formed the team to
assemble this Budget, as well as all the Department Heads and their respective staffs who
continue to assist us in balancing our Budget.
My staff that deserves special recognition are Deb West, Assistant CAO; Rebecca
Campbell, Management Analyst; Angela Brasov, Secretary to the CAO and Colten !vans,
Intern in the CAO's Office. Others deserving of recognition include, but may not be
limited to, Rob Knudson and Dawn Perkins from Department of Finance, Israel Luna,
Michael Allen and Fred Cavazos from Information Technology, Darlene Nunes from
Central Services and Sarah Allen from the Health Department.
