In the previous two budget years, 2012-13 and 2013-14, several catchwords and phrases
were used that were the focus of much attention from a fiscal standpoint. Specifically,
these included Realignment; Redevelopment, Successor Agencies, Oversight Boards; AB
900 Expansion of the Kings County jail; $16 billion state budget deficit and Budget
Triggers; Federal Budget Sequestration; Increased Costs, Flat Revenues; and Pent-up
Demands. Several of these are still in play in 2014-15. While others are not, in some
cases, thankfully not.
Overall, the budget picture for 2014-15 and projections going forward are somewhat
improved. However, this picture is very tenuous, as the effects of the ongoing drought
will likely become a drag on the local economy. This will manifest itself in a variety of
ways, but will no doubt directly affect sales tax revenues for the County and property
values over time. The bottom line is a lot of rain and snow is imperative in the winter of
2014-15 and the state and federal government need to move on water storage projects that
have been studied and re-studied for decades. This, coupled with some form of local
groundwater management program is crucial to the economic well-being of Kings
County and its future budgetary outlook.
As stated above, some of the issues described over the last two fiscal years are still
having significant impacts on the County's spending plan. The most noteworthy include:
- Realignment
Kings and virtually all of the other 57 counties in the state continue to struggle with the
impacts of realignment under AB 109. This program, whereby the counties assumed a much greater responsibility for treating, supervlSlng, and/or incarcerating convicted
felons, has been a huge challenge for the Probation Department, the Sheriffs Office and
everyone else that has had to take on this additional responsibility.
Over the last three years, funding received from the state to take on the so-called "Non,
Non, Non's" (Non-serious, Non-violent, Non-sexual) offenders was approximately $6 to
$8 million annually. Unfortunately, in 2014-15, the estimated funding is going to be
down approximately 8%. This is going to add more stress to the overall system to handle
the population of Non, Non, Non's.
Your Board will recall that Kings County was already under a court ordered jail cap even
before AB 109 Realignment. As a result, the Sheriff had to release inmates early, which
was only exacerbated by realignment. Among the efforts to address this problem was the
conversion of the Juvenile Academy back to an adult "Branch Jail." In addition, the
County successfully applied for jail construction funding under AB 900, which will result
in the commencement of construction of additional capacity on the jail.
- AB 900 Expansion of the Kings County Jail
Kings County has been awarded $33 million in state grant funds toward an estimated $43
million expansion of the main jail. This project has been through planning and design
development for the past few years and at the time this was written, was actually out for
bids with construction planned to begin in July, 2014.
In order to pay for cost above the state grant, the County will meet its required match
through funds on hand and with staff time spent working on the project. However, this
still leaves about $6 million in additional hard cost that will have to be financed. Staff is
proposing to issue tax-exempt lease revenue bonds to cover the remaining cost of the
project, with a structure over approximately 15 to 17 years with annual debt service of
approximately $500,000 beginning in 2016. While the General Fund is technically the
source of these payments, staff has identified funds generated by AB 1265, the partially
replaced revenues under the Williamson Act and Farmland Security Zone programs, as
the primary source for paying this obligation. As previously described, this is consistent
with utilizing these funds for capital projects, just as the County started doing with open
space subventions from the state before the legislature and the Governor stopped that
program.
While it is anticipated that the AB 900 project will assist with the jail overcrowding
problem, it certainly is not going to relieve all the pressure of the growing jail population
under realignment. Therefore, Kings County successfully applied for another $20 million
in state grant funds under SB 1022. The proposed project will consist of another
expansion of the Main Jail with a focus on beds and program space to treat inmates for
drug and alcohol abuse, mental health issues, and other factors that influence the possible
incarceration of people, particularly those that are repeat offenders and can't seem to
break clear of the criminal justice system. More information on this will be forthcoming
throughout 2014-15.
- Redevelopment, Successor Agencies, Oversight Boards
In spite of several efforts in the state legislature over the last two years to modify or
recreate the redevelopment authority, the process is again effectively unchanged from last
year. Your Board will recall that Kings County's only redevelopment agency, located in
Kettleman City, has been completely dissolved and has no outstanding issues. The
reason for the original creation of that agency, which was to assist Kettleman City in
addressing its water quality/quantity issues, still remains a work in progress. It's been a
slow, tedious process working with the State Department of Public Health to utilize a
grant to build a surface water treatment plant. This budget continues the commitment of
using an annual apportionment of hazardous waste taxes toward the construction,
maintenance and other costs associated with the long term viability of the proposed water
treatment plant. The first $150,000 of hazardous tax receipts are appropriated to the
long-term commitment for the Kettleman City Water Project.
- Increased Costs, Flat Revenues
While the 2014-2015 Proposed Budget appears to reflect a more stable fiscal situation
that does not anticipate possible reductions because of state fiscal issues, the overall
situation is not nearly as robust as pre-recession levels. The discretionary revenue upon
which the Board funds most of the public safety budgets is really not increasing much in
2014-15. The budget is proposed to be higher based on more revenue to pay for
Affordable Care Act (ACA) programs and access to similar state and federal revenue
sources wherever possible, and also a recognition that fund balance continues to track
upward in the General Fund, reversing trends that hit hard in 2008-09 through 201O-1l.
This indicates that the County's ability to generate savings on the expenditure side of the
budget, coupled with higher than anticipated revenues, provide a more secure "fiscal
footing" going forward.
Discretionary revenues have got to start increasing again soon in order to maintain even
our "status quo" budging practices, whereby we continue to try to maintain existing
minimum levels of service. We know there will be continuing cost pressures, such as
rising retirement rates, and without discretionary revenue to pay for these and other
obligations, many of which are outside your Board's direct control, it will be increasingly
difficult to stay in a stronger economic position.
The conservative approach that we've taken over the years in our budgeting practices has
paid off most recently by receiving a Bond Rating of "A" for our proposed revenue bonds
for the AB 900 Jail project. This is the highest rating the County has received in at least
the last 30 years. This is significant in terms of generating savings on the County's debt
service for that project, and potentially other projects going forward.
One word of caution on the AB 900 project is worth stating, however. The long-term
cost of staffing the facility will continue to be a challenge, specifically given the demands
on AB 109 funding which is likely not going to be as high over time as originally
anticipated. Staff is working with the Sheriff on phasing in the new staff in preparation for the opening of the facility, which would occur in April, 2016. New staff is
recommended in this 2014-15 budget as there is significant time needed to complete
recruitments and training. This proposal assumes that the recently converted Branch Jail
will no longer be used for adults. The key to moving in that direction is to continue to
develop programs that will reduce recidivism as incarceration alone for the growing
number of inmates simply is unaffordable.
- Pent-Up Demands
Last year your Board will recall that we had significant concerns about reaching a
successful conclusion at the bargaining table with the various employee associations
representing County employees. Throughout 2013-14 the County successfully completed
negotiations for multi-year agreements with all bargaining units, with all of them under
contract into at least June, 2016. This is a tremendous help in planning for this year and
next year's budget. The County's relationship with its bargaining units remains strong as
a result.
There is continuing demand for additional staffing throughout the County departments, as
many have struggled to keep up with program demands as the County has maintained its
status quo approach. There are some additional positions recommended in various
departments, most of which are revenue offset, while some are not. These are, in our
estimation, required just to keep up with program requirements.
There are no contested budgets which demonstrates the positive way that all department
heads continue to work with Administration to achieve a balanced budget that lives
within our means.
Budget Totals
The overall Proposed Budget totals $310,500,065 or about $27.8 million more than last
year's Adopted Final Budget. Changes occur throughout the Budget, but it's fairly clear
that this increase is primarily related to the SB 1022 project, the next phase of the jail
expansion, which is a $20.7 million project.
The General Fund Budget is $189,848,114 or approximately $6.8 million (3.7%) more
than last year's budget of$183.1 million.
Total allocated positions are 1,397.91 full-time equivalents (FTE's), which is a net
increase of 32.53 FTE's over the adopted total in 2013-14. Most of these positions are
directly tied to Realignment 2011, implementation of the ACA or, in some cases, restored
or new positions in various departments that are either being restored or added due to
workload.
Overview by Function
Given the assumptions described above, together with more detailed assumptions
described in the narratives for each department, the Final Budget can be broadly outlined
by function as described below:
 General Government
County Departments that are described as General Government functions include the
Board of Supervisors, Administration, Department of Finance, Assessor, County
Counsel, Human Resources, Elections, Radio Communications, Insurance, and
Support of Organizations. Also included in this functional group is the General Fund
Contribution to Other Funds, such as Building Maintenance and Surveyor.
The General Government function totals $17.3 million, approximately $l.l million
more than last year. This increase, which will typically be repeated throughout the
functional areas of the entire budget, consists of additional cost for contractual salary
increases, retirement cost increases, utilities and on occasion, additional proposed
positions which typically are revenue offset. One issue worth noting here is the
increased cost for the Department of Finance and the Assessor is largely driven by
having to absorb the entire cost of the property tax system running on the mainframe.
While originally scheduled to be replaced by the end of 2014, the revised schedule
should have the system replaced by the end of the 2014-15 fiscal year by end of
calendar year 2015. A new budget unit has also been added to facilitate the
implementation of a new financial and human resources system, which is
appropriated at approximately $150,000.
 Public Safety
Public Safety departments are divided into three categories: 1) Criminal Justice
Departments. including the District Attorney, Sheriff, Probation, and the various
divisions they run, such as the Victim-Witness Program, Jails, and Juvenile Center;
others in this category include costs related to the Courts, such as Defense of the
Indigent Accused in the Consolidated Courts Budget, and the Court Reporter. Also
within the Criminal Justice category are Child Support and the Minors Advocacy
Unit. 2) Other Protective Services, such as Ag Commissioner/Sealer, Planning and
Building Inspection, Public Guardian, and Recorder, and 3) Fire.
These budgets total $78.2 million, up approximately $4.7 million over 2013-14.
Much of the increase in public safety is driven by realignment, but there are many
other changes proposed, including some major equipment purchases for both the
Sheriff and Fire Department. Staff is recommending the purchase of another swat
vehicle for the Sheriff and two previously approved fire engines are reflected in the
Fire budget. There are additional appropriations for Probation driven by the
expanded use of SB 678 funds from the state, which originally were considered to be
non-recurring funds but now appear to be more permanent.
More specific details of the proposed budget for all the public safety departments can
be found in the narrative section for each department.
 Roads
The Roads budget totals $12.2 million, which is $4.8 million higher than last year.
The Roads budget continues to go up as funds rollover on previously budgeted but
not completed projects are re-budgeted and all sources, including remaining Prop IB
funds are utilized. It should be noted that federal funding for roads continues to be at
risk as federal gas tax receipts are not coming close to keeping up with demand. Both
the federal and state governments are trying to address this issue but have not landed
on a solution to date.
 Health
The Health function includes the Public Health Department and all of its divisions,
Behavioral Health and Alcohol and Other Drug Programs Administration, and the
First Five Commission. Total appropriation is $27.2 million, or approximately $2.4
million lower than last year. This reduction is primarily due to the elimination of
appropriations of $2.8 million for participation in the County Medical Services
Program (CMSP). These funds are not sent to the County to then be forwarded to
CMSP. Instead those funds are retained by the state to fulfill our obligation to the
state for former CMSP participants that are now eligible for Medi-Cal. This does not
suggest that we are no longer in CMSP, but that population is significantly lower as
other programs are being utilized, such as Medi-Cal through CalViva. The other
reduction worth noting is the now complete elimination of the Family Planning
budget.
Behavioral Health programs are up approximately $1.0 million over last year at $16.6
million, once again reflecting the ongoing implementation of additional programs
funded by the Mental Health Services Act (MHSA). No General Fund discretionary
revenue beyond the required maintenance of effort is included in Behavioral Health
programs.
The First Five Budget, at $l.9 million, reflects what was approved by the First Five
Commission, which has spending authority over this program. This is down
$180,000 from last year, continuing the long term downward trend.
 Welfare
The Welfare function includes Human Services Administration, Categorical Aid,
Child Abuse Prevention and the Job Training Office.
A total appropriation for Human Services, including Categorical Aid, is $70.7
million, easily the largest department in the County. This is up approximately $4.6
million over last year. Of course, this is the total appropriations, of which the vast
majority is offset by revenue from the state and federal government. The majority of this increase is due to implementation of the ACA, however it's worth noting that this
budget proposes no transfer of moneys from the Health Realignment Fund to support
Human Services programs for the first time in several years.
The Job Training Office is down approximately $500,000 reflecting anticipated
adjustments in federal funds supporting these programs.
 Education
The Education function includes the Library and Cooperative Extension programs.
The combined Final Budget for these in 2014-15 is approximately $2.4 million,
unchanged from last year.
The Library Fund continues to live within its means, and the Cooperative Extension
program continues to be temporarily reorganized together with the Tulare County
program, however staff is recommending a contractual relationship for the Master
Gardener program for expanded services in Kings County.
 Recreation
The Parks Division of Public Works is the only budget unit in this function. It is
budgeted at $2.45 million, up about $450,000 over last year. This primarily reflects
the cost of facilitating water purchases and working together with water districts in
Kings County, all of which are paid for by those districts, resulting in no net cost to
the County on these transactions.
 Capital Outlay
The Final Budget for Capital Outlay is $65.4 million. The largest project, which was
rebudgeted in 2014-15, is the Phase II Jail Expansion as described above. In addition,
the Phase III Jail Expansion SB 1022 project, at $20.7 million is reflected here for the
first time.
Other project details can be found in Budget Unit 700000.
 Debt Service
Debt Service covers payment on debt in two areas - Pension Obligation Bonds, which
are accounted for in a separate fund; and Construction Debt, which accounts for
payments on the Cogeneration Plant, payment on the Revenue Bonds, issued to
finance the construction of the first and second phase of the new Jail, payment on
debt issued for the expansion of the Central Plant, and for other energy saving
projects, such as the solar energy producing shade structures.
Pension Obligation Bonds are budgeted at a cost of approximately $1.25 million,
offset by charges to the Criminal Justice Departments in the retirement
appropriations. This will be the tenth year of payments on the variable portion of these bonds. The decision to finance half of the cost of these bonds with variable rate
instruments has turned out to generate significant savings to the County, as these rates
over the last several years have dipped well below 1.0%. This continues to be one of
the reasons that Kings County does not have an unfunded liability for safety pensions
as high as many other agencies.
The revenues to pay for the Cogeneration Plant, Central Plant upgrade, and the solar
projects are incorporated into the utilities charges for all the County departments. No
noticeable changes in those appropriations will be detected, as utility savings as a
result of these projects will offset the cost of financing them. However, the cost of
electricity, primarily due to the increased requirements to use renewable energy
sources, is continuing to rise.
 Internal Service Funds
This functional category includes Infonnation Technology, Motor Pool Services,
Public Works, Liability Self-Insurance, and Workers' Compensation. The cost of
these departments is applied to operational departments and is therefore reflected in
the appropriations for other functions. Workers' Compensation costs are on the rise,
while other insurance costs are also up. Changes in departmental budgets for
workers' comp, up or down, are a reflection of claims and exposure in each
department.
Infonnation Technology charges to departments overall reflect a higher cost for 2014-
15. Individual departments may not be necessarily up or down, however, as several
projects are currently underway directly impacting their LT. Charges. The LT.
Internal Service Fund also includes the Purchasing, Record Storage/Microfilm,
Central Services, and Telecommunications functions.
Recognition
I would like to extend my appreciation to my staff and others who formed the team to
assemble this Proposed Budget, as well as all the Department Heads and their respective
staffs who continue to assist us in balancing our Budget.
My staff that deserves special recognition are Deb West, Assistant CAO; Rebecca
Campbell, Deputy CAO; Anthony Loza, Management Analyst, and Angela Brasov,
Secretary to the CAO. Others deserving of recognition include, but may not be limited
to, Rob Knudson from the Department of Finance, Hector Valenzuela, Freddie Cavazos
and Pascual Lopez from Information Technology, as well as Darlene Nunes from Central
Services.