For 2012-13, your Board will recall that there were several catch words and phrases that
were discussed in some detail that played out throughout the fiscal year. Many of those
are still an issue for the County's budget and likely will be for some time to come. As a
result, staff has chosen to present this budget message in a format that repeats the
description of those various issues, and provides an update as to the status of each one for
2013-14. In addition, we have added a section that will cover a new item worth
mentioning for this year: Pent-up Demands.
- Realignment
2012-13 was the first full fiscal year with "Realignment 2011" in effect. This version of
shifting responsibilities for costs and functions previously handled by the state to counties
includes the incarceration and treatment of so-called low-level offenders that historically
have gone to state prison. These are now called the "non-non-nons," which is shorthand
for non-serious, non-violent, non-sexual offenders. This portion of Realignment 2011
began in October, 2011. and as a result, in just the first eleven months, the Sheriff had to
release early a dramatically higher number of inmates than in the previous year, due to
the obviously significant increase in inmates.
In order to at least partially handle this influx of inmates, the County received slightly
more than $6 million in 2012-13. This resulted in over 40 new positions in the 2011-12
and 2012-13 budgets combined, primarily in the Sheriff's Office and Probation.
Significant funds were also set aside for drug and alcohol treatment services as there is an
agreement among all involved that services in this arena, as well as mental health
programs, job training, anger management, and other such services, need to be expanded if the revolving door of repeat offenders, otherwise known as recidivism, is to be
reduced.
Other programs included in Realignment 2011 are: Court security, public safety grants,
such as COPS and JJCPA, Mental Health Managed Care, Early and Periodic Screening,
Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT), Drug and Alcohol programs, Foster Care and Child
Welfare Services, and Adult Protective Services. All of these programs have new sharing
ratios between the state and counties.
In 2010, your Board will recall that Governor Brown was proposing to fund Realignment
2011 with a temporary extension of the income and sales tax rates that had previously
been increased, but were set to expire on June 30, 2011. He was unsuccessful in getting
enough votes to get his proposal on the ballot before the voters. Failing that, he proposed
and the legislature approved, a shift of existing state revenues. This approach had no
"Constitutional guarantee," which the Governor had proposed to include in the tax
extension to be approved by the electorate. Therefore, though the Governor included
"carved out" revenues in the state budget, the ongoing certainty of these revenues to fund
Realignment 2011 was tied to his latest attempt to increase taxes, which appeared on the
ballot as an initiative in November, 2012. So, like it or not, the ongoing revenues and the
Constitutional protection to ensure they would be available in the future were inextricably
tied together in the Governor's initiative to temporarily increase income and sales tax.
Update for 2013-14:
Early releases continue to be a recurring theme as all counties continue to struggle with
accommodating the influx of inmates that previously would have gone to state prison. A
major change in the County's facilities was proposed and approved by your Board in
2012-13: The conversion of the Juvenile Academy back into a Branch Jail. This is slated
to commence on July 1, 2013 and is reflected in the 2013-14 budget. This will allow for
additional housing for adults but will reduce housing for juveniles. New programs that
have shown success elsewhere are being implemented to assist with continuing to reduce
the number of juveniles in the system.
- Redevelopment, Successor Agencies, Oversight Boards
Late in 2011, the State Supreme Court upheld AB 1X26 and overturned AB 1X27,
which together were included in the 2011-12 State Budget as a mechanism to have
redevelopment agencies pay the state to assist with its budget difficulties. The result was
the end of redevelopment and the establishment of successor agencies to "unwind" all
redevelopment agencies, paying off all of their respective obligations and dispersing their
assets to all remaining participating taxing agencies. This process is to be approved over
time by an oversight board that is designed to watch over the activities of each successor
agency. So, in the case of Kings County, there are five successor agencies, one for each
city and one for the County. Each of these are the respective city councils and is the
Board of Supervisors for the County. For each of these there is also an established
oversight board. All of the identified obligations submitted by the successor agencies,
with the blessing of their respective oversight board, must then be approved by the State
Department of Finance.
How this affects Kings County's Budget is basically in two ways. First, with the
dissolution of the County's Redevelopment Agency, which is contiguous with the
boundaries of the Kettleman City Community Services District, questions had been raised
regarding the County's loan to the Redevelopment Agency, which in tum was loaned to
the Kettleman City Community Services District to assist in addressing its water quality
and quantity issues. All approvals were obtained through the level of the State
Controller's Office, which recognized the legitimacy of this arrangement so the project
could stay on track.
Second, with the dissolving of the other agencies in the four cities; A venal, Corcoran,
Hanford, and Lemoore, it appeared that the County, together with other local tax sharing
entities, would likely see additional property tax revenues being passed through on an
ongoing basis. The actual amount to be passed through was uncertain in 2012-13, as
much depended on approvals from the state.
Update for 2013-14:
In spite of several efforts in the state legislature to modify or recreate the redevelopment
authority, the process is effectively unchanged from last year. The County is still
assisting the Kettleman City Community Services District with its proposed construction
of a water treatment plant. The $3 million loan to Kettleman City through the County
Redevelopment Agency has been returned to the County and is in the fund balance for
the Capital Outlay Fund. Future match requirements to receive funding for the project
through the California Department of Public Health will continue to propose utilizing
Hazardous Waste Taxes, or a portion thereof.
Additional property taxes are now identified in the General, Library and Fire Funds that
are a direct result of redevelopment dissolution. There is a line item entitled "RDA
RPTTF Residuals" that designates this revenue source, which is $1.5 million for the
General Fund.
-AB 900 Expansion of the Kings County Jail
Through the process established by AB 900, Kings County has been awarded a grant of
$33 million to add another housing unit onto the County Jail. This is of utmost
importance to the County, given the impacts of Realignment 2011 described above.
In order to do the project correctly, in a fashion that will add enough capacity for several
years, the overall project is anticipated to cost approximately $43 million. The required
match for the $33 million state grant is $4 million, which the County has available
through impact fees and identified soft match, but that leaves $6 million in "overmatch"
which is presently unavailable in the County Treasury. Staff is proposing to finance this
overmatch over a 20 year period through tax-exempt debt, or private placement
financing, whichever is most cost-effective. It was anticipated that funds would be
earmarked to make the first installment in 2012-13, utilizing a portion of the replacement
funds for the Williamson Act Subvention. This is consistent with these monies being utilized for capital projects for several years running, going back to when the County was
actually receiving its full Williamson Act and Farmland Security Zone Subventions.
Update for 2013-14:
County staff and our consultants are still working on the final design of the jail expansion
so final costs are still being developed but the initial estimates remain unchanged. No
financing has been completed yet but the plan going forward is also still unchanged,
however all or a part of the $3 million in the Capital Outlay Fund balance that was
previously set up as a loan to Kettleman City is available to assist with the jail expansion.
- $16 Billion State Budget Deficit and Budget Triggers
Once again, the state tackled a chronic budget deficit, which was pegged at $16 billion
heading into the 2012-13 budget year, according to the Governor's May Revise in 2012.
As described above, the Governor attempted again to fill a portion of this deficit with
temporary tax increases. On top of that, the State Budget contained reductions to a
number of grants, including Medi-Cal, CalWORKS, and In-Home Supportive Services.
In addition, concessions were negotiated for state employees that resulted in a 5%
reduction in compensation. The Budget imposed additional cuts to education and
particularly the judiciary, with the usual internal borrowing to address cash flow.
The State Budget as enacted by the state, once again had "triggers" in it. These were cuts
that were proposed to automatically happen on January 1, 2013 if the Governor's
proposed tax increases did not pass in November, 2012. The proposed total was $6.1
billion, with $5.5 billion being cut for K-14 schools and $250 million each for the UC
and CSU systems. The balance of $100 million would have come from cuts to park
rangers, game wardens, and lifeguards. Grants to law enforcement for water safety patrol
would have been reduced. This would have been a direct cut to the Sheriffs Department
in Kings County. State Fire protection capabilities would have been cut as well as flood
control programs in the Department of Water Resources.
Updatefor 2013-14:
A $16 billion state budget deficit and triggers are not in play for 2013-14. With the
passage of Proposition 30, the state does not have the massive structural deficit that it was
facing last year. How well balanced the state budget actually will be in 2013-14 is the
subject of much debate in Sacramento as this message was being drafted. The Governor
has much more conservative estimates of revenues than the Legislative Analyst's Office
(LAO). This has resulted in the Governor being in disagreement with legislative
leadership from his own party, but it is anticipated a budget will be enacted by the state
within constitutional deadlines. While a "balanced" budget is anticipated without triggers
in 2013-14, it's worth noting that Prop. 30 revenues are temporary and it's doubtful that
the state will actually start paying its retirement and post-retirement benefit obligations,
which are massive and being ignored for now. This is worth noting as counties will
always be reliant on the fiscal well-being of the state in order to keep its own fiscal house
in order.
- Federal Budget Sequestration
All of the state budget issues described above were happening against a backdrop of a
massive federal budget deficit with no real identified, agreed-upon course of action to
deal with it prior to the National Elections in November, 2012. The only approach in
place, which came about as a result of Congress's inability to agree on a course of action,
is what is known as sequestration.
Essentially this is where budget cuts will occur automatically, much like what the state
calls triggers. Without any additional action by Congress and the President prior to
January 1, 2013, there would have been massive cuts to both domestic and defense
spending. There is no way this can be accomplished without having some impact,
potentially devastating, on the County. This is due to the fact that so many programs that
are carried out by the County on behalf of the state, include a lot of federal funding. Such
programs are found in Human Services, Health, Child Support, and Job Training to name
just a few. Additionally, defense spending cuts could negatively impact Lemoore Naval
Air Station, which is well known as a major factor in the well-being of Kings County's
economy. In 2012-13, it appeared likely that the results of federal budget sequestration
would require mid-year budget adjustments.
Update for 2013-14:
Congress and the President did work out an agreed-upon course to avoid the so-called
Fiscal Cliff on January 1, 2013. This only delayed sequestration, however. That began
in March, 2013. The effects of sequestration have not been, at least to this point, readily
apparent in any negative way in Kings County. Issues such as flight delays have
occurred at major airports around the nation and there have been discussions of furloughs
and other cuts at federal installations such as Lemoore Naval Air Station, but nothing as
drastic as mid-year budget cuts to county departments has occurred. Going forward, it
remains to be seen what happens when the federal government yet again faces a major
issue such as increasing the national debt limit.
- Increased Costs, Flat Revenues
These terms could be applied to every level of government, but we will only address how
they affect Kings County's Budget here.
Essentially, with the exception of the Proposed Jail Expansion and the impacts of
Realignment 2011, the Final 2012-13 spending plan was a "status quo" budget, whereby
we were just trying to maintain existing minimum levels of service. The difficulty in
accomplishing this was due to increased costs, many of which were beyond our direct
control, such as retirement rates and insurance, and flat revenues, primarily in the
discretionary category, led by property taxes.
The Department Heads in Kings County continue to work tremendously with your
Board's staff to seek reductions over time, now going on five years. It should be noted,
however, that there is increasing frustration with our inability to move forward with
significant adjustments, including in the form of compensation for County employees.
Several departments in 2012-13 requested compensation reviews or classification studies
due to changes in duties or compaction or organizational issues. However, due to the
structural deficit in the county budget and the uncertainty of the state's financial situation,
Administration recommended and your Board agreed to hold off on any studies and to
revisit these requests no sooner than January 2013 after several issues were worked out,
not the least of which was the outcome of the November State and Federal elections.
Update for 2013-14:
- Pent-Up Demands
As described above, there has been increasing frustration with our inability to move
forward with significant positive adjustments. For 2013-14, this frustration has only
increased, which is presently playing out at the negotiation table with the bargaining units
that have contracts which expired earlier this year. This is not to suggest that ongoing
talks have not been productive, professional, and will hopefully result in new contracts,
it's merely to point out that this is one of several areas where staff is attempting to make
modest gains without too much risk going forward.
This year is different than past years as we do not know, because of a lack of contracts
with four bargaining units, exactly what our anticipated salary and benefit costs will be.
Agreed upon adjustments in 2013-14 will have to be transferred from contingencies as
staff has made no assumptions of what the outcome of these contract negotiations will be.
In addition, this budget, for the most part, is a status quo spending plan in the sense that
we are still trying to maintain basic service levels with perhaps modest increases in some
staffing allocations. There are two notable exceptions to this: The impacts of
Realignment 2011 in the criminal justice system which has resulted in significant shifts
and additions of personnel in the Sheriffs Department and Probation; and the impacts of
the Affordable Care Act (ACA) which results in a significantly expanded call center in
the Human Services Agency.
Other than these, all changes in staffing are typically driven by attempting to at least
partially restore some of the levels that were lost due to the impacts of the "Great
Recession" now dating back nearly six years.
All department heads continue to work tremendously with Administration to balance
their "Pent-up Demands" with the County's ability to pay. All proposed department
budgets are agreed upon with the department heads.
Budget Totals
The overall Proposed Budget totals $283,449,406, or about $16.1 million more than last
year's Adopted Final Budget. Changes occur throughout the Budget, but it's fairly clear that this increase is primarily related to the increased AB 109 allocations and the
implementation of the ACA.
The General Fund Budget is $180,996,921 or approximately $13.6 million (7.5%) more
than last year's budget of $167.4 million. Again, this is primarily due to increases in
Realignment 2011 and implementation of the ACA.
Total allocated positions are 1,363.38 full-time equivalents (FTE's), which is a net
increase of 80.35 FTE's over the adopted total in 2012-13. Most of these positions are
directly tied to Realignment 2011, implementation of the ACA or, in some cases, restored
positions in various departments that may have been eliminated in recent years.
Overview by Function
Given the assumptions described above, together with more detailed assumptions
described in the narratives for each department, the Final Budget can be broadly outlined
by function as described below:
 General Government
County Departments that are described as General Government functions include the
Board of Supervisors, Administration, Department of Finance, Assessor, County
Counsel, Human Resources, Elections, Radio Communications, Insurance, and
Support of Organizations. Also included in this functional group is the General Fund
Contribution to Other Funds, such as Building Maintenance and Surveyor.
The General Government function totals $16.0 million, approximately $1.5 million
less than last year. This is largely due to a $1.0 million allocation to the Workers'
Compensation Self-Insurance Fund and a $1.0 million contribution to the Liability
Self-Insurance Fund that was done last year and both were not repeated in 2013-14.
Insurance premiums are up just over $70,000. Other departments in the General
Government function are typically slightly up, reflecting our efforts to absorb some
increases beyond our control, such as retirement and utilities and, in some cases,
restoration of some previously eliminated positions. More detail is contained in the
narrative for each budget unit in this category.
 Public Safety
Public Safety departments are divided into three categories: 1) Criminal Justice
Departments, including the District Attorney, Sheriff, Probation, and the various
divisions they run, such as the Victim-Witness Program, Jails, and Juvenile Center;
others in this category include costs related to the Courts, such as Defense of the
Indigent Accused in the Consolidated Courts Budget, and the Court Reporter. Also
within the Criminal Justice category are Child Support and the Minors Advocacy
Unit. 2) Other Protective Services, such as Ag Commissioner/Sealer, Planning and
Building Inspection, Public Guardian, and Recorder, and 3) Fire.
These budgets total $72.4 million, up approximately $2.4 million over 2012-13. This
can be tied to the increased responsibilities associated with housing the so-called nonnon-
nons, utilizing the state revenues allocated to Kings County to attempt to pay for
them.
The Fire Fund is budgeted lower but one major change should be noted- fixed assets
are down $600,000, primarily due to not repeating a $560,000 SCBA system
purchase. Again in 2013-14, no Hazardous Waste Tax is proposed to be dedicated to
Fire. What little remains of Hazardous Waste Taxes have been programmed for
capital outlay, specifically the Kettleman City Water Treatment Plant. In addition,
$700,000 of funding from the Mitigation Agreement with the Tachi Y okut Tribe is
appropriated to Fire, while $200,000 of funding is allocated to the Sheriffs
Department. This Mitigation Agreement is set to expire in 2020, but we anticipate
negotiating a new agreement going forward.
 Roads
The Roads budget totals $7.4 million, which is $1.5 million higher than last year.
Once again, statewide allocations for road projects appear to be out of the budget
debates in Sacramento, at least for now. As a result, the Public Works Department is
anticipating utilizing a variety of sources to complete projects in 2013-14, including
remaining Prop. 1 B monies.
 Health
The Health function includes the Public Health Department and all of its divisions,
Behavioral Health and Alcohol and Other Drug Programs Administration, and the
First Five Commission.
The overall total for the Health Department is essentially unchanged from last year,
and utilizes the same maintenance of effort provisions that have been in place for
several years, therefore requiring no new discretionary funds. However, due to the
continuing decline of the 1991 Realignment Funds, some programs are scheduled for
elimination at different stages in 2013-14. More detail is discussed in the Health
Department budget units.
Behavioral Health programs are up from last year at $15.6 million, once again
reflecting the ongoing implementation of additional programs funded by the Mental
Health Services Act (MHSA).
The First Five Budget, at $2.0 million, reflects what was approved by the First Five
Commission, which has spending authority over this program. This is up over
$280,000 from last year, reversing recent trends.
 Welfare
The Welfare function includes Human Services Administration, Categorical Aid,
Child Abuse Prevention and the Job Training Office.
A total appropriation for Human Services, including Categorical Aid, is $66.1
million, easily the largest department in the County. This is up approximately $7.4
million over last year. Of course, this is the total appropriations, of which the vast
majority is offset by revenue from the state and federal government. It should be
noted that the sharing ratio of these programs between Kings County and the state has
changed under Realignment 2011, and the vast majority of this increase is due to
implementation of the ACA.
The Job Training Office is up approximately $2.0 million reflecting anticipated
adjustments in federal funds supporting these programs.
 Education
The Education function includes the Library and Cooperative Extension programs.
The combined Final Budget for these in 2013-14 is approximately $2.4 million,
unchanged from last year.
The Library Fund continues to live within its means, and the Cooperative Extension
program continues to be temporarily reorganized together with the Tulare County
program.
 Recreation
The Parks Division of Public Works is the only budget unit in this function. It is
budgeted at $2.0 million, up just slightly over last year. This reflects higher costs of
doing business but also includes a position paid for with Realignment 2011 funds to
oversee inmates on work programs helping in the parks. In addition, staff is
proposing the restoration of one Grounds worker. Kingston Park, however, is
proposed to stay closed.
 Capital Outlay
The Final Budget for Capital Outlay is $45.3 million. By far the largest project,
which was rebudgeted in 2013-14, is the Jail Expansion as described above. Other
projects that are rebudgeted but needed additional funds are the morgue and the
tunnel to connect the jail to the state-funded new court.
Other project details can be found in Budget Unit 700000.
 Debt Service
Debt Service covers payment on debt in two areas - Pension Obligation Bonds, which
are accounted for in a separate fund; and Construction Debt, which accounts for payments on the Cogeneration Plant, payment on the Revenue Bonds, issued to
finance the construction of the first phase of the new Jail, payment on debt issued for
the expansion of the Central Plant, and for other energy saving projects, such as the
solar energy producing shade structures.
Pension Obligation Bonds are budgeted at a cost of approximately $1.2 million, offset
by charges to the Criminal Justice Departments in the retirement appropriations. This
will be the ninth year of payments on the variable portion of these bonds. The
decision to finance half of the cost of these bonds with variable rate instruments has
turned out to generate significant savings to the County, as these rates over the last
few years have dipped well below 1.0%. This continues to be one of the reasons that
Kings County does not have an unfunded liability for safety pensions as high as many
other agencies.
The revenues to pay for the Cogeneration Plant, Central Plant upgrade, and now the
solar projects are incorporated into the utilities charges for all the County
departments. No noticeable changes in those appropriations will be detected, as
utility savings as a result of these projects will offset the cost of financing them.
However, the cost of electricity, primarily due to the increased requirements to use
renewable energy sources, is continuing to rise. The originally financed fire engines
were paid off in 2012-13. The Board authorized the purchase of two new trucks to
replace engines that are past their useful life that are now newly financed (and
budgeted within the Fire Fund).
 Internal Service Funds
This functional category includes Information Technology, Motor Pool Services,
Public Works, Liability Self-Insurance, and Workers' Compensation. The cost of
these departments is applied to operational departments and is therefore reflected in
the appropriations for other functions. Workers' Compensation costs are on the rise,
while insurance costs are also up. Changes in departmental budgets for workers'
comp, up or down, are a reflection of claims and exposure in each department.
Information Technology charges to departments overall reflect a higher cost for 2013-
14. Individual departments may not be necessarily up or down, however, as several
projects are currently underway directly impacting their LT. Charges. The LT.
Internal Service Fund also includes the Purchasing, Record Storage/Microfilm,
Central Services, and Telecommunications functions.
I would like to extend my appreciation to my staff and others who formed the team to
assemble this Proposed Budget, as well as all the Department Heads and their respective
staffs who continue to assist us in balancing our Budget.
My staff that deserves special recognition are Deb West, Assistant CAO; Rebecca
Campbell, Deputy CAO; Angela Brasov, Secretary to the CAO and Colten Ivans, ExtraHelp
employee in the CAO's Office. Others deserving of recognition include, but may
not be limited to, Rob Knudson and Dawn Perkins from the Department of Finance,
Israel Luna, Michael Allen and Fred Cavazos from Information Technology and Darlene
Nunes from Central Services.