The 2015-16 Recommended Budget proposes new funding and positions to address
critical issues that the Board is working to resolve. This includes improvements to the
criminal justice system and jail facilities, reforms in the child welfare system, and
improvements in patient care as the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
continues. The budget also includes recommendations to allocate funding to strengthen
the County’s financial reserves and continues our investment in the construction and
refurbishment of community facilities, including libraries, parks and beaches.
The current economic outlook for the nation and California shows positive growth for the
remainder of 2015 and is expected to hold steady in 2016. While the housing market
has seen rapid gains in prices as well as a surging demand in recent years, growth has
slowed and has begun to level off in the coming year. The labor market continues to
improve, with the County expecting to surpass its pre-recession peak for the number of
jobs during 2015-16. Furthermore, the unemployment rate is expected to continue its
trend downward into 2016.
The economic outlook, although positive, continues to face challenges and
uncertainties. Current economic indicators show steady domestic growth. However,
the far-reaching effects of instability in global markets may potentially hinder the
sustainability of the national and local recovery. Additionally, the overall impact from the
recent significant decline in oil prices remains unclear. While declining prices are
expected to result in higher consumer and business spending, government entities that
rely on oil-related revenues, such as the gasoline tax, sales and use taxes, and property
taxes collected by the County, face reduced funding sources. Nevertheless, the
economic recovery is expected to continue, and we will continue to monitor economic
indicators and analyze their implications throughout the budget process.
Our office, in consultation with the Assessor’s office, is forecasting a 5.05 percent
increase to the 2015 tax assessment roll. Since this forecast is preliminary and the
Assessor is scheduled to issue its official forecast in May 2015, and release the final roll
in July 2015, our office will continue to work with the Assessor’s office to update our
property tax projections accordingly. We are also forecasting a 5.0 percent increase in
statewide sales tax growth.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
The Board of Supervisors’ commitment to adhere to the County’s long-standing
conservative budget practices allowed the County to weather the Great Recession
without major service reductions, layoffs, or furloughs. As a result of the recession, the
County employed a strategy that, along with other measures (i.e. curtailments and
efficiencies), used one-time budget solutions as a bridge until the economy
strengthened. The use of one-time funding solutions to balance the budget ended in
2013-14, and for the third year in a row, we are recommending a budget with no budget
gap, meaning that the ongoing costs are funded entirely with ongoing revenues.
At this initial stage of the annual budget process, we find that the amount of estimated
revenue growth, coupled with unavoidable cost increases and the need to fund critical
programs will, once again, challenge us to maintain the balance between fiscal
sustainability and service delivery. In a departure from many of the County’s budget
proposals over the past five years, which focused on closing budget gaps, recovery and
budget stabilization, the 2015-16 Recommended Budget provides funding to address
many of the critical programmatic issues the Board is working to resolve.
Program Changes
Outlined below are some of the significant program changes that are financed with
locally generated revenues.
? County Jails Mental Health Needs – Adds $23.5 million in ongoing funding to
the Provisional Financing Uses (PFU) budget unit. This amount, along with
$10.0 million in ongoing funding included in the 2014-15 Final Adopted Budget,
brings the total ongoing amount up to $33.5 million for mental health issues at
County jails. On June 4, 2014, the Department of Justice (DOJ) issued a report
outlining fifty-three (53) recommendations that pertain to mental health services
and suicide prevention issues in the County jail system. This Board letter
recommends that $45.3 million be set aside in the PFU budget unit to address
the DOJ recommendations pending negotiations with DOJ and Board approval.
? County Jails Excessive Use of Force – Reflects $64.5 million in ongoing
funding and $10.5 million in one-time funding, for a total of $75.0 million to be set
aside in the PFU budget unit to address allegations of excessive use of force in
the jails. The Chief Executive Office will continue to work with the Sheriff’s
Department to determine the level of resources that are required and present
final recommendations to the Board in June.
? Comprehensive Diversion – Inmate Treatment Program – Supplements
$20.0 million in one-time funding in the PFU budget unit with $10.0 million of
ongoing funding for this program. This funding is set aside in anticipation of the
District Attorney’s report on a Comprehensive Criminal Justice Mental Health
plan. Although General Fund dollars are being set aside, our office continues to
explore other outside revenue sources to fund this program.
? Animal Care and Control – Sets aside a total of $3.6 million in funding
($2.7 million ongoing and $0.9 million in one-time funding) in the PFU budget unit
for the Palmdale Animal Care Center, which is scheduled to open in late Spring
of 2016. This amount includes both one-time start-up costs and the day-to-day
operating costs for the new Care Center.
? Fire-Lifeguards – Restores $1.5 million in funding that was curtailed from the
Fire-Lifeguard budget during the Great Recession. This funding is being set
aside in the PFU budget unit and will be moved to the Fire-Lifeguard budget unit
in a later budget phase.
? In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Program – Increases funding for the
IHSS program by $5.5 million based upon State law that requires counties to
adjust the maintenance of effort base amount by an annual 3.5 percent inflation
factor.
? General Relief (GR) Caseload – Reflects a $21.4 million reduction in the
Department of Public Social Services’ Assistance budget unit due to an expected
8.7 percent decline in the GR caseload.
? Unincorporated Area Stormwater Program – Sets aside $6.5 million in the
PFU budget unit, along with $2.3 million already included in the Capital
Projects/Refurbishments budget, to help comply with the 2012 adopted National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit in the unincorporated
areas.
? Budget and Fiscal Policies – In accordance with County budget and fiscal
policies, we are recommending that $11.6 million be assigned to Appropriation
for Contingencies and $5.0 million be added to the County Extraordinary
Maintenance budget unit to help address deferred maintenance needs
throughout the County.
In addition, we are recommending important program changes that are financed with
outside revenues sources, primarily with State and federal funding.
? Children and Family Services – Reflects appropriation and revenue
increases of $66.9 million, and the addition of 542.0 budgeted positions, to
further reduce caseloads and improve child safety. The new budgeted
positions will be allocated to the following areas:
? Child Welfare Services – Adds 444.0 line-operational positions, including
250.0 Children’s Social Workers (CSWs), 70.0 Supervising CSWs, and
124.0 line staff to support these additional items to reduce caseloads;
? Specialized Programs – Increases 58.0 positions, including 16.0 CSWs,
10.0 Supervising CSWs, and 32.0 line staff to provide specialized services
that support child safety;
? Foster Youth Programs – Adds 22.0 positions to develop an employment
training program for foster youth; and
? Administrative Support – Augments 18.0 positions for critically needed
administrative support.
? Investment in Mental Health Wellness Act (SB 82) – Reflects a $111.5 million
increase in appropriation for the Department of Mental Health (DMH) to
implement SB 82, the Investment in Mental Health Wellness Act, which is fully
funded with State revenue. SB 82 expands urgent care centers, crisis residential
treatment, and mobile crisis support teams. In addition, it adds four types of
teams providing mental health triage and field-based crisis response
services. This adjustment adds 88.0 budgeted positions.
? Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) - Reflects an increase in appropriation of
$7.4 million for the DMH, fully offset by MHSA funding, for continued
implementation of MHSA plans approved by the Board on July 14, 2014,
including the Assisted Outpatient Treatment Program, also known as
“Laura’s Law”, approved by the Board on November 25, 2014. This
recommendation adds 30.0 budgeted positions.
The ACA was implemented on January 1, 2014 and the Department of Health Services
continues to refine its analysis of the impact. The Department is making good progress
on an integrated care delivery model to help it succeed under the ACA. The
Department’s 2015-16 Recommended Budget includes a revenue placeholder of
$81.3 million while the Department continues to develop its revenue projections related
to the ACA, the upcoming replacement 1115 Waiver, and the reconciliation of the
Assembly Bill (AB) 85 realignment revenue redirection.
The Recommended Budget is fully funded with available resources and also reflects the
use of $184.9 million in estimated obligated fund balance to be transferred to the
four hospital enterprise funds for ongoing health care costs. Highlighted below are the
significant recommended changes for Health Services:
? A net increase of 351.0 positions and $22.3 million in related funding for the
second phase of the standardized nurse staffing plan to comply with State
regulations;
? An increase of 30.0 positions and $1.7 million in related funding for the second
phase of the Community Health Worker initiative to facilitate medical care for
high-risk, high-need patients;
? An increase of 27.0 positions and $3.2 million in related funding to establish
additional primary care medical homes;
? An increase of 14.0 positions and $2.0 million in related funding to support the
Medical Hubs expansion; and
? A net increase of $42.3 million to annualize funding for the Department’s support
of patient care for the new Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Hospital, which is
anticipated to open in May 2015.
CAPITAL PROJECTS/EXTRAORDINARY MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS
Capital Projects
The 2015-16 Recommended Capital Projects/Refurbishments appropriates
$726.3 million for continued development, design, and construction of projects that
address high-priority health, public safety, recreation, and infrastructure needs.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget for Capital Projects/Refurbishments reflects a
decrease of $109.8 million from the 2014-15 Final Adopt Budget, due to the completion
of 42 projects in 2014-15. In addition, several bond-financed projects, which are not
accounted for in the Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget once bonds have been
issued, were also completed, including the Hall of Justice Renovation Project and the
Manhattan Beach Library Project.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget allocates $44.2 million for soil and groundwater
investigation, monitoring, and remediation projects at County-owned sites in the cities of
Downey, Carson, and throughout the unincorporated area.
The County continues to address facility needs resulting from the enactment of the
State’s Public Safety Realignment Act (AB 109), which resulted in an influx of new
inmates into County jails. The 2015-16 Recommended Budget appropriates
$162.7 million for facility improvements to various jail facilities, including the
refurbishment of the Mira Loma Detention Center.
In addition to these environmental and public protection projects, the County continues
to refurbish and construct new libraries, parks, and beach facilities, as well as address
its own governmental needs through the construction of new facilities.
Extraordinary Maintenance
The County continues to invest in deferred maintenance to meet performance
requirements and expectations for its facilities. The 2015-16 Recommended Budget
earmarks $170.8 million for high-priority repairs, maintenance and accessibility
modification needs at County facilities, including juvenile halls, animal shelters, County
beaches, parks, and for various roof repairs.
In 2015-16, the second phase of building condition assessments of 24.1 million square
feet of approximately 1,200 County-owned and/or County-maintained facilities and the
development of prioritized capital plans to address deferred maintenance will continue.
It is anticipated that the condition of approximately nine (9) million square feet of
buildings will be assessed during the fiscal year.
On January 9, 2015, Governor Jerry Brown released his FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget,
which includes $113.3 billion in State General Fund expenditures. The proposed
budget assumes $3.5 billion in additional State revenues above the amount projected in
the FY 2014-15 State Budget Act. Governor Brown indicated that while the economy
continues to improve, maintaining a balanced State Budget for the long-term will be an
ongoing challenge, and it will require fiscal restraint.
The Governor’s proposed budget contains no reductions to County-administered
programs, and it includes the repayment of $533 million statewide in pre-2004 deferred
State mandate payments owed to local governments, with a County estimated
repayment of $88 million. The Governor’s plan also reflects an increase in the base
allocation for the AB 109/2011 Public Safety Realignment from $934.1 million to
$1.1 billion statewide, and proposes to redirect an estimated $698.2 million statewide
from counties to the State to reflect potential county indigent health care savings due to
the implementation of the Medi-Cal expansion under the federal ACA. DHS estimates
the amount of 1991 Health Realignment funding to be redirected from the County to the
State in 2015-16 at $100.0 million.
The Legislature is currently conducting Budget Subcommittee hearings on the
Governor’s Proposed Budget. However, most actions on the State Budget will be held
pending the release of the Governor’s May Budget Revision that will contain updated
revenue estimates and budget allocations.
Federal Budget
The overall federal budget outlook for the County in 2015-16 is positive largely because
the County’s revenue for Medicaid, which is by far the County’s largest source of federal
revenue, will continue to grow due to the ACA’s Medicaid expansions. The County also
will receive increased revenue for Title IV-E Foster Care, which is its third largest
federal revenue source, under the terms and conditions of California’s Title IV-E waiver,
which provides participating counties with steadily increasing annual capped allocations.
Moreover, the County’s federal revenue will be stable through 2015-16 under the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program (CalWORKs in California),
Child Support Enforcement, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(CalFresh in California), and federal discretionary programs through which the County
receives its remaining federal revenue.
It is expected that the new Republican-controlled Congress will seek to reduce overall
federal spending, including deep cuts in Medicaid, which is the third largest federal
program after Social Security and Medicaid. Republicans, however, lack the two-thirds
majority in both houses needed to override expected presidential vetoes of legislation
that would significantly reduce Medicaid spending, such as by repealing the ACA.
Nevertheless, the risk of cuts in Medicaid and other federal programs through which the
County receives federal revenue is greater than in recent years when Democrats
controlled one or both houses of Congress. However, even if federal spending cuts are
enacted, their fiscal impacts are unlikely to be felt until after the end of 2015-16 at the
earliest.
Long-Term Budgetary Issues
As we look forward, we recognize that many budgetary hurdles lie ahead and will
require significant County spending. Some of the major challenges that will require a
multi-year funding approach include replenishing the County’s Rainy Day Fund,
addressing deferred maintenance needs, investing in capital improvements, and
establishing a fleet vehicle replacement program. Although, the County has taken
important steps to address retiree healthcare benefits, serious consideration needs to
be given to developing and implementing a plan to prefund this benefit.

