The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 Recommended Budget marks the first step in our annual
budget process and culminates with the Supplemental Budget scheduled for late
September 2016. The Recommended Budget maintains a balance between service
delivery and fiscal sustainability, while addressing the Board of Supervisors (Board’s)
programmatic priorities, including funding for homeless initiatives, wage enforcement,
economic development, affordable housing, diversion and reentry, Proposition 47
programs, and employee cost of living adjustments.
The current economic outlook for the nation, California, and the County shows positive
growth for the remainder of 2016 and into 2017. Growth in the labor market is strong,
with experts asserting that the national economy is back to full employment levels and
forecasting higher wages supported by market conditions. The housing market
continues to improve as prices grow moderately and demand persists for single-family
homes, as well as rental units. Consumer spending has demonstrated strong growth,
which will bolster the local economy.
The economic outlook also faces some challenges. Instability in global markets and
declining oil prices have resulted in uncertainties over manufacturing, exports, and the
financial markets. We will continue to monitor economic indicators and analyze their
implications throughout the budget process. We must remain mindful that the current
expansion will eventually give way to another economic slowdown that will likely
challenge our budget. Since World War II, economic expansions have averaged
approximately five (5) years. The current economic expansion has already exceeded
this average.
Our office, in consultation with the Assessor’s office, is forecasting a 5.0 percent
increase to the 2016 tax assessment roll. This forecast is preliminary, as the Assessor
is scheduled to issue its official forecast in May 2016, and release the final roll in July
2016. Our office will continue to work with the Assessor’s office to update our property
tax projections accordingly. We are also forecasting a 4.0 percent increase in statewide
sales tax growth.
Program Changes
Outlined below are some of the significant program changes that are financed with
locally generated revenues.
• Office of Homelessness - Reflects $0.7 million increase to the Chief
Executive Officer’s (CEO) budget to establish an Office of Homelessness. On
February 9, 2016, the Board directed the CEO to establish such an office as part
of the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget to provide executive leadership for this
important initiative. We have determined that this office would best be housed
within the CEO. This office will oversee, coordinate, and ensure implementation
of the 47 Homeless Initiative strategies approved by the Board, as well as act as
the County’s central point of contact and lead for coordinating with departments
on all on-going efforts related to homelessness.
• Homeless and Housing Programs - Contains $98.7 million in appropriation
authority for the Homelessness and Housing budget unit, aside from the
hundreds of millions of dollars being spent by the various County departments to
provide services to the homeless. This budget serves as the central funding
source for the Homeless Initiative. This includes $21.6 million in new one-time
funding financed by AB 109 revenues, which was approved by the Board on
February 9, 2016, as part of the Homelessness Initiative strategies.
• In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Program – Increases funding for the
IHSS program by $37.0 million for the following changes:
? Maintenance of Effort (MOE) – Reflects a $14.9 million increase based
upon State law that requires counties to adjust the MOE base amount by
an annual 3.5 percent inflation factor.
? IHSS Wage Increase – Provides an $18.7 million increase to annualize
the IHSS wage increase approved by the Board on June 16, 2015.
? IHSS Healthcare Benefits – Allocates $3.4 million in additional funding to
support costs associated with healthcare benefits for IHSS workers.
• General Relief (GR) Caseload – Reflects a $5.0 million reduction in the
Department of Public Social Services’ Assistance budget unit due to a projected
decline in the GR caseload.
• Sheriff’s Department – Allocates $4.5 million in additional funding, and adds
21.0 budgeted positions for the following Sheriff priority programs:
? Human Trafficking Bureau – Adds $1.6 million and 6.0 budgeted
positions to the Sheriff’s Detective budget unit to help investigate and
combat human trafficking and exploitation cases.
? Emergency Operations Bureau – Reflects an increase of $2.9 million in
funding, and adds 15.0 budgeted positions to provide around-the-clock
operational presence at the Sheriff’s Department Operational Center
(DOC). Although the Sheriff’s DOC opened in August 2015, it remains the
only major law enforcement DOC in the nation that does not have a
24-hour and 7-day operational presence.
• Unincorporated Area Stormwater Program: Sets aside $7.4 million in the
Provisional Financing Uses (PFU) budget unit to help comply with the 2012
adopted National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit in the
unincorporated areas.
• Fire-Lifeguards – Restores $2.0 million in funding that was curtailed from the
Fire-Lifeguard budget during the Great Recession. This adjustment will restore
funding for the rescue boat replacement program along with other operating
costs that were curtailed.
• Budget and Fiscal Policies – In accordance with County budget and fiscal
policies, we are recommending that $10.4 million be added to the Appropriation
for Contingencies to be used as a hedge against any unforeseen fiscal issues
during the year, and $5.0 million be added to the County Extraordinary
Maintenance budget unit to help address deferred maintenance needs
throughout the County. In addition, FY 2016-17 marks the second year of our
multi-year Board-approved plan to prefund retiree healthcare benefits.
In addition, we are recommending important program changes that are primarily
financed with outside revenues sources, including State and federal funding.
• Health Services – The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget is fully funded with
available resources and also reflects the use of $84.4 million in fund balance to
be transferred to the four hospital enterprise funds for ongoing health care costs.
Below are some important changes to the Health Services’ Budget.
? Provides a $7.2 million increase for Housing for Health activities to help
address the issues of homelessness, primarily in areas such as rapid
rehousing, case management services, and employment services;
? Allocates an additional $2.1 million in related funding to establish
additional primary care medical homes; and
? Reflects an increase of $0.9 million to establish leadership positions to
oversee the implementation of the Integrated Correctional Health Services
Plan.
• Office of Diversion and Re-Entry (ODR) – On August 11, 2015, the Board
created ODR and directed the CEO to finance diversion and re-entry (DR)
activities with a combination of one-time and ongoing funding sources. The
Department of Health Services was charged with providing oversight and
coordination of all countywide DR activities for persons who have mental illness
or substance use issues, and persons who are homeless or at risk of being
homeless upon discharge from incarceration. ODR supports the redirection of
persons in need of physical, mental and public health services from the criminal
justice system to appropriate care and treatment in lieu of incarceration. A
separate General Fund budget unit was created to account for DR funds, which
will be provided to various County departments for approved diversion activities.
The DR Recommended Budget reflects the following:
? Provides $10.7 million increase in new appropriation and revenue funded
by ongoing Public Safety Realignment (AB 109);
? Allocates program funding of $9.1 million for ODR staffing costs; to open a
Sobering Center, including space, staffing and overhead costs; and for
contracted housing, including interim housing, rental subsidies and movein
assistance costs; and
? Earmarks $1.4 million in first-year funding as part of a multi-year plan to
provide Crisis Intervention Training to Sheriff’s Department to improve
tactics when dealing with the mentally ill and reduce the use of force.
• Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) – Reflects the addition of $141.7 million in
appropriation that is completely offset with MHSA funding, and 40.0 budgeted
positions for continued implementation of MHSA plans approved by the Board on
October 20, 2015 and January 6, 2016.
• Children and Family Services – Provides $11.8 million in funding and adds
40.0 budgeted positions for the following programs:
? Child Welfare Services – Adds $4.5 million in appropriation, and 40.0
budgeted positions that are completely offset with State and federal
revenues. This includes 33.0 positions to primarily support the County’s
effort to combat the commercial and sexual exploitation of children. We
are also recommending 7.0 positions for critically needed administrative
support ($1.0 million), and adding 273.0 ordinance only positions to
provide the department with flexibility in hiring additional social workers
throughout the fiscal year.
? Parent-in-Partnership (PIP) Program – Provides an increase in
appropriation and revenue of $1.3 million for the PIP program. Parent
engagement through the PIP program is an important component of family
reunification goals of the department.
? High-Risk Youth Services – Provides an increase in appropriation and
revenue of $1.0 million to improve child safety and placement
opportunities for youth with severe behavioral issues.
? Childcare Program – Reflects a $4.0 million increase in appropriation
and revenue based upon an increased allocation of funding from the
State. This program funds childcare services for children who are with
their parents/relatives or are in first-time placements with non-related
caregivers (foster parents) in order to ensure the child’s safety and to
assist in avoiding out-of-home placements.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Capital Projects/Refurbishments budget appropriates
$695.9 million for continued development, design, and construction of projects that
address high-priority health, public safety, recreation, and infrastructure needs.
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for Capital Projects/Refurbishments reflects a
decrease of $66.3 million from the FY 2015-16 Final Adopted Budget, due to the
completion of 30 projects in FY 2015-16. In addition, several bond-financed projects,
which are not accounted for in the Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget once bonds
have been issued, were also completed, including the Zev Yaroslavsky Family Support
Center Project.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget allocates $78.4 million for soil and groundwater
investigation, monitoring, and remediation projects at County-owned sites in the cities of
Downey, Carson, and portions the unincorporated area.
The 2016-17 Recommended Budget appropriates $148.0 million to address custody
and law enforcement facility improvements throughout the County, including $5.1 million
for the Men’s Central Jail replacement planning effort and $118.2 million for the
Mira Loma Detention Center refurbishment.
In addition to these environmental and public protection projects, the County continues
to refurbish and construct new libraries, parks, and beach facilities, as well as address
its own governmental needs through the construction of new facilities.
Extraordinary Maintenance
The County continues to invest in deferred maintenance to meet performance
requirements and expectations for its facilities. The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget
earmarks $191.7 million for high-priority repairs, maintenance and accessibility
modification needs at County facilities, including juvenile halls, animal shelters, County
beaches, parks and for various roof repairs.
In FY 2016-17, the second phase of building condition assessments of County-owned
and/or County-maintained facilities will continue with the development of prioritized
capital plans to address deferred maintenance. It is anticipated that the condition of
approximately 12.6 million square feet of buildings will be assessed during the fiscal
year.
Since a significant portion of the County budget is comprised of revenues received from
the federal and State governments, we continue to monitor budget actions by those
entities to determine the impact to the County budget.
State Budget
On January 7, 2016, Governor Jerry Brown released his $170.7 billion FY 2016-17
Proposed Budget, which provides $122.6 billion in State General Fund expenditures,
includes $3.2 billion in total reserves, and projects a $8.0 billion Rainy Day Fund
balance by June 2017. The Administration reports that State revenues are expected to
increase by $3.7 billion in FY 2015-16 and $2.2 billion in FY 2016-17 above the
amounts projected in the FY 2015-16 State Budget Act.
Governor Brown indicated that a strengthening State economy continues to push
revenues higher, but he cautioned that maintaining a balanced budget for the long-term
will be an ongoing challenge requiring fiscal restraint and prudence. The Governor also
noted that since the year 2000, short periods of balanced State Budgets have been
followed by massive budget shortfalls. The Governor also reported that the State still
has billions of dollars in existing liabilities for deferred maintenance projects,
infrastructure needs, and for State retiree healthcare benefits, which must be
addressed.
The Governor’s proposed budget contains no reductions to County-administered
programs. The proposed budget reflects an increase in the base allocation for the
AB 109/2011 Public Safety Realignment from $1.1 billion to $1.2 billion, and it provides
an additional $169.9 million in FY 2016-17 and FY 2017-18 for counties to determine
Medi-Cal eligibility. The Governor also proposes $36.0 billion over the next decade to
maintain highways and roads, expand public transit, and improve critical trade routes
with funding split evenly between State and local transportation priorities. The
Department of Public Works reports that in FY 2016-17, the transportation funding
package would provide the County with approximately $34.0 million in additional
revenue that will soften the impact of the recent decline in gas tax
revenues. Thereafter, the County would receive approximately $100.0 million in
additional annual funding to address the immediate backlog of maintenance, repair, and
rehabilitation needs of the County’s streets and highways and to sustain good repair
practices in future years.
The Legislature is currently conducting Budget Subcommittee hearings on the
Governor’s Proposed Budget. However, most actions on the State Budget will be held
pending the release of the Governor’s May Budget Revision that will contain updated
revenue estimates and budget allocations.
The overall federal budget outlook for the County in FY 2016-17 is positive. The current
114th Congress has not enacted, and is unlikely to enact, legislation that would
significantly reduce the County’s federal revenue in FY 2016-17. The County receives
most of its federal revenue through mandatory spending programs, such as Medicaid
and Title IV-E Foster Care and Adoption Assistance, for which continued funding does
not require the enactment of federal legislation. This means that most of the County’s
federal revenue will remain safe, especially this year when divided government, deep
partisan differences, and a short legislative calendar should result in the enactment of
relatively few federal bills.
The risk of any significant reduction in the County’s remaining federal revenue that is
received through appropriated discretionary programs also is low. The Bipartisan
Budget Act of 2015, which was enacted in November 2015, increased the non-defense
discretionary spending cap by a total of $40 billion in Federal Fiscal Years (FFY) 2016
and 2017, thereby increasing the total pool of funds available for funding discretionary
programs through which the County receives funding. Moreover, in recent years,
Congress has funded the vast majority of discretionary programs, which the County
receives funding at or near their prior year levels.
SHORT- AND LONG-TERM BUDGET ISSUES
The County, like all governmental entities, must balance the demands for new services
and unavoidable cost increases within the amount of new revenue estimates. Given the
County’s limited authority to raise revenues, the Board has maintained a long-standing
adherence to conservative budget practices, which helped weather the Great Recession
without major service reductions, layoffs or furloughs. As we begin this initial stage of
the budget process, we once again are challenged by the demand for County services
that far exceeds the available financing sources.
The County has taken steps to address some of its long-term budget issues over the
last year. The Board approved a multi-year plan to prefund retiree healthcare benefits,
supplemented the County’s Rainy Day by $81.4 million, and added $20.0 million to a
reserve to address information technology capital planning. Looking forward, we
recognize that many budgetary hurdles lie ahead and will require significant investment
by the County. Most of these challenges require a multi-year funding approach that
includes replenishing the County’s Rainy Day Fund up to its prescribed level and further
supplementing funding for the replacement of legacy information technology systems.
In addition, we have forecasted a need of approximately $1.0 billion to fund deferred
maintenance in County buildings and facilities. This does not include ongoing
depreciation of facilities, nor does it account for the cost of replacing or conducting
major refurbishment of buildings, as these exceed their useful life.
