The current economic outlook for the nation and California shows moderate growth for
the remainder of 2013 and continuing into 2014. This positive economic growth has
been driven by improvements in the housing market and the continued downward trend
in unemployment. The housing market recovery began in early 2012, aided by
historically low-interest rates and a decline in foreclosure activity. The turnaround in the
housing market gained momentum towards the end of 2012 into 2013 and is expected
to continue. Improvements in the housing market and the continued downward trend in
unemployment have strengthened consumer confidence and increased consumer
spending. As a result, we have experienced positive gains in retail sales and sales tax
revenues led by increased sales of autos, gasoline, and construction materials.
The labor market is slowly improving as businesses begin to rebound, contributing to a
decline in unemployment rates; however, unemployment rates in Los Angeles County
remain at historically high levels. The economic outlook, although positive, continues to face challenges and
uncertainties. The impact of health care reform, sequestration, and the federal
government’s long-term fiscal imbalance remain to be seen. In addition, low housing
inventory and tighter lending standards can potentially hinder the housing recovery.
Nevertheless, economic recovery continues but the critical factor is its sustainability. We
will continue to monitor economic indicators, as we move forward, throughout the
budget process.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
Today, we recommend a budget to the Board without a budget gap. For the first time in
four (4) years, the net County cost (NCC) portion of the County’s budget is financed
entirely with ongoing revenue sources. As a result of the recent recession, the County
experienced a “cyclical” budget deficit. This occurred when the economy went into
recession and County revenues declined, while spending on safety net programs and
unavoidable costs increased. For the first time in four years, the County does not have
to rely on reserves or other one-time funding solutions to balance the budget. The chart
below illustrates the progress that has been made in reducing our budget gap during the
economic crisis.Since 2008-09 the County has faced significant budget deficits in the NCC portion of our
budget. NCC is that portion of our budget financed with locally generated revenues.
These deficits were managed without service reductions, layoffs, or furloughs. This
achievement was made possible through the leadership of the Board, County
managers, and the hard work of all County employees. The Board’s long-standing
conservative budget practices and our strong compliance to fiscal policies enabled us to
weather these trying economic times.
To control costs the County has also aggressively pursued savings through our
Efficiency Initiative Program and implemented a hard-hiring freeze and a freeze on
non-essential services, supplies and equipment. Throughout this difficult period,
employee labor groups have actively partnered with the County by agreeing to zero
salary increases, while step increases for County managers were, and continue to be,
suspended.
These collective actions to manage our budget during these trying times was
recognized last fall when the credit rating agency, Standard and Poor’s (S&P), raised
the County’s long-term credit rating. S&P underscored the County’s strong financial
management as one of the reasons for the upgrade. This was significant since the
County was the largest municipality to have received a rating upgrade in 2012, while in
the same period rating agencies downgraded 580 municipal ratings in comparison to
just 191 rating upgrades across the nation. The County has also received highest
short-term credit rating for the last 16 years, which contributed to record low-interest
costs.
Our principle strategies to deal with the past budget deficits were to judiciously use
reserves, take limited departmental curtailments that did not create significant service
impacts, reduce capital funding, and aggressively pursue savings from efficiencies.
Had the County relied solely on departmental curtailments, the impact to County
services and its residents would have been much more draconian and would have
resulted in the reduction of critical services and the layoff of a large number of County
employees. This would have put an even greater strain on an already fragile local
economy. We believe that the effects of the recession on our budget (i.e., declines in
revenues and increases in assistance caseloads) are a cyclical consequence of the
recession and its aftermath. Over the last four years, structural changes to the budget
came from departmental curtailments of approximately $358.6 million. These measured
actions, along with the use of one-time funding sources, have allowed us to strategically
achieve a balanced budget by maintaining critical core services. Through this strategy,
we have sought to avoid extensive reductions to department budgets. As noted
previously, the 2013-14 Recommended County budget does not include any one-time
budget solutions for ongoing expenses.
Unavoidable Cost Increases
The primary drivers of unavoidable cost increases are employee benefits. The County’s
retirement contribution rates will increase primarily due to the losses sustained by the
Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association (LACERA) in FY 2008-09 and
the reduction in the assumed investment rate of return. Under California county
retirement law, liabilities not funded through member contributions are the responsibility
of the employer. LACERA’s funding policy calls for asset gains and losses to be
smoothed over a five-year period, and the unfunded portion of the liability to be amortized over thirty years. In addition, increases in health insurance premiums for
County employees.
Revenue Increases
Just as the economy has improved, so have the County’s revenues and we are once
again forecasting increases in a variety of locally generated revenues along with
increases in statewide sales tax revenues.
For the third year in a row, the Assessor is forecasting a preliminary assessed valuation
increase. For 2013-14, the change is estimated to be 2.88 percent. Since the forecast
is preliminary and the Assessor is scheduled to release updated forecasts in May 2013
with a final assessment roll forecast in July 2013, our office will continue to work with
the Assessor’s office to monitor and update our property tax projection accordingly. In
addition, we are recommending a $40.0 million (ongoing) and $20.0 million (one-time)
increase in property tax revenue residual from the dissolution of redevelopment
agencies.
Once again, we are seeing year-over-year growth in Proposition 172 Sales Tax and
Realignment Sales Tax. Based upon this increase and a survey of local economic
forecasts, we have assumed a 4.0 percent growth factor in our overall sales tax
projection for the 2013-14 Recommended Budget. Like property taxes, we will continue
to monitor these revenue sources and update our projections going forward, throughout
the budget process.
The increases in property tax and sales tax are partially offset by a decrease in the
property tax administrative fees, interest earnings, and a reduction in business license
taxes due to the impending closure of the Puente Hills Landfill.
Looking Forward
Achieving a balanced budget is a notable accomplishment given the economic crisis
that we have endured without service reductions, layoffs, or furloughs; however, the
County still faces a number of challenges and uncertainties ahead, and we must
continue with our conservative budget practices. During the budget crisis, we utilized
reserves and capital funds to help balance our budget. Serious consideration should be
given to restoring our reserves and working towards the County budget policy that calls
for a ten percent (10%) reserve of locally generated revenues in our Rainy Day Fund,
and providing funding to address the County’s deferred maintenance needs. As noted
above, the County also utilized ongoing departmental budget curtailments to help
achieve a balanced budget. On average, departments suffered a 15% reduction to the
NCC portion of their budgets while at the same time absorbing certain employee benefit cost increases. Some departments also have structural deficits caused by several
years of curtailments and cost absorptions. Strategically restoring these curtailments
and correcting structural deficits should be given strong consideration as we move
forward. County employees have also gone without a cost-of-living adjustment since
August 2008 for safety employees, and January 2009 for the remaining employees.
Finally, one of the biggest areas of uncertainty concerns the impact that health care
reform (Affordable Care Act) will have on the County Health Department.
OTHER FUNDING RECOMMENDATIONS
Listed below are some important recommendations included in the 2013-14
Recommended Budget.
? Citizens’ Commission on Jail Violence (CCJV) – Reflects $1.0 million in
funding and the allocation of 4.0 budgeted positions to the Sheriff’s Department
as recommended by the CCJV. In addition, we recommend that an additional
$10.0 million be set aside in the Provisional Financing Uses budget pending
completion of a program analysis by the implementation monitor and
subject-matter experts along with a financial analysis by our office. It should be
noted that our review will likely result in the need for additional funding. Once our
analyses are complete, our office will provide recommendations to the Board for
consideration during a subsequent budget phase.
? Office of Inspector General (OIG) – Sets aside $5.0 million in ongoing funding
in the Provisional Financing Uses budget for an Inspector General. On
October 2, 2012, the Board directed County Counsel and our office to evaluate
the feasibility of creating an OIG. The OIG would provide comprehensive
oversight and monitoring of the Sheriff’s Department and its jails. This funding
would be used to address the operational needs of OIG. Once the full analysis
determines the cost of the OIG, we will provide the Board with recommendations
for consideration.
? Summer Gang Suppression – Allocates $3.6 million funding in the Provisional
Financing Uses budget for the Sheriff’s Summer Gang Suppression program.
? Unincorporated Area Stormwater Urban Runoff Quality Program – Reflects
$10.0 million in ongoing funding and $6.0 million in one-time funding to address
regulatory stormwater and urban runoff compliance requirements in the
unincorporated areas of the County.
? Mental Health – Recommends that $4.0 million be added to the Department of
Mental Health’s budget to add 50 additional Institution for Mental Diseases (IMD) beds. Adding IMD beds will provide critical care for individuals who require these
services and help to alleviate overcrowding of emergency rooms and hospital
inpatient beds throughout the County.
? Probation Juvenile Day Reporting Centers (JDRC) – Sets aside an additional
$1.3 million in the Provisional Financing Uses budget, bringing the total amount
set aside for JDRC to $2.3 million. JDRCs provide the Courts with an alternative
to incarceration (probation camps) and help to reduce camp population by
providing intensive community-based services to moderate- to high-risk juvenile
probationers.
? High-Tech Cyber Crime – Recommends $1.0 million in funding and 7.0
budgeted positions to supplement the District Attorney’s High-Tech Cyber Crime
team to help protect the County's network infrastructure from cyber attacks and
to address significant increases in high-tech cyber crimes.
? Health Care Reform – Reflects a net increase of 107.0 budgeted positions for
the Department of Public Social Services’ Administration budget. Enactment of
the Affordable Care Act (ACA) will provide increased health coverage for
hundreds of thousands of County residents. This change in health coverage
eligibility will increase the Department’s existing Medi-Cal caseload starting in
January 2014 and will markedly increase the Medi-Cal workload thereafter.
? Children’s Welcome Center – Recommends that $3.2 million in appropriation
be added to the Department of Children and Family Services’ Administration
budget to improve the department’s Emergency Response Command Post
operations to ensure the safety of children awaiting after-hours placement. This
increase in appropriation is partially offset with $2.2 million in State and federal
revenues.
? Energy Efficiency Projects – Reflects an increase in appropriation and revenue
of $26.9 million to the County’s utilities budget unit to fund investor-owned utilities
and other energy efficiency programs. The increase will continue and grow the
County's leadership role in the State's immediate and longer term objectives
towards development of a sustainable, clean-energy economy.
HEALTH SERVICES
The Department of Health Services (DHS) is continuing to develop its analysis of the
impact of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), which is effective January 1, 2014. The
potential impact of ACA has not yet been factored into the Department’s 2013-14
Recommended Budget.
The mid-year implementation of the ACA makes projecting the impact for the entire
2013-14 fiscal year (FY) more difficult. Disproportionate Share Hospital, Medi-Cal feefor-
service, Safety Net Care Pool, and Healthy Way LA (HWLA) matched funding will be
impacted in FY 2013-14 in varying degrees. The analysis is further complicated as
certain Waiver-related funding streams are shared among the public hospitals
statewide, based on a distribution formula that takes into account the numbers of
uninsured patients and other factors. The varying impacts of the ACA in counties with
public hospitals are factored into the formula. Only when that process is completed will
the Department be able to determine how much of the shared funds the County will
receive for FY 2013-14. The ACA will also impact the Department’s payer mix and this
factor will be included in the analysis. Any one of these items has the potential to
materially impact the Department’s projections.
Additionally, the two major features of the ACA that will have the most significant effect
on DHS are: 1) patient choice; and 2) payment based on capitation or bundled
payments rather than expenses. DHS must be successful in addressing these features
or could face huge financial shortfalls and/or closure of facilities. DHS is rapidly taking
the necessary steps to prepare for the ACA implementation, including, but not limited to:
? Developing and instituting a patient-centered medical home model
? Empanelling patients in primary care homes
? Increasing enrollment in HWLA
? Increasing the number of primary care, specialty care, and diagnostic outpatient
appointments
? Implementing an electronic health record information system
? Installing a disease management registry to track necessary patient interventions
? Launching eConsultation to improve provider communication about patient care
and to optimize the use of specialty care capacity
? Improving the patient experience, and
? Decreasing the cost of services while improving quality and service levels
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget is fully funded with available resources. The
Department is continuing to refine its projection analysis for the various funding streams
in light of these complexities and will update them in a future budget phase.
POTENTIAL STATE/FEDERAL BUDGET IMPACTS
State Budget
On January 10, 2013, the Governor released his 2013-14 Proposed State Budget,
which includes $97.7 billion in State General Fund expenditures. While the Governor’s
budget plan contains no significant reductions to County-administered programs, it outlines his proposals to implement federal Health Care Reform, which is a critical
priority to the County. The Governor’s plan does contain a potential risk to the County‘s
1991 Realignment revenue allocation. The Brown Administration has expressed
significant interest in redirecting 1991 Realignment funds from counties to the State.
These funds, estimated at $395.0 million, are used to fund critical health and public
health services. At the direction of the Board, we continue a comprehensive legislative
strategy to address this issue.
Since the State budget situation continues to unfold and remains fluid, we are deferring
recommendations to align the County budget with actions by the Governor and the
Legislature until later phases of the State Budget process when their situation becomes
clearer. Similarly, we are deferring Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) budget
adjustments, since AB 109 allocations to counties are expected to be addressed in the
Governor’s May Budget Revision.
Federal Budget
Congress did not reach agreement on full-year funding for Federal Fiscal Year (FFY)
2013 (which began on October 1, 2012) until March 21, 2013. The President is required
to release a proposed budget for the coming fiscal year by the first Monday in February.
However, as of March 21, 2013, President Obama has not yet released his Proposed
FFY 2014 Budget, and is not expected to do so until mid-April. Such delays in the
Federal budget cycle have become common with the deep differences between the two
parties, neither of which control both houses of Congress.
Continued gridlock on Federal budget matters, would mean that the Federal
government will continue to run huge budget deficits. This year, the annual Federal
budget deficit is expected to fall below $1 trillion for the first time since 2008 due to the
improving economy; short-term spending increases and tax cuts that expired on
December 31, 2012; and the $85 billion in across-the-board sequestration spending
cuts that were imposed on March 1, 2013. These sequestration cuts will reduce the
County’s overall Federal revenue by less than one percent because the vast majority of
the County’s Federal revenue comes from mandatory (entitlement) programs, such as
Medicaid, Title IV-E Foster Care and Adoption Assistance, Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families, Child Support Enforcement, and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program, which are exempt from such cuts. Non-defense discretionary programs for
which funding levels are set through annual appropriations bills were cut by 5 percent
for FFY 2013.
The County’s Federal Medicaid revenue will grow in the coming years largely due to
Medicaid expansions enacted under the Affordable Care Act. However, under current
Federal law, the funding outlook for County revenue received through Federal  discretionary programs is far less promising. Under current law, even larger
sequestration cuts totaling over $109 billion a year will be applied to non-exempt
programs over the next eight years. The sequestration cuts for FFY 2013 were reduced
to $85 billion under the legislation that was enacted this year to avert the “fiscal cliff.”
We will continue to monitor and report to the Board on the latest developments.
CAPITAL PROJECTS/EXTRAORDINARY MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS
Capital Projects
The 2013-14 Recommended Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget appropriates
$976.9 million for continued development, design, and construction of projects that
address high priority health, public safety, recreation, and infrastructure needs. The
funded projects reflect the new programmatic direction being undertaken on a national
level with regard to health care and with respect to the State of California’s policies over
the incarceration of adult and juvenile offenders.
The recommended 2013-14 appropriation also reflects a decrease of $401.1 million
from the 2012-13 Final Adopted Budget, due to the completion of 19 projects in
2012-13, and the issuance of long-term bonds to finance certain projects that were
initially funded in the Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget. Bond-financed projects
are no longer accounted for in the Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget once bonds
have been issued. Such projects include the seismic retrofit of the County’s acute care
inpatient facilities, expansion of the County’s surgical and emergency room facilities,
and rehabilitation of two historic assets.
In terms of currently funded projects, the 2013-14 Recommended Budget reflects the
implementation of Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) Realignment, and Juvenile
Justice Realignment (SB 81). The County is also investing in new outpatient centers at
the Martin Luther King Jr., and Rancho Los Amigos Medical Center campuses, and in
the High Desert area. In addition, construction of a new community hospital is
underway at the Martin Luther King Jr., Medical Center campus which will provide a
new inpatient care option for the residents of South Los Angeles.
The County jail system is also experiencing a major programmatic shift with the
enactment of AB 109, the State’s Public Safety Realignment Act. Under AB 109
Realignment, certain State inmates are transferred to the County’s jail system. The
influx of new inmates, combined with the longer sentences of State inmates, has
significantly increased the County’s jail population. To mitigate this impact, the County
is developing a plan to modernize and expand its detention facilities. The
Recommended 2013-14 Budget appropriates $157.5 million for facility improvements
under the plan. Once the Board-order consultant study is completed, we will finalize the plan to improve the County’s detention services. In order to implement SB 81, an
additional $41.1 million is being recommended to construct a reconfigured juvenile
detention facility at Camp Kilpatrick to accommodate a new evidence-based
rehabilitation and educational model. The project is partially funded by a State grant.
In addition to these health and public protection projects, the County continues to
refurbish and construct new libraries, parks, and beach facilities to enrich the lives of
County residents, as well as address its own governmental needs through the
construction of new facilities, such as a new countywide data center.
Sustainable Design Program
In January 2007, the Board of Supervisors approved the establishment of the
Sustainable Design Program as a component of the County’s Energy and
Environmental Policy. The purpose of the Program is to support the County’s goal of a
20% reduction in its facility’s energy and resource consumption by the year 2015
through the integration of sustainable, “green building” technologies into the designs of
the County’s capital improvement and refurbishment projects. The 2013-14
Recommended Capital Projects/Refurbishments Budget reflects the County’s continued
commitment to the ideal of sustainability, with the incorporation of sustainable design
technologies into 144, or 46 percent of the County’s 311 active building or refurbishment
related projects.
Extraordinary Maintenance
The County continues to direct ongoing investment to meet performance requirements
and expectations for its facilities. The 2013-14 Recommended Budget appropriates
$106.0 million for high priority repairs, maintenance and accessibility modification needs
at County facilities, including juvenile halls, animal shelters, County beaches, parks, and
for various roof repairs throughout the County.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget also appropriates funds for a pilot program
approved by the Board of Supervisors on September 4, 2012, which will lead to an
overall plan resulting in physical assessments and ongoing maintenance tracking for
21.8 million square feet of County-owned space, and allowing for long-range facility
planning. The pilot program includes a typical public health center, community and
senior center, park and fire station.
Countywide Efficiency Efforts
The County continues to aggressively explore efficiencies as a means to generate
ongoing and one-time savings while improving operations. With the support of the Board, our office has placed a high emphasis on both countywide and departmental
efficiencies over the last four (4) years, working with departments to cut operating costs
through diligent efforts and innovative reengineering of existing processes. The
County’s ability to avoid the serious cutbacks and layoffs that many other jurisdictions
have suffered in this economic crisis is in part due to these cost-saving efforts. To date,
the County has achieved over $250 million in operational efficiencies. The FY 2013-14
Recommended Budget includes the continuation of numerous efficiency projects, as
well as two new efforts. Projects include:
? Refinancing of bonds issued by former Redevelopment Agencies saving ongoing
funding for the County, schools, and local cities (potentially $100.0 million over
20 years);
? Fuel Management System to accurately track and monitor fuel usage;
? Dramatically lower pharmaceutical drug costs through streamlined/volume
purchasing and inventory management ($100.3 million per year);
? Conversion of General Relief recipients to collect Supplemental Security Income
($18.6 million one-time savings);
? Negotiation of enterprise software licenses ($10.8 million one-time savings);
? Improved Medi-Cal claims processing and reduction of denied days ($8.0 million
per year);
? Increased clinic participation and expansion of industry-sponsored assistance to
reduce indigent client medication costs ($6.1 million per year);
? Systematic monitoring and termination of all unused phone/data lines ($5.5
million per year);
? Increased collections through offering payment plans at hospitals ($2.5 million
per year); and
? Requiring all county contractors to be current on their personal and real property
taxes ($3.7 million one-time savings). 
