Marin County is dedicated to being a responsive, open
and community-focused government. Working with our
community partners, we deliver a wide range of services
that make our community a better place to live and work.
From providing health insurance to the uninsured to
responding to a natural disaster, we are continually striving
to make Marin a safer and more equitable community.
Because of past decisions to restructure spending, the
budget is balanced and fiscally sound. It maintains current
service levels and makes targeted investments to address
the Board’s highest priorities. All three independent bond
rating agencies affirm Marin County’s AAA rating, citing
a strong local economy, sound fiscal management and a
proactive approach to reducing unfunded retiree liabilities.
Overall, the County budget is increasing by just over 4
percent. To avoid future shortfalls, the budget continues
our practice of matching one-time revenues with onetime
expenses. Our goal is to practice the same financial
discipline in good times that we did during the economic
downturn. Several strategies have guided the development
of this budget proposal, including the following:
?? Maintaining current service levels
?? Adjusting fee schedules to keep pace with inflation
?? Allocating one-time and limited ongoing funds
toward the County’s highest priorities
?? Building up reserves during good economic times
?? Implementing the 5 Year Business Plan
Implementing the 5 Year Business Plan
Earlier this year, the Board adopted a 5 Year Business Plan designed to improve County services by empowering our workforce to more effectively adapt and respond to the complex issues facing our community. The planning and development process involved a collaboration of County employees and community partners from a variety of backgrounds. The 5 Year Business Plan builds upon past planning efforts and strives to solidify the foundation for excellent services and accountability that will benefit our residents for years to come.
One of the key steps in becoming a more responsive government was identifying the major trends facing our county. Data shows that our community is experiencing a growing wage gap, an increasing number of households living below self-sufficiency standards, and an evolving ethnic and demographic makeup. Furthermore, rapidly changing technology has resulted in dramatically different expectations of county services.
While still in early stages of implementation, our vision of working together to become a more responsive government is supported in this budget through investments in cultural competency training, career development, and the Information Services Technology Strategic Plan.
Investing in County Road Infrastructure
Consistent with the Board’s policy of improving the County’s Pavement Condition Index (PCI), we are recommending an ongoing increase of $1 million for annual road maintenance programs as well as $6 million in one-time funds to support the summer 2016 paving program. In addition to declining gas tax revenues, recent reports show that the County needs to increase road maintenance expenditures by approximately $10 million per year in order to steadily improve pavement conditions in unincorporated areas.
Over the next few years, the County will also leverage $35 million in federal grant funds for improvements to roads in Muir Woods and Point Reyes, and will utilize $13 million in Transportation Authority of Marin (TAM) funding to resurface Sir Francis Drake from Greenbrae to Ross.
Supporting Equity & Mitigating Income Inequality
As the safety net provider for the community, the County focuses its attention and resources on addressing poverty and income inequality. The County has responded to the growing equity gap in various ways over the past few years. Working with community partners such as Marin Kids and Marin Promise, expanding access to healthcare, and reducing park and library fees have all been positive steps.
The County also spends over $9 million per year to address homelessness, including a broad range of direct services and support for our community partners. This budget includes an additional $400,000 in ongoing funding for enhanced homeless outreach programs and service coordination.
The budget also includes funding to increase the living wage paid to our In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) partners and provides a cost of living adjustment for our community-based organization partners. We are pleased to see the state adopt a multi-year path to a $15 per hour minimum wage.
Preserving Affordable Housing
As housing and rental prices continue to climb, many of our residents are being displaced from their homes. The Board held public workshops throughout the year and directed staff to pursue a strategy of preserving affordable housing by revising rental regulations, developing landlord incentives, and establishing a second unit amnesty program. This budget allocates $1 million to the County’s Housing Trust and $450,000 to create a landlord incentive program that supports the creation and preservation of affordable housing in our community.
The County’s Housing Trust was established to increase the stock of permanent affordable housing units. Funds from the Housing Trust can be used for the acquisition or preservation of existing affordable housing or for the conversion of market rate housing to affordable housing. The landlord incentive program will provide support for landlords who rent to low-income tenants and may include supplemental security deposits or loss mitigation funds.
Addressing Climate Change and Sea Level Rise
The County’s recently adopted Climate Action Plan (CAP) identified several local municipal actions to supplement statewide initiatives which, together, will assist the County in achieving its target of reducing emissions from municipal operations to 15 percent below 1990 levels. The CAP’s local municipal measures include energy efficiency improvements to County-owned buildings and facilities, increased fuel efficiency and alternative fuel vehicles in the County fleet, reduced water usage and waste production from County facilities, and reduced emissions from our employees’ daily commute.
This budget recommends $1 million to implement strategies in our CAP, including $500,000 in one-time capital investments in LED lighting and solar power systems to reduce our carbon footprint for building operations and $500,000 in ongoing incentives for employees to take public transit, such as the Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit (SMART) commuter train.
The County is also leveraging grant funds to complete a sea level rise vulnerability assessment. Marin County ranks second in the Bay Area for potential infrastructure impacts due to sea level rise. The vulnerability assessment is part of a county program known as BayWAVE (Marin Bay Waterfront Assessment Vulnerability Evaluation), which is a collaborative effort involving elected officials and staff from all 11 of the county’s cities and towns as well as staff from local agencies and private organizations with assets along the shoreline.
Reducing Unfunded Retiree Obligations
The County has taken various actions over the past few years to reduce unfunded retiree liabilities, including contributing over $94 million in discretionary accelerated payments, establishing an OPEB retiree health trust, and creating a pension rate stabilization reserve. The retiree health trust currently has a balance of over $60 million and the proposed budget includes an additional $10 million in contributions to the trust. We are also proposing a $1 million contribution to the County’s pension stabilization reserve, which would bring the total reserve to $7 million.
These actions, along with investment earnings, have reduced the County’s unfunded liabilities by $243 million over the past four years and are one of the primary factors in the County’s AAA credit rating.
Preparing for Future Uncertainty
The national economic expansion is now in its seventh year, which makes it the fourth longest expansion in U.S. history. Most economists project continued economic growth over the next two years, although the growth rate is expected to moderate. While there is no reliable method to predict national or global economic cycles, historical trends show that a recession is likely to occur in the near future. The 2009 recession required significant organizational adjustments and the County decreased annual operating expenses by over $30 million and reduced the workforce by over 10 percent.
Being mindful of economic cycles, we have made a concerted effort to review service priorities, ensure new General Fund positions are essential and/or fully cost-covered, and use one-time funds only for one-time purposes. The Board has also made prudent fiscal decisions to build up reserves, refinance existing debt at favorable rates, and invest in road and facility infrastructure.
State Budget Update
The Governor’s May Revision to the Proposed FY 2016-17 State Budget reflected a decline in April tax collections, but projected a statewide economic expansion and a short-term surplus, followed by a deficit beginning in FY 2018-19. Due to the volatile nature of state revenue sources, the Governor maintains his plan for adding $2 billion to state reserves. Although the proposal does not include reimbursements to cities and counties for post-2004 unfunded state mandates, it does include stable funding for Managed Care Organizations and county Medi-Cal Administration, as well as public safety and drought augmentation programs. However, it does not include any additional funding for local transportation projects.
Five Year General Fund Projection
Marin County revenue sources have steadily increased over the past few years, largely resulting from increased property values and increased state and federal funding for safety net programs. Service levels and personnel costs have also increased and, as a result, the budget has been balanced for the past two years. In addition to providing cost of living increases to our workforce and community partners, the County has absorbed increased costs for pensions and workers’ compensation insurance. We have also increased discretionary funding for mental health services, road maintenance, and the replacement of technology and vehicles.
The County’s discretionary spending levels are largely tied to the annual changes in property values. While median sales prices remain high, the County’s annual property tax revenue is limited by the combination of Proposition 13, limited new development, and relatively low sales volume. Property tax growth rates are expected to moderate, as are other revenue sources such as sales tax and transient occupancy tax. Given the projected slowdown in revenues over the next five years, we are projecting a balanced budget over the next two years, followed by slight budget shortfalls beginning in FY 2018-19.
Increasing Permanent Supportive Housing
The County of Marin has taken a leadership role in efforts to address homelessness, but we cannot be successful without the support of cities, foundations, volunteers, religious organizations and the non-profit community. With a focus on permanent supportive housing for disabled individuals and families, together we can provide support to people who are homeless or at risk of homelessness.
Our work not only supports housing and direct services, but is also instrumental in coordinating the efforts of many providers to effectively target resources and reduce duplication. Support provided by the County to collect data and facilitate collaboration among a wide variety of stakeholders allows local programs to compete for more than $3 million annually in federal funds for homeless programs. The County’s total investment in homeless services totals over $9 million annually and includes housing, shelter, planning, service coordination, medical care, social services, mental health services and substance use services.
The County is dedicated to ensuring that our homeless programs are implemented in accordance with best practices and that strategic decisions are based on empirical data. To remain competitive for federal funds and ensure that local dollars are used effectively, Marin must assess the strengths and gaps of our available housing and services, continually improve data collection efforts, provide training and other support to our community-based providers, and implement appropriate best practices. In addition to the County’s $2 million investment in a new detox facility, this budget proposes $400,000 in ongoing investments related to homeless programs which include:
??
Implementing a Homeless Outreach Team (HOT) program model, a coordinated effort of existing outreach programs, housing location services, and case management services to target high-need, chronically homeless persons; and building capacity in existing homeless housing programs to serve high-need, high-barrier households
??
Evaluating the current mix of supportive housing to identify strategies to fund and create necessary housing
??
Assessing the ability and willingness of existing recipients of Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) projects to “graduate” to a less service-intensive housing voucher (like Section 8), thereby freeing limited PSH availability for higher-needs populations
??
Working with community based organizations to target outreach and housing services
Working together with our community partners, the County is ready to contribute to the purchase of a facility that will offer a variety of services for homeless individuals, including meals, a day center, medical services and treatment, showers, laundry, mail service, housing search assistance, rapid re-housing and prevention services, benefit counseling, employment services and case management.
Expanding Mental Health Services
In February, the Board conducted public workshops to consider options for expanding mental health service programs across the county and accepted staff recommendations to expand outreach efforts with a focus on evidence-based practices and voluntary programs. The Board subsequently approved reorganizations within the Mental Health and Substance Use Services division that utilized over $1.5 million in state and federal funding to increase staffing by 12 employees to expand capacity and better integrate service delivery. The formation of multi-disciplinary teams, including the addition of bilingual support service workers and social service workers, will enable licensed clinicians to serve a larger number of high-need clients.
One of the key challenges in Psychiatric Emergency Services is locating and providing acute inpatient placement options. Longer term adult transitional residential program facilities are also extremely scarce within the County. We are recommending $525,000 to provide start-up costs for a new 10-12 bed transitional residential program for adults, a level of intensive care not currently available in Marin.
In total, this budget includes over $2 million in new ongoing funding for mental health services, including the aforementioned $1.5 million from state and federal sources to expand capacity and $600,000 in additional ongoing General Fund support for two new licensed crisis specialist positions and on-demand tele-psychiatry services. The additional General Fund resources will enable staff to serve the community 24 hours per day and will expand in-person psychiatric coverage on Saturdays and Sundays.
Investing in Technology
Consistent with the County’s 5 Year Business Plan, Information Services and Technology (IST) developed a Strategic Plan that is focused on solutions for the most pressing needs over the next five years, including more convenient access to information and services anytime, anywhere, and on any device by residents and employees. This budget includes one-time technology investments of $1 million and $500,000 in ongoing funding to implement the IST Strategic Plan.
The most important initiatives include expanding the County’s ability to provide online services, including accepting online payments and offering automated electronic forms, developing impactful mobile apps, expanding the use of mobile devices by County employees, protecting public information by making security a top priority, and automating various internal processes to improve services for residents and enhance efficiencies for employees.
The coming year also brings important focus to business improvement efforts, including the implementation of the new enterprise resource planning (ERP) system to replace SAP. A central focus of the implementation has been taking advantage of the opportunity to assess and modify business processes to better reflect best practices.
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget for all funds is $540.7 million, an increase of 4.09 percent overall. The Proposed General Fund budget, which is the primary fund for most County programs and services, is increasing by 3.20 percent to $427.3 million. The ongoing General Fund budget, which excludes one-time expenditures, is $415.3 million, a 2.29 percent increase over the prior year.
One-time General Fund expenditures of $12 million are fully funded from the FY 2015-16 year-end fund balance. Consistent with our budget policies, approximately $20 million in prior year fund balance is required for ongoing operations.
As part of the conversion to a new financial system, revenue and expenditure sources were analyzed and in many instances were reclassified between categories based on State Controller guidelines. These reclassifications are shown in the in the following table, as well as in financial summaries in the department budget sections.
In addition to reclassifications, a new fund was created to account for Health and Human Services operations. The new fund reflects best practices, and will improve accounting and analysis of the various state and federal funding sources for the County’s safety net services. Many departments also used the financial system conversion to reorganize operational structures which resulted in the creation of new divisions and programs that more accurately reflect current services.
Increased Property Tax Revenue
Property taxes are the largest single source of discretionary revenue for the County’s General Fund. During the recent recession, the slowdown in the housing market caused property tax revenues to flatten. With median single family home prices again topping $1 million, the County’s property tax revenue is projected to increase by 6.0 percent in FY 2016-17. Consistent with statewide and national projections, and informed by consultations with the County Assessor, we are projecting a gradual slowing of the growth rate for property tax revenues over the next few years. The long term average growth rate is 5.4 percent over the past 20 years and the majority of county properties have come out of decline status as a result of the economic recovery. Without significant new housing development, and with relatively low turnover each year, Marin County’s property tax revenue growth is largely limited by Proposition 13. If property tax revenue growth exceeds 6.0 percent in FY 2016-17, we are recommending the additional revenue be dedicated to ongoing road infrastructure investments.
Stable Pension Rates
The Marin County Employees’ Retirement Association (MCERA) investment earnings through June 30, 2015 were 5.0 percent. Although the earnings assumption is 7.25 percent, prior year investment earnings that exceeded the long-term earnings assumption are being “smoothed” over five years and largely offset last year’s earnings shortfall.
This results in relatively flat employer rates for pension benefits in FY 2016-17. The County’s funded ratio remains healthy at 86.4 percent and the County’s pension contributions for FY 2016-17 are approximately $49 million.
Declining Workers Compensation Costs
For the past several years, required annual contributions to our workers compensation insurance fund increased significantly. These increases were primarily attributable to higher costs for public safety workers, largely due to legislative changes that expanded the scope of public safety injuries and illnesses that are presumed to be work-related. Specifically, public safety employees are now covered for most cancers and heart conditions, and the presumption has been extended from five to ten years after employment for incidents of cancer.
Beginning in 2014, County staff engaged in a coordinated case management approach to help mitigate risks, including additional training and a review of policies and procedures. This past year, actuarial analysis shows that required County contributions have leveled off. Staff will continue this integrated, interdepartmental case management approach to mitigate risks and manage costs where possible, with the shared goal of returning staff to work as quickly as possible.
Proposed New Ongoing Expenditures
$3.0 Million
??
$1.0 million in additional ongoing support for road maintenance
??
$500,000 in technology investments to provide improved e-government options
??
$400,000 in additional investments for homeless programs
??
$600,000 for enhanced psychiatric emergency services, including 2.0 FTE Licensed Crisis Specialists
??
$500,000 for a congestion management program to incentivize public transportation options for County employees
Proposed One-Time Expenditures
$12.0 Million
??
$6.0 million to the Road and Bridge Fund
??
$1.0 million contribution to the pension rate stabilization reserve, increasing the reserve to $7.0 million
??
$1.0 million contribution to the Housing Trust to preserve affordable housing for families
??
$525,000 to acquire mental health transitional housing
??
$500,000 for Climate Action Plan implementation
??
$450,000 for a landlord incentive program to preserve affordable housing
??
$250,000 for bridge funding for preschool and childcare
??
$100,000 for an educational outreach initiative to reduce community use of pesticides
??
$2.175 million for one-time budget change proposals (BCP’s)
Significant Baseline Adjustments Included in the Proposed Budget
Health and Human Services »
The Health and Human Services budget is largely supported by state and federal funding sources for specific health and safety net services. Many County revenues and expenses for state-mandated services have decreased, largely related to adjusted health care service requirements for indigent residents resulting from the Affordable Care Act and Medi-Cal. As a result, the Health and Human Services budget is increasing by approximately 1 percent overall, and the General Fund net county cost is relatively flat.
Marin County Parks »
Increases to the Parks budget are primarily attributable to one time construction costs for Measure A projects. General Fund baseline adjustments include $162,000 for West Marin visitor services, $50,000 for Stafford Lake Bike Park maintenance and $10,000 for landscape maintenance at the Civic Center.
Information Services and Technology (IST) »
The IST baseline budget has been adjusted to reflect contractual maintenance costs for countywide software, operational costs at the Emergency Operations Facility (EOF), and licensing fees related to the new financial system. Many of these costs have been previously paid in non-departmental, and corresponding offsets have been incorporated. It is expected that the licensing fees for the new financial system will be offset by savings related to the retirement of SAP.
Department of Public Works »
Baseline adjustments in the Department of Public Works reflect increased traffic signal maintenance costs in unincorporated areas and increased vehicle replacement funds for County departments.
Human Resources »
The Human Resources baseline budget has been adjusted to reflect ongoing costs for countywide benefit programs. These costs were previously paid through non-departmental and corresponding offsets have been incorporated. New training and development costs related to the 5 Year Business Plan have also been incorporated.
Budget Change Proposals (BCP’s)
As in previous years, departments submitted Budget Change Proposals (BCP’s) to request additional funds for departmental operational needs. Given our limited ability to fund new initiatives, we are very selective in recommending new positions and expenses. Positions recommended below are fixed term, consistent with the one-time or short-term duration of the recommended projects.
The Proposed Budget recommends $2,175,000 in total BCP funding for FY 2016-17. Of this amount, $1,175,000 is for General Fund one-time department BCP’s and $1,000,000 is for one-time technology BCP’s. A total of 2.0 FTE fixed-term positions are recommended to complete the short-term duration of the associated projects. General Fund proposals will be included in the non-departmental budget for allocation during the year.
The IST Strategic Plan identified specific strategies, actions, metrics and outcomes to guide the department’s progress toward the primary goals of expanding mobile capabilities, improving customer service and enhancing security. The following one-time BCP’s provide funding to implement the highest priority technology initiatives.
Increased Online and Mobile Access - $278,000
The IST Strategic Plan focuses heavily on enhancing customer service offerings by providing County employees and the public with the ability to access information and conduct business from mobile devices. Providing focused training for County staff and expanding wireless capacity throughout the Civic Center will create the necessary skills and infrastructure for upgraded online and mobile services.
Cyber Security - $200,500
The County is the custodian of vast amounts of data and keeping it secure is a top priority. Our software developers will receive training in the latest coding techniques to ensure our systems are protected - even as we expand opportunities to connect to County systems of record. With the proliferation of mobile devices, we will install additional security and identity management software to extend security coverage to these devices safely and securely.
Workforce and Customer Service - $521,500
As identified in the 5 Year Business Plan, the County intranet is in need of an upgrade. Customer service for the public will also be improved through enhancements made to the Code Enforcement and Environmental Health Services systems.
The County is on stable financial and operational footing because of the actions taken by the Board over the past several years. The 5 Year Business Plan provides a clear and ambitious strategic direction for our entire organization. In addition, addressing equity issues, preserving affordable housing, reducing our carbon footprint, investing in infrastructure, improving technological capabilities and developing our workforce are all essential initiatives. Given our current and impending fiscal constraints, we need to continue our efforts to adapt and respond to emerging issues while focusing on efficiently providing critical community services.
We are constantly striving to become a more responsible and transparent organization. Two years ago, the County partnered with OpenGov to publish budget and financial data in an open and transparent way that allows residents to explore and understand the County’s finances. This year, the Sheriff is implementing body worn camera technology on deputies to ensure accountability and enhance trust in law enforcement operations. We are also continually expanding our presence in various online and social media platforms to increase opportunities for residents to engage with and influence County services.
Providing responsive services that support a healthy, safe, equitable and sustainable community involves meaningful participation and effective collaboration at all levels. Our County faces unique challenges in the coming years, and success will require a commitment to lead, a dedication to learn, and a willingness to change.
