Submitted for your review and consideration is the balanced Fiscal Year 2015-16
Recommended Budget for the operations of all County services and Special Districts
under your direction. The Recommended Budget provides a spending plan through June
30, 2016, and is based on reasonable revenue estimates and a projected General Fund
beginning balance of $3,321,235. The Recommended Budget leaves intact the General
Reserve - $2,333,370 as well as the Pension Obligation Bond (POB) Designation -
$696,595. It should be noted that last year the General Reserve was increased by
$25,000, and that in years past the POB Designation has been used to balance the
General Fund (a total of $500,000).
For the last several years Departments have been told to submit status quo budgets or
even budgets with a two-percent reduction due to the recession and its lasting effects on
the economy. Because of this financial prudence, the County was able to survive the
recession period with little to no impact on the County’s workforce. However, the status
quo budget process has had a negative impact on the County’s infrastructure –
technologically and structurally, not to mention being unable to do financial long range
planning for capital improvements, succession planning, and to begin to address
unfunded liabilities.
Departments were instructed to submit realistic budgets that included infrastructure
and personnel needs. All of the requested budgets followed these guidelines, and the
Department Heads and their support staff are to be commended for approaching this
budget cycle with the same fiscal responsibility they have always exhibited.
Unfortunately, the new requests exceeded revenue estimates and a number of
recommended adjustments were necessary to balance the Recommended Budget. Again,
the Department Heads are to be commended for their willingness to work with
Administration on adjusting their budgets to attain a balanced Recommended Budget.
The Board of Supervisors has made great strides in the last two years in adjusting the
salaries of county employees to be competitive. Just as important, county employees are now paying almost all of the employee’s retirement contribution, which in previous years
had been a county expense. These salary and benefit adjustments have been accounted
for in the Recommended Budget, with salary amounts typically increasing from the
previous fiscal year, but the benefit portion remaining almost status quo to the previous
year. Benefit savings will continue to be realized in the coming fiscal years as county
employees move towards completely paying the employee retirement portion.
The fiscal year that just ended was one of tremendous change for Mariposa County
government. Two newly elected members of the Board of Supervisors and the County
Auditor took office in January 2015; four new Department Heads were selected – County
Health Officer, Human Resources Director/Risk Manager, Public Works Director, and
County Administrative Officer; the Clerk of the Board was appointed as a Department
Head; and the Sheriff-Coroner-Public Administrator assumed leadership of the County
Fire Department as Interim Fire Chief. It should also be mentioned that the County’s
Human Services Director has just completed her first year of county employment.
Budgets for these departments reflect changes as a result of these new appointments.
General Fund Overview
Total appropriations in the General Fund Requested Budget were $52,371,807 with
revenue only totaling $49,707,669, resulting in a $2.6 million shortfall. The
Recommended Budget was balanced by reducing several new requests for additional
appropriations, utilizing salary savings, and by increasing the estimated fund balance.
The projected fund balance in the Recommended Budget is increased by $921,235 and
this is due mainly because of how the Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) performed in the
last fiscal year. TOT collections are far exceeding budgeted estimates by over $1.5
million. A portion of this increase should, however, be considered one-time in nature,
due to the unseasonably warm and dry winter the County experienced which allowed
visitors to experience our communities and Yosemite literally year-round. If the County
experiences a “normal” wet/snowy weather pattern, then TOT collections of this amount
will probably not be attainable.
Also contributing to the projected larger fund balance is a strong General Contingency
remaining balance and the unanticipated reimbursement by the State for prior year
SB90 claims. Additionally, no funding for the Disaster Recovery is requested this year as
the audit time period has closed, and the remaining funding is being included in the
fund balance. All of these should be considered one-time in nature.
Attachment I summarizes the adjustments that were used to balance the Recommended
Budget. Also included is additional justification for funding requests from the Clerk of
the Board and the Mariposa Arts Council.
Non-General Fund
The Road Fund requested a much larger General Fund contribution because of a
reduction in revenue. The requested contribution is recommended to be reduced almost
in half by increasing this fund’s estimated fund balance and with reductions in various
appropriation line items. If the fund balance does not come in as anticipated, then a
larger General Fund contribution may be necessary in order to maintain existing
services. There is also the possibility of additional funding being made available through
State legislation, but this legislation has not yet been enacted. If the legislation is successful, adjustments to the Road Fund will be brought to the Board for review once
the actual financial impact has been determined.
The Wraparound program has seen a decrease in use and is being requested to be
included in the Behavioral Health budget. For ease of accounting, expenses related to
the In-Home Support Services are being tracked in the Social Services budget. Both of
these requests are in line with the reorganization that has been occurring in the Human
Services Department.
A slightly larger General Fund contribution was requested for the Building Fund, but this
amount is recommended to be reduced by increasing this fund’s estimated fund balance.
The General Fund contribution approved by the Board in the previous fiscal year,
coupled with prudent use of appropriations, should result in a larger than requested
fund balance. However, if the recommended fund balance is less than anticipated, then
this fund may require an increase d contribution amount from the General Fund.
Additional Positions
Three new positions are included in the Recommended Budget. A PC Technician in the
Technical Services budget to assist with the increased workload; a Development Services
Technician in the Health budget based on workload and is offset by fees; and a
Psychiatric Nurse Practitioner that will be split between Behavioral Health and Social
Services.
Two new position requests are not being recommended at this time but deserve further
analysis as both are related to succession planning – a Deputy Agricultural
Commissioner and a Deputy Community Services Director. It is recommended that the
Department Heads work with their Board liaisons, Human Resources, and the County
Administrative Officer to identify the best course of action for future Board review.
The Farm Advisor has requested that the Extra-Help Master Gardener Coordinator
position be made either a full-time or a 0.80 Permanent Part-Time position. In the last
two fiscal years, this position was made full-time by a University of California Agriculture
and Natural Resources grant. Prior to this the position was an Extra-Help position. It is
recommended that the Farm Advisor continue to search for grants or other revenue
sources to again make this a full time position.
Conclusion
The Recommended Budget includes several funding enhancements, based on department
requests or for items that have already received Board approval. These are listed on
Attachment II. Of equal importance are items or areas of concern that are not included
in either the Requested or Recommended Budget, but deserve to be mentioned for
possible funding consideration. A majority of these were not included because exact
funding is not yet known. These are listed on Attachment III.
Included on Attachment III are the as yet unknown impacts of Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB) 68 financial reporting requirements that pertain to pension
liability. At this time, the Auditor’s office is working with our outside Auditors to
determine the financial impact this will have on the County’s enterprise funds and
possibly the General Fund. An audit is also being performed on our Superior Court with
regards to the collection and reporting of fines and penalties. If corrections are found, then this may also have a financial impact. Just as a cautionary mention, several years
ago the court audit identified corrections of a little over $300,000 that the General Fund
had to repay. Consideration should also be given to the possibility of beginning to prefund
the County’s Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB). Currently the County only
funds the current year costs, and both CalPERS and Public Agency Retirement Services
(PARS) offer pre-funding plans which could be beneficial to the County in the long-term.
As stated previously, the Recommended Budget is balanced using estimated fund
balances. Adjustments to balance the Recommended Budget with the actual year-end
fund balances will need to be approved by the Board in late September. If the final fund
balance for the General Fund is less than $3.3 million, then additional reductions will be
required. If the final fund balance is larger than anticipated, then additional resources
will be available for unfunded requests or for the General Reserve.
Should additional funding resources be available, it is recommended that by the
conclusion of the Final Budget Hearings, that the Board compile a list their funding
priorities for consideration during Balancing Adjustments in September. The Board may
make adjustments to the Recommended Budget during Final Budget Hearings keeping in
mind that the Final Budget must be balanced – financing resources must equal financing
needs.
I would like to thank the Department Heads and county employees for their support and
assistance in developing this Recommended Budget. Getting to a balanced budget
requires a collaborative effort and I appreciate their willingness in working with me and
my staff. Special thanks to the Auditor and her staff for their assistance with budget
projections. And very special thanks to our former Deputy County Administrative Officer
– Cindy Larca for her assistance with the budgeting process and who stayed on an extra
month to help with the formatting of the Recommended Budget.
