Submitted for your review and consideration is the balanced Fiscal Year 2016-17
Recommended Budget for the operations of all County services and Special Districts
under the Board of Supervisor’s direction. The Recommended Budget provides a
spending plan through June 30, 2017, and is based on reasonable revenue estimates
and a projected General Fund beginning balance of $4,700,000, which is slightly less
that the fund balance last fiscal year. The Recommended Budget increases the General
Reserve by $260,000 as recommended by the Auditor to ensure that the Reserve is
within the minimum requirements based on the size of the County’s budget.
Departments were instructed to submit realistic budgets that included infrastructure
and personnel needs. The Requested Budget also includes the estimated amount of
funding to fulfill the proposed work plans of the Department Heads that were discussed
during the recent performance reviews. The Department Heads and their support staff
are to be commended for approaching this budget cycle with the same fiscal
responsibility they have always exhibited. As is the case with most budgets, the new
requests exceeded revenue estimates and a number of recommended adjustments were
necessary to balance the Recommended Budget. Again, the Department Heads are to be
commended for their willingness to work with Administration on adjusting their budgets
to attain a balanced Recommended Budget.
Great strides have been made in adjusting the salaries of county employees to be
competitive and employees are now paying all of the employee’s retirement contribution,
which in previous years had been a county expense. These salary and benefit
adjustments have been accounted for in the Recommended Budget, with salary amounts
typically increasing from the previous fiscal year and the benefit portion increasing
slightly to account for revised pension estimates. Salary adjustments account for the
largest increases in a majority of budgets, and it should be noted that no negotiations
will occur until the fall of 2017. The County is paying a small percentage of the
Retirement-Employee cost for Department Heads, and this may be adjusted by the Board
this fall when Department Head salaries are reviewed.
Total appropriations in the General Fund Requested Budget were $55,993,300 with
revenue only totaling $52,925,371, resulting in a little over $3 million shortfall. The
Recommended Budget was balanced by reducing several requests for additional
appropriations, utilizing salary savings, reducing General Contingency, by increasing the
estimated revenue anticipated to be received from Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) and by
increasing the estimated fund balance.
The projected fund balance in the Recommended Budget is increased to an amount
similar to last fiscal year and this is due in large part to the performance of TOT. TOT
collections are far exceeding budgeted estimates (again) and the final collection amount
may be over $14 million, making this another record-breaking year for TOT collections.
A portion of this increase should, however, be considered one-time in nature, due to the
celebration of National Park and Yosemite National Park (YNP) anniversaries. It is
important to note that the concession contract for YNP also changed this year (March
2016) and along with this change came some national coverage over the controversy
involving the trademark of National Park names. As YNP exposure returns to “normal”
levels, collections may also drop to “normal” amounts around $13.5 million.
Also contributing to the projected larger fund balance is a strong General Contingency
remaining balance and departments not completely spending down all of their
appropriations. Some of this is due to delays in the completion of some projects,
unanticipated savings in some purchases, and salary savings from vacant positions. All
of these should be considered one-time in nature.
The Human Services Department has requested and it is recommended to re-establish
the Economic and Community Development budget (001-0528) and separate these
functions from the Social Services budget. This request is to allow for greater efficiencies
in tracking and accounting revenue/appropriations that are specifically tied to these
functions. With key management positions now being filled, this change in budgeting
will allow for greater oversight and accounting of the specific divisions of the Human
Services department. There is no impact to the General Fund as these are both subvented
budgets, but there is a significant decrease in the Social Services budget to
recognize this separation of job duties and personnel.
The Technical Services department was able to complete all of their requested upgrades
and new purchases in the previous fiscal year, with many of them coming under budget.
The new telephone system should realize savings, but because it was installed later in
the fiscal year, departments did not have sufficient time to fully analyze and account for
the savings. These savings should be realized by Mid-Year and departments can
recognize and update their budgets at that time.
Attachment I summarizes the adjustments that were used to balance the Recommended
Budget.
Non-General Fund
The Road Fund requested a much larger General Fund contribution because of a
reduction in revenue. The requested contribution is recommended to be reduced to last
fiscal year’s contribution amount by increasing this fund’s estimated fund balance. If the fund balance does not come in as anticipated, then a larger General Fund contribution
may be necessary in order to maintain existing services.
The Coulterville Service Area and the Yosemite West Maintenance District are requesting
a General Fund contribution in order to continue with necessary maintenance activities
to their respective water and sewer systems and to offset the charges incurred for the
services provided by staff in the Plant Operations budget. Revenues being collected for
services are not sufficient to continue with these activities and rates will need to be
reviewed once the contracted rate study has been completed. Both of these requests for
General Fund support were reduced by recommended adjustments to revenue and a
reduction to certain appropriations. The contribution to the Coulterville Service Area is
recommended to be considered a non-interest loan from the General Fund, while the
contribution to Yosemite West Maintenance is recommended as a contribution to
partially satisfy audit findings contained in the Yosemite West audit.
A General Fund contribution is requested in the Solid Waste & Recycling budget due to
revenues not keeping pace with the cost of providing services, as well as a correction to
past account receivables being recognized in the previous fiscal year. The request for
General Fund support was eliminated by adjusting this budget’s estimated fund balance
and revenue collections, as well as recognizing salary savings and minor reductions to
certain appropriation line items. Should this budget require General Fund support, it is
recommended that this contribution be a no-interest loan, with direction to review rates
and analyze services to ensure best practices are being followed.
Plant Operations is again requesting a General Fund contribution and in a greater
amount. This is due in part to now being fully staffed with the appropriate number and
type of personnel, and with the need to fully equip the division with the necessary tools
to maintain the Special District’s water and sewer systems. The requested contribution
is reduced through a recommended adjustment to fund balance and reductions to
certain appropriations. It is anticipated that once the Special District rate study has
been completed and implemented, that this budget will no longer need a General Fund
contribution.
Because of revenue estimates not meeting anticipated collection levels in the previous
fiscal year, the Fleet Maintenance budget requested a General Fund contribution. This
request is recommended to be reduced by adjustments to revenue and the estimated
fund balance. After the actual year-end fund balance is known, should a General Fund
contribution still be necessary, it is recommended that the contribution be considered a
no-interest loan, and that direction be given to review current rate charges and analyze
services to ensure best practices are being followed.
Additional Positions
The Public Works Department continues to evolve and take shape under the new
Director. The Board approved several reorganizations last fiscal year, and the
department is requesting some position adjustments this fiscal year to add more
efficiencies to the management of Public Works. The Accounting Technician in the Fleet
budget is requested and recommended to be reallocated to the Public Works
Administration budget for better coordination with existing accounting staff and to
provide additional accounting support for the entire department. A Transportation
Planner position is requested and also recommended in the Public Works Administration
budget. This position will be offset by funding from the Transportation Planning budget as well as salary savings from a vacant Engineer Technician position (an employee in this
classification has been performing these duties and an internal promotion is being
considered).
To complete the management and financial oversight of Public Works, the department is
requesting two positions: an Administrative Analyst and an Administrative Technician in
Public Works Administration. It is recommended that these positions be considered, but
not effective until January 1, 2017, to allow the department time to finish some internal
reallocation of job duties. No funding has been included, which is not typical, however
the department believes that additional savings will be able to be realized prior to
January 1, 2017, which will provide the necessary funding. A separate Board item will
be prepared incorporating the necessary budget adjustments for the Board to consider in
late November or early December. This will also provide the necessary time for the
department to work with Human Resources staff on determining if these are the
appropriate staffing levels for the proposed job responsibilities.
The District Attorney is requesting that an existing 0.8 Permanent Part-Time (PPT) Victim
Witness Advocate be increased to full time, and an additional 0.80 PPT Victim Witness
Advocate be allocated. These increase in allocations are offset by grant funding provided
for the Victim Witness and the Vertical Prosecution grants. There is no impact to the
General Fund.
The Farm Advisor has requested that the Extra-Help Master Gardener Coordinator
position be made a 0.70 PPT position, to allow additional staff working hours for this
program. The Human Resources/Risk Management Department is requesting that the
existing 0.60 PPT Senior Office Assistant be increased to 0.80 PPT to assist the
department with recruitment and clerical duties. Both of these increases in allocation
are not recommended at this time, due to concerns regarding increasing on-going costs
without a guaranteed increase in on-going revenue to support these positions. That
being said, both of these positions would prove valuable to county operations, and
should funding be identified, the Board may wish to give these allocations consideration.
Conclusion
The Recommended Budget includes a handful of funding enhancements, based on
department requests or for items that have already received Board approval. These are
listed on Attachment II. Of equal importance are items or areas of concern that are not
included in either the Requested or Recommended Budget, but deserve to be mentioned
for possible funding consideration. A majority of these were not included because exact
funding is not yet known. These are listed on Attachment III.
The Board may make adjustments to the Recommended Budget during Final Budget
Hearings keeping in mind that the Final Budget must be balanced – financing resources
must equal financing needs. As stated previously, the Recommended Budget is balanced
using estimated fund balances as will be the case with the Final Budget. Adjustments to
balance the Final Budget with the actual year-end fund balances will need to be
approved by the Board in late September. If the final fund balance for the General Fund
is less than $4.7 million, then additional reductions will be required. If the final fund
balance is larger than anticipated, then additional resources will be available for
unfunded requests, General Contingency, the General Reserve, or the POB Designation.
It is recommended that by the conclusion of the Final Budget Hearings, the Board should
compile a list of their funding priorities for consideration during Balancing Adjustments
should the fund balance come in greater than estimated. Strong consideration should be
given to only funding one-time costs rather than increasing on-going costs. The fund
balance next year should be less if the recommended increase in TOT is approved,
because revenue estimates will be much closer to actual collections. What this means is
that if the fund balance is greater than estimated, that this should be considered a onetime
increase in available funding. Increasing the amount in the POB Designation if
possible is encouraged to allow a “safety-net” for future years, should revenue be unable
to keep pace with appropriations.
I would like to thank the Department Heads and county employees for their support and
assistance in developing this Recommended Budget. Getting to a balanced budget
requires a collaborative effort and I appreciate their willingness in working with me and
my staff. Special thanks to the Auditor, Debbie Isaacs and Assistant Auditor, Luis
Mercado for their assistance with budget projections. And a very special thank you to
our recently hired Deputy County Administrative Officer, Dallin Kimble, for his
assistance with the budgeting process and compiling the Recommended Budget. This
was no easy task given that he just joined the County in May and had to learn “Mariposa
Budgeting” in such a short time-frame.
Mariposa Chamber of Commerce for the operation of the Mariposa Visitors’ Center,
which takes into account the increase in minimum wage effective January, 2017.
• Completion of the fixed asset survey equipment.
• Continued preservation of historical, Board of Supervisors minutes.
• Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) 68 and OPEB accounting
information on properly accounting for these liabilities.
• Equipment in the Treasurer/Tax Collector for more efficient operations.
• Outside legal counsel for assistance with guardian/conservatorship cases.
• Clerical position compensation/classification review.
• Funding contribution to the Mariposa County Fair.
• Memory and software upgrade to the County’s existing server.
• Funding to begin the 10-year General Plan review.
• Electronic Medical Records System.
• Re-establishment of the Employment & Community Development budget.
• Public Address system and computer for Parks & Recreation.
• New SUV Vehicle in Transit.
• Portable compressor, hoist, and truck tool boxes for Plant Operations.
• Lump sum payment of the Unfunded Liability associated with safety members.
