Attached is the County Administrative Office’s budget recommendation for Fiscal Year 2013-14.
Similarly to the budgets presented to your Board in recent years, due to the difficult economic conditions
this is a “status quo” budget. This year's Recommended Budget does not include all the requests made by
departments. However, the budget is balanced and does not rely on the use of funds set aside in prior
years in order to fulfill the general goals of the County.
The Recommended County Budget (excluding debt service funds, internal service funds, enterprise funds
and special districts) of $92,075,000 represents less than a 1% increase from last year’s adopted budget.
This very modest increase demonstrates that there are very few changes in available funding sources.
Particularly in those areas where your Board has discretion.
The revenues needed by departments to protect public health and safety, provide quality health and
human services, protect the environment, plan for growth, renew infrastructure, enhance quality of life,
and carry out other mandated and discretionary programs will remain relatively unchanged in FY 2013-
14.
While most other California counties have seen significant reductions over the last few years, Mariposa
County has been able to avoid having to take any drastic actions. All of your Department Heads have
been carefully managing their limited resources. However, due to funding constraints and the nature of
available funds two layoffs are recommended in the Public Works Department this year.
The Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) remains the foundation of Mariposa County's discretionary revenue.
After three years of record-setting collections, fiscal Year 2012-13 revenues remained very strong. There
was a statistically insignificant drop despite the closing of the number of rooms within Yosemite National
Park. We expect these revenues to continue to be reliable during the upcoming year and are projecting a
modest increase over the budgeted figures for Fiscal Year 2013-14.
Property taxes are expected to remain stable since local commercial and residential real estate values have
not shown any appreciable changes. Sales Tax revenues are extremely difficult to predict. Sales Tax
revenues were down slightly from the previous year; however, we are incorporating a modest increase for
the upcoming year.
The budget is balanced with an assumed carryover balance, as the final number is not available. The
budget is very tight and, as always, if that carryover balance does not reach the projected figure it may be
necessary to make adjustments.
Fiscal Year 2012-13 saw the completion of three fire stations in the County. The final station on the
drawing Board is scheduled to be completed by spring. There are some significant expenditures planned
in order to maintain County facilities. The Tobacco Settlement Fund will address most of those costs.
There is virtually no increase in discretionary revenues. Likewise, with the exception of the County's
CalPERS obligation, increases in costs related to County employees’ compensation are also negligible
this fiscal year. Contributions to the employees’ retirement fund through CalPERS will once again
increase during Fiscal Year 2013-14. The County continues to participate in the CalPERS Fresh Start
program designed to reduce the significant unfunded pension liability.
Budget Concerns
The overall economy and State Budget continue to be major concerns for Mariposa County. Due to the
efforts of the affected department heads, implementation of the State's new realignment funding formula
and associated responsibilities has so far been smooth in Mariposa County. We will continue to monitor
the situation.
With the passage of the Governor’s tax measures last fall we do not expect there to be any major negative
impacts on the County budget. The Williamson Act is again not being funded this budget year and we
were recently notified that some Federal transportation dollars may be in jeopardy.
Tourism remains strong. Due, in large part, to the efforts of the Tourism Bureau, visitors continue to take
advantage of the sights Mariposa County and Yosemite have to offer. Purchases made by tourists
continue to lag behind the levels of just a few years ago. This reduced spending continues to ripple
through the local economy as evidenced by the reduction in Sales Tax collected last year.
The County continues its participation in the “fresh start” program through CalPERS. This will lead to a
reduction in the liability over time but does put added pressure on the budget. The rates for FY 2014-15
will be released in October. Our CalPERS obligation remains one of the greatest unknown factors in the
County budget from year-to-year. The County continues to monitor the market for the opportunity to
issue pension obligation bonds which may ultimately provide a better option for retiring the $18+ million
obligation.
Labor costs should remain relatively stable as inflation remains in check. Throughout California many
municipal entities, which often serve as a benchmark for comparison, are seeing an end to furloughs
and/or other rollbacks. Mariposa County is scheduled to enter into negotiations with our employee
organizations this fall; however, we are optimistic that our costs will be able to be held stable because we
simply do not have additional resources.
As always, the County grapples with cost factors beyond our control. Energy costs continue to be
monitored as they can have a major effect on all departments. The Recommended Budget is crafted with
the assumption that there will be only modest increases in energy costs. We continue to struggle with managing the costs associated with defending indigents within the court system. The costs associated with
prosecuting, monitoring and confining criminals continue to fluctuate within our County.
BUDGET HIGHLIGHTS
A new budget unit has been added for Fiscal Year 13-14. The Plant Operations budget unit (616-0308)
formerly included in the Facilities budget has been separated to better account for reimbursement and
expenses related to the water and sewer districts that are currently in operation in the County ;
Coulterville, Yosemite West, Don Pedro, Mariposa Pines, and Wawona. A few other minor budget units
have also been added.
This will be the first full year for the operation for the Human Resources Department. As regulations
become more complicated and time-consuming the need for additional staff to be dedicated to this
function was recognized by your Board.
OTHER BUDGET HIGHLIGHTS
In the past, as the Legislature struggled to establish statewide priorities there have been a number of
proposals for changes in many program-specific revenues primarily in the Human Services field. In
comparison there are fewer proposals this year. If funding levels change, the level of service provided will
also be adjusted. Backfilling of State and/or Federal programs is not recommended.
There is still uncertainty surrounding implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the California
specific program, Covered California. It is not expected that this program will have budgetary effect on
the County; however, workload at the Human Services Department will increase. We expect that there
will be a corresponding increase in revenues. Discretionary revenues controlled by the Board of
Supervisors are not expected to increase over last year’s actual collections.
Building activity remains at a low level. As an enterprise fund, the Building Department has made
adjustments in response to activity level. This department continues to operate at a loss continuing to
utilize funds from the General Fund. The Department continues to operate with minimal staff. There are
proposals being considered restructuring the funding of the Department. Recommendations will be
presented to your Board in the near future.
The Recommended Budget also includes significant funding of the Tourism Bureau. Recognizing the
importance of attracting visitors to our County, this funding must always receive careful consideration.
Tourism is not just the engine that drives the County government but also provides a large majority of the
private sector jobs within Mariposa County. This year’s Recommended Budget includes funding for the
Yosemite Renaissance, Arts Council, and North Side Museum. Funding for the contract to operate the
two Visitor Centers is recommended. Funding also continues for the Mineral and Mining Museum.
The Recommended Budget also continues to provide funds for the replacement of the new fire engines.
When property owners approved the assessment for the purchase of fire engines the County made a
commitment to assure that a replacement fund would be established. The new fleet of 12 engines and four
water tenders requires that $190,000 be allocated for this purpose.
The County’s financial soundness depends greatly on its ability to maintain sufficient reserves so that it
can weather year-to-year swings in revenues and handle unexpected revenue disruptions. Therefore, the County Administrative Office recommends that if additional funds become available they be used to
replenish the designation for unfunded pension obligations. Funds were withdrawn from this account to
balance previous' budgets and to help finance the new fire stations.
It is also recommended that a contingency fund of $311,000 be set aside for unanticipated expenses
during the upcoming year. This is less than ideally would have been recommended.
Strong cash balances are not only prudent; they assure financial markets that the County can survive
negative State budget impacts and/or downturns in economically sensitive revenues. It is likely that the
County will need to finance some future capital expenditures. Therefore, it is absolutely vital to preserve
investor confidence in the County’s long-term financial flexibility and creditworthiness, which translates
into excellent credit ratings and ensures the County’s access to financial markets at the most favorable
interest rates when needed.
PROGRAM IMPACTS
If adopted as proposed, the Recommended Budget will have no impact on service delivery. All
departments report that they will be able to maintain current service levels.
PERSONNEL REQUESTS
Normally, several personnel requests are made by departments. Knowing the difficult financial times we
are contending with, every department was called upon to limit their requests in order to allow for a
balanced budget. With the exception of the Human Services Department no position increases are
anticipated. Human Services is making changes in response to service levels including new duties related
to the Affordable Care Act. The Building Department has requested to add a permanent part-time
position. This is under study but not recommended at this time.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS & GOALS
At your Board’s direction, departments were also requested to submit a listing of significant
accomplishments and goals for the upcoming year. This is been incorporated into the budget package.
CONCLUSION
The FY 2013-14 Recommended Budget is a status quo spending plan. It continues our tradition of being
fiscally prudent and structurally balanced, with current year estimated revenues matching current year
anticipated expenses. The Recommended Budget continues to address the County’s unfunded liability.
Given the current economic conditions, this Recommended Budget allows the County to provide its
primary services and does not contemplate a reduction in services.
This budget relies on several revenue assumptions. Any significant divergence from those assumptions
will require corrective action by the Board of Supervisors at the midyear review or earlier if
circumstances warrant.
The Recommended Budget allows the County to maintain reserves to enable the County to weather
future fluctuations in available resources. Fiscal prudence dictates holding those reserves. The County must also continue its efforts to encourage the Legislature and State Administration to remember the
State’s fiscal responsibility to mandated programs, which claim more than half of the County budget.
The Budget Hearings will provide opportunities for members of the public to comment on the budgetary
recommendations presented here. It is our opinion that the Recommended Budget not only meets the
County’s legal obligations and responds to the needs of the County's citizens, but also is both structurally
sound and sustainable into the future.
