Attached is the County Administrative Office’s budget recommendation for Fiscal Year 2012-13. Due to
the difficult economic conditions we have faced for several years, recent budgets have included modest
reductions in spending. For the first time in several years, this year's Recommended Budget does not
include any reductions to department’s requests. The budget is balanced and does not rely on the use of
funds set aside in prior years in order to fulfill the general goals of the County.
The Recommended County Budget (excluding debt service funds, internal service funds, enterprise funds
and special districts) of $91,185,188 represents an increase from last year’s adopted budget. The increase
reflects changes in available funding sources including implementation of the new State realignment plan.
The revenues needed by departments to protect public health and safety, provide quality health and
human services, protect the environment, plan for growth, renew infrastructure, enhance quality of life,
and carry out other mandated and discretionary programs will remain relatively unchanged in FY 2012-
13.
While most other California counties continue to see reductions, Mariposa County should be able to avoid
reductions in service. This is due to the continued efforts by your Department Heads to carefully manage
their allocated resources.
The other major factor in the relative stability of the Mariposa County budget is the Transient Occupancy
Tax (TOT) which remains the foundation of Mariposa County's discretionary revenue. Fiscal Year 2011-
12 produced record TOT revenues for the third straight year. We expect these revenues to continue to be
reliable during the upcoming year. We are projecting a modest increase over the budgeted figures for
Fiscal Year 2011-12.
Property taxes are expected to remain stable since local commercial and residential real estate values have
not shown any appreciable changes. Sales Tax revenues are extremely difficult to predict. Sales Tax revenues were down slightly from the previous year, however, statewide projections suggest a modest
increase which we have incorporated in our projections for the upcoming year.
The budget is balanced with an assumed carryover balance, as the final number is not available. The
budget is very tight and if that carryover balance does not reach the projected figure it may be necessary
to make adjustments. Conversely, if the carryover balance is higher than projected then we may be able
to reimburse some funding sources utilized to fund fire stations.
There is virtually no increase in discretionary revenues. Likewise, with the exception of the County's
CalPERS obligation, increases in costs related to County employees’ compensation are also negligible
this fiscal year. Contributions to the employees’ retirement fund through CalPERS will once again
increase during Fiscal Year 2012-13. The County continues to participate in the CalPERS Fresh Start
program designed to reduce the significant unfunded pension liability.
Budget Concerns
The overall economy and State Budget actions continue to be major concerns for Mariposa County. As
the State's new realignment funding formula and associated responsibilities unfolds we will continue to
monitor the situation to determine long-term implications.
The Governors's Budget is predicated on the passage of tax measures by the voters this fall. While many
of the programmed reductions do not directly affect Mariposa County, if these tax measures fail it can be
assumed that all areas of State funding will be carefully scrutinized. The Williamson Act is again not
being funded this budget year.
Tourism remains strong. Due, in large part, to the efforts of the Tourism Bureau, visitors continue to take
advantage of the sights Mariposa County and Yosemite have to offer. Purchases made by tourists
continue to lag behind the levels of just a few years ago. This reduced spending continues to ripple
through the local economy and as evidenced by the reduction in Sales Tax collected last year.
The County continues its participation in the “fresh start” program through CalPERS. This will lead to a
reduction in the liability over time but does put added pressure on the budget. The rates for FY 2013-14
will be released in October. The returns on investments for CalPERS has been disappointing recently.
This may negatively affect our rate next year, however, due to the smoothing process used by CalPERS
any change will probably be minimal. Even so, our CalPERS obligation remains one of the greatest
unknown factors in the County budget from year-to-year. The County continues to monitor the market for
the opportunity to issue pension obligation bonds which may ultimately provide a better option for
retiring the $18+ million obligation.
Labor costs should remain relatively stable as inflation remains in check. Throughout California many
municipal entities, which often serve as a benchmark for comparison, have had to increase furloughs
and/or rollback previously approved pay increases. Mariposa County is scheduled to enter into
negotiations with our employee organization this fall, however, we are optimistic that our costs will be
able to be held stable.
As always, the County grapples with cost factors beyond our control. Energy costs continue to be
monitored as they can have a major effect on all departments. The Recommended Budget is crafted with
the assumption that there will be only modest increases in energy costs. We have made progress in
potentially reducing the costs associated with defending indigents within the court system. The costs
associated with prosecuting, monitoring and confining criminals continue to fluctuate within our County.
A number of budget units have been added for Fiscal Year 12-13. They include: Surveyor & Engineering
(001-0150) formerly included in the Road Fund, this budget unit has been separated to better account for
specific State/Federal revenue received for road maintenance/projects and for the auditing of certain Road
Fund expenses and overhead charges; DEA Grant Investigation (439-0274) and Bailiff-Court Security
(440-0277) which have been segregated from the Sheriff's budget in order to provide for a better
accounting trail. There is also a newly instituted 2011 Realignment Fund (433-0530) along with other
funds required to provide for the proper accounting of realigned expenditures. A few other minor budget
units have also been added.
OTHER BUDGET HIGHLIGHTS
As the Legislature struggles to establish statewide priorities we have seen several proposals for changes in
many program-specific revenues primarily in the Human Services field. By law, these revenues must be
spent for specific, mandated programs or come to the County as direct reimbursements for the cost of
providing services. The Board of Supervisors has no discretion in their use. As these funding levels
change, the level of service provided is also adjusted. Backfilling of State and/or Federal programs is not
recommended.
Most State and Federal subventions must be used to operate health and human services programs; hence,
these are the areas most vulnerable to service reductions when funding is decreased. Discretionary
revenues controlled by the Board of Supervisors are not expected to increase over last year’s actual
collections.
Building activity remains at a low level. As an enterprise fund, the Building Department has made
adjustments in response to activity level. This department continues to operate at a loss utilizing funds
loaned from the General Fund. The total loan amount has increased from last fiscal year. The Department
continues to operate with minimal staff.
The Recommended Budget also includes significant funding of the Tourism Bureau. Recognizing the
importance of attracting visitors to our County, this funding must always receive careful consideration.
Tourism is not just the engine that drives the County government but also provides a large majority of the
private sector jobs within Mariposa County. This year’s Recommended Budget includes funding for the
Yosemite Renaissance, Arts Council, and North Side Museum. Funding for the contract to operate the
two Visitor Centers is recommended. Funding continues for the Mineral and Mining Museum with the
understanding that if the Museum is closed Mariposa County’s obligation ceases.
The Recommended Budget also continues to provide funds for the replacement of the new fire engines.
When property owners approved the assessment for the purchase of fire engines the County made a
commitment to assure that a replacement fund would be established. The new fleet of 12 engines and four
water tenders requires that $185,000 be allocated for this purpose.
PROVISIONS FOR RESERVES
AND CONTINGENCIES
The County’s financial soundness depends greatly on its ability to maintain sufficient reserves so that it
can weather year-to-year swings in revenues and handle unexpected revenue disruptions. Therefore, the
County Administrative Office recommends that if additional funds become available they be used to
replenish the designation for unfunded pension obligations. Funds were withdrawn from this account to
balance the previous two years' budgets and to help finance the new fire stations.
It is also recommended that a contingency fund of $395,000 be set aside for unanticipated expenses
during the upcoming year. This is consistent with past practices.
Strong cash balances are not only prudent; they assure financial markets that the County can survive
negative State budget impacts and/or downturns in economically sensitive revenues. It is likely that the
County will need to finance some future capital expenditures. Therefore, it is absolutely vital to preserve
investor confidence in the County’s long-term financial flexibility and creditworthiness, which translates
into excellent credit ratings and ensures the County’s access to financial markets at the most favorable
interest rates when needed.
PROGRAM IMPACTS
If adopted as proposed, the Recommended Budget will have no impact on service delivery. All
departments report that they will be able to maintain current service levels.
PERSONNEL REQUESTS
Normally, several personnel requests are made by departments. Knowing the difficult financial times we
are contending with, every department was called upon to limit their requests in order to allow for a
balanced budget. There are no additional positions included in this year's Recommended Budget. There
are, however, several unallocated positions within the Human Services Department.
UNMET NEEDS
Every Department has shown constraint in preparing this year's budget. Because of the serious budget
constraints which we have experienced for several years there are many important and worthwhile
projects for which funding requests have not been submitted. In preparation for this budget cycle, your
Board directed departments to submit a short list of unmet needs. The list of unmet needs is included for
your review. Replacing the County’s outdated financial system remains the highest priority unmet need as
determined by the Administrative Office.
SPECIAL NOTE
Developing the budget takes several months. The work includes input from every department. As part of
the process, the Auditor's office provides payroll projections which allow departments to include payroll
costs. As noted in the previous section, the County's financial system is outdated and does not provide
much flexibility. With our current system, developing payroll projections is extremely labor-intensive.
When this year's budget was constructed it was assumed that a new agreement would be in place with
MCMCO that included employee participation in the retirement plan. Since the agreement was
subsequently not approved, the payroll projections for Department Heads and non-safety management
level employees are not totally accurate. The discrepancy is not material to the overall budget and
correcting would have severely impacted the Auditor's ability to complete the other processes necessary
for the year-end closing.
CONCLUSION
Relatively speaking, the FY 2012-13 Recommended Budget is a less constrained spending plan than those
presented over the last few years. It continues to be fiscally prudent and structurally balanced, with
current year estimated revenues matching current year anticipated expenses. The Recommended Budget
continues to address the County’s unfunded liability. Given the current economic conditions, this Recommended Budget allows the County to provide its primary services and does not contemplate a
reduction in services.
This budget relies on several revenue assumptions. Any significant divergence from those assumptions
will require corrective action by the Board of Supervisors at the midyear review or earlier if
circumstances warrant.
The Recommended Budget allows the County to maintain reserves to enable the County to weather
future fluctuations in available resources. Fiscal prudence dictates holding those reserves. This continues
to be especially important since State legislators continue to develop solutions to the State budget
problems which ultimately have extremely negative effects on counties and impacts our ability to deliver
services. The County must continue its efforts to encourage the Legislature and State Administration to
remember the State’s fiscal responsibility to mandated programs, which claim more than half of the
County budget.
The Budget Hearings will provide opportunities for members of the public to comment on the budgetary
recommendations presented here. It is our opinion that the Recommended Budget not only meets the
County’s legal obligations and responds to the needs of the County's citizens, but also is both structurally
sound and sustainable into the future.
