Our goal in preparing this budget has been to make recommendations consistent with our long-term 
priorities and to be fiscally
responsible to the residents we serve. Given the continued slowdown in revenues, we expect a 
relatively flat budget next year - increasing 1.0% over last year. The proposed budget reflects our 
fifth consecutive year of reductions to adapt to our new economic reality. Although the economy has 
shown some signs of recovery, our costs continue to grow faster than our revenues. We expect slow 
to flat economic growth for the foreseeable future.
Over the past several years, we have taken many steps to reduce our structural imbalance. These 
efforts include: a hiring freeze begun in 2007; adopting a lower-cost retiree health plan for new 
employees in 2008; reducing annual spending by over $30 million; and eliminating more than 10% of 
our workforce. Recent data also illustrate that over the next 5 years 42% of the total County 
workforce will be eligible to retire - with 24% likely to retire given current patterns. As a 
result, we will need to look to these next few years as an opportunity to reshape the organization 
to adapt to our new reality rather than being a victim of it.

Creation of Retiree Health Trust to Close Projected $2.5 Million General Fund Operating Gap
Our projected General Fund shortfall was $2.5 million. Although improved, our projections also 
indicate budget shortfalls for the next three years, largely because of slower revenue growth and 
higher pension and retiree health costs. Below is a chart depicting our projected General Fund 
budget shortfall over the next 3 years in millions of dollars (red) as well as projections 
including the recommended establishment during the next fiscal year of an Other Post Employment 
Benefits (OPEB) trust for
retiree health benefits (green) - which we anticipate will close our projected General Fund 
operating gap for FY 2012-13:
including:
•Better-than-expected Marin County Employees Retirement Association (MCERA) pension investment 
earnings through June 30, 2011;
•Revised labor cost assumptions based upon recent labor agreements;
•Adjustments in various revenues, including increases to property tax related revenues and 
decreases in interest earnings and departmental revenues to reflect current actuals; and
•Increases in some departmental expenses.
To close next year's budget gap, we have worked with an actuary to reduce our required contribution 
for retiree health benefits with the recommended establishment of a retiree health trust. Your 
Board's approval in April of the creation of a retiree health trust closes our FY 2012-13 projected 
shortfall, significantly reduces future expenses, as illustrated in the green area above, and 
allows us to pay for our unfunded retiree health liabilities over a 30 year period.

Two-Year Budget Strategy Closes FY 2012-13 Shortfall and Creates Policy Options for FY 2013-14
Because our projected operating gap was smaller for FY 2012-13 than for future years, our budget 
process included a two-year strategy. For FY 2012-13, our focus was largely on countywide 
reductions or early, department-initiated reductions to close the budget year gap. This strategy 
allowed departments the capacity to consider more substantive, longer-term potential changes to 
their operations or business plans for the larger future year budget shortfalls. Departments 
developed 28 long-term restructuring policy options that we will study over the course of the next 
year with departments. These new policy options include partnership efforts with local or regional 
providers; reduced or eliminated programs or services; and/or restructuring and
consolidation opportunities.

Departments agreeing to implement early long-term restructuring options with ongoing savings 
starting July 1, 2012 would
receive a one-time credit as an incentive. In April, your Board approved that the Public Defender 
receive such an incentive for his efforts to implement an organizational restructuring that will 
save $169,000 - deleting 2.0 FTE vacant positions, including a Deputy Public Defender IV, and 
adding 1.75 FTE support staff to allow for improved operations of the department. These adjustments 
result in a net 0.25 FTE decrease to the Public Defender (please see Attachment A for additional 
details).
Similarly, we are recommending a one-time credit in the amount of $274,000 to the Department of 
Health & Human Services for efforts to restructure its Administration Division in light of program 
reductions in previous years which have made 2.0 FTE filled HHS Fiscal Supervisor positions 
unnecessary going forward. An additional restructuring option for July includes elimination of the 
remaining Green Commute carpool incentive program, which should result in approximately $75,000 of 
ongoing savings.
Unfortunately, this Proposed budget will also include some recommended layoffs largely due to known 
State or federal cuts, including State realignment of Children's Mental Health Services, and 
federal cuts to the Women, Infant and Children's (WIC) program, totaling 2.80 FTE filled position 
reductions. Through a combination of holding positions vacant, as well as attempts to reprogram 
staffing levels toward a new, lower level of service program for basic Children's Mental Health 
Services, staff have mitigated reductions in force to the extent possible. Another 11.95 FTE vacant 
position reductions are recommended due to State or federal cuts. We are recommending 4.80 FTE 
filled reductions overall as part of this Proposed budget, and 11.95 FTE vacant positions in the 
Department of Health & Human Services (please see Attachment B). An overall total of 17.0 FTE 
General Fund position reductions in two departments, including 4.80 FTE filled and 12.20 FTE vacant 
positions, are summarized in the table
below:
We anticipate the need to make additional budget cuts during the next fiscal year due to State and 
federal budget reductions. In
the recent May Revise, the Governor's budget is slated to rely on passage in November of an $8.5 
billion revenue measure to fund K-12 schools, higher education and State courts as a critical 
solution to close a $15.7 billion State budget shortfall next year. The November revenue measure 
includes a four year, quarter cent increase to the State sales tax as well as a seven year income 
tax increase on those who make $250,000 or more.
The most significant budget impact of the Governor's May Revision is a potential loss of $530,000 
in funding for County roads, as well as approximately $89,000 in funding for local Child Support 
Services. While not having direct County budget impacts, other proposed reductions would 
significantly impact clients - including reductions to Child Care; reforms to the Cal WORKS Welfare 
to Work program; and a 7% reduction to authorized hours for In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) 
providers. Staff will need to coordinate with the Department of Health & Human Services to better 
understand the proposals and their impacts to local clients of these services.
Should the Governor's revenue measure fail, deep mid-year “trigger” cuts would be required to 
balance the budget - largely impacting K-12 and higher education. We anticipate returning to your 
Board this summer for balancing adjustments once the Governor and the Legislature agree upon a 
budget. We have previously reserved approximately $5 million for state budget
uncertainties to allow us time to adapt to the expected loss of program revenues.

The proposed budget represents a work plan to achieve our mission and priorities in the coming 
year. Below are a number of key
issues that have informed the development of our budget for next year.

Long-Term Restructuring Continues to Guide Budget
In January 2010, your Board approved the Long-Term Restructuring Plan, a roadmap to guide decision 
making and strategies over the next five years to ensure the County's financial sustainability. 
Over 50 Countywide and department-specific policy options were proposed as well as strategies 
addressing nine key, emerging issue areas: pension costs, health care costs, facility maintenance, 
road maintenance, budget strategies, volunteerism, e-government, community partnerships and dynamic 
organizational structures. Many of the plan's policy options were approved as part of last year's 
budget, and progress continues in support of many of the emerging issue strategies.
Because we project shortfalls over the next 3 years, we have worked with our departments to 
identify an additional 28 long-term reduction policy options that will help us address our future 
budget shortfalls. These options were presented for informational purposes to your Board during 
your April, 2012 workshops, and will be explored by staff over the next year to help close future 
budget shortfalls. These options require future staff analysis and would only be implemented by 
subsequent actions of your Board. Some examples include the following:
•Increase Marin Commons rental revenue from private lessees
•Implement ticketing software system changes at Marin Center
•Consider sharing responsibility for Public Health Laboratory services with one or more neighboring 
counties
•Explore additional realignment of Health & Human Services clinics
•Implement virtual PCs as older PCs expire
•Identify new ongoing revenue sources to support parks, open space, and agriculture conservation
•Explore reducing or eliminating the County's Print Shop, or alternatively increasing revenue 
opportunities
•Implement Project ATOM to reduce ongoing support costs
Our Long-Term Restructuring Plan will continue to be a guide as we address our budget challenges 
over the next few years.

New Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust Saves $2.5 Million General Fund in FY 2012-13, and 
More than $5.0 Million Ongoing Beginning FY 2013-14
To close next year's budget gap, we have worked with an actuary to estimate our required 
contribution for retiree health benefits with the recommended establishment of a retiree health 
trust. The creation of a retiree health trust will close our FY 2012-13 projected shortfall, 
significantly reduce future expenses, and allow us to pay for our unfunded liabilities over a 30 
year period.
Based on our previous actuarial valuation of retiree health liabilities, we had expected an 
unfunded liability of $395.2 million. The most recent valuation completed in January, 2012 reflects 
an unfunded liability of $382.7 million - or about $12.5 million less. We saved approximately $22 
million with our new health plans, as well as by not increasing our Plan 3 allocation. However, 
these savings are partially offset because people are living longer, as well as other factors.
In recent months we have been exploring the creation of a trust that would allow us to earn a 
higher return on the funds we have thus far set aside. The County's July 1, 2011 OPEB actuarial 
valuation included a 4.25% discount rate - which can be thought of as an expected rate of return. 
The creation of an OPEB trust would allow the County to earn 5.0%-7.0% depending upon tolerance for 
market risk and the County's required cash flow for future benefits. By creating an OPEB trust that 
can earn higher returns, the estimated Unfunded Actuarially Accrued Liability (UAAL) will be 
reduced from $382.7 million today. With a projected UAAL of
$399 million next year absent an OPEB trust, a $334 million projected UAAL with the new trust would 
translate to an estimated $65 million UAAL savings over the status quo for FY 2012-13. Please refer 
to the chart below for a graphical representation of the
projected UAAL impact of an OPEB trust assuming a conservative 5.5% discount rate:
Implementing an OPEB trust would save an estimated $2.5 million General Fund in FY 2012-13, and 
more than $5.0 million ongoing
beginning FY 2013-14 - creating significant savings relative to our previous forecast while fully 
funding our actuarially required contribution for the County's retiree health liabilities, 
something few local governments can claim.

Property Tax Slowdown Means Less Money Available to Fund County Services
The downturn in the housing market continues to impact the County budget as approximately one 
quarter of County revenues consists of property tax receipts. The County experienced -1.80% 
(negative) property tax growth last year, the first year since voters approved Proposition 13 in 
the 1970's that property tax growth was negative. For FY 2012-13, we are projecting 1.0% growth and 
only 1.5%-2.5% for the following four years. During the housing boom, we routinely experienced 
7%-9% annual growth in property tax revenue - as illustrated in the graphic below - which typically 
generated an additional $7-$10 million of discretionary revenue each year for County services. This 
reduced growth rate going forward means that less money will be
available to fund current and emerging service needs.
Employee Benefits and Retiree Costs Continue to Pressure Budget
A continuing pressure on our budget is the cost of benefits, including health care for employees 
and retirees. Marin County is not immune to rising health care costs for its active and retired 
employees. Regionally and nationwide, health care rates have grown considerably faster than core 
inflation. The County has successfully worked with most of our unions and employee organizations to 
develop more affordable health plans to avoid future increases and to make our plans more 
affordable to employees.
In 2007, we introduced changes to help make our current employee benefits more competitive while 
reducing retiree health care costs for future employees. This substantially slowed the growth of 
our long-term liability related to providing retiree health care benefits. Changing our plan design 
will continue these efforts. As mentioned previously, establishment of an OPEB trust next year will 
significantly reduce our costs going forward while fully funding our retiree health benefits.
Public pensions are also a significant factor contributing to our projected budget shortfall. 
Equity market losses through June 30, 2009 in Marin County Employees' Retirement Association 
(MCERA) investment assets resulted in a significant increase from FY 2009-10 in our required 
employer pension contribution. As the graphic below illustrates, the County is anticipated to pay 
10.3% of its General Fund budget toward employer pension costs - or approximately $38.9 million in 
FY 2012-13. Costs are anticipated to
increase for one more year into FY 2013-14, and then stabilize going forward.
In an effort to reduce these growing costs over the long-term, we have already agreed with several 
miscellaneous bargaining
units on a less costly 2% at 61.25 retirement plan tier for new employees. We will continue 
exploring with safety and other miscellaneous units similar plans to control costs - or other 
options that could save an equivalent amount of money. These will occur through negotiated 
agreements with our bargaining groups.

Baseline Adjustments Included in Recommended Budget
Some departments experienced more significant baseline balancing adjustments. For example, the 
Community Development Agency (CDA) has experienced a slow-down in its Building Inspections Fund fee 
revenue collections due to the economy. CDA will balance its baseline budget by shifting 2.0 FTE 
Code Enforcement Specialist and 0.35 FTE Community Development Technician II positions to the 
General Fund. The added $246,000 in General Fund cost will be offset by holding vacant a 1.0 Senior 
Geographic Information Systems Analyst position until ongoing reductions are identified by the 
department during the fiscal year; $25,000 in increased Code Enforcement revenue; $50,000 in 
reduced professional services expenditures; as well as some one-time  revenues.
In the Department of Health & Human Services, due to the State's realignment of the AB 3632 
Children's Mental Health Services Program mandate to local school districts, the County will need 
to reduce staffing in June as mentioned earlier. Through a combination of holding positions vacant, 
as well as attempts to reprogram staffing levels toward a new, lower level of service program for 
basic children's mental health services, staff have mitigated reductions in force to the extent 
possible. Due to the state realignment of this mandate, the proposed budget will include the 
elimination of 11.45 FTE vacant and 2.0 FTE filled positions.
A new children's mental health program within our existing baseline budget is recommended for FY 
2012-13. The recommended program will include 1.0 FTE Clinic Psychologist-Bilingual; 3.0 FTE 
Licensed Mental Health Practitioners/Mental Health Practitioners; 1.0 FTE Licensed Mental Health 
Practitioners/Mental Health Practitioner-Bilingual; a 0.50 FTE Mental Health Unit Supervisor; and 
0.50 FTE Office Assistant III to comprise the continued $750,000 baseline funding. This new program 
would also include an $80,000 services and supplies budget, as well as a $226,000 contract services 
budget, offset with State revenues for
the smaller program.

In addition, we are recommending reductions to the Women, Infant and Children's (WIC) program based 
upon federal revenue
cuts, including 0.80 FTE filled and 0.50 FTE vacant positions. For all departments, baseline 
position changes are reflected in the Proposed Budget.




Managing for Results / Overview of Proposed FY 2012-13 Budget

Managing for Results (MFR) Program Continues to Align Resources with County's Mission, Values and 
Goals
The Proposed Budget has been guided by the County's Managing for Results (MFR) process. MFR is 
designed to achieve your Board's vision of being a results-oriented and customer-focused 
organization whose resources are aligned with its overall mission, values, and goals. MFR helps us 
by continuously improving our services to ensure we are doing the most important things well.
A primary focus of MFR is the development and use of performance measures to help assess the 
quality of County programs and overall progress in achieving the County's most important 
priorities. Departments have enhanced their efforts in developing meaningful measures to provide 
key results of program performance. Throughout the year, departments will measure their success and 
make any necessary adjustments to achieve their program objectives.
Departments have identified 3-5 Key Measures that communicate important outcomes and information 
related to department programs. These high level performance measures are intended to highlight 
information that is important to County residents, departments, and County policymakers for 
achieving specific Countywide goals. These measures are located within the department sections of 
the Proposed Budget document. A comprehensive list of department performance measures can be found 
in the Performance Measures section.

Overview of Expenditures and Revenues
The FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget is essentially flat, increasing by 1.0%. The budget is balanced and 
reflects sound financial practices. For example, ongoing revenues are used for ongoing expenditures 
while one-time revenues support one-time spending.
The General Fund is the primary fund for most County programs and services. The FY 2012-13 Proposed 
Budget includes $293.9 million in General Fund revenues and $414.5 million in revenues for all 
funds. A portion of General Fund sources is obligated to support equity transfers for capital 
projects and debt service payments.


New Special Revenue Funds Added to the Budget
The FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget now includes a number of new budgeted special revenue funds 
converted from trust funds. On a net basis, total General Fund sources are flat - decreasing 
slightly by 0.2% overall. All budgeted funds are reported on Schedule 2 in the Supplemental Section 
of this document. Departments, particularly Health & Human Services, are now receiving revenues 
directly into these new special revenue funds and often transferring these funds into their General 
Fund programs to offset County spending for program services. This will result in fewer budgeted 
intergovernmental revenues on a General Fund basis offset with an increase in budgeted transfers to 
support General Fund spending activity. This change is illustrated by the significant increase in 
net General Fund transfers below and the 15.8% decrease in General Fund revenues; more funds are 
now being brought into the General Fund from other funds going forward via transfers, whereas in 
years past
more funds were leaving the General Fund to support obligations in other funds.

The FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget for all funds is $445.1 million, a 1.0% increase from the FY 2011-12 
Approved Budget (see table
below). The General Fund budget for FY 2012-13 is $371.7 million, a 0.2% decrease versus the prior 
year. With a required use of
prior year fund balance of $25 million for FY 2012-13, approximately $20.0 million is required for 
ongoing General Fund operations.

To achieve a balanced budget, the FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget reflects the estimated budget savings 
associated with reducing
our required contribution for retiree health benefits with the recommended establishment of a 
retiree health trust during FY 2012-
13. The creation of a retiree health trust closes our FY 2012-13 projected shortfall of $2.5 
million, significantly reduces future expenses, and allows us to pay for our unfunded liabilities 
over a 30 year period.

Approved April Reductions
Approved by your Board in April of this year, and incorporated into our baseline budget for FY 
2012-13, were departmental expenditure reductions totaling $169,000 in the Public Defender's 
Office. We are recommending that the Public Defender receive a one-time credit for his early 
implementation of an organizational restructuring that will save $169,000 ongoing - deleting 2.0 
FTE vacant positions, including a Deputy Public Defender IV, and adding 1.75 FTE support staff 
positions to allow for improved leadership, responsibility and accountability in the department. 
Details can be found on Attachment A.

Proposed June FY 2012-13 Reductions
As outlined in the Baseline Adjustments section, proposed June reductions include filled and vacant 
position reductions required to offset the loss of federal and State funding in the Department of 
Health & Human Services. Due to the State realignment of the AB 3632 Children's Mental Health 
Services mandate, the proposed budget will include the elimination of 11.45 FTE vacant and 2.0 FTE 
filled positions. A new children's mental health program within our existing baseline budget is
recommended for FY 2012-13. The recommended program will include 6.0 FTE positions; an $80,000 
services and supplies budget;
and a $226,000 contract services budget, offset with State revenues, to comprise the new smaller 
program for basic children's
mental health services of approximately $750,000 annually. In addition, we are recommending 
reductions to the Women, Infant and Children's (WIC) program based upon federal revenue cuts, 
including 0.80 FTE filled and 0.50 FTE vacant positions.
Finally, 2.0 FTE filled HHS Fiscal Supervisors are recommended for reduction relating to the 
department's Administrative restructuring. Restructuring the Administration Division would better 
reflect the changes in HHS services, better support HHS programs and clients, and move the 
department toward a more horizontal management structure. Similar to the Public Defender's early 
long-term restructuring option, savings of $274,000 would not contribute to closing the FY 2012-13 
budget shortfall but would represent early ongoing savings toward future year shortfalls. The 
Department would receive a one-time credit for early implementation of this reduction option in the 
amount of $274,000. Details can be found on Attachment B.

Budget Change Proposals (BCP's)
As in previous years, departments submitted Budget Change Proposals (BCPs) to request additional 
funds for departmental operational needs. Given our limited ability to fund new initiatives, we are 
very selective in recommending new positions and expenses. The Proposed Budget recommends $946,075 
in total BCP funding set aside in Non-Departmental. Of this amount,
$710,000 is for one-time expenses and $236,075 is on-going or cost-covered. Below is a listing of 
the recommended BCPs by
category:
One-Time Set Asides for Emerging Issues
One-time funds of approximately $5.0 million are being used to support one-time spending for FY 
2012-13. In addition to $710,000 for one-time BCP's mentioned above, and one-time spending included 
in the baseline budget largely for elections costs and one- time payment allocations relating to 
recent bargaining agreements, $1,100,000 is also included in set-asides for various emerging issues 
consistent with your Board's goals - including: $250,000 for a Serial Inebriates Program; $75,000 
for the Marin Carbon Project; $150,000 for actuarial costs to study a potential a new hybrid 
pension plan for new hires; $125,000 in partial funding for design and environmental analysis for 
the Bolinas Lagoon Ecosystem Restoration Project; $250,000 for a Community Child Care glide path 
due to State budget cuts; and $300,000 toward a shelter diversion/rapid re-housing program.
The budget also includes an additional $1 million in one-time contribution to the retiree health 
reserve - over and above the $12.3 million already included in the FY 2012-13 baseline for this 
purpose. Finally, $800,000 is set-aside for needed maintenance of
County roads.

Changes to the FY 2012-13 Budget Book
As mentioned earlier, the FY 2012-13 Proposed Budget now includes a number of new budgeted special 
revenue funds converted from trust funds. All budgeted funds are reported on Schedule 2 in the 
Supplemental Section. In addition, beginning this year, we present program budget overview and 
program budget detail in new reports in the supplemental section of the budget book. This will 
provide more information than has been previously included in prior year budget books, while also 
saving some staff resources in the budget book production process. Staff will continue to identify 
additional avenues to streamline budget production processes to facilitate additional analytics in 
the budgeting process.
Conclusion
Throughout these challenging times, our County workforce has continued to provide quality services 
to our community. I am confident this commitment will continue over the coming year as we adapt to 
state budget cuts and our long-term challenges. I want to thank your Board and our department heads 
for their leadership, collaboration and support - and in particular the Department of Finance, 
Information Services and Technology, and the Human Resources Department for their assistance in the 
preparation of this budget. I also want to recognize our employees for their thoughtful input, 
suggestions and questions. Lastly, I
would like to recognize my staff for their contributions and dedication throughout this year-long 
process.
