The County Executive Office respectfully submits the Fiscal Year 2014/15 Proposed Budget for
your review and consideration, in accordance with Merced County Ordinance 1679. The
cooperation and efforts of department heads and their staff during the development of this
Proposed Budget is greatly appreciated.
The goal for this year's budget is to continue transitioning from the economic recession and
move toward stabilizing expenses and aligning them with revenues. The Proposed Budget
maintains current service levels and holds staffing to current-year levels, unless offset by
additional dedicated revenue. Although the economy continues to show signs of improvement,
this year's budget still has challenges that require fiscal discretion. Revenues have grown, but
so have expenses due to the expiration of furloughs and increased costs in retirement, health
and workers compensation. The County has also lost some significant revenue streams that are
recommended to be absorbed by local funding sources. In addition, the Proposed Budget
continues to rely on the available fund balance to help fund ongoing operations.
Despite these challenges, progress has been made and the County's economic outlook is
starting to become stronger thanks to efforts by staff to control spending, prioritize tasks and
work together as an organization. The local economy has stabilized and improved in some
senses, but the impact of the drought is still uncertain and concerning. Any long-term recovery
will continue to be slow and spread out over several years.
ECONOMY
The region's employment figures continue to improve as the economy stabilizes. The most
recent State unemployment data show Merced County's unemployment rate at 14.3 percent,
which is below the year-ago rate of 15.7 percent and significantly better than the
unemployment rate of 18 percent two years ago. Since 2012, the county has added about 3,000
jobs per year.
Staff continues to streamline our permitting processes and improve our business-friendly
model of service to attract commerce. The Board has shown its support for economic
development through a series of actions this past year aimed at staying competitive, improving
the local business climate and further developing resources already within the County. Four
items are specifically helping to address this: the development of a County-Specific Economic
Development Plan, the development of a Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy,
membership with the California Central Valley Economic Development Corporation and
conducting a high level Market Feasibility Review of Castle. The Proposed Budget includes onetime
funding to continue these steps with a more detailed Market Feasibility Study at Castle.
All of these strategies are intended to improve collaboration with the cities to develop leads
that draw in economic activity while making Merced County a more attractive place to conduct
business.
Efforts by the County to attract business are showing progress. Several companies have chosen
Merced County as their place to do business, some of which have located at Castle Commerce
Center. One of these companies is Google, which has entered into two lease agreements with
the County to develop its self-driving car technology and high-altitude balloon technology
designed to provide internet access to rural areas. These agreements show that Merced County
is beginning to become uniquely positioned to accommodate a wide-range of business
endeavors.
STATE BUDGET
The economic improvement statewide is reflected in the Governor's May Revision, which
shows a modest surplus from additional tax revenues and continues the Administration's
policies to pay down debt and reduce long-term liabilities. The plan allocates additional
resources to education, public safety, public works, affordable health care, CaiWORKs and
environmental purposes. Much of the forecasted $2.4 billion increase in revenue will be
absorbed into costs associated with health care, drought and other programs.
The May Revision includes an increase of $142 million for drought-related items, which include
emergency response, public assistance and firefighting. There is no restoration of Williamson
Act subventions, but the document does incorporate an expedited $100 million payment to
local governments for pre-2004 mandate reimbursement claims which could mean one-time
funding of approximately $243,201 to Merced County. Despite encouragement from several
California counties, including Merced, the plan does not contain appropriations for Payment in
Lieu of Taxes obligations to counties. Currently, the State owes 36 counties over $17 million in
PILT. Merced County alone is owed over $1 million.
Previous legislation under the 2011 Realignment is impacting County Cost for foster care
placements. AB 12 became effective January 1, 2012 which extended the eligibility for children
in a foster care placement from the age of 18 to 21. The number of children in extended
placement has grown exponentially in Merced County, increasing the County's share of foster
care and adoptions assistance by approximately $575,000 during Fiscal Year 2013/14. This increase has been programmed in the FY 14/15 Proposed Budget, however it is anticipated that
further adjustments may be necessary at Final Budget. Throughout the year, staff will monitor
the number of placements and will pursue any alternative programs that might be available in
order to help mitigate the increase to County Cost.
Another anticipated impact is an expiring State waiver for a Maintenance of Effort (MOE)
requirement, or County share of cost, for the CaiFresh program, formerly known as Food
Stamps. This MOE was suspended by the State in Fiscal Year 2011/12 to help fund the
increased cost of Food Stamp expansion due to the recession. That waiver is set to expire July 1,
2014, and translates to a $1 million increase to Net County Cost in the FY 14/15 Proposed
Budget, reflective of the County's 15 percent share. There are proposals in the State Legislature
to phase out the increased cost to counties over four years, being held harmless for the first
year. Depending on the outcome of the State Budget, adjustments may be possible at Final
Budget.
Discussions between the State and counties regarding Medi-Cal are ongoing. With the adoption
of AB 85 and the statewide implementation of expanded Medi-Cal in FY 13/14, Merced County
selected the County Savings Determination process to redirect the indigent health portion of
Health Realignment to the State and participate in an ongoing true-up process. The shift of
realignment revenue to the State left Merced County without any revenue to fund over $2.0
million of residual indigent health care expenses in the Medical Assistance Program. Staff has
been working with the State, with the assistance of our legislative delegation, on a transition
plan. County staff has successfully negotiated with the State an initial step to retain
approximately 30 percent, or $1.1 million, of the redirected realignment revenue in FY 14/15.
Staff will continue to work on options with the State to mitigate the remaining residual indigent
health expenses.
AB 109- prison realignment- still poses challenges for local governments, especially within the
Central Valley, as we continue to receive insufficient revenue from the State to manage the
influx of offenders. While Merced County has done a great job establishing best practice
services that focus on the full range of offender issues, the County is still experiencing increased
difficulties related to AB 109 in our jail system and other parts of the justice system. County
staff has shared a proposal with the Realignment Advisory Committee (RAC) that includes a
socioeconomic factor into the allocation formula which would provide more equity among
counties. While the possibility of a restructured formula is considered, funding will once again
fall short in FY 14/15. Merced County received a total allocation of $6.2 million for FY 13/14.
Although the growth allocation is estimated to increase, the projected FY 14/15 base amount is
expected to be lower than the previous year's allocation total due to the third year transition of
parolees. Staff will continue to work at the State and local levels to promote more responsible
and equitable methods to allocate AB 109 resources, as well as continue to identify alternative
programs to transition offenders into society.
While AB 109 has posed difficulties as the County deals with an influx of inmates, steps are
being taken to attempt to improve correctional facility security and efficiency. The Governor's
May Revise does include an additional round of funding of $500 million for correctional facilities through SB 1022. Your Board has already approved a plan to pursue this grant funding in order
to restructure the bed and program capacity at the correctional facility along Sandy Mush Road.
While improving the safety and security of the facilities, the project would also improve the
capacity for current and additional treatment and assessment programs. Recently, the Board
took steps to better position the County by initiating an updated Needs Assessment Study and
starting the CEQA process to better position the County if the additional $500 million remains in
the State Budget.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
The FY 2014/15 Proposed Budget is $467.8 million, which is down $1.0 million from last year's
Final Budget of $468.8 million. Of the $467.8 million, $372.4 million is programmatic funding
and $95.4 million is funded from local discretionary resources (net county costs). With local
revenues projected at $70.1 million and a projected fund balance of $23.0 million for a total of
$93.1 million, the Proposed Budget includes approximately $2.3 million in one-time
adjustments/revenues to balance the shortfall.
Although local revenues are projected to be $3.1 million greater than last fiscal year, there is
approximately $7.9 million increase in Net County Costs related to increased expenses and
reduced departmental revenues. The largest components are approximately $3.7 million in
salary and benefit accounts (the furloughs expiring per labor agreements, a higher employer
contribution for retirement, increases in health insurance and workers compensation); an
additional $1.5 million in the CaiFresh MOE and foster care (which could grow more at Final
Budget); and approximately $2.7 million in reduced revenue in Probation Department, the
District Attorney's Office, the Sheriff's Department, and the Library. A couple examples of
reduced revenues are the expiring Federal COPS grant which funds five (5) Deputy Sheriff
positions and FY 13/14 being the last year of Redevelopment Area funding to the Library.
In addition to continuing to work with the above Departments to better understand possible
options to mitigate the reduced revenues, there may be further recommendations in the
following areas at Final Budget depending on the fund balance available and outcome of the
State Budget: the shift of indigent health care expenses and realignment revenue to the State,
staffing through another Federal COPS grant, staffing challenges related to the implementation
of the Enterprise Financial System (ERP), Castle Water and Sewer rates, the permitting process,
economic development efforts, Animal Control, Revenue and Reimbursement Office, and the
phone/radio communication systems.
The Proposed Budget is based upon current laws in effect and does not consider proposals
included in the Federal or Governor's May Revise Budget. It is a temporary operating plan until
the uncertainty surrounding several economic and State impacts are clarified. These
uncertainties have made it challenging to specifically identify a clear spending plan at this time
which necessitates the further review of some areas. Key elements of the budget and final recommendations will hinge on the fund balance or cash carry over, as well as the outcome of
the State Budget. Depending on how the outcome of these issues, a key consideration for the
Board is whether to ask staff to identify further recommendations that minimize the use of onetime
funding or identify one-time funding to continue the transition.
As information on year end and the State Budget become clearer, staff will continue working
with all departments to identify options and recommendations to further address the shortfall
and address key priority service delivery areas for your consideration at Final Budget.
