In accordance with Merced County Ordinance 1679, the County Executive Office respectfully submits the FY 12/13
Proposed Budget for your review and consideration. Department heads and their staff are to be commended for
their cooperation and effort throughout the development of this Proposed Budget.
The Proposed Budget reflects the many challenges and uncertainties facing government as a result of the economy,
State's realignment of services, elimination of redevelopment agencies, and the outcome of the State budget. State
government, counties, cities, and schools are all facing significant financial issues as we all continue to feel the
negative effects of the "Great Recession". Locally, Merced County property tax revenues are over $20 million
dollars less than four years ago. Your Board has been fiscally prudent and taken positive steps towards addressing
the structural deficit. Although staff is cautiously optimistic that assessed values may have finally reached the
bottom and are stabilizing, any recovery or significant growth in revenues will be slow and take many years. As a
result, the year end fund balance has become more important in planning and determining the local resources
available each fiscal year. Bringing expenses more in line with revenues is critical to prevent the fund balance from
continuing to decline.
Statewide counties are struggling to address the realignment and transition of state programs and responsibilities
to counties. With FY 12/13 being the first full year of implementation for AB 109, counties statewide are
reevaluating programs and services related to this new responsibility. Although the realignment includes some
new revenues, the overall financial structure will not provide sufficient resources to only focus on commitment and
detention. As the cost of services continues to grow with the increasing number of offenders, counties will be
required to focus on the full range of services, including probation, mental health and human services, in order to
be programmatically and fiscally successful. Part of that struggle planning for next fiscal year is that the AB 109
allocation structure is still an uncertain component of the State Budget.
In addition, the State Supreme Court decision in December 2011 regarding the elimination of redevelopment
agencies (RDA) has created statewide uncertainties to the disposition of RDA assets and liabilities. Although
Merced County's RDA is relatively new with little tax increment, the elimination of all RDAs will impact the
countywide apportionment of property taxes, as well as the pass through payment from the City of Merced RDA to
the Library. Until clarifying statutes or court decisions are provided, the ultimate impact on the apportionment of
property taxes is unknown.
The Proposed Budget is based upon current laws in effect, and does not consider proposals included in the Federal
or Governor's May Revise Budget, such as further restructuring/realignment proposals or an annual charge to
counties of $24,000 per juvenile offender in state custody. A significant component of the Governor's May Revise
addressing the State's $15.7 billion deficit relies on voter's approving his November statewide ballot initiative
which would raise revenues of $8.5 billion for FY 12/13. If the ballot measure is unsuccessful, the Governor
proposes $6.1 billion in trigger reductions. At this point, the State budget negotiations can be expected to be fluid
and most likely detrimental to local government.
The FY 12/13 Proposed Budget is $426.9 million, down $9.5 million from last year's Final Budget of $436.4 million.
Of the $426.9 million, $341.5 million is programmatic funding and $85.4 million funded from local discretionary
resources (net county cost). With local revenues currently projected at $64.6 million and a fund balance projected
at $17.0 million for a total of $81.6 million, the Proposed Budget includes approximately $3.8 million in one-time
adjustments/revenues to balance.
The Proposed Budget is a temporary operating plan, until the uncertainty surrounding a number of economic and
state impacts are solidified. These uncertainties delayed specifically identifying a clear and succinct spending plan
in the Proposed Budget at this time. As was noted earlier, key elements of the budget and final spending plan will
hinge on the fund balance or cash carry over, as well as the outcome of the State Budget.
Although decisions will be challenging and difficult, staff will continue working with all departments to further
identify recommendations to minimize the use of one-time adjustments/revenue and address any state impacts for
your consideration at Final Budget.
