Mono County's economic picture appears to be slowly improving in spite of costs that continue to
increase: and this budget gives rise to a feeling of cautious optimism. While we still struggle to make
ends meet, the budget is balanced with a combination of increasing revenue projections from an
improved economy, maintaining conservative expenditure requests and a carryover fund balance that
is more than expected.
The CAO Recommended Budget for fiscal year 2015-2016 is balanced (as required by law). It totals
$67,030,460 in expenditures and $62,846,364 in revenues. The General Fund portion of the CAO
Recommended budget is $35,759,730 in expenditures and $33,908,262 in revenues and it relies on
$1,851,468 in carryover fund balance. The CAO Recommended Budget does not include policy
items.
In contrast to the CAO Recommended Budget, the Department Requested Budget seeks $67,700,363
in expenditures and $62,860,877 in revenues, with a General Fund component of $36,260,133 in
expenditures and $33,915,775 in revenues. The Department Requested budget results in a General
Fund deficit of $2,344,358 which is $492,890 more than the General Fund Balance that was relied on
to balance the CAO Recommended Budget. When the Finance Director certifies Fund Balance
during the budget hearings on August 18th, carryover fund balance will most likely come in between
the two; leaving your board the opportunity to allocate funding to policy items or other unmet needs.
The Fiscal Year 2014-15 CAO Recommended Budget is sufficient to:
~ Provide core services and programs while avoiding significant reductions to other programs
and services
~ A void additional impact to staff, including layoffs
~ Provide funding to purchase a CARB compliant water truck
~ Fund the gap caused by a reduction in Highway User Tax funding for roads
~ Continue funding the County Emergency Medical Services without decreasing service levels
~ Maintain Mono County's commitment to the Senior Services Program
~ Meet Mono County's administrative policy to budget 1 % of general fund expenses for
contingencies
~ Provide funding to reorganize Bridgeport office space to conserve energy and save money
It is also important to recognize that this budget leaves many County needs unmet, and others only
partially fulfilled. Therefore, we acknowledge that this budget does not:
~ Provide additional funding for CARB compliance
~ Restore County Reserves to the policy minimum that was compromised by using reserves for
unreimbursed losses from the Round Fire
~ Allocate enough resources in the Road Department for an El Nifio winter
~ Provide resources to increase economic development programs
~ Set aside funds in anticipation of County staffs salaries being restored after two years of
furloughs
Preparing the budget is a long and sometimes difficult process where many tough decisions must be
made. Submitting a balanced County budget cannot be accomplished without the support,
cooperation, and understanding of all County departments and certainly without the untiring and
dedicated work of the Finance Department and CAO staff. We offer our sincerest thanks to all of
you.
On behalf of Lynda Salcido, Interim County Administrative Officer, this 2015-16 CAO
Recommended Budget is respectfully submitted.