The format for the materials for the budget workshop for fiscal year 2012-2013 is similar to the
format used last year:
• Department budgets are grouped by budget officer.
• Each budget group includes the department head’s statement of prior accomplishments
and goals for the current year.
• An organization chart is included for each department.
• The Sheriff – Radio budget and the Central Services budget have been eliminated. Those
activities are now reflected in the Emergency Services and Facilities budgets respectively.
• Requests for funding to support activities of non-county agencies and organizations will
be considered at a subsequent Board meeting.
The proposed fiscal year 2012-2013 budget of approximately $71 million before policy items is
balanced, with $36 million of expenditures in the General Fund and $35 million in other funds
and dependent special districts. This is an increase of $8 million from the final budget of $64
million in fiscal year 2011-2012, including a $4 million increase in the Road Fund. However,
General Fund expenditures decreased by $3 million compared to the prior year’s budget.. The
budget assumes a property tax delinquency rate similar to last fiscal year. Better property tax
revenue estimates will be available at the mid-year budget review. Various revenues influenced
by the economy are expected to remain at depressed levels. Notably, due to the closure of June
Mountain Ski Area, transient occupancy receipts are expected to drop by more than $100,000.
No employee step increases or cost-of-living increases were budgeted. The General Fund
balance has been reduced to reflect the need to fund deficit balances in other funds. The loan to
the Solid Waste Enterprise Fund was increased by $450,000 to cover the anticipated deficit
through the end of Fiscal Year 12/13. To the extent that the Board might fund the shortfall
with a tipping fee increase or expenditure reductions, the amount of the additional loan could be
reduced.
After balancing the proposed budget, there is a remaining General Fund balance of $564,457
available to fund policy items and contingency, without appropriating any funds from the
General Reserve. The General Reserve funds available are $1,615,314.
The County continues to use a base-year budgeting method, and major capital expenditure items
and year to year operational changes are reflected as policy items. A policy item is included to
establish a contingency at 1% of General Fund expenditures per the Board’s budget policy.