I am pleased to present the Fiscal Year (FY) 2014-15 Recommended Budget for your consideration
during budget hearings commencing on June 10, 2014. This Budget reflects a slow emergence from
the Great Recession that strained locally generated revenues and reduced discretionary resources
available to your Board of Supervisors (Board) to fund County programs and services. This
financial pressure was compounded by the State's past fiscal crisis and resulting reductions in local
health, welfare, and other state aid payments. Through four years of ensuing budget reductions,
County departments reduced staffing through attrition, discretionary spending cuts, and improved
efficiencies. As a result of your Board's conservative budget practices and fiscal policies, the County
endured the recession without major service reductions or layoffs. In FY 2011-12, the County
restored structural balance in its fmances by achieving an operating surplus of $5.5 million, followed
by a $12.8 million surplus in FY 2012-13. However, in achieving fiscal balance, departments
forfeited levels of pre-recession budget flexibility. Although the economy is improving, inflation in
operating costs consumes the modest recovery in revenues. It is within this context that departments
prepared their budget requests for FY 2014-15.
The recommended spending plan for FY 2014-15 includes expenditures for all funds of $1.09
billion, representing an increase of $43.5 million over the current year adopted budget. Almost twothirds
of the increase pays for growth in salary and benefit costs, including the first wage increase in
five years for most of the County's workforce. Adding to these costs is the mid-year addition of 184
positions to County payrolls. The largest portion of this staffing increase is attributed to Natividad
Medical Center, including 109 positions added to support the proposed new Level II Trauma
Program. The County's Health and Social Services programs also added positions for
implementation and enrollment activities associated with the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and other
activities related to health and welfare realignment. Additional areas of increased expenditures
include higher costs at Natividad Medical Center for pharmaceutical drugs, increased expenditures
in the County's general liability program, and higher public assistance payments.
This Recommended Budget provides that the General Fund is structurally balanced without use of
fund balance in accordance with your Board's financial policies. Recommended appropriations for
the General Fund total $551.8 million, representing growth of $22.8 million (4.3%) over the current
year adopted budget. Much of this growth reflects increases in the underlying cost of providing
baseline service levels, including wage increases authorized under current labor agreements, higher
employee health insurance costs, increased costs in the general liability program, as well as costs to
replace information technology infrastructure and upgrade the County's enterprise resource
management system. In total, the County Administrative Office anticipates the cost of existing
staffing and services to grow more than $17 million due to these and other cost pressures.
As a result of this fiscal pressure, departments' baseline budget submissions contained position and
service level reductions. Additionally, some departments are also experiencing revenue reductions
unique to their programs, such as declining attendance and receipts at the Parks Department's resort
and enterprise operations. Overall, departmental baseline budgets include a countywide reduction of
82 positions, including the loss of 40 vacancies and 42 filled positions. Major areas of baseline
position reductions include: Social Services, Probation, Parks- Resort Operations, District Attorney,
and the Monterey County Free Libraries.
To mitigate reductions in staffing and potential operational impacts of rising costs and other fiscal
pressures, departments submitted augmentation requests totaling $21.6 million in requested General
Fund Contributions. These requests include the restoration of 20 vacancies and all 42 filled
positions, and add an additional 35.5 new positions. Most of the new position requests restore
positions lost in prior budget cycles or add staffing supported by program revenues, generally in
health and social services programs that meet mandates under State-County realignment and the
Affordable Care Act.
Available discretionary funding to support department augmentations totals $4.3 million, much less
than the requested $21.6 million. In developing the Recommended Budget, the County
Administrative Office targeted funding toward restoration of filled positions to preserve the
County's service levels. The Recommended Budget restores 36 General Fund positions, including
two vacancies (funded from within the requesting department's existing resources), 27 filled
positions, and seven new positions financed by departmental revenues. The budget also includes
18.5 new positions funded outside the General Fund by the Health Department. The significant
augmentations of General Fund Contributions include:
• $1.8 million for the Sheriff's Office to avoid reductions in staff by funding cost increases for
various support functions, including increased cost for the general liability insurance program,
building use charges, increased data processing and communications charges, and higher inmate
hospital charges;
• $814,522 to retain eight filled positions in the juvenile evening reporting center, juvenile hall
echo unit, and juvenile probation victim restitution program which could no longer be supported
due to countywide cost increases;
• $538,161 for the Resource Management Agency, including $194,971 to offset increased utility
costs for shared County buildings and $343,190 to retain three filled positions in Planning;
• $790,586 to retain 16 filled positions within the Economic Opportunity Department, AuditorController's
Office, District Attorney's Office, and Department of Social Services; and
• $217,000 for Social Services in support of the general assistance program and $100,000 for the
Agricultural Commissioner to meet maintenance of effort requirements of the State to avoid
losing an estimated $1.6 million in gas tax revenue.
Other key elements of the recommended General Fund budget include:
• Maintains a strategic reserve in the General Fund in compliance with your Board's budget
strategic reserve policies;
• Appropriate $5.4 million for operational contingencies, in compliance with the Board's policy for
a contingency reserve equal to one percent of estimated General Fund revenues; and
• Provide contributions to the Monterey County Convention and Visitors' Bureau (MCCVB), Arts
Council, and Film Commission in accordance with current formulas, adding $116,091 in
additional County General Fund to these economic development initiatives in FY 2014-15.
This Recommended Budget does not include full year funding for 15 filled positions in the Parks
Department, of which 14 are assigned to the lake resorts. The resorts suffer from chronic revenue
shortfalls, exacerbated by the severe drought, low water levels, and resulting decline in number of
visitors. The Parks Department requested $1.7 million in General Fund monies to retain these staff
and perform basic maintenance of the resort facilities. In the absence of additional discretionary
monies, funding these non-General Fund requests requires commensurate reductions to other
program areas. However, alternative solutions to minimize employee impacts will be provided at
the budget hearings.
This Recommended Budget document represents a collaborative effort by staff and department
heads under your Board's guidance. The development of budget recommendations was framed
toward meeting your Board's strategic initiatives and financial policies by aligning available
resources with Board-established priorities. As in prior years, your Board's Budget Committee
provided consistent leadership, and engaged your entire Board in maintaining fiscal integrity
throughout the budget year. Department heads continue to respond to dynamic budgetary conditions
and constantly evolving State-County realignments, while balancing department-specific mandates
against the broader resources of the County as a whole. The County Administrative Office, on
behalf of County departments and your Board expresses gratitude for the enormous contributions of
Monterey County employees for their dedication and public service to the diverse constituents of
our community.
In closing, on behalf of the Administrative Office and the Department Heads team, I thank your
Board of Supervisors for your steady leadership, collective vision, and unwavering commitment to
the long-term fiscal and operational integrity of Monterey County. I look forward to your
consideration of this spending plan during budget hearings.