I am pleased to present the Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 Recommended Budget for your consideration
during budget hearings commencing on June 51h 2013. The County of Monterey progresses toward
long-term structural integrity even as local governments, along with the rest of the country, still
struggle from the financial impacts of the 2007-09 recession. After four years of budget reductions,
the County ended last fiscal year with a General Fund operating surplus of $5.5 million, and a $0.9
million surplus estimated at the end of the current year. In achieving fiscal balance, departments
forfeited levels of budget flexibility enjoyed in prior years. Nevertheless, increases in operating
costs outpace estimated revenue growth, constraining your Board's capacity to maintain desired
levels of service. It is within this context that departments prepared their budget requests for FY
2013-14.
The recommended spending plan for FY 2013-14 includes expenditures for all funds of $1.04
billion, representing an increase of $96.6 million over the current year adopted budget. Much of the
increase is the result of accounting changes to enhance transparency and accountability for the
recent realignment of responsibilities and associated funding from the State to counties for various
health, social services, and public safety programs. Without the accounting changes, the
recommended budget would have grown by $30.4 million (3.2%) over the current year budget, with
most of the increase funding higher employee retirement and health insurance costs, additional
positions supporting realigned programs and Affordable Care Act (ACA) implementation, and
increased capital expenditures.
Financing sources for FY 2013-14 include $995.3 million in revenue and $46.8 million in use of
fund balance. Most of the use of fund balance is in funds supporting Natividad Medical Center and
capital projects. The General Fund is structurally balanced without use of fund balance in
accordance with the Board's fmancial policies.
Recommended appropriations for the General Fund total $526.6 million, representing growth of
$31.9 million (6.5%) over the current year adopted budget. Federal, state, and other program
revenues, such as those in support of realigned programs and the ACA, finance most of this growth.
The recommended increase in County General Fund contributions (GFC) from discretionary monies
is $7.8 million, funded by modest growth in property and transient occupancy ("hotel") tax
revenues.
To maintain baseline service capacity, and in some cases enhance programs, departments submitted
augmentation requests totaling $20.8 million, financed by $12.2 million in program revenue and
$8.6 million in requested GFC. In recommending augmentations, the County Administrative Office
reviewed departments' resource flexibility and recommended GFC's to the extent possible, aligned
to Board-adopted strategic initiatives and key objectives. Consideration was given to requests that
leverage additional program revenue or grants. Higher property and transient occupancy tax revenue
provided a limited amount of resources to finance the most critical departmental augmentation
requests. These recommended augmentations increase baseline amounts by $16.1 million in
appropriations, including $5.2 million in County GFC. The three largest areas of augmentation
include the following program areas:
• An additional 92 positions within the health and social services areas to implement ACA,
including 51 positions within social services and 41 additional clinic services positions
within the health department. These augmentations do not require additional GFC.
• Increase of $2.2 million in GFC and 14 positions for the Sheriffs Office to enhance the
safety and security of staff, the community, and inmates housed in the County jail. The
recommended augmentations include 12 additional custody and control positions for the
jail's control towers, allowing the Sheriffs Office to redeploy deputies to other critical
functions appropriate for their level of skill and training.
• An additional $1.4 million and 23 positions in support of other County public safety
programs, including: $489,618 for Probation to restore 2.0 Silver Star Gang Prevention and
Intervention probation officers, retain an Adult Placement Program position, and fund Next
Generation Radio (NGEN) operational costs; $403,521 and 11 positions for the District
Attorney to prosecute real estate fraud, investigate gang activity, support efforts related to
forensics, and provide victim and witness assistance; $464,389 to the Public Defender to
restore four positions at risk due to departmental cost pressures; and add five dispatch
positions at a GFC of $43,313 for Emergency Communications to reduce employee
overtime and improve service levels.
Key elements of the recommended General Fund budget include the following highlights:
• Maintains the General Fund Strategic Reserve at $52.2 million (current year level).
• Appropriates $5.2 million for operational contingencies, in compliance with the Board's
policy for a contingency reserve equal to one percent of estimated General Fund revenues.
• Provides contributions to the Convention and Visitors' Bureau (MCCVB), Arts Council,
and Film Commission in accordance with current formulas, adding $255,980 in additional
County GFC to these economic development initiatives in FY 2013-14.
The General Fund is balanced and includes modest augmentations to baseline budgets. However,
two significant employee benefits continue to drive up operating costs: rising pension contributions
and higher health care premiums. In April 2013 the California Public Employees' Retirement
System (CalPERS) adopted changes to its asset smoothing and amortization policies. CalPERS is
also considering lowering the discount rate (i.e., assumed rate of return on investments) by 0.25%
and increasing the assumed life expectancy of members. These changes will increase the County's

retirement contributions paid on behalf of employees by $2.8 million to $8.3 million in FY 2015-16,
ramping up to an annual increase of $14.3 million to $25.3 million over a five-year phase-in period.
The other significant cost pressure is the increasing cost of providing employee health insurance.
Health insurance premiums for most County employees rose 16.9% in 2013. Assuming a
conservative 5.6% future growth rate (the 2000-2010 average), the County's would see an additional
General Fund increase of $2.3 million in 2014-15, followed by another $2.5 million increase in
2015-16.
The increases in PERS retirement contributions and health insurance premiums will likely consume
all (if not more) than the potential growth in the County's discretionary revenue over the next five
years, assuming continued economic recovery and associated increases in local revenues. The
impact from health and retirement cost growth has major implications for the County's capacity to
provide desired levels of service and adequately fund maintenance of infrastructure in the future.
In closing, this Recommended Budget document represents a collaborative effort by staff and
department heads with ongoing guidance from your Board. The development of budget
recommendations was guided by your Board's strategic initiatives and financial policies, aligning
available resources with Board-established priorities. Your Board's Budget Committee provided
consistent leadership, and actively engaged your full Board in maintaining fiscal integrity
throughout the budget year. Department heads continue to respond to dynamic budgetary conditions
and historic state-county realignments, while balancing department-specific mandates and
commitments against the broader resources of the County as a whole. The County Administrative
Office, on behalf of County departments and your Board of Supervisors is particularly grateful for
the enormous contributions of all Monterey County employees for the valuable services they
provide to the community in the spirit of public service.
On behalf of the Administrative Office and the Department Head team, I thank your Board of
Supervisors for your collective vision, sound leadership and continuing commitment toward the
long-term fiscal and operational integrity of Monterey County. I look forward to your consideration
of this spending plan during budget hearings.