Submitted for your consideration and adoption is the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 Recommended Budget,
prepared in accordance with your adopted Budget Policies. You are scheduled to begin public
hearings for all General Fund, Special Revenue Fund, Internal Service, and Enterprise departments on
June 17th and to adopt the budget on June 25th.
The Recommended Budget reflects the initial recovery of the financial downturn that impacted the
nation, state and local economies over the past five years. The County is beginning to experience
growth in a number of discretionary revenue sources including property, sales, and transient
occupancy taxes. Staff is projecting limited growth in property taxes, the County’s largest discretionary
revenue source, as these revenues are expected to continue to increase and the strength of the economy
continues to recover which will assist the County in addressing increasing future costs associated with
unmet infrastructure needs and projected increases in employee health insurance and retirement
benefits in future years. Because there still remain concerns about the timing of the improved
economic conditions and the State’s fiscal recovery, the Recommended Budget generally maintains
General Fund programs at their current staffing and funding levels.
The Recommended General Fund Budget includes a 3.1% increase in appropriations compared to the
FY 2012-2013 Adopted Budget. This increase is the result of a number of factors, including negotiated
salary cost of living and scheduled step increases for employees, increased employee benefit costs and
increases in reserves and designations, offset by increased discretionary and departmental revenue.
The Recommended Budget reflects the elimination of 2 vacant positions and the addition of 3.4
positions. The recommended new positions are funded by 2011 Public Safety Realignment revenue,
Mental Health Medi-Cal revenue, Animal Shelter service charges, and the General Fund.
Looking back, the FY 2012-2013 Adopted Budget was a budget year with significant changes. The
budget was prepared using the County’s new budget module and new chart of accounts. This
included the creation of a budget unit hierarchy, starting at the sub-division level and rolling up to
division, department and fund. In addition new identifying numbers were created for all funds,
budget units and major account classifications.
Two major organizational changes also occurred during FY 2012-2013. Appropriations and revenue
related to the Health & Human Services Agency (HHSA) were moved from the General Fund to a new
special revenue fund. Also completed during FY 2012-2013 was the reorganization of the Public
Works, Environmental Management and Conservation, Development & Planning Departments.
Finally, the ongoing implementation during FY 2012-2013 of the 2011 Public Safety Realignment Act,
which shifted responsibility for “low level” offenders from the State Department of Corrections and
Rehabilitation to the counties as well as mental health and social service programs. This change has
impacted numerous departments in Law and Justice, Public Safety, and HHSA Divisions.
BUDGET PROCESS
The FY 2013-2014 budget process began January 15, 2013, when the Board received a revised Strategic
Financial Plan and approved the FY 2013-2014 Budget Policies and Calendar. Other steps in the
process included:
? January 10th: Budget Orientation/Training for all departments.
? March 1st: Departments submitted their budget requests to the County Executive Office.
? March 19th: A Mid-Year Review of the FY 2012-2013 budget status was presented to the Board.
? April 3rd: CEO Analysts completed their initial review of departmental budget requests.
? April 24th: CEO Analysts completed review of departmental budgets and discussions with
departments; budget numbers were finalized.
BUDGET POLICIES
As mentioned above, in January of this year, your Board adopted a set of Budget Policies to guide staff
in preparing the FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget. Utilizing the Strategic Financial Plan, it shows
the General Fund will likely be in structural balance over the next five years. Numerous uncertainties
still need to be factored into this time period that potentially could alter this positive position such as
the growth of property taxes including Excess ERAF and what the future holds for 2011 Public Safety
Realignment, the jail population, and pension reform. The Plan also recognizes that the County
currently has General Fund reserves to assist in financial smoothing when faced with budget
uncertainties. The Budget Policies generally call for holding the line on spending and utilizing the Plan
for budget development.
The County’s Recommended All Funds Budget for FY 2013-2014 totals $452,394,201 in appropriations.
This is a $3.7 million, or 1%, increase in appropriations compared to the FY 2012-2013 Adopted Budget
appropriation level. A detailed comparison of the FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget’s appropriation
levels and the FY 2012-2013 Adopted Budget’s appropriation levels follows:
The primary reasons for the increase in the Recommended Budget compared to the FY 2012-2013
Adopted All Funds Budget include:
? An increase in the General Fund of $5.3 million of which $3.4 million is a Public Works project
for the Rutherford Reach 5, 6, 7, and 9. This project has offsetting revenues therefore there is no
effect to the bottom line Net County Cost.
? A $6.8 million increase in salary and benefit costs across all funds and budget units. This
reflects a 1.5% cost of living adjustment (COLA) for all employees and step increases for eligible
employees below the top step of the salary range for the position. Also included in this amount
are the costs for pension, medical, dental and vision insurance along with Other Post-
Employment Benefit costs. This does not include potential cost increases associated with health
care reform which will not be known until the fall of 2013 and could potentially increase County
costs by an additional $1.5 million. The Recommended Budget does include a recommendation
to set aside a $1.5 million designation to address these expenditures.
A $1.1 million decrease in the Enterprise Funds is primarily the result of a decrease in revenue
to support the operational activities of the Airport. With the termination of several leases, the
Airport continues to pursue filling the vacant space and is in the process of releasing a Request
for Proposal to secure future tenants. In addition the reduction of appropriations is the result of
the refinancing of the 2003 Certificates of Participation paying off the debt service for the Flight
Center Hangars and the California Highway Patrol facility.
? A $1.9 million decrease in the Operating Funds. The majority of the decrease is within the
Roads Fund and the Affordable Housing Fund. The Affordable Housing Fund had two projects
that were either totally (Hartle Court) or partially (Oak Creek Terrace) financed during FY2012-
2013 therefore decreasing the appropriation for FY 2013-2014. The Road Fund had numerous
large dollar projects that were completed in FY 2012-2013.
? An increase of approximately $5.6 million for various local law enforcement and health and
human services programs that replace categorical State funding previously received directly by
the relevant department’s operating budgets. Now that these programs are realigned, State law
requires that the revenue be received and accounted for in a special revenue fund and then
transferred to the relevant operating budget, thus, effectively, doubling the appropriation level
for these realigned programs. Also included in the increase are appropriations that reflect costs
for housing and supervising certain “low level” offenders from the California Department of
Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) to the counties.
? A decrease of $1.8 million of revenue for the Airport Industrial Area Mitigation Fund. In FY
2012-2013, a onetime loan in the amount of $1.5 million from the Accumulated Capital Outlay
Fund was budgeted as revenue in order to fund the Devlin Road Segment C extension project.
The loan process was completed in FY 2012-2013 and the recently created Community Facilities
District will repay the loan.
? A $2.1 million decrease in appropriations in the Capital Improvement Project Funds (CIP). This
decrease reflects the completion and expenditures to date of several projects including the
remodeling of the interior of the Administration Building to accommodate a centralized
permitting center. The budget also includes the transfer of $26.8 million from the Accumulated
Capital Outlay division to the CIP fund for the Health & Human Services Campus project, the
Administration Building exterior repair, and preliminary jail planning costs. Due to the
transfer from one fund to another, the costs appear to be “double-counted” as part of the $60
million of appropriations in the CIP Funds.
The Recommended Budget reflects the elimination of 2 vacant positions (see Schedule B). The Budget
includes the addition of 3.4 positions (see Schedule A). The recommended new positions are funded by
2011 Public Safety Realignment revenue, Mental Health Medi-Cal revenue, Animal Shelter service
charges, and the General Fund. Schedule C shows the limited term positions proposed to be converted
to regular positions and/or extended or deleted. Schedule D shows the positions to be reclassified,
changed in FTE status and/or transferred to other budget units.
4
THE GENERAL FUND BUDGET
The County’s Recommended General Fund Budget appropriation level for FY 2013-2014 totals
$175,988,165. This is an increase of $5.4 million or 3.1%, compared to the FY 2012-2013 Adopted Budget
appropriation level. A more detailed comparison of the FY 2013-2014 Recommended General Fund
Budget to the FY 2012-2013 Adopted General Fund Budget follows:
The primary reasons for the increase in both revenues and expenditures in the Recommended Budget
compared to the FY 2012-2013 Adopted General Fund Budget include:
? Increases in employee salary and benefit costs for existing employees as previously described,
of which approximately $3.8 million is in the General Fund.
? A $3.1 million increase in appropriations, offset by increases in revenue and use of existing fund
balance for the continued implementation of the 2011 Public Safety Realignment Act. These
new programs increased the FY 2012-2013 Adopted Budget by $1.95 million and included the
funding of 6 additional Correctional Officer positions, staff secure facility capital costs, 2 Mental Health Counselor positions to support forensic counseling in the Jail and staff an expanded
Mental Health Court program and additional alcohol and drug treatment placements at the
McAllister Institute. The increase also includes recommendations from the County’s
Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) and jail capital project gap funding necessary to
maintain the jail facility. The Probation Department is budgeting Realignment funding to cover
the loss of SB 678 revenue for probation supervision. Finally, the District Attorney’s Office has
included the addition of a Victim Witness Advocate II position to support new responsibilities
related to Parole revocations and general Realignment related issues.
? A decrease in Appropriations for Contingencies of $500,000 which is effectively transferred to
General Reserves for the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
? The receipt of approximately $3.7 million in additional revenue for major maintenance or other
projects budgeted in the Public Works Projects budget unit. Most of this revenue will come
from Measure A or Rutherford Dust grants.
? A $1.1 million or 8%, increase in Proposition 172 revenue that helps fund General Fund public
safety departments.
? A $440,000 increase in State revenue in the Agricultural Commissioner’s budget, to fund the
expanded European Grapevine Moth program.
? The transfer of $615,309 in Property Tax Administration fees from Discretionary Revenue to the
Assessor, Treasurer-Tax Collector, Auditor-Controller, County Counsel, Board of Supervisors,
and the County Executive Office budgets. This revenue is now directly attributable to the costs
incurred within each department.
The FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget reflects a $2.3 million (2%) increase in Discretionary Revenue
compared to the FY 2012-2013 Adopted Budget level. This is the net result of increases and decreases
in a variety of revenue sources, including:
? $1.8 million (4%) increase in Secured Property Tax revenue;
? $595,000 (4%) increase in VLF Swap Property Tax revenue;
? $330,000 (19%) increase in Triple Flip Property Tax revenue;
? $650,000 (100%) increase in Redevelopment Dissolution Property Tax revenue;
? $220,000 (39%) increase in Current Year Supplemental Property Tax revenue;
? $832,000 (15%) increase in Sales and Use Tax revenue;
? $60,000 (1%) decrease in Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue;
? $615,000 (100%) decrease in Property Tax Administration revenue; and
? $122,000 (9%) decrease in revenue from Court fines.
FUND BALANCE, RESERVES AND DESIGNATIONS4
The Recommended General Fund Budget assumes a FY 2013-2014 beginning fund balance of
approximately $58.4 million, an increase of approximately $1.6 million, or 2.9%, from the FY 2012-2013
actual beginning balance level5. The $58.4 million beginning balance is comprised of:
? $23.1 million in General Reserves. This represents approximately 9.6% of General Fund and
Health & Human Services Fund appropriations, not including the operating contingency, the
General Fund transfer to the Health & Human Services Fund and any transfer to the ACO
Fund. Board Policy calls for maintaining General Reserves at 10% of appropriations, net of the
exclusions mentioned above. The Recommended Budget adds $1,200,323 to General Reserves
meeting the Board’s policy goal of the 10%.
? $25.1 million “assigned” (or designated) for various purposes, including $23.1 million assigned
for Fiscal Uncertainties. $23.1 million represents approximately 9.6% of General Fund and
Health & Human Services Fund appropriations as described above. The remaining
approximately $2 million is assigned for other designated purposes in various departments. At
the Recommended level, the budgeted Designation for Fiscal Uncertainties will be
approximately $1.2 million less than the amount necessary to meet the Board’s goal (10% of
appropriations as described above) for this designation.
? $1,976,000 in a Reserve for Loans and Advances Receivable. This represents a portion of the
money owed to the County by the Lake Berryessa and Napa Berryessa Resort Improvement
Districts.
? The “available” balance of $7.9 million, which can be used to fund County programs.
? The Recommended Budget also includes an additional $1.5 million to be assigned for future
Affordable Care Act (ACA) costs. Beginning in FY 2013-2014 new fees and taxes are being
imposed on employers to fund the various components of the ACA. These additional fees will
increase health premiums by as much as 3% to 4.5%. Because of the uncertainty of these costs
staff is recommending that a new assigned amount of $1.5 million be established for future
budget adjustments. In addition, beginning in January 2014 all employers with 50 or more
employees will be required to provide health insurance for employees scheduled to work 30
hours or more per week or 130 hours or more per month if certain criteria are met. This
requirement may have a significant impact on County costs since it is likely that it will be a
requirement to provide health insurance to seasonal and temporary employees which has not
been the case in the past.
It is important to keep in mind, however, that the above fund balance number is only an estimate. The
Auditor-Controller will determine the final fund balance number in the first quarter of FY 2013-2014.
Any revision to the Adopted Budget will be scheduled for your Board’s consideration once the actual
fund balance numbers have been established. If additional fund balance is identified at that time, I will
be recommending that it be utilized to increase the Designation for Fiscal Uncertainties to the level set
as a goal by the Board.
GENERAL FUND FIVE YEAR FORECAST
Recognizing that expenditure and revenue decisions made in one year can have a significant effect on
the resources that will be available in future years, staff provides your Board with an annual General
Fund Five Year Forecast. The most recent forecast was presented in January and projects the General
Fund ending balance through FY 2016-2017 under three different scenarios – a Baseline Scenario
(assuming the continuation of current trends, adjusted only for known or very likely changes), a
Revenue Decrease/Expenditure Increase Scenario and a Revenue Increase/Expenditure Decrease
Scenario. The results are shown in the following table:
As can be seen, depending on the assumptions used, the Forecast provides a fairly wide range of
possible outcomes. Based on these projections, our conclusion is that, assuming no major changes in
operating or capital programs or staffing levels, the General Fund is likely to be in structural balance
over the upcoming five-year period, with the downside risks being slightly greater than the upside
risks. The following table shows the composite Discretionary Revenue/Net County Cost surplus/deficit
of the three scenarios and the central tendency (which is the Baseline Scenario):
Taken together, the three Scenarios suggest that the average annual difference between Net County
Cost and Discretionary Revenues could range from a $950,000 deficit (1% of Net County Cost) to a $3
million surplus (3% of Net County Cost), with a Central Tendency (the Baseline Scenario) of a $1
million annual surplus (1% of Net County Cost).
SIGNIFICANT ISSUES
Since the economic downturn in 2008, the County has prudently managed the Budget in an attempt to
maintain structural balance. With the Board’s leadership, the County adopted and has followed
Budget Policies that have served to establish a solid fiscal foundation. As the economy begins to once
again grow and strengthen it will be important for the County to address a number of significant
unmet needs and plan for expected increases in future pension and health care costs. The following
issues will need to be addressed in future fiscal years:
1. Roads: As part of the Board’s discussions in September 2012 regarding the County’s road
system, staff identified the need for $10.2 million dollars per year in order to maintain a 70%
Pavement Condition Indicator (PCI) on 416.8 miles of roadway. The FY 2013-14 Recommended
Budget, includes $1.4 million in General Fund appropriations for this purpose.
2. Capital Infrastructure Needs: The County faces many challenges as a result of aging facilities.
There has been much discussion regarding the need for a new Jail and new facilities to house
the HHSA campus and staff has been working diligently to move forward with these projects,
but identifying funding to support these efforts will be critical in the coming years. In addition,
there are a number of costly renovations that need to be made on the County’s remaining
buildings which include: the Administration Building, Hall of Justice, Carithers, Juvenile
Justice Center, and Sheriff. In the County’s Five Year Capital Improvement Program covering
Fiscal Years 2012-2013 through 2016-2017, the Public Works Department identified $132 million
in capital projects. In coming years, staff will need to develop a financial strategy to address
these growing infrastructures needs.
3. Labor Negotiations: During the coming fiscal year the County will negotiate a new labor
agreement with the Deputy Sheriffs’ Association since their current Memorandum of Understanding expires on September 30, 2013. In addition, the County will commence
negotiations with the Napa Public Services Employees Union/SEIU Local 1021 since the current
labor agreement will expire on June 30, 2014. The Recommended Budget does not include
funding for any potential negotiated adjustments. The outcome of these negotiations could
impact labor costs from the budgeted amount. As a point of reference, every 1% increase in
employee salaries costs the County approximately $1 million.
4. Affordable Care Act: The Affordable Care Act (ACA), also referred to as Healthcare Reform,
was passed into law in March of 2010. Over the past several years various provisions of the law
have been implemented, but the major provisions affecting who is eligible for health insurance
go into effect in January, 2014. All employers with 50 or more employees will be required to
offer health insurance to employees who are scheduled to work 30 or more hours in a week or
130 or more hours in a month. As a result the County will likely be required to offer health
insurance to seasonal and temporary employees. In addition, many new fees are now being
imposed which will increase our health insurance costs between 3% and 4.5% on top of normal
inflationary increases. While precise fiscal impacts of the ACA are unknown for the coming
year, the proposed Recommended Budget does set aside $1.5 million to address the potential
impacts for FY 2013-2014, but the impacts on future fiscal years is still unknown.
5. Employee Pension Costs: The County’s Miscellaneous plan currently has an unfunded liability
of $140 million and the Safety Plan has an estimated $20.5 million unfunded liability based on
June 30, 2011 valuations. The County has made concerted efforts to proactively pay for
employee pension costs in a responsible manner. In addition, CalPERS has made significant
changes in amortization and smoothing policies and actuarial assumptions that will help
agencies address unfunded liabilities in a proactive manner. These changes will also have
significant financial impact on employer contribution rates in the coming years. It is estimated
that the policy changes will increase the County’s contribution rate by approximately 5% over
the next five years. The impact on the County budget will be less than the impact on many of
our neighboring cities and counties since the County shares rate increases on a 50/50 basis with
employees. CalPERS will be considering additional changes in actuarial assumptions in the
future which may have additional impacts on the County’s budget.
6. Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB): The County’s unfunded OPEB liability as of the June
30, 2011 valuation was $35 million. The projected unfunded liability is $34 million for June 30,
2013. The County will be contributing 6.6% of pay in the Recommended Budget or
approximately $6.4 million towards paying down this liability over the next 16 years.
Given these projections and other fiscal risks the County may be facing, staff believes it would be
prudent to continue to be cautious, to control costs and to avoid major new investments in operating
(non one-time) programs. At the same time, given the robust nature of the General Fund’s fund
balance and the thought and planning reflected in the County’s adopted Strategic Financial Plan, the
County is well positioned to respond in a careful and thoughtful way to the impact of a significant
deterioration in economic conditions or the County’s fiscal situation.
STATE BUDGET IMPACTS
On January 10th, the Governor released his proposed FY 2013-2014 State Budget reflecting significant
improvements in the State’s financial picture. These budgetary improvements are the result of the
voter’s approval of a temporary tax increase this past November, the State more closely reaching
structural balance, and a modest economic recovery. Recent data from the State Controller’s Office and
the Legislative Analyst Office suggests that the major categories of State revenue are exceeding the
Governor’s estimates, specifically in the areas of sales tax and personal income tax. To the extent these
revenues exceed the budgeted amounts it must be noted that because of the current method of
allocating revenue the majority will be allocated to schools and community colleges.
The Governor’s proposed State budget, for the first time, in years assumes a balanced budget and
includes no large spending cuts to HHSA programs. The main areas of concern related to the HHSA
budget for FY 2013-2014 are the federal government’s response to its own ongoing deficits and various
issues relating to the funding and implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The Governor
stated his commitment to partner with the Obama administration to effectively implement the ACA,
while pointing out that California is still waiting for federal guidance in a number of areas. HHSA is
following developments closely as implementation of the ACA unfolds.
The Governor focused a large portion of the Proposed State Budget on Education. Even though there is
not a direct connection for Counties, potential changes in the Education area could have an underlying
impact on local government. A major provision of the budget proposal is reforming funding formulas
for California’s K-12 schools which could have a significant impact on excess ERAF.
Staff will continue to evaluate the Governor’s Proposed Budget once the May Revision is released to
determine its impact on Napa County. We often do not know what the ultimate impact of the State
budget will be on the County until after the County’s budget is adopted in June.
OVERVIEW OF THE RECOMMENDED BUDGET
The following are some of the key issues associated with the FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget:
County-wide Issues
? As noted above, employee salary and related benefit costs will increase due to cost of living
adjustments and step increases.
? The Recommended Budget reflects the impact of a $1.4 million, or 8%, increase in the cost of the
County’s share of employee health insurance. This amount does not reflect the future impact of
the Affordable Care Act as previously discussed.
? Consistent with the Board’s adopted Budget Policies, the Recommended Budget reflects
payments necessary to fully fund the County’s Other Post-Employment Benefit (OPEB)
unfunded liability. The projected unfunded liability is $34 million for June 30, 2013. The
Recommended Budget includes contributions of 6.6% of pay or approximately $6.4 million
towards paying down this liability over approximately the next 16 years.
General Administration/Finance
The recommended General Administration and Finance All Funds budgets reflect total appropriations
of $91,856,257, a decrease of $1,105,913; and total revenue of $142,051,715, an increase of $1,834,949.
In terms of the General Fund, Net County Cost for General Administration and Finance functional
areas is budgeted to decrease by $2.9 million. The following summarize the significant changes to the
General Fund budgets:
? The Recommended Budget includes a reallocation of Property Tax Administration Fees from
Non-Departmental Revenue to the departments responsible for the distribution, collection and
administration of property taxes: Assessor, Treasurer/Tax Collector, Auditor-Controller,
County Counsel, Board of Supervisors, and County Executive Officer. The amount reallocated
in FY 2013-2014 is $615,000 resulting in a reduction in those affected departments’ Net County
Cost.
? Contingencies have been reduced by 8.3% from $6,000,000 to $5,500,000 in accordance with the
Board’s adopted budget policies.
? The Human Resources Division of the County Executive Office has an increased Net County
Cost of approximately $178,000 due to shifting administrative functions of the Workers’
Compensation program to the Risk Management Division with a corresponding reduction in
revenue. Staffing levels in both divisions remain the same, with Human Resources staff
remaining responsible for leave management and the interactive process and Risk Management
staff responsible for claims management.
? The Treasurer/Tax Collector has included appropriations in the Recommended Budget to
prepare and release a Request for Proposal for a comprehensive analysis of the County’s
banking services. Implementation of any recommendations as a result of this analysis will be
brought to the Board for consideration in FY 2013-2014. Because of this addition, the Net
County Cost has increased slightly even with the reallocation of the Property Tax
Administration Fees.
? The Elections Division of the Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk has reduced its appropriation for
FY 2013-2014 by approximately 10% or $112,000 because it will be conducting a Primary
Election versus FY 2012-2013 which was a Presidential Election. The resultant reduction in
revenue has caused an increase in the Net County Cost of approximately $123,000.
Significant adjustments in the County Executive Office Non-Departmental budget units are as follows:
? The General Fund continues to provide financial support to two dependent districts – Lake
Berryessa Resort Improvement District and Napa Berryessa Resort Improvement District.
However, appropriations have decreased in the General Expenditures budget unit because new
loans are not required for operations at this time. Repayment of existing loans totaling
approximately $3.4 million is not anticipated for FY 2013-2014.
The General Fund will be contributing $3.2 million towards capital improvement projects
through the General Expenditure budget unit. Projects included in the Recommended Budget
are exterior rehabilitation of the Administration Building, completion of the Atlas Peak Telecom
Tower, and various projects at the Jail and Hall of Justice.
? There is an overall reduction in the Affordable Housing Fund with the financing of one
affordable housing development – Hartle Court; and the partial financing of a portion of Oak
Creek Terrace affordable housing development in FY 2012-2013. After accounting for $4.7
million in specific affordable housing projects and worker proximity housing there remains a
balance of approximately $2.6 million.
? The Special Project Fund has appropriated approximately $1.1 million representing a slight
increase of $61,000 towards Parks and Open Space, Visitor Management programs, and Arts
and Culture. Both Arts and Culture and Visitor Management programs have undergone
structural changes when compared to previous years with non-profit agencies submitting
proposals for use of the funds along with Arts Council and Visit Napa Valley.
Community Resources/Infrastructure
The recommended Community Resources & Infrastructure All Funds budgets reflect total
appropriations of $145,240,261, a decrease of $5,396,344; and total revenue of $98,152,771, an increase of
$2,998,211.
In terms of the General Fund, Net County Cost for Community Resources & Infrastructure functional
areas is budgeted to decrease by $718,058. The following summarize the significant changes to the
General Fund budgets:
? In July 2012, the Departments of Public Works, Environmental Management, Conservation,
Development and Planning, and Building Inspection were reorganized into two departments:
Public Works and Planning, Building and Environmental Services (PBES). Because of the
significant changes in the budgeting of revenue, staff, and other expenditures between these
new departments, the budget has been analyzed for changes not from the Adopted FY 2012-
2013 budget but from the final Adjusted FY 2012-2013 budget which is a closer approximation
of costs to the departments after the reorganization.
? With the recovering economy and the Board approved fee increase in August of 2012 for most
fees charged by Departments, the budgets assume overall increases in revenue. This is
particularly true for the Planning, Building, and Environmental Health Division budgets that
assume that overall revenues will increase by approximately $840,000 (12%).
? As a result of the increase in permit activity and workload, the PBES Department is budgeting
the filling of previously allocated but unfunded or under filled positions in the Department.
The Public Works Projects division includes 30 projects, 14 of which are rollover or new projects
fully funded by the General Fund. The total impact on the General Fund is $1,532,942, an
increase of only $17,214 compared to FY 2012-2013. Total appropriations for projects have
increased by $3,770,851. This is primarily due to the addition of a Napa River Rutherford Reach
restoration project that is fully funded and receives no General Fund support.
? The Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer of Weights and Measures Department has a decrease in
the Net County Cost of approximately 13% or $207,628 due to increased State revenue to
combat the European Grapevine Moth (EGVM). Additional funding will be used to increase
the number of traps in the vineyards from 25 to 100 per square mile. In addition, State funding
has also increased based upon performance of pesticide regulatory activities. Overall, revenue
has increased 16% or $447,450. The Department has 32 allocated positions but will continue to
utilize extra help positions to assist with the EGVM program.
In terms of non-General Fund budgets, the following summarizes the significant changes:
? Appropriations and revenue for the Roads Operating and Capital Improvement budget
divisions are projected to decrease as a result of completed projects. Per the County’s revised
Strategic Financial Plan, FY 2013-2014 is the first year in a five year phase-in of additional
General Fund support for road maintenance. The General Fund contribution increased $560,000
in FY 2013-2014 and will increase by $560,000 each year until FY 2017-2018.
? The Animal Shelter shows a decrease of approximately $101,337 in General Fund contributions.
The contracted cities have increased their share of cost by approximately $109,906 as the final
year of a five-year phased agreement. Contract cities are now contributing 100% of the total city
share of the Animal Shelter.
? Revenues from Excess ERAF for the Accumulated Capital Outlay are budgeted at $2,000,000.
Appropriations in the amount of $26,950,864 are related to four rollover projects including the
Health and Human Services Campus Planning and Construction project.
? The Napa County Library operations budget has increased appropriations slightly (1%) and
decreased revenue slightly as well (1%). Overall services remain relatively stable with the
exception of the Literacy program. Funds were to be eliminated in the State’s FY 2012-2013
budget; however, approximately $35,000 was made available in the form of an emergency grant.
In addition, through the generosity of the community, local donations have been received in the
amount of $46,441 as of May 2013. Funds not expended in FY 2012-2013 will be carried over to
FY 2013-2014 to continue program operations. Finally, staffing changes approved by the Board
in April, 2013 have been reflected in the Recommended Budget.
Law/Justice
The recommended Law & Justice Departments’ budgets reflect a $945,000 increase in appropriations
and a $767,000 increase in revenue. Both the Law & Justice and Public Safety Departments continue to
implement and strengthen programs to manage the impacts of the 2011 Public Safety Realignment Act.
Several significant changes are included in the recommended Law & Justice Departments’ budgets as a
result of Realignment including:
? The addition of a Victim Witness Advocate II position in the District Attorney’s Office to
provide direct services to victims and work closely with the Probation Department and the
Napa County Department of Corrections on Penal Code 1170 (h) (Realignment) cases, Post
Release Community Service notifications, and Parole Revocation hearings – all of which are
County responsibilities under Realignment.
? Increases to salary and benefit costs for positions serving in programs developed in response to
Realignment including the Intensive Supervision Unit, Electronic Monitoring supervision and
Deferred Entry of Judgment-Misdemeanor Program administration in Probation.
? The loss of SB 678 revenue to the Probation Department and the shift of Realignment revenue to
cover those positions and programs which include the Pre-Trial Release Program and the data
analysis and reporting function.
? The projected increase in the number of Parole Revocation hearings, which beginning July 1,
2013 become the responsibility of the District Attorney’s Office to prosecute and the Public
Defender’s Office to provide defense services.
Public Safety
The recommended Public Safety Departments’ budgets include a $1,519,000 increase in appropriations
and a $1,242,000 increase in revenues. Significant changes in these budgets include:
? The shift of a sergeant position from the main Sheriff’s budget Division to the Special
Investigations Unit. During FY 2012-2013, the Napa Special Investigations Bureau (NSIB)
continued to be challenged with significant changes after the State Bureau of Narcotics
Enforcement eliminated both the funding and administrative staffing to the program. The
participating agencies were left to reorganize leadership and refocus their investigative efforts.
The Recommended Budget allows the addition of a Sergeant to the unit to provide additional
daily supervisory assistance.
? The Sheriff’s Department includes a reduction in the cost of dispatch services. The Sheriff’s
Department successfully renegotiated the agreement for dispatch services provided by the City
of Napa Dispatch Center. The annual cost will decrease by $240,000 based on additional
agencies contracting with the Dispatch Center reducing the percentage cost to the Sheriff’s
Office and a reevaluation of actual dispatch service costs during the last contract period.
The addition of eight additional Correctional Officer positions over the adopted FY 2012-2013
position allocation list and the planned conversion of 8 of the 13 Correctional Technician
positions to Correctional Officers upon vacancies based on a staffing study approved by the
Board in September 2012. Realignment revenue will fund six of the new positions and the
General Fund will cover the remaining two positions as well as the cost of converting the
Technicians to Officers as those occur. The result has contributed to a $298,190 increase in Net
County Cost for the Department in total.
Health & Human Services
By approving the FY 2012-2013 budget, the Board of Supervisors approved the conversion of HHSA to
a separate fund status. The FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget continues to base the budget on
principles developed during the multi-year planning process by HHSA and the County Executive
Office in preparation for the conversion.
? The recommended General Fund contribution is $16.5 million compared to $16.2 million in FY
2012-2013 which is $319,000 or 2% higher due to an increase in the IHSS program. This increase
is based on the shift at the State level to charge counties a Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for the
IHSS program rather than using a cost sharing ratio. The MOE for Napa County is set at $2.5
million while only $2.2 million was included in the adopted budget for FY 2012-2013 since the
MOE amount was not known at that time.
? Included in the Recommended Budget are strategies totaling $455,000 to decrease costs and/or
increase revenues developed by HHSA staff in order to meet shortfalls due to increased salaries
and benefits, increased internal charges, a reduction in funding for homeless services and a
variety of other changes.
? FY 2013-2014 revenue projections are $89.5 million which is $3.6 million or 4.2% higher than in
FY 2012-2013. Included in the Recommended Budget are Realignment revenue increases of $1.8
million and projected Medi-Cal revenue increases of $626,000 and Social Services and Child
Welfare revenue increases of $1.2 million. These significant increases enabled HHSA to offset
salary and benefit increases and remain within its allocated County support for FY 2013-2014.
? The FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget request includes total expenditures of $89.5 million
which is $3.6 million or 4.2% higher than Fiscal Year 2012-2013. The major expenditure increases
reflect the growth in salaries and benefits costs of $2.6 million and a $319,000 increase in the
county share of In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS). The remaining $681,000 includes increases
to services that are generally offset by revenues.
? The Agency’s requested Recommended Budget proposes a net increase of one (1.0 FTE) position
in the Fiscal Division dedicated to Mental Health billing which will result in increased revenue
that is projected to offset the cost of the position and more. The budget proposes extending two
(2.0 FTE) Limited Term positions in Public Health through August 8, 2014 and one (1.0 FTE)
Limited Term position in Public Health through September 30, 2014. A proposed extension of
one (0.5 FTE) Limited term position through June 30, 2015 in Mental Health is funded by the
Mental Health Block Grant.
RECOMMENDED ACTION
Budget Hearings begin on Monday, June 17th, at that time staff will present the Recommended Budget
and your Board will begin accepting general public testimony. Hearings on individual department
budgets will then commence. Once staff presentations and public testimony are concluded, your Board
will be asked to make decisions on appropriations, revenue and financing levels, approve the fixed
assets and new positions and adopt any policy and other budget control language.
It is recommended that your Board hold the scheduled hearings, approve the recommended
appropriations and revenue levels as presented, approve the recommended positions, fixed assets and
policy items and adopt the County of Napa Budget for FY 2013-2014 on Tuesday, June 25, 2013.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Preparing the County’s budget involves a significant commitment of time and effort on the part of
County department heads, management and departmental fiscal staffs and the staff of the County
Executive Office. I would like to thank everyone involved for their efforts and the sometimes difficult
decisions they have made in helping to craft a balanced budget for the County.
In particular, I would like to recognize the work of Auditor-Controller Tracy Schulze, Assistant
Auditor-Controller Bob Minahen and Jobina Toh from the Auditor-Controller’s Office, Jon Gjestvang,
Chief Information Officer and Ben Guerard, Roda Lee Myers and Jim Phillips from Information
Technology Services, Pam Kindig, Interim Assistant County Executive Officer and the members of the
Budget and Analysis team in the County Executive Office: Helene Franchi, Karen Collins, Molly
Rattigan, Liz Habkirk, and Patti DeWeese. This team has put in countless hours and is primarily
responsible for the Recommended Budget available to you today.
