Submitted for your consideration and adoption is the Fiscal Year 2012/13 Recommended Budget,
prepared in accordance with your adopted Budget Policies. You are scheduled to begin public
hearings for all General Fund and special revenue fund departments on June 18th and to adopt a budget
on June 26th.
The Recommended Budget reflects the lingering impact of the national, state and local economic
downturns on the County’s revenues and programs. Although the so-called “Great Recession” is over
and we are beginning to see growth in a number of discretionary revenue sources – like sales and
transient occupancy taxes – we are only projecting limited growth in property taxes, the County’s
largest discretionary revenue source, and most economists are predicting that the economy will
continue to recover at its current anemic pace for next few years. Given these economic conditions and
the State’s fiscal problems, and consistent with your Board’s Budget Policies, the Recommended
Budget generally maintains General Fund programs at their current or reduced staffing levels.
After adjusting for transfers to reserves and certain one-time adjustments, the Recommended Budget
includes a Net County Cost increase of 1.5% compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget. This
increase is the result of a number of factors, including negotiated salary cost of living increases for
employees, increased employee benefit costs and increases in charges for internal services (like
Information Technology and Fleet), partially offset by increased Departmental revenue.
All-told, the Recommended Budget reflects the elimination of 3 vacant positions and the addition of 3
positions, the latter funded by 2011 Public Safety Realignment revenue.
As proposed, the Recommended Budget reflects a $7.4 million (6%) increase in discretionary and semidiscretionary
(1991 Realignment and Proposition 172) revenue compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted
Budget. However, that includes approximately $4.7 million in OMB A-87 revenue in FY2012/13 related
to moving the Health and Human Services Agency to its own fund which is offset by an equivalent
increase in General Fund Contribution to that new fund. If that additional OMB A-87 revenue is
factored out, the Recommended Budget reflects a $2.7 million (2%) increase in discretionary and semidiscretionary
revenue.
The FY2011/12 Adopted Budget included $600,000 in American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA) funds for various projects and programs. Minimal ARRA funding is included in the
Recommended Budget due to the end of that economic assistance program. The FY2012/13
Recommended Budget does, however, include approximately $16 million in 2011 Public Safety
Realignment funding for certain law enforcement, corrections and health and human services
programs. This funding was not included in the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget because 2011 Realignment
had not been implemented by the State when that Budget was approved. The 2011 Realignment
funding for law enforcement and health and human services programs (approximately $15 million)
generally replaces other State funding sources so there is no net increase in available revenue or
program expenditures. However, since State law requires that 2011 Realignment funding be received
in special revenue funds and then transferred to the relevant operating budget units, revenue and
related appropriations are double-counted, creating what appears to be a $15 million increase in
appropriations. In addition, a key part of 2011 Public Safety Realignment was the shift in responsibility
for certain “low level” offenders from the State Corrections Department to the counties. Though not
included in the Adopted Budget, in FY2011/12 the County received approximately $1.2 million to fund
the cost of these new County responsibilities. This money was received in a new Local Community
Corrections Account special revenue fund and the FY2011/12 Adjusted Budget included a transfer of
$360,000 to various operating budgets. The FY2012/13 Recommended Budget reflects the receipt of $2.1
million in Corrections Realignment funds in the Local Community Corrections budget and
approximately $900,000 is appropriated to be transferred to the relevant operating budgets.
The FY2012/13 Recommended Budget is the first County budget prepared using the County’s new
budget module and a new fund and account hierarchy (chart of accounts) developed by the Auditor-
Controller’s Office. Together, implementing the new budget module and chart of accounts has taken
over a year and involved dozens of staff from all County departments. A key feature of the new chart
of accounts is the creation of a budget unit hierarchy, starting at the sub-division level and then rolling
up to division, department and fund. A key feature of the new budget module is that it allows
departments to allocate position costs across divisions. These features will make it easier for staff to
appropriately monitor and analyze departmental budgets.
In terms of the budget document itself, the main changes you will see include:
• All funds, budget units and major account classifications have different identifying numbers.
Because the new account hierarchy includes sub-divisions, a few Component Budget Units have
been eliminated and incorporated as subdivisions within existing Component Budget Units. In
the budget document, you will continue to see summaries at the department level (like County Executive Officer) and more detail at the Component Unit level (budget divisions, like Human
Resources or Emergency Services). For FY2012/13, budget subdivisions will not be shown in the
Recommended Budget document, but we intend to include that information in future years.
Appropriations will still be made at the budget division, or Component Budget Unit, level.
However, where Component Budget Units are eliminated, you will see budget units with
historical data only.
• Because the new chart of account structure allows us to segregate fund balance by budget unit,
and in order to comply with new accounting rules, appropriations and revenues related to a
number of programs are being consolidated from many different funds into a fewer number of
funds. Examples include the Capital Improvement Program (CIP) funds, the Non-operating
special revenue funds and certain insurance funds.
• As mentioned above, for FY2012/13 appropriations and revenue related to the Health & Human
Services Agency (HHSA) have been moved from the General Fund to a new Health & Human
Services Fund. In addition, appropriations and revenue previously included in the General
Fund’s Capital Improvement Program budget have been split into two categories: major
maintenance and other non-capital projects and true capital projects. The former are now
budgeted in a Public Works Projects budget in the General Fund and the latter are included in
the new Capital Improvement Project Fund. As a result of these changes total General Fund
appropriations will decrease significantly and the General Expenditures budget will increase
significantly, because what was Net County Cost for these budgets will now be reflected as a
General Fund Contribution.
It should also be noted that the Recommended Budget does not include any changes related to the
proposed reorganization of the Public Works, Environmental Management and Conservation,
Development & Planning Departments. In March of 2012 the Board of Supervisors provided
conceptual approval for a plan to consolidate permitting functions from Environmental Management
and Public Works into the Conservation, Development and Planning Department, eliminate the
Environmental Management Department as a stand-alone department and make certain other
organizational changes. The main purpose of these changes was to provide more efficient and effective
service to the public. When this budget was prepared, the Board had not yet given final approval of
the proposed new organizational structure.
Finally, this budget was prepared before the Governor issued the May Revision to his Proposed
FY2012/13 State Budget. Recent data from the State Controller’s Office suggests that State revenue for
FY2011/12 and 2012/13 may fall short of the Governor’s original projections, and this, in turn, could
result in the State reducing expenditures in a number of areas, including, potentially, health and
human services programs or other county programs.
BUDGET PROCESS
The FY2012/13 budget process began in January of this year, when budget preparation instructions
were issued to all departments. Other steps in the process included:
• January 12th: Budget Preparation Orientation/Training for all departments.
January 24th: Board approved the Budget Policies outlined below.
• March 1st: Departments submitted their budget requests to the County Executive Office.
• March 20th: A Mid-Year Review of the FY2011/12 budget status was presented to the Board.
• April 4th: CEO Analysts completed their initial review of departmental budget requests.
• April 24th: Your Board held a Budget Study Session. At that session, staff presented your Board
with the General Fund Five Year Forecast and reported on a number of issues identified by the
CEO Analysts as they reviewed budget information provided by the departments. You also
provided direction on certain issues.
• April 25th: CEO Analysts completed review of departmental budgets and discussions with
departments; budget numbers were finalized.
BUDGET POLICIES
As mentioned above, in January of this year, your Board adopted a set of Budget Policies to guide staff
in preparing the FY2012/13 Budget. Given the lingering effects of the national economic downturn,
state fiscal problems and the General Fund’s precarious structural balance, but recognizing that the
County currently has substantial General Fund reserves, the Budget Policies generally call for holding
the line on spending and utilizing the Fiscal Contingency Strategy in the Board’s approved Strategic
Financial Plan to structure the County’s response to fiscal difficulties. Key provisions of the Budget
Policies include:
• For General Fund departments and programs (except Health & Human Services), prepare
budgets with a goal of holding Net County Cost to the current budget level, with exceptions
being considered on a case-by-case basis, taking into account a number of factors, including
whether the Net County Cost increase is beyond the control of the department and whether the
department has made a serious effort to absorb the cost increase/revenue decrease. For non-
General Fund departments and Health & Human Services, prepare budgets with a goal of
holding the General Fund Contribution to the current budget level.
• Do not propose new or enhanced programs or positions unless those programs are fully funded
by a grant or other dedicated revenue source, are related to implementation of Corrections
Realignment, the Adult Correctional System Master Plan or the Major Capital Improvements
Program or they involve the reallocation of General Fund resources to fund critical
accountability, regulatory compliance or public health and safety needs.
• Pursue new revenues to the fullest extent possible for all services, as well as total cost
identification for fee-setting purposes.
Except where the Board has previously made a decision to earmark revenues for a particular
purpose, wherever legally possible revenues are to be treated as discretionary revenues, rather
than dedicated to a particular program or purpose.
• If funding is reduced, there should be no increased County share for programs funded
primarily from non-General Fund sources, unless increased County share is legally mandated
or the Board has previously determined that the program is a high priority.
• For budget units with 20 or more allocated positions, budgets should be reduced to reflect
historical salary savings.
• Continue to fund the County’s Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) unfunded liability on a
20-year amortization schedule, and allocate the relevant cost to County departments.
• Financial conditions permitting, transfer General Fund resources to the Special Projects Fund in
an amount equal to 12.5% of the prior calendar year’s actual Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
revenue received by the County.
• Place a minimum of 3% of the General Fund’s and Health & Human Services Fund’s
appropriations into a General Fund Operating Contingency and work toward a goal of having
General Reserves equal to approximately 10% of General Fund and Health & Human Services
Fund appropriations, not including the appropriation for Contingency and any budgeted
transfer to the Accumulated Capital Outlay (ACO) Fund and General Fund Contribution to the
Health & Human Services Fund. General Reserves are to be maintained at this level at all times,
except in the case of a dire fiscal emergency.
• If necessary to balance the General Fund budget, cancel designations in an amount not to
exceed $2 million plus the amount of the General Fund Operating Contingency.
• After covering current year operating and capital costs and meeting General Fund Contingency
and Reserve requirements, place any remaining resources in a designation for fiscal
uncertainties in the General Fund until General Reserves and unrestricted designations equal
20% of General Fund and Health & Human Services Fund appropriations (not including the
appropriation for Contingency, any transfer to the ACO Fund and the General Fund
Contribution to the Health & Human Services Fund). Once General Reserves and the
Designation for Fiscal Uncertainties equal 20% of General Fund and Health & Human Services
Fund appropriations, transfer any remaining unappropriated discretionary resources to the
ACO Fund. These funds will be accumulated and used to help cover the cost of needed major
capital improvements.
• Utilize the Resource Reduction Strategy in the Board’s approved Strategic Financial Plan to
structure additional recommendations that may be needed to address exigent fiscal difficulties.
• Include quantitative performance measures in a separate document to be presented to the Board
early in 2013 including, where possible, “benchmark” data from other jurisdictions. The Performance Measure document should also include narrative information that describes the
“story behind” the performance measures.
The above Budget Policies implement some of the Longer-term Actions included in the Fiscal
Contingency Strategy component of the Board’s approved Strategic Financial Plan (previously the
Fiscal Contingency Plan). That Strategy identifies 5 Shorter-term and 12 Longer-term actions that can
be implemented incrementally to deal with reductions in County resources. The Plan is based on a
number of key principles, including:
• In periods of fiscal distress, the County’s emphasis will be on preserving General Fund
discretionary resources to finance core County programs. Preference will be given to those
programs that have historically been funded by local taxpayers.
• To the extent possible, across-the-board reductions in services will be avoided. Reductions will
be made on a case-by-case basis.
• In making expenditure reductions, the goal will be to reduce or eliminate funding for lower
priority programs or services before considering funding reductions for higher priority
programs.
• In the event of a substantial reduction in funding for what are primarily state- and federalfunded
programs administered by the County, the County’s goal, to the extent legally possible,
is to avoid back-filling reductions in state and federal dollars with County dollars.
The Recommended Budget reflects the implementation of the first six Longer-term Fiscal Contingency
Strategy Actions. In addition, for the most part, the Recommended Budget reflects the Board’s policy
on the use of Excess ERAF that is included in the County’s Strategic Financial Plan. Recognizing the
instability and uncertainty associated with this funding source, the Strategic Financial Plan states that,
for the next five fiscal years, all County fiscal planning should be based on the premise that no more
than $5 million a year in Excess ERAF revenue will be available to the General Fund to fund on-going
County operations, and that any Excess ERAF revenue received in a year beyond the $5 million level
should be treated as limited duration revenue that could be used to meet non-recurring needs like
capital projects or paying down unfunded liabilities.
THE ALL FUNDS BUDGET
The County’s Recommended All Funds Budget for FY2012/13 totals $445,567,592 in appropriations.
This is a $107,034,012, or 32%, increase in appropriations compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget
appropriation level. Much of this increase does not reflect an actual net increase in expenditures, but,
as mentioned above, reflects changes in accounting practices that, in effect, double-count certain
expenditures. The recommended increase in appropriations also reflects a significant increase in
capital project appropriations related to the redevelopment of the County’s Health & Human Services
campus. A more detailed comparison of the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget’s appropriation levels
and the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget’s appropriation levels is shown below:
The primary reasons for the increase in the Recommended Budget compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted
Budget include:
• A $54 million increase in appropriations in the Capital Improvement Project Fund. This reflects
a net increase of $28.4 million in appropriations for actual capital projects – primarily the Health
& Human Services Campus Redevelopment Project (at approximately $26 million), but also a
$1.5 million loan to the Traffic Mitigation Fund for the Devlin Road extension project, costs
related to the repair of the outside of the Administration Building, costs related to the
remodeling of the interior of the Administration Building to accommodate a centralized
permitting center and certain preliminary jail planning costs. The $54 million increase also
reflects a $26 million increase in the transfer of funds from the Accumulated Capital Outlay
budget unit to the General Fund Capital Improvement Projects budget unit to help cover the
cost of some of these projects, thus, effectively, double-counting these costs.
• A $16 million increase in Non-Operating special revenue fund budgets related to the
implementation of 2011 Public Safety Realignment by the State during FY2011/12, after the
County’s FY2011/12 Budget had been adopted. Approximately $15 million of that increase is
funding for various local law enforcement and health and human services programs that
replaces categorical State funding for those programs that used to go directly to the relevant
operating budgets. Now that these programs are realigned, State law requires that the revenue
be received and accounted for in a special revenue fund and then transferred to the relevant operating budget, thus, effectively, doubling the appropriation level for these realigned
programs. In addition, approximately $900,000 of the increase in Non-Operating special
revenue fund appropriations reflects costs associated realignment of responsibility for
supervising certain “low level” offenders from the State Department of Corrections and
Rehabilitation (CDCR) to the counties. This money is transferred from a Non-Operating special
revenue fund to the relevant operating budget unit – generally Corrections, Probation or
Central Services - where it is appropriated again and actually spent on programs or services.
• A $19.9 million increase in the Health & Human Services Agency’s budget and the General
Fund’s General Expenditures budget related to the move of the Health & Human Services
Agency’s (HHSA’s) budget from the General Fund to a special revenue fund. This does not
reflect an actual increase in expenditures on programs and services. In FY2011/12, the Health &
Human Services Agency’s budget was included in the General Fund and reflected a $10.5
million Net County Cost. With the move of HHSA’s budget to the new Health & Human
Services Fund, what was a Net County Cost becomes a budgeted General Fund Contribution in
General Expenditures. In addition, the County’s policy is to allocate OMB A-87 (County
overhead) costs to non-General Fund departments, thus the HHSA budget includes $4.7 million
in OMB A-87 costs. When HHSA was a General Fund department it was receiving an implicit
General Fund subsidy of this amount (since it received County overhead services, but did not
pay for them). So this amount is also included in General Expenditures as part of the General
Fund Contribution to the Health & Human Services Fund, thus holding the Agency harmless as
a result of the change to a separate fund.
• A $7 million increase in salary and benefit costs across all funds and budget units. This reflects
cost of living adjustments (COLAs) for all employees during FY2011/12 and FY2012/13, totaling
3% over the two years, as well as 5% step increases for the roughly one quarter of employees
below the top step of the salary range for their position and increases in certain benefit costs.
As you know, the current labor agreements with the Deputy Sheriff’s Association and Public
Service Employees (PSE) union provide for a 1.5% cost of living adjustment in FY2012/13. In
addition, in accordance with those labor agreements, all County employees received an
unbudgeted 1.5% COLA in FY2011/12.
• A $3.2 million increase in costs in the Employee/Retiree Benefits Internal Service Fund due to a
change in how the County accounts for the payment of employee dental, vision, life and
disability insurance costs. Prior to FY2012/13, the cost of the County’s share of these benefits
was included in the budget of each operating department and then paid by the Auditor-
Controller directly to the relevant agency or vendor. In the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget,
these costs are included in the operating departments’ budgets and in the Employee/Retiree
Benefits Fund. This is because the County is self-insured in these areas and so actual payments
to vendors must be accounted for in an Internal Services Fund.
The Recommended Budget reflects the elimination of 3 vacant positions (see Schedule B). The Budget
includes 3 new positions – all in the Corrections Department and funded with 2011 Public Safety
Realignment revenue (see Schedule A). Schedule D shows the positions to be reclassified, changed in
FTE status and/or transferred to other budget units. Schedule C shows the limited term positions
proposed to be converted to regular positions and/or extended or deleted.
The County’s Recommended General Fund Budget appropriation level for FY2012/13 totals
$169,756,430. This is a decrease of $58,117,901, or 26%, compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget
appropriation level. It should be noted, though, that this decrease in appropriations is due to the
transfer of budget responsibility for certain programs from the General Fund to other funds. A more
detailed comparison of the FY2012/13 Recommended General Fund Budget to the FY2011/12 Adopted
General Fund Budget is shown below:
As mentioned above, the primary reason for the decrease in budgeted General Fund expenditures and
Departmental Revenue from FY2011/12 to FY2012/13 is the transfer of responsibility for revenue and
appropriations for certain programs from the General Fund to other funds. The most significant shift
in budget responsibility is the shift of the Health & Human Services Agency budget from the General
Fund to a new Health & Human Services Operating Special Revenue Fund. This results in a net
reduction in General Fund appropriations and revenue of approximately $66 million. The FY2012/13
Recommended Budget also reflects a $2.9 million reduction in General Fund resources transferred to
the Accumulated Capital Outlay (ACO) Fund compared to the amount included in the FY2011/12
Adopted Budget. These and other expenditure decreases are partially offset by expenditure increases
in a number of areas, including:
Increases in employee salary and benefit costs for existing employees as described above, of
which approximately $4.4 million is in the General Fund.
• A $1.1 million increase in appropriations and revenue related to the shift of responsibility for
“low level” offenders from the State Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation to the
counties, as part of the 2011 Public Safety Realignment plan approved by the State Legislature
in FY2011/12. This includes salary and benefit costs for 10 new positions and certain other
program costs in the Corrections, Probation and Central Services budgets. Funding will come
from 2011 Public Safety Realignment revenue and SB 678 revenue. As you are aware, the
County began implementing corrections Realignment programs in FY2011/12, after the
FY2011/12 Budget was adopted, and the FY2011/12 Adjusted General Fund Budget included
$590,000 in appropriations and revenue for this purpose. Thus, compared to the FY2011/12
Adjusted Budget, FY2012/13 revenues and appropriations will only increase by $510,000, due
both to proposed new programs and full year costs for programs that were implemented during
part of FY2011/12.
• A net $1.3 million increase in General Fund appropriations for capital, major maintenance and
certain other projects. In FY2011/12 the cost of these projects totaled approximately $14 million,
which was budgeted in the General Fund’s Capital Improvement Program budget. In the
FY2012/13 Recommended Budget, that budget unit has been eliminated and funding – totaling
$15.3 million - is now shown in new Public Works Projects and Property Maintenance Projects
budgets as well as in the General Expenditures budget as a General Fund Contribution to the
new Capital Improvements Projects Fund. Approximately $900,000 of this increase is funded
by additional Departmental Revenue and $400,000 by Net County Cost.
The $61.5 million (31%) decrease in Departmental Revenue is due primarily to the $66 million
reduction in Health & Human Services revenue mentioned above. If this decrease is factored out, the
Recommended Budget reflects a $4.7 million (9%) increase in Departmental Revenue. The primary
reasons for this increase include:
• The requested receipt of approximately $1.1 million in Corrections Realignment and SB678
revenue described above.
• The receipt of approximately $900,000 in additional revenue for major maintenance or other
projects now budgeted in the Public Works Projects budget unit also mentioned above. Most of
this revenue will come from Measure A or Rutherford Dust project grants.
• A $700,000, or 6%, increase in Proposition 172 revenue that helps fund General Fund public
safety departments.
• A $380,000 increase in “unrefunded” gas tax revenue in the Agricultural Commissioner’s
budget, based on a review of the historical amount of that revenue that the County has
received.
• A $250,000 increase in revenue to the Elections Division from other local governments to cover
costs related to the November 2012 General Election.
The $6.7 million (7%) increase in Discretionary Revenue is due primarily to the receipt of $4.7 million in
additional OMB A-87 (County overhead) revenue as a result of the movement of the Health & Human
Services Agency’s (HHSA’s) budget from the General Fund to a special revenue fund as described
above. The net impact on the General Fund of allocating OMB A-87 charges to HHSA is zero.
If the additional OMB A-87 revenue from HHSA is factored out, the FY2012/13 Requested Budget
reflects a $2 million, or 2%, increase in Discretionary Revenue compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted
Budget level. This is the net result of increases and decreases in a variety of revenue sources, including:
• A $1.2 million (3%) increase in Secured Property Tax revenue;
• A $429,000 (3%) increase in VLF Swap Property Tax revenue;
• A $230,000 (30%) decrease in Current Year Supplemental Property Tax revenue;
• A $408,000 (8%) increase in Sales and Use Tax revenue;
• A $669,000 (7%) increase in Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) revenue;
• A $206,000 (13%) decrease in revenue from Court fines; and
• A $248,000 (20%) decrease in revenue from delinquent tax penalties.
Net County Cost
“Net County Cost,” or “General Fund Contribution,” refers to the discretionary resources allocated to
the different County departments or programs. Discretionary resources come from the General Fund’s
Discretionary (Non-Departmental) revenues and General Fund beginning balance. For FY2012/13, the
total recommended Net County Cost is approximately $109.9 million, a $3.4 million (3.2%) increase
compared to the FY2011/12 budgeted level. However, the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget Net County Cost
included the transfer of $2.9 million to the ACO Fund, while the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget does
not include any transfer of General Fund resources to that Fund. In addition, as discussed above, the
FY2012/13 Recommended General Fund Budget includes a $4.7 million transfer to the new Health and
Human Services Fund to cover the cost of OMB A-87 charges that, in turn, are discretionary revenue to
the General Fund. If these transfers are factored out, the Recommended Budget reflects a $1.5 million,
or 1.5%, increase in Net County Cost. This increase is due to a number of factors, including the salary
and benefit cost increases for existing employees described above and increases in Information
Technology Services and certain other internal service charges and an increase in expenditures on
General Fund supported capital and major maintenance projects.
Fund Balance, Reserves and Designations4
The Recommended General Fund Budget assumes a FY2012/13 beginning fund balance of
approximately $56.7 million, a decrease of approximately $900,000, or 1.5%, from the FY2011/12 actual
beginning balance level5
. The $56.7 million beginning balance is comprised of:
$21.75 million in General Reserves. This represents approximately 9.3% of Recommended
General Fund and Health & Human Services Fund appropriations, not including the General
Fund Operating Contingency, the General Fund transfer to the Health & Human Services Fund
and any transfer to the ACO Fund (though no transfer to the ACO Fund is included in the
FY2012/13 Recommended Budget). Board Policy calls for maintaining General Reserves at 10%
of General Fund and Health & Human Services Fund appropriations, net of the exclusions
mentioned above. The Recommended Budget adds $20,823 to General Reserves, however, even
with this slight increase, FY2012/13 budgeted General Reserves will still be approximately $1.4
million short of the amount necessary to meet the Board’s policy goal.
• $26.2 million “assigned” (or designated) for various purposes, including $21.75 million
“assigned” (or placed in a designation) for Fiscal Uncertainties. $21.75 million represents
approximately 9.3% of General Fund and Health & Human Services Fund appropriations, not
including the General Fund Operating Contingency, the General Fund transfer to the Health &
Human Services Fund and any transfer to the ACO Fund. Board policy sets a goal of
maintaining a Designation for Fiscal Uncertainties of 10% of General Fund and Health &
Human Services Fund appropriations, net of the exclusions mentioned above. At the
Recommended level, the budgeted Designation for Fiscal Uncertainties will be approximately
$1.4 million less than the amount necessary to meet the Board’s goal for this designation.
• $895,000 in a Reserve for Loans and Advances Receivable. This represents a portion of the
money owed to the County by the Lake Berryessa and Napa Berryessa Resort Improvement
Districts.
• The “available” balance of $7.6 million, which can be used to fund County programs.
It is important to keep in mind, however, that the above fund balance number is only an estimate. The
Auditor-Controller will determine the final fund balance number in the first quarter of FY2012/13. Any
revision to the Adopted Budget will be scheduled for your Board’s consideration once the actual fund
balance numbers have been established. If additional fund balance is identified at that time, I will be
recommending that it be utilized first to bring General Reserves up to the level called for in Board
policy and, second, to increase the Designation for Fiscal Uncertainties to the level set as goal by the
Board. If additional fund balance is not identified, I may recommend budget revisions that will
provide sufficient resources to at least increase General Reserves to the required level.
General Fund Five Year Forecast
Recognizing that expenditure and revenue decisions made in one year can have a significant effect on
the resources that will be available to fund General Fund programs in future years, staff provides your
Board with an annual General Fund Five Year Forecast. The most recent Five Year Forecast was
presented to your Board in April and projects the General Fund ending balance through FY2016/17
under three different scenarios – a Baseline Scenario (assuming the continuation of current trends,
adjusted only for known or very likely changes), a Revenue Decrease/Expenditure Increase Scenario
and a Revenue Increase/Expenditure Decrease Scenario. Each of these scenarios makes different
assumptions about what the General Fund’s Discretionary Revenues and the Net County Cost of
General Fund programs will be over the next five years – though all scenarios assume that $5 million in Excess ERAF will be available each year to fund on-going operations and that any Excess ERAF above
that amount will be transferred to the ACO Budget or spent on other one-time needs. The results of
that Forecast are shown in the following table:
As can be seen, depending on the assumptions used, the Forecast provides a fairly wide range of
possible outcomes, with a projected ending fund balance (net of restricted designations) in FY2016/17
of between $44 million and $64 million, compared to the FY2011/12 unrestricted beginning balance of
approximately $55 million. Based on these projections, our conclusion is that, assuming no major
changes in operating or capital programs or practices or staffing levels, the General Fund is likely to be
in structural balance over the upcoming five-year period, with the downside risks being slightly greater
than the upside risks. The following table shows the composite Discretionary Revenue/Net County
Cost surplus/deficit of the three scenarios and the central tendency (which is the Baseline Scenario):
 Taken together, the three Scenarios suggest that the average annual difference between Net County
Cost and Discretionary Revenues could range from a $2.3 million deficit (2.3% of Net County Cost) to a
$1.7 million surplus (1.7% of Net County Cost). The central tendency is an average annual deficit of
approximately $320,000 (0.3% of Net County Cost).
Given these projections and the fiscal risks the County is facing, we believe it would be prudent to
continue to be cautious, to control costs and to avoid major new investments in operating (non onetime)
programs. At the same time, given the robust nature of the General Fund’s fund balance and the thought and planning reflected in the County’s newly adopted Strategic Financial Plan, we are well
positioned to respond to the impact of a significant deterioration in economic conditions or the
County’s fiscal situation.
STATE BUDGET IMPACTS
On January 5th, the Governor released his proposed FY2012/13 State Budget, outlining a plan to
eliminate an estimated $9.2 billion deficit ($4.1 billion in FY2011/12 and $5.1 billion in FY2012/13). To
help address the deficit, the Governor’s Budget included $4.2 million in expenditure reductions
(primarily in Health & Human Services programs, education and various State mandates) and $4.6
billion in new revenue, including approximately $4.4 billion in revenue from a temporary increase in
the sales tax and income tax that would require voter approval.
As proposed by the Governor, the temporary increase in sales and income taxes would be part of a
November 2012 ballot measure that would also provide a constitutional protection for counties’ 2011
Public Safety Realignment revenues (from Vehicle License Fees and Sales Tax revenue). The
Governor’s proposed FY2012/13 Budget includes $5.8 billion in funding for 2011 Public Safety
Realignment, which is a $247 million (4%) increase from the FY2011/12 budget level, but the FY2012/13
Budget includes two new Realigned Mental Health programs – Mental Health Managed Care and
Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) – that are slated to receive approximately
$732 million in funding. The FY2012/13 Proposed Budget does not, however, include Realignment
funding to reimburse the State for parole costs ($957 million was included in the FY2010/11 State
Budget for this purpose). When both of these factors are accounted for, the Governor’s FY2012/13
Proposed Budget includes approximately $472 million, or 10%, more in 2011 Public Safety Realignment
funding for counties than was included in the FY2011/12 State Budget. The amount of Realignment
funding included in the Governor’s Proposed Budget for supervision of “lower level” offenders
transferred to the counties is $581.1 million, which is a 142% increase over the amount included in the
FY2011/12 budget (and, in fact, we have been told by the State to expect to receive double the amount
received in FY2011/12 for this purpose– for Napa County this would mean we would receive
approximately $2 million). It needs to be kept in mind, however, that the transfer of responsibility for
offenders from the State to the counties took effect on October 1, 2011, three months after the 2011/12
fiscal year began and the number of offenders in county custody is expected to ramp up over a roughly
two year period.
With regard to Realignment, the Governor’s Budget outlines a revised juvenile justice proposal
whereby the State would stop intake of juvenile offenders to the Division of Juvenile Justice facilities on
January 1, 2013. In order to prepare counties for this shift in responsibilities the Budget proposed to
provide $10 million in planning funding to counties in FY2011/12.
If the November 2012 ballot measure proposed by the Governor is not approved, the Proposed Budget
identifies $5.4 billion in “Trigger Cuts” to take effect on January 1, 2013. $4.8 million of those cuts are
to K-12 education and community college funding, $400 million are to the University of California and
California State University systems and the rest target various State departments, including the courts. 
In terms of counties, the bulk of the proposed changes in the Health & Human Services area will
impact our clients, but it appears that the impact on County budgets and staffing will be limited in
FY2012/13. The three most significant changes in terms of State cost savings are:
• CalWORKS:
The Governor is proposing a major restructuring of CalWORKS, involving a
number of different components, including a two-track system, with one track providing
assistance to all eligible participants at a certain level for 24 months, with a progress assessment
at 12 months. The second track would be for those aid recipients who meet certain employment
goals. Recipients in this track would receive a higher level of assistance for up to 48 months.
The Governor’s proposal also would include shifting responsibility for determining Child Care
eligibility to counties in FY2013/14, changing the Child Care income eligibility criteria and
reducing the child care reimbursement rate ceiling. Total cost savings from all of the
Governor’s CalWORKS changes are estimated to be $946 million.
• In Home Supportive Services:
The Governor is proposing a number of reductions to the In
Home Supportive Services (IHSS) program, including eliminating “domestic and related
services” for IHSS consumers living with other adults who are not participants in the IHSS
program, unless those adults are found to be unable to perform those services. This proposal
would affect 254,000 recipients and save an estimated $164 million a year. If this proposal were
adopted, it would likely save the County money.
• Medi-Cal:
The Governor is also proposing a number of changes to the Medi-Cal program,
including various actions to improve coordination of persons who are “dual eligible” for Medicare
and Medi-Cal (at first involving the implementation and then expansion of pilot projects in
a number of counties) and making long-term care services a Medi-Cal Managed Care benefit.
The Governor’s Budget estimates that there will be nursing home and hospital cost savings
from the pilot projects and is proposing a payment deferral and alignment of policies for all
Managed Care counties. This proposal is projected to save the State $678 million in FY2012-13
and $1 billion in FY2013/14. The Governor is also proposing the expansion of Medi-Cal
Managed Care into all counties, starting in June 2013 and enrolling all current Medi-Cal
beneficiaries, including IHSS recipients and those in the institutional long-term care program.
The Governor’s Budget also includes implementing an annual open enrollment for Medi-Cal
beneficiaries. Currently, beneficiaries can change plans up to 12 times a year. Napa County is
already a Managed Care county.
There are a number of other proposals that could impact counties, including:
• A proposal to suspend the County share of Child Support Collections in FY2012/13, and redirect
the $34.5 million to the State’s General Fund (this funding was also suspended in FY2011-12).
Napa County’s Child Welfare Services Division has historically received about $177,000 from
this source.
• A proposal to once again defer the State’s payment for pre-2004 State mandates, as well as
proposals to repeal or suspend numerous State mandates, though, in most cases, Napa County
has not received funding related to these mandates for a number of years.
The continuation of trigger cuts implemented in January 2012, when State revenue was forecast
to fall below the statutory threshold level. These include cuts to library funding that will
reduce revenue to the Napa County Library by more than $300,000.
This Recommended Budget was prepared before the Governor released the May Revision to his
Proposed Budget and it is expected that the May Revision will include additional funding reductions to
address State revenue reductions in FY2011/12 and projected revenue reductions in FY2012/13. Staff
will continue to evaluate the Governor’s Proposed Budget to determine its impact on Napa County and
to track its progress through the Legislature. As the Board knows, we often do not know what the
ultimate impact of the State budget will be on the County until a number of months after the budget is
adopted.
SIGNIFICANT ISSUES
The following are some of the key issues associated with the FY2012/13 Recommended Budget:
County-wide Issues
• As noted above, employee salary and related benefit costs will increase due to cost of living
adjustments and step increases.
• The Recommended Budget reflects the impact of a $1.7 million, or 10%, increase in the cost of
the County’s share of employee health insurance.
• Consistent with the Board’s adopted Budget Policies, the Recommended Budget reflects
payments necessary to fully fund the County’s Other Post-Employment Benefit (OPEB)
unfunded liability over a 20-year period. For FY2012-13, OPEB costs will total approximately
$6.4 million, a $200,000, or 3%, increase over the FY2011/12 Adopted budget amount. However,
in the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget approximately $1.3 million of OPEB costs –an increase
identified in an actuarial study completed after the departments had prepared their budget
requests - was paid out of the General Expenditures Budget and not charged to the operating
departments. In the Recommended Budget, the full $6.4 million is being allocated to the
relevant operating departments, increasing their OPEB costs by an average of 30%.
• The Recommended Budget reflects the impact of a $457,000, or 26%, increase in Workers’
Compensation charges to departments and a $328,000, or 21%, decrease in General Liability
charges. This represents a net increase of 4%, but because different departments have different
experience levels in these two areas, the impact on some departments is significantly greater.
The increase in Workers’ Compensation charges is largely due to a reduction in the rate at
which the Workers’ Compensation Fund is being spent down to offset department charges.
Prior to FY2011/12, in an effort to provide budget relief to departments, the fund balance was
spent down at an unsustainable rate. The goal is to maintain the fund balance at an 80%
confidence level, which is consistent with actuarial standards.
• The Recommended Budget reflects the impact of a $475,000, or 5%, increase in Information
Technology Services (ITS) charges to departments. However, due, in part, to a change in the ITS cost allocation formula, there will be a significant shift in cost from some departments to
others. ITS charges to all General Fund departments, for example, will increase by almost 11%
compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget level. The changes to the ITS cost allocation
formula were made to simplify the formula and correct problems with the old formula. Staff
will continue to review the new formula and may make changes in the future.
• The Recommended Budget reflects the impact of a $360,000, or 14%, increase in Fleet charges to
the operating departments and a $102,000, or 17%, increase in Property Management charges.
Part of the reason for the increase in Property Management charges is the implementation of a
new automated system to better track and manage facility maintenance projects. Part of the
reason for the increase in Fleet charges is increased fuel costs and the shift of approximately
$140,000 in lease costs for the California Blvd. property from the ACO Fund to the Fleet Fund,
reflecting a Board decision not to exercise the purchase option at this time.
General Administration/Finance
• The County Executive Officer’s Housing & Intergovernmental Affairs (HIA) Division budget
reflects a $20,000 reduction in appropriations and a $7,000 reduction in Net County Cost. This
is due to the expiration of an agreement (funded at $32,000 in FY2011/12) with the Napa County
Transportation & Planning Agency (NCTPA) and the filling of a position at a lower step than
budgeted in FY2011/12, partially offset by other salary and benefit increases for existing
employees. The agreement with NCTPA was to develop a Sub-Regional Housing Needs
Analysis and that work is complete.
• The County Executive Officer’s Human Resources Division budget reflects a $254,000 increase
in appropriations and a $233,000 increase in Net County Cost, due, in part, to the shifting of
budget responsibility for $160,000 in Employee Assistance Program and benefits administrator
consultant costs from the now-discontinued General Fund Employee/Retiree Benefits budget
unit to the Human Resources budget unit. The appropriation and Net County Cost increase
also reflects the impact of salary and benefit cost increases for existing employees.
• The County Executive Officer’s Emergency Services budget reflects a $145,000 decrease in
appropriations and $152,000 decrease in revenue due primarily to a decision not to include
revenue and appropriations related to a $125,000 Federal Emergency Performance Grant. The
FY2011/12 Adopted Budget included revenue and appropriations related to that grant, though
the County did not actually apply for the funds or spend the money in that fiscal year. Staff has
chosen not to apply for that grant because the grant requirements have become very restrictive
and time-consuming. Staff will continue to sustain current local emergency management
capabilities, but, without the grant, certain enhancements to the system will not be made.
• The County Executive Officer’s Communications budget reflects a $117,000 increase in
appropriations and Net County Cost, due primarily to a proposal to spend approximately
$100,000 to make various improvements to the County’s radio system, including the creation of
a Tactical Interoperable Communications Plan (TIC), the installation of equipment to allow law
enforcement personnel in the unincorporated area to have seamless communications with the dispatch center and other law enforcement personnel in the County, and the purchase and
installation of a multi-channel expandable radio logging recorder.
• The General Expenditures budget reflects a $17 million increase in appropriations and a $16.1
million increase in Net County Cost. The primary reason for the increase in appropriations is
the shift in budget responsibility for certain programs from the General Fund to special revenue
funds, which converted what had been a Net County Cost in the former General Fund budget
units into a General Fund Contribution to the new funds. General Fund Contributions are
budgeted as transfers to other funds in the General Expenditures budget unit. The largest of
these new General Fund Contributions is the $16.1 million transfer to the Health & Human
Services Fund (this is approximately $5.7 million higher than Health & Human Services’
FY2011/12 budgeted Net County Cost, due to the reimbursement of the Agency’s $4.7 million in
OMB A-87 costs, a $220,000 increase in IHHS provider wages, a $420,000 increase in OPEB costs
and a $236,000 increase in General Fund costs for homeless services that had previously been
paid out of the Affordable Housing Fund). Other new General Fund Contributions include the
transfer of $3.6 million to the new Capital Improvement Projects Fund and a $300,000 transfer to
the Insurance Fund. These and other increases are partially offset by decreases in the General
Fund Contribution to certain funds including a $1.3 million reduction in the General Fund
Contribution to the Employee/Retiree Benefits Fund (reflecting an FY2011/12 increase in OPEB
costs identified after departments had already prepared their FY2011/12 budgets) and a
$236,000 decrease in the General Fund Contribution to the Animal Shelter Fund (reflecting, in
part, the implementation of the plan to gradually allocate costs appropriately to the cities).
• The Central Services budget reflects an $89,000 reduction in appropriations and an $119,000
reduction in Net County Cost. The primary reason for these reductions is a $131,000 decrease in
the interest the County pays on delinquent property tax accounts under the Teeter Plan. Staff is
estimating that the number of delinquent accounts will decline in FY2012/13. These and other
decreases in appropriations are partially offset by increases in a number of areas, most
significantly a $70,000 increase in costs related to the administration of the County’s employee
deferred compensation program.
• The Tobacco Settlement budget (which was formerly in a Non-operating Special Revenue Fund
but is now, technically, part of the General Fund) reflects appropriations of $1.2 million and
revenue of $1.4 million. The FY2011/12 Adopted Budget included $990,000 in appropriations in
the old Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement Fund. The $210,000 increase is due primarily to
a $200,000 transfer to the Health & Human Services Fund to help cover the cost of homeless
services previously funded entirely out of the Affordable Housing Fund. Despite this, the fund
balance assigned to Tobacco Settlement will increase by $200,000. The Tobacco Master
Settlement budget’s share of the General Fund’s fund balance on July 1, 2012 is estimated to be
approximately $11.2 million.
• The Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk’s Primary-General Elections budget reflects a $243,000
increase in departmental revenue and $184,000 decrease in Net County Cost, due primarily to
the receipt of revenue from local governments participating in the November 2012 General
Election. The Primary-General Elections budget also includes appropriations to prepare elections materials in Spanish as well as English. As a result of the 2010 Federal Census, the
County is now required to provide bilingual election materials.
• The Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk’s Recorder-County Clerk budget includes $48,000 in
appropriations and revenue to cover the cost of scanning and indexing birth and death
certificates from 1931 to 1972 and converting other documents to film images.
• The Special Projects budget (which was formerly in an Operating Special Revenue Fund, but is
now, technically, part of the General Fund) reflects appropriations of $1,153,000 and a General
Fund Contribution of $1,089,000. The FY2011/12 Adopted Budget included $1,019,000 in
appropriation and a $969,000 General Fund Contribution to the old Special Projects Fund. In
accordance with Board policy, the General Fund Contribution to this budget unit is based on
12.5% of the prior calendar year’s actual Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) collections. Calendar
year 2011 TOT revenue increased by approximately 12% over the calendar year 2010 amount.
• The FY2012/13 Recommended Budget reflects significant changes in how insurance and
employee benefit costs are accounted for, including consolidating a number of funds and
moving budget responsibility from the General Fund to Internal Services Funds. In terms of
employee benefits, the most significant increase is a $2.7 million appropriation in the new
Employee Benefits budget unit in the Employee/Retiree Benefits Internal Services Fund. This
represents the cost of dental, vision, life and disability insurance for County employees. In
previous years these costs were charged to the various operating departments and bills were
then paid directly by the Auditor-Controller. For FY2012/13, operating departments will
continue to be charged for costs, but the money will be deposited in the Employee-Retiree
Benefits Fund and the Auditor-Controller will pay the bills out of the new Employee Benefits
budget unit, thus, effectively, double-counting these costs. This change is required because the
County is self-insured in these areas and, thus, accounting rules require that the actual payment
of insurance bills be accounted for in an Internal Services Fund. The Employee Benefits budget
unit also includes a $500,000 appropriation to cover unused vacation accrual payoffs for
employees retiring or otherwise leaving County employment, funded by a General Fund
Contribution. In FY2011/12 this same amount was included in the now-discontinued General
Fund Employee/Retiree Benefit budget unit.
• The Recommended Workers’ Compensation Insurance Budget reflects a $139,000 increase in
appropriations and a $454,000 increase in revenue compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget
level for this program. All-told, budgeted revenue will exceed appropriations by $25,000,
allowing for a slight increase in the Workers Compensation share of the Employee-Retiree
Benefits Fund’s fund balance. As mentioned above, in previous years the Workers
Compensation Fund’s fund balance was spent down at a rate that staff has been determined is
unsustainable if the balance level is to meet appropriate actuarial standards.
Community Resources/Infrastructure
• As mentioned above, the Recommended Budget reflects a number of changes in how certain
capital, major maintenance and other projects are budgeted for. The FY2011/12 General Fund
Adopted Budget included approximately $14 million in appropriations in the General Fund Capital Improvement Program budget and $3.2 million in the HHSA Construction budget, for a
total of $17.2 million. The Recommended Budget includes a total of $43.2 million for these same
types of projects, including $11.7 million in the Public Works Projects budget in the General
Fund and $31.6 million in the new General Fund Capital Improvement Projects budget unit in
the Capital Improvement Projects Fund. The primary reason for the increase in appropriations
is the inclusion of $26.1 million for the Health & Human Services Campus Redevelopment
Project in the General Fund Capital Improvement Projects budget (compared to $3.2 million
appropriated for this project in FY2011/12) and the inclusion of $2 million for the
Administration Building lobby remodel and surface replacement. The FY2012/13 General Fund
share of cost for all of these projects is approximately $5.1 million and $27.7 million is coming
from the Accumulated Capital Outlay (ACO) budget.
• The Recommended Accumulated Capital Outlay (ACO) budget in the Capital Improvement
Project Fund (previously in the Accumulated Capital Outlay Fund) reflects appropriations of
approximately $29.3 million, an increase of approximately $26 million compared to the
FY2011/12 appropriation level for the old ACO Fund. The Recommended ACO budget includes
the transfer of $27.7 million to the General Fund Capital Improvement Projects budget unit in
the Capital Improvement Projects Fund for three projects: the Health & Human Services
Campus Redevelopment Project ($26.2 million); the Administration Building Surface Repair
Project ($1 million); and the Jail Environmental Impact Report ($500,000). The Recommended
ACO budget also includes appropriations for a $1.5 million loan to the Airport Industrial Area
Impact Mitigation Fee Non-Operating Special Revenue Fund to cover part of the cost of the
Devlin Road Extension Project. The ACO budget unit’s share of the Capital Improvement
Project Fund’s fund balance on July 1, 2012 is estimated to be approximately $35.2 million.
Based on the Recommended Budget, the amount of uncommitted ACO resources available is
approximately $6.5 million.
• The FY2011/12 Adopted Roads Fund budget totaled approximately $17 million. For FY2012/13,
the Roads Fund budget totals $21.4 million, now split into two separate budget units: Roads-
Operations & Maintenance and Roads- Capital Improvement Projects. The Recommended
Roads-Operations & Maintenance budget includes appropriations of $8.3 million, primarily to
cover the cost of existing Roads Fund staff and to make a $2.1 million transfer of Roads Fund
carryover fund balance and General Fund Contribution to the Roads-Capital Improvement
Projects budget unit. The Recommended Roads- Capital Improvement Projects budget reflects
appropriations of $13.1 million for 11 rollover and 6 new road projects, including $4 million for
the Devlin Road Extension Project and $3.2 million for the Oakville Bridge Replacement Project.
The Roads Fund’s estimated fund balance on July 1, 2012 is approximately $4.8 million.
• The Affordable Housing Fund budget reflects a $940,000 reduction in appropriations and a
$133,000 increase in revenue compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget level. One reason for
the recommended decrease in appropriations is a $436,000 reduction in support for the
County’s homeless assistance programs. The FY2011/12 Affordable Housing Fund Adopted
Budget included $553,000 in funding for the following homeless assistance programs:
? Winter Shelter: $133,000
? South Napa Shelter: $191,000
? Samaritan Family Shelter: $105,000
? Hope Center: $40,000
? Center for Common Concerns: $84,000.
As you are aware, the County began paying these costs out of the Affordable Housing Fund in
FY2008/09, when the Fund’s revenues and fund balance were significantly higher than they are
now. Given the lower amount of Affordable Housing Fund resources now available, staff
determined that no more than $117,000 of the Fund’s resources could appropriately be spent on
homeless services, since the primary purpose of the Fund is to finance the provision of
affordable permanent housing. Based on Board policy direction, the remaining amount of
County funding for homeless assistance programs will come from the General Fund through
the General Expenditures budget ($236,000) and the Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement
budget ($200,000). As of July 1, 2012, the Affordable Housing Fund will have an estimated fund
balance of approximately $10 million, of which approximately $7 million is reserved for specific
affordable housing projects or the Worker Proximity Housing program. This leaves
approximately $3 million available for new projects.
• The Recommended Budget for Public Works’ Fleet Management – Operations budget unit
reflects a $250,000 increase from the FY2011/12 Adopted level and the Recommended Budget
for the Vehicle Replacement budget unit reflects a $143,000 increase. The increase in Fleet –
Management Operations is due in part to the inclusion of a $138,000 lease payment for the
California Blvd. property and in part to the budgeted transfer of $160,000 in Fleet Management
–Operations’ share of fund balance to the Vehicle Replacement budget unit. In FY2011/12, the
California Blvd. lease payment was made out of the ACO Fund, since it was anticipated the
County would exercise the option to purchase that property. Now that a decision to purchase
the property has been delayed, annual lease payments are more appropriately considered an
operating cost that is the responsibility of this budget unit. The increase in the Vehicle
Replacement budget is due, in part, to the cost of purchasing 14 replacement vehicles – 11 of
them hybrids - and, in part to increased depreciation charges based on vehicle usage. As noted,
due to a cash surplus in the Fleet Management – Operations share of the Fleet Management
Fund’s fund balance, the Recommended Budget reflects the transfer of $160,000 from the Fleet
Management-Operations’ share of the fund balance to the Vehicle Replacement budget unit. As
of July 1, 2012, the Fleet Management Fund’s fund balance (for all budget units) is estimated to
be approximately $4.7 million.
• The Public Works Department’s Airport- Capital Improvement Projects budget reflects a $2.5
million decrease in appropriations and revenue, due to the completion of a number of capital
projects, including the rehabilitation of Airport pavement areas. The Recommended Budget
includes funding for 7rollover and one new project, including the Atkins/Borges Land Purchase.
Funding comes primarily from the Federal government.
• The Recommended Environmental Management budget includes $90,000 in appropriations
and Net County Cost to purchase new office furniture to complete the remodel that was put on
hold in 2008 in response to the economic downturn. Due to the proposed elimination of the
Environmental Management Department and the consolidation of its functions into the Conservation, Development and Planning and Public Works Departments, the intent now is to
use the $90,000 to help remodel office space to accommodate the reorganization.
• The Recommended Budget for the Agricultural Commissioner-Sealer of Weights and
Measures reflects the reclassification of a vacant Agricultural and Standards Worker II to a Staff
Services Analyst I/II position to assist in managing, reporting and complying with State and
Federal funding requirements. Revenue is recommended to increase by $380,000 and Net
County Cost to decrease by $113,000, due primarily to the receipt of State funding related to
European Grapevine Moth trapping.
• The Recommended Conservation, Development & Planning budget reflects a $77,000 increase
in appropriations, a $14,000 increase in revenue and a $63,000 increase in Net County Cost
compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted level. This is the net result of increases and decreases in a
number of areas including: a $240,000 increase in appropriations and $60,000 in revenue due to
the consolidation of the General Plan budget from its own budget unit into the Conservation,
Development and Planning budget unit; a $190,0000 increase in appropriations and revenue
due to the addition of 2 positions that will provide services for the Parks and Open Space
District; a $200,000 decrease in appropriations and revenue due to a reduction in the amount of
developer-funded consultant services it is estimated will be needed in FY2012/13. The
Recommended Budget also reflects a reduction of 2 FTE positions (half of the time of the
Department Director and a Principal Planner and 1 FTE Staff Services Analyst) and related
appropriations and an offsetting reduction in revenue from the Building Code Enforcement
Fund. In FY2011/12, the full cost of these positions was included in the Conservation,
Development & Planning budget, but a portion of the cost was offset by a transfer of revenue
from the Building Inspection budget unit in the Code Enforcement Fund. For FY2012/13, the
positions themselves are either split with the Building Inspection budget unit or included
entirely in that budget unit.
• The Recommended Building Inspection budget reflects an increase of $167,000 in
appropriations and $250,000 in revenue compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget. The
recommended increase in revenue is due to increased building activity in the County’s
unincorporated area. The FY2012/13 Recommended Budget will require the use of $71,000 in
fund balance, an $84,000 decrease from the $154,000 in fund balance required to balance the
FY2011/12 Adopted Budget. It is estimated that the Building Inspection budget unit’s share of
the Code Enforcement Fund’s fund balance will be $415,000 on July 1, 2012.
• The Recommended County Library-Operations budget reflects a $123,000 reduction in State
revenue due to the State’s elimination of Transaction Based Reimbursement, Public Library
Fund and Literacy funding. Among other things, this will result in a $50,000 reduction in
expenditures on Literacy Services, such as programs that teach adults to read, English as a
second language programs and Jail outreach programs. Staff for these programs are included in
the Recommended Budget (the County has always paid for the staff), but no funding is
provided for books and other materials, which means only limited programming will be
provided. Library staff is looking for other funding sources for Literacy Services programs.
The Recommended County Library-Operations budget also includes a $49,000 increase in appropriations to pay for services provided by the North Bay Cooperative Library System (NBCLS) with State funding that has also been eliminated from the State budget. As of July 1,
2012, the Library Fund’s fund balance is estimated to be approximately $10.6 million.
Law/Justice
• The Recommended District Attorney’s budget reflects a $1.9 million (28%) increase in
appropriations, a $1.1 million increase in revenue and an $803,000 (17%) increase in Net County
Cost compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget. However, part of those increases is due to
the inclusion in this budget unit of appropriations and revenue that were included in the
separate District Attorney-Grants budget unit in FY2011/12. If that is taken into account, the
FY2012/13 Recommended Budget reflects a net increase of $595,000 (7%) in appropriations,
$298,000 in revenue and $297,000 (6%) in Net County Cost. The Recommended Budget also
reflects the loss of $108,000 in Vertical Prosecution Grant revenue due to the elimination of
funding for this program as part of the State budget trigger cuts and the loss of about $171,000
in ARRA funds due to the end of that financing program. In FY2011/12, revenue from these
sources covered part of the cost of a Deputy District Attorney, the cost of a Legal Secretary
position and approximately $95,000 in pass-through funding for other agencies. The
Recommended Budget eliminates appropriations for the $95,000 in pass-through funding and
the filled Legal Secretary position, but does not eliminate the Deputy District Attorney position.
Though the filled ARRA-funded Legal Secretary position is being eliminated, the incumbent
will be moved into a vacant Legal Secretary position that was unfunded in FY2011/12 but will
now be funded with approximately $80,000 in new DUI Prosecution Grant funds from the State
Department of Transportation. The Deputy District Attorney position partially funded with
Vertical Prosecution Grant revenue (the total cost of the position is $140,000) prosecutes child
sexual assault crimes. Vertical Prosecution grant revenues have funded all or part of this
position since 1997 (prior to that the position was supported entirely by the General Fund) and
vertical prosecution has become a best practice that minimizes the emotional stress on the
victim. For these reasons, we are recommending backfilling the loss of the Vertical Prosecution
Grant revenue with General Fund resources.
• The District Attorney-Consumer Fraud budget reflects an $115,000 (29%) increase in
appropriations and revenue due in part to the additional 0.5 FTE Deputy District Attorney
position approved by the Board in April of 2012. Adding this position will increase the number
of consumer fraud cases the Division can handle.
• The Recommended Budget for the Probation Department reflects a $1 million (11%) increase in
appropriations, an $894,000 (25%) increase in revenue and an $115,000 (2%) increase in Net
County Cost compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget level. The primary reason for the
increase in appropriations and revenue is the addition of 7 new positions and certain other
costs during FY2011/12 to implement programs related to the Realignment of responsibility for
certain “low level” offenders from the State Department of Corrections to the counties. The
cost of these positions and programs in FY2012/13 is approximately $755,000 and funding will
come from 2011 Public Safety Realignment and SB 678 revenue. The Recommended Budget
also includes $80,000 in 2011 Realignment revenue to fund an existing 0.75 FTE Probation
Officer position that will also implement Realignment-related programs. Previously, those
positions were funded with ARRA revenue and performed different duties. 
The Probation Department’s Recommended Juvenile Hall budget reflects a $441,000 increase in
appropriations, a $61,000 increase in revenue and a $380,000 increase in Net County Cost. The
primary reason for the increase in appropriations and Net County Cost, is that the cost of
medical services for Juvenile Hall inmates ($306,000) is now included in the Juvenile Hall
budget. Previously, these medical costs were included in the Corrections Department’s
Detention Medical Services budget along with funding for medical services for Jail inmates.
Recommended Budget eliminates the Detention Medical Services budget and shifts
appropriations and revenue to the Juvenile Hall and Corrections budgets.
• The Recommended Budget for the Probation Department’s Care of Court Wards budget unit
reflects a $152,000 reduction in appropriations and Net County Cost. This is due to a
significant decrease in the number juveniles placed in camps or with the State Department of
Juvenile Justice. This decrease, in turn, reflects increased efforts by the Probation Department
to utilize programs that maintain youth in the community. The Probation Department only
recommends camp placement for juveniles who have committed serious offenses or who have
failed in other programs or placements.
• The Recommended Budget for Child Support Services includes the elimination of two unfilled
Case Manager positions and one filled Account Clerk position. The Board has already
authorized the layoff of the incumbent in the Account Clerk position. Elimination of these
positions and reductions in various services and supplies categories are necessary because State
revenue is not increasing and the Department needs to cover increased salary and benefit and
internal services costs. Despite the reductions, the Department believes it should generally be
able to maintain current service levels.
Public Safety
• The Recommended Sheriff’s budget includes $165,000 in funding for a Sergeant position that
was previously included in the Sheriff’s Special Investigations budget unit, which reflects an
equivalent reduction in appropriations. The City of Napa will now provide a Sergeant to
oversee the Napa Special Investigations Bureau (NSIB) and the Sheriff’s Sergeant who had that
responsibility will now be assigned to oversee the Sheriff’s Problem Oriented Policing, Sheriff’s
Activity League and School Resources Officer functions. The Sheriff’s budget also reflects a
$140,000 increase in dispatch costs from the City of Napa.
• The Recommended Sheriff-Coroner budget unit reflects a $49,000 reduction in appropriations
and Net County Cost compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget level. The primary reason
for this decrease is the elimination of the Coroner Forensic Technician position during
FY2011/12, partially offset by compensatory $29,000 increase extra help appropriations.
• The Recommended Corrections budget reflects a $3.2 million (31%) increase in appropriations,
a $735,000 (18%) increase in revenue and a $2.4 million (39%) increase in Net County Cost
compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget. However, these increases are due in part to the
inclusion in this budget unit of appropriations and revenues related to medical services for jail
inmates that were previously budgeted in the Detention Medical Services budget unit. If this is factored out, the net increase in Corrections appropriations is approximately $770,000 (8%)
and the increase in Net County Cost is $388,000 (6%). Approximately $307,000 of the net
increase in appropriations and revenue is due to the proposed addition of 3 positions and
services and supplies costs to address issues related to the Realignment of “low level”
offenders from the State Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation to the counties.
Funding will come from 2011 Public Safety Realignment. The total Corrections appropriation
increase also reflects an increase in jail medical costs of $224,000. In total, the cost of jail and
Juvenile Hall medical services is budgeted to increase by approximately $224,000 compared to
the FY2011/12 Detention Medical Services Adopted Budget level. This increase is the result of
the County entering into a new contract with CFMG (the company that provides jail and
Juvenile Hall medical services) during FY2011/12. That contract includes increases in service
levels in a number of areas a well as a cost of living increase.
• The Recommended Fire Protection budget reflects an $804,000 (7%) increase in appropriations,
a $281,000 (3%) increase in revenue and a $523,000 (34%) increase in the use of fund balance
compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget level – for a total use of $2.1 million in fund
balance. The primary reason for the increase in appropriation and use of fund balance is a
$953,000 increase in the appropriations for equipment replacement, including the “remount”
(that is, a replacement of all but the technical equipment) of three fire engines and one rescue
vehicle. The County’s contract for fire services from CalFire is budgeted to decrease by
approximately $41,000. As of July 1, 2012, the Fire Protection Fund’s fund balance is estimated
to be approximately $9.5 million.
Human Services
As discussed above, the Health & Human Services Agency’s (HHSA’s) budget has been moved from
the General Fund to a new Health & Human Services Fund. The Agency’s Recommended Budget calls
for total appropriations of approximately $85.9 million, an increase of approximately $8.9 million (11%)
compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget for the Agency. Revenues are projected to increase by $3.2
million and the Agency’s overall General Fund Contribution is recommended to increase by $5.6
million compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted revenue level and Net County Cost for the old Health &
Human Services General Fund budget units. Approximately $4.7 million of the increase in
appropriations and General Fund Contribution is related to the Agency’s move to a separate fund and
reflects the allocation of OMB A-87 (County overhead) charges to the Agency and a General Fund
reimbursement of the Agency for those OMB A-87 costs. If OMB A-87 charges are factored out on both
the appropriation and General Fund Contribution side, total Agency appropriations are recommended
to increase by $4.1 million (5%) and the General Fund Contribution is recommended to increase by
$918,000 (9%).
The $918,000 increase in General Fund Contribution reflects increases in costs for which HHSA has
traditionally been held harmless, including: a $220,000 increase in IHSS In-Home Supportive Services
provider wages, a $420,000 increase in Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) costs and $236,000 in
additional General Fund Contribution to help cover certain homeless services costs previously paid for
out of the Affordable Housing Fund.
Other Human Services budget issues include:
• The Recommended Public Health budget reflects an $801,000 decrease in Departmental
Revenue from a number of sources compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget level for this
Division. This decrease is partially offset by the re-allocation of $750,000 in General Fund
Contribution from other Health & Human Services budget units and by a reduction of staffing
and services and supplies costs in the Women Infants and Children (WIC) program in
FY2011/12.
• The Recommended Mental Health budget reflects a $2.4 million increase in appropriations and
$1.9 million increase in revenue compared to the FY2011/12 Adopted Budget level for this
Division. The increase in appropriations is due to a number of factors, including a $608,000
increase in Children’s Medi-Cal therapy contracts, an increase in Mental Health Services Actfunded
contracts and positions added during FY2011/12 and a $209,000 increase in residential
placements in children’s group homes. The increase in children’s contracts is due to a large
backlog of children needing services. The budgeted revenue increase includes a $1 million
increase in Medi-Cal and Early and Periodic Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) revenue and
$470,000 in additional Mental Health Services Act funds.
• The Recommended Self-Sufficiency budget includes $700,000 in appropriations and revenue to
cover the cost of the new Lake County One-Stop Workforce Investment contract. At the end of
FY2010/11, but after the County’s FY2011/12 Budget was adopted, the County entered into an
agreement to consolidate the Lake and Napa County’s Workforce Investment Boards, under
Napa County’s authority. Funding will come from the Federal Workforce Investment Act.
• The Recommended Operations budget includes $535,000 in appropriations, Departmental
Revenue and General Fund Contribution to cover the cost of homeless services that were
previously funded out of the Affordable Housing Fund. The costs will now be paid out of
HHSA’s Operations budget, with funding (through inter-fund transfers) from the Affordable
Housing Fund, Tobacco MSA budget and a General Fund Contribution (budgeted in the
General Expenditures budget). This budget unit also includes approximately $100,000 in
appropriations and revenue from the ACO Fund to cover the cost of a Staff Services Analyst to
assist the Agency in dealing with the Health & Human Services Campus Redevelopment
Project.
• The Recommended Organizational Resource and Development budget unit reflects
appropriations and revenue related to the addition of two positions during FY2011/12 related to
the expansion of the Medi-Cal Administrative Activities (MAA) program to certain communitybased
organizations. Funding will come from increased Tobacco MSA and MAA claiming
revenue.
Non-Operating Special Revenue Funds
Non-operating Special Revenue Funds are funds established to account for specific resources that are
legally restricted to expenditure for specific purposes. These funds receive, hold and account for, revenue – usually from the State or Federal governments – but do not spend the revenue directly on
programs. Instead, resources in the Non-operating Funds are transferred to the appropriate operating
budget units where program expenditures take place. As mentioned above, there are three structural
changes related to the Non-operating Special Revenue Funds reflected in the FY2012/13 Recommended
Budget.
First, 71 Non-operating funds have been combined into 6, though there are still 71 budget units.
Second, the Recommended Budget includes approximately $15 million in new Non-operating Fund
appropriations for Health and Human Services and Public Safety programs that were previously
funded by categorical grants to the operating departments from the State, but were Realigned during
FY2011/12 and now the revenue is received first in the Non-operating Funds and then transferred to
the appropriate operating budget.
Third, the Recommended Budget includes approximately $910,000 in new Non-operating Fund
appropriations related to the Realignment of offenders from the State Department of Corrections to the
counties. Approximately $2.2 million in Realignment revenue is received in the new 2011 Realignment
Non-operating fund and approximately $910,000 is appropriated as a transfer-out to various operating
departments.
In addition to the above structural changes, there are numerous increases and decreases in revenue and
appropriations in the various Non-operating budget units. The most significant is a $3 million increase
in appropriations in the Airport Industrial Area Mitigation budget unit, due primarily to the transfer of
resources to the Roads Fund to cover costs related to the Devlin Road Extension Project.
FINAL BUDGET HEARINGS PROCESS
Budget Hearings begin on Monday, June 18th, at which time staff will provide a presentation on the
Recommended Budget and your Board will begin accepting general public testimony. Hearings on
individual department budgets will then commence. Once staff presentations and public testimony are
concluded, your Board will be asked to make decisions on appropriations, revenue and financing
levels, approve the fixed assets and new positions and adopt any policy and other budget control
language. On Tuesday, June 26th, the Recommended Budget Schedules will be presented to your Board
for adoption.
RECOMMENDED ACTION
It is recommended that your Board hold the scheduled hearings, approve the recommended
appropriations and revenue levels as presented, approve the recommended positions, fixed assets and
policy items and adopt the County of Napa Budget for FY2012/13 on Tuesday, June 26, 2012.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Preparing the County’s budget involves a significant commitment of time and effort on the part of
County department heads, management and departmental fiscal staffs and the staff of the County
Executive Office. This year, the budget process has been particularly challenging because of the simultaneous implementation of a new chart of accounts and budget module. I would like to thank
everyone involved for their efforts and the sometimes difficult decisions they have made in helping to
craft a balanced budget for the County.
In particular, I would like to recognize the work of Auditor-Controller Tracy Schulze, Assistant
Auditor-Controller Bob Minahen and Jobina Toh from the Auditor-Controller’s Office, Jon Gjestvang,
Chief Information Officer and Ben Guerard, Roda Lee Myers and Jim Phillips from Information
Technology Services, Britt Ferguson, Assistant County Executive Officer and the members of the
Budget and Analysis team in the County Executive Office: Helene Franchi, Karen Collins, Molly
Rattigan, Liz Habkirk, Danny Nguyen and Patti DeWeese. This team has put in countless hours and is
primarily responsible for the Recommended Budget available to you today.