This year’s budget is the most robust in the County’s history on
a raw dollar basis. While this might sound impressive, it is
deceiving. I make this statement on a purely dollar to dollar
comparison without taking into account inflation (which has
been very mild) and the State’s continual realigning of
programs to the counties. This year’s total County budget is
$214 million. This is an increase of just 12% over 8 years.
In an apples to apples comparison, this year’s budget exceeds
the previous highest budget of 2008/2009 by $5.9 million or
just over 3%. This factors out the State of California 2011
realignment of programs which cost an additional $17.2. The
2011 Realignment of Criminal Justice and Health and Human
Service Programs has been an ever increasing part of the
County’s budget. Since 2011, Realignment funding has
increased $5.1 million or 42%. These funds are used throughout
the County organization primarily in the Sheriff’s Office,
Probation Department, Behavioral Health, District Attorney and
the Public Defender. Most of these realigned programs from the State are dealing with lower level criminal
offenders and their reintegration into society rather than incarceration locally or at the State level. Realignment
will be a continuing growth factor in the County’s budget as it was constitutionally mandated by the voters of the
State in 2011.
The total county budget this year increased by a little less than $13 million over last year. Of that, $7 million were
increased personnel costs (much of it due to increased pension costs as anticipated) and the balance was primarily
the aforementioned State Realignment with smaller increases for roads, transit and the Homebuyer Assistance
Program. The Board of Supervisors fiscally conservative policies certainly have had something to do with this
contained increase in costs. The graph below illustrates my point:
In contrast to Nevada County, there are a very few areas in the State of California that have not recovered from
the Great Recession. These are mostly areas that have supported the ill-fated State of Jefferson movement. This
movement has virtually nothing in common with Nevada County either socially or economically. Nevada County
is doing better than almost all rural counties. Unemployment in Nevada County has dropped to 4.7% from a high
of close to 10%. The Bay Area, Southern California and the Inland Empire have now seen multiple years of
stronger and sustained economic expansion with unemployment rates at 3% or lower. There are indications that
their economies may be becoming overheated, which is a precursor to a recession. We are almost a year to 18
months behind what happens with the more prosperous areas of the State. Here is the County’s unemployment
rate since the Great Recession:
In a very consistent and plodding manner, general fund sales tax continues to be an example of the slower
recovery in the rural areas. Though it has never been and will never be the County’s largest revenue source, sales
tax is an indicator of a local economy’s health. The County saw a 2% increase for this current fiscal year which
was consistent with our projections. We are again projecting just a 2% increase for the coming year. This year’s
and next year’s estimates are still a little over 6% behind the high water mark of the 2006/2007 fiscal year. The
chart below shows how a weaker economic expansion has drawn-out the sales tax rebound:
The County’s largest revenue source for the General Fund is by far property tax. The real estate market is
beginning to show signs of heating up resulting in a growth of revenues. Over a period of almost 30 years, the
County realized an average growth rate of 5.5% a year in property taxes. Property tax revenues actually declined
for 4 years during the recession and recovery. You can see on the graph below that last year we actually hit that
average at 5.5%, and next year we are projecting a slightly stronger growth rate right at 6%.
For nearly a decade and a half, the County has been able to maintain essential services throughout this long
recession and recovery because of the aforementioned fiscally conservative policies established by the Board of
Supervisors. These policies worked in the good times as well as the bad. The effect during the good times was to
create a fund balance, as we are doing now, to assist the County operation in more difficult times. If the County
sticks to the current Board policies we will be well positioned for the next economic downturn. Since recessions
have traditionally occurred every seven to nine years, the next one can be expected fairly soon, as I stated last year
probably around 2019. As you can see from the chart below the fund balance is stabilized at well above prerecession
levels:
These reserves have always been important to maintain essential services during difficult economic times. It is
imperative that these reserves be maintained and replenished for possible financial threats that are always looming
just ahead of us. For example, the most consistent threat facing the County’s financial situation will become real
in the 2016/2017 fiscal year when the County’s pension costs will be increased by more than $1.6 million each
year for 5 years. Without increased revenue to meet these demands from the state pension system (CalPERS),
personnel cuts and use of reserves would have been the only tools left to keep the budget balanced. Thus far we
have been able to balance the budget without dipping into those reserves for that purpose. Depending on revenue
returns in the future, the use of these reserves will likely be necessary.
In the last three years’ budget messages, I have enumerated the many things that the Board of Supervisors has
done to mitigate pension cost impacts since 2005. The Board continues to be vigilant in this matter. For example,
just two years ago they directed an increase in the reserve for pension costs of over $2 million to bring that
particular reserve designation to over $3 million. We have recommended in this budget an additional $3.6 million
to the pension reserve for a new total of just over $7.1 million.
As has been said for many years now, the good news is that the fiscally conservative, prudent and consistent
policies outlined by your Board of Supervisors over the last decade have proven correct. The Board’s continuing
hallmark has been to favor long range financial planning over the gimmicky, quick and elusive fixes that have
often been used by so many local and state governments. Some of the more extreme examples of these
government practices have been in the headlines as they experience continued layoffs, service cutbacks, deferred
maintenance, and in the extreme even bankruptcy. The County of Nevada has not required any of these unwise
and unstable practices. Instead, we have set aside fund balances (reserves) to maintain the County’s service levels
and infrastructure.
These reserves are also set aside for specific purposes such as one-time expenditures in the following areas:
General Plan Updates, Facilities Planning, an Economic Development Infrastructure reserve and reserves for
areas of liability. In addition, there are funds set aside for general purposes like emergencies and economic
uncertainties.
Controlling the size of government continues to be a debate at the federal and state levels. Here at the County, it
begins with controlling the number of employees this local government has in the organization. Despite the
pressures of the federal government (think Affordable Care Act) and the state government (think state realignment
of programs), the County has kept any growth in the number of employees to the bare minimum. It is a given that
a local government’s pension liability will be greater if the number of employees grows. The County of Nevada
has controlled the number of employee positions over the last decade even in the good times. There is a moderate
increase of six full-time positions included in this budget. Despite these pressures you can see by the chart below
that a lid has been kept on the growth of your County government:
I would like to compliment Mike Ertola for the outstanding services these last few years through the quiet
leadership he provided in implementing many new programs under AB 109, which is the State’s shifting of low
level felons to counties. I would also like to compliment Sheriff Keith Royal as he continues to be recognized for
his prudent management of the Sheriff’s Office budget. Enough cannot be said about the Sheriff’s professionalism
and leadership. He sets an example for others to follow in our organization and throughout the State.
As I have said many times, putting together a document like this requires a great deal of focus, discipline and
tenacity. Once again, congratulations must be extended to Martin Polt for his leadership of the entire effort
putting this document together and coordinating the departments and the budget subcommittee meetings. He led
the excellent work of Ryan Gruver, Elise Strickler and Janiene Lynch in the development of this document. He
is also created professional growth for three County employees who served as temporary budget analysts. They
did a fine job in that role. They are Jeffrey Thorsby, Andrea Sexton, and Brittany Hutson. As always, thanks
need to be extended to Marcia Salter and her Auditor Controller staff for their involvement in guaranteeing a
quality document. Alison Lehman was of great assistance in all phases of this process, with a vigilant eye on
staffing matters and other administrative issues, as well as, requiring everyone to adhere to Board policies.
As always, this budget could not have been accomplished without the many excellent employees in this
organization, including some very high performing fiscal personnel. I would like to thank all of those involved,
and in particular, the Board of Supervisors’ Ad Hoc Budget Subcommittee consisting of Chairman Dan Miller
and Vice Chairman Hank Weston for their many days and long hours of reviewing budgets with serious
scrutiny.
