This section provides highlights of the base budgets and recommended
augmentations for the County budget programs
and departments. Due to increases in costs which continue
to outpace growth in sources, many Departments have proposed
reductions which are included in the current year recommended
budget. Departments have worked diligently to
manage their budgets and have reduced some funding gaps
identified in the 2012 Strategic Financial Plan. Departments
continue to consistently maintain programs and minimize
impacts on services.
Due to the continued uncertainty related to stability of General
Purpose Revenues and other General Fund revenue
sources, General Fund Departments were requested to submit
contingency plans to implement a potential 10% Net
County Cost reduction. A total of $70.0 million in Net
County Cost contingency reductions were submitted but are
not recommended for implementation at this time.
Public Protection
District Attorney
¦ The District Attorney submitted $4.6 million in proposed
reductions with a maximum potential of 38 positions
to be reduced. All programs within the District
Attorney’s office will be impacted at some level by the
proposed reduction. The recommended restoration is
$1.7 million and all positions, with the remaining funding
derived from savings and revenues not known at the
time of budget submittal. Restoration is targeted to
support core staffing that is required to provide effective
Community Services
16 County of Orange
FY 2013-2014 Recommended Budget
prosecution services. Additional detail of service
impacts are provided in the FY 2013-14 Budget Augmentation
Requests document.
Public Defender
¦ Public Defender submitted $3.7 million in proposed
reductions with a maximum potential of 37 positions to
be reduced. The reduction in funding would require
that the Department begin reducing caseloads immediately.
Restoration of $1.9 million is recommended, with
the remaining funding derived from savings not known
at the time of budget submittal. Additional detail of service
impacts are provided in the FY 2013-14 Budget
Augmentation Requests document.
¦ An additional $560 thousand service level expansion is
recommended in support of a new case management
system.
Sheriff-Coroner
¦ Due to increases in expenditures and County funding
limitations, the Sheriff-Coroner submitted $15.8 million
in proposed reductions with no reduction in positions.
Due to funding limitations, only $12.0 million is
recommended for restoration. Additional detail of service
impacts are provided in the FY 2013-14 Budget
Augmentation Requests document.
Community Services
¦ The FY 2013-14 recommended budget includes a
request of $2.6 million for General Relief which is not
recommended due to General Fund funding limitations.
Caseloads and funding impacts will be monitored
throughout the year.
Health-Care Agency
¦ The Health Care Agency is requesting an additional $2.0
million to cover increased enrollment in the Low
Income Health Program (LIHP). One-time funding of
$2.0 million is recommended.
OC Community Resources
¦ OC Community Resources is requesting an additional
$4.0 million to develop and operate three year-round
emergency shelters which is not at this time and will be
considered during the 2013 Strategic Financial Plan.
Infrastructure and Environmental Resources
OC Public Works
¦ The recommended base budget for OC Public Works
includes a $196,096 reduction in appropriations to meet
Net County Cost Limits; restoration and ongoing funding
is recommended. Detail of potential service
impacts are provided in the FY 2013-14 Budget Augmentation
Requests document.
General Government
Assessor
¦ The recommended base budget for the Assessor
includes a $3.7 million reduction in appropriations to
meet Net County Cost Limits of which $1.5 million is
recommended for restoration. Detail of potential service
impacts are provided in the FY 2013-14 Budget
Augmentation Requests document.
¦ Additional service level expansion of $862,051 is recommended
in support of Assessment Tax System (ATS)
costs ($582,051), and equipment refresh ($280,000).
Human Resource Services
¦ A $150,000 reallocation of Net County Cost from County
Executive Office to Human Resource Services is recommended
to reconcile to actions taken in the FY 2012-13
2nd Quarter Budget Report.
¦ Additional one-time service level expansions of
$830,000 are recommended in support of Information
Technology projects ($200,000); online Equal Opportunity
Employment Training ($110,000); labor negotiation
services ($350,000); and investigative personnel
services ($170,000).
Registrar of Voters
¦ One-time service level expansion of $2.4 million is recommended
for the June 2014 Primary Election.
Treasurer-Tax Collector
¦ The recommended base budget includes a $909,572
reduction in appropriations to meet Net County Cost
Limits; a one-time restoration of $500,000 is recommended
while a fee study is conducted.
Debt
The adopted budget funds all debt obligation payments.
Budgets displayed in Program VI include amounts for
annual payments on the County’s refunded debt financing of
the Juvenile Justice Center, Manchester parking facilities,
and debt financing of infrastructure improvements in the

County’s Assessment Districts, and Community Facilities
Districts. Although the County’s former 1996 and 1997 Pension
Obligation Bonds were economically defeased, this budget
reflects the payments made by the trustee from escrow.
This program also includes the debt associated with the
County’s Teeter program. Debt related to specific operations
such as John Wayne Airport and Integrated Waste Management
is included in Program III where the operational budgets
for those operations are also found. Based on the
County’s Strategic Financial Plan and at current funding levels,
the County is able to fulfill these debt obligations and
sustain current and future services and operations.
Cash Flow Management
The County did not issue Tax and Revenue Anticipation
Notes (TRANs) in FY 2012-13 and will continue to monitor
cash flow needs in FY 2013-14.
The County issued short term taxable Pension Obligation
Bonds to prepay, at a discount, a portion of the County’s
2013-14 pension obligation. The bonds were issued on January
14, 2013 in the amount of $268 million at rates ranging
from 0.58% to 0.76%.
IV. SUMMARY
This budget serves as a realistic plan of resources available to
carry out the County’s core businesses and priorities. It is
consistent with the County’s mission statement, the Strategic
Financial Plan and departmental business plans. It follows
the CEO budget policy guidelines, meets some of the departmental
augmentation requests, incorporates impacts of the
state budget proposals as known at this time, addresses
important capital needs and provides adequate reserves.