This section provides highlights of the base budgets and recommended
augmentations for the County budget programs
and departments. Due to increases in costs which continue
to outpace growth in sources, many Departments have proposed
cuts which are included in the current year recommended
budget. Departments have worked diligently to
manage their budgets as have significantly reduced funding
gaps identified in the 2011 Strategic Financial Plan. Departments
continue to consistently maintain programs and minimize
impacts on services.
Due to the continued uncertainty related to stability of General
Purpose Revenues and other General Fund revenue
sources, General Fund Departments were requested to submit
contingency plans to implement a potential 5% Net
County Cost reduction. A total of $27.2 million in contingency
reductions were submitted but are not recommended
for implementation at this time.
Public Protection
16 County of Orange
FY 2012-2013 Recommended Budget
Public Protection
District Attorney
¦ The District Attorney submitted $2.1 million in proposed
reductions with a maximum potential of 19 positions
to be reduced. All programs within the District
Attorney’s office will be impacted at some level by the
proposed reduction. All $2.1 million is recommended
for restoration. Restoration is targeted to support core
staffing that is required to provide effective prosecution
services. Additional detail of service impacts are provided
in the Budget Augmentation Book.
Public Defender
¦ Public Defender submitted $2.4 million in proposed
reductions with a maximum potential of 28 positions to
be reduced. The reduction in funding would require
that the Department begin reducing caseloads immediately.
All $2.4 million is recommended for restoration.
Additional detail of service impacts are provided in the
Budget Augmentation Book.
Sheriff-Coroner
¦ Due to declines in revenue, including Federal and State
funding, weak growth in revenues such as Proposition
172 revenue and County funding limitations, the Sheriff-
Coroner submitted $21.9 million in proposed reductions
with no reduction in positions. Due to funding
limitations, only $16.7 million is recommended for restoration.
Additional detail of service impacts are provided
in the Budget Augmentation Book.
Community Services
¦ Significant Community Service impacts were realized in
FY 2008-09, FY 2009-10 and again in FY 2010-11 due to
State funding shortfalls. There were no requests for restoration
of reductions made in FY 2011-12. The FY
2012-13 recommended budget includes a reduction of
$5.0 million for In-Home Supportive Services which is
not recommended for restoration due to General Fund
funding limitations. Caseloads and funding impacts
will be monitored throughout the year.
Health-Care Agency
¦ The Health Care Agency is requesting an additional $1.2
million to cover increased enrollment in the Medical
Services Initiative (MSI) program ($1.0 million) and
funding for Behavioral Health Inpatient Beds
($250,000). One-time funding of $1.2 million is recommended.
Infrastructure and Environmental Resources
OC Public Works
¦ OC Public Works is requesting funding of $100,000 to
retain a Housing Element consultant to comply with the
California Department of Housing and Community
Development’s (HCD) mandate that each local jurisdiction
in the Southern California Council of Governments
(SCAG) region submit an updated Housing Element by
October 2013. One-time funding is recommended.
General Government
Assessor
¦ The recommended base budget for the Assessor
includes a $3.3 million reduction in appropriations to
meet Net County Cost Limits of which $1.3 million is
recommended for restoration. Detail of potential service
impacts are provided in the Budget Augmentation
Book.
County Accounting & Payroll System (CAPS) Program
¦ The recommended base budget includes $1.7 million in
appropriations offset by revenue from financing proceeds
for the implementation of the CAPS+ Budget
Reporting and Analysis Support System (BRASS)
upgrade to the Performance Budgeting (PB) system.
Capital Improvements
Capital Projects
¦ The recommended base budget for Capital Projects
includes a $2.5 million reduction in appropriations to
meet Net County Cost Limits which is recommended for
full restoration. $960,862 of this reduction would
impact Sheriff-Coroner Fund 14Q, Construction and
Facility Development Fund, as specific jail projects
would be cancelled or deferred if funding is not
restored. Additional detail of project impacts is provided
in the Budget Augmentation Book.
Debt
The adopted budget funds all debt obligation payments.
Budgets displayed in Program VI include amounts for
annual payments on the County’s refunded debt financing of
the Juvenile Justice Center, Manchester parking facilities,
and debt financing of infrastructure improvements in the
County’s Assessment Districts, Community Facilities Districts
and the Orange County Development Agency.

Although the County’s former Pension Obligation Bonds
were economically defeased, this budget reflects the payments
made by the trustee from escrow. This program also
includes the debt associated with the County’s Teeter program.
Debt related to specific operations such as John
Wayne Airport and Integrated Waste Management is
included in Program III where the operational budgets for
those operations are also found. Based on the County’s Strategic
Financial Plan and at current funding levels, the
County is able to fulfill these debt obligations and sustain
current and future services and operations.
Cash Flow Management
In July 2011, the County of Orange issued $150 million in Tax
and Revenue Anticipation Notes (TRANs) to finance seasonal
cash flow requirements during Fiscal Year 2011-12.
The notes will be fully paid by June 2012. It is not currently
anticipated that the County will issue Tax and Revenue
Anticipation Notes (TRANs) in FY 2012-13.
The proceeds from the TRANs cover anticipated cash deficits
resulting from the uneven flow of revenues, such as State
payment deferrals of reimbursement of many health and
human service programs administered by the County.
County General Fund expenditures occur in relatively level
amounts throughout the year, while receipts follow an
uneven pattern. Secured property tax installments, which
represent the largest component of general purpose revenues,
are primarily received in December and April of each
year.
The County issued short term taxable Pension Obligation
Bonds to prepay, at a discount, the County’s 2012-13 pension
obligation. The bonds were issued on January 18, 2012 in the
amount of $230 million at rates ranging from .75% to .95%.
IV. SUMMARY
This budget serves as a realistic plan of resources available to
carry out the County’s core businesses and priorities. It is
consistent with the County’s mission statement, the Strategic
Financial Plan and departmental business plans. It follows
the CEO budget policy guidelines, meets some of the departmental
augmentation requests, incorporates impacts of the
state budget proposals as known at this time, addresses
important capital needs and provides adequate reserves.