Introduction
The County Executive Officer presents Placer County’s Proposed Budget for Fiscal Year 2015-16 for the Board of
Supervisor’s review and consideration. This document is the culmination of a comprehensive effort on the part of
county staff from all departments to develop a budget that recognizes future obligations, protects the county from
potential Federal and State impacts to the extent foreseeable at this time, and maintains critical services that benefit
our communities.
The Proposed Budget represents the County’s legal authority to spend, provides a comprehensive guide to county
programs and services for next year and sets the stage for long-term sustainability of County operations. The
Proposed Budget serves as the interim spending plan until the Final Budget is adopted by the Board of Supervisors
(Board) in September. It funds services and activities deemed critical and necessary, providing a cohesive annual,
framework that reflects the Board’s policy direction and priorities. Additionally, the recommendations contained within
this document adhere to the County Budget and Financial Policies as well as incorporate Board direction received
over the course of the year. Finally, the Proposed Budget reflects the dynamic nature of the County service delivery
model which continues to evolve in order to meet ongoing service demands within available revenues.
Executive Summary
The FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget is balanced and continues to provide core services to our constituents and meet
important obligations to the Placer County community. In addition, the Proposed Budget uses realistic and probable
revenue estimates, and maintains appropriate reserves and contingencies. Unanticipated revenues received,
changes to carryover fund balances, and other technical revisions following adoption of the Proposed Budget will be
brought to the Board for consideration with the Final Budget in September. Finally, the Proposed Budget
transparently aligns costs of delivering programs and services within and by departments as a means to continue the
phased transition towards priority-based budgeting.
Fortunately the economy continues to modestly improve as it continues emerging from the impacts of the recently
experienced “Great Recession”. Property Tax, the County’s largest discretionary revenue source, continues to
increase as property values approach pre-recession levels. Sales taxes and other targeted revenue sources closely
tied to the state of the overall economy also continue to improve. Due to the continued steady hand of the Board and
the ongoing commitment of departments to deliver the most cost effective services, Placer County is fiscally strong
and getting healthier.
The Proposed Budget meets our immediate challenges in addition to preparing to the greatest degree possible for the
years ahead. The Proposed Budget maintains critical and core operations while enabling an environment where the
county is well positioned to respond to ongoing challenges; including, but not limited to, providing sustainable library
and fire support services, addressing needs outlined in the Criminal Justice Master Plan, and fostering an
environment of engaged staff as long-tenured employees continue to retire. Our success is tied to our continued resolve to balance long-term fiscal integrity with the strategic allocation of finite resources that address near-term
operational and service needs.
Accomplishments
The FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget comes as I complete my third year as County Executive Officer. As I reflect back
on the year, I continue to be moved by the dedication to excellence that the Board and employees demonstrate on a
daily basis and the commitment to community our residents bring to Placer County. The following highlights a few
significant accomplishments:
? Focus on Organizational Fiscal Health: Long-term success for any organization requires a concentrated
focus on maintaining fiscal health through continuous development of a multi-year budget framework, refined
alignment of all costs to applicable programs and departments, performing budget-to-actual variance
analysis, funding reserves and contingencies at policy levels, and using one-time revenue sources for onetime
expenditures. These core elements provide the necessary framework enabling the County’s continued
phased transition towards a Priority-Based Budgeting concept.
? Approach to Funding Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liabilities: Recognizing the need for continued fiscal
vigilance in addressing the long-term financial obligations of the County, the Budget and Financial Policies
were updated to incorporate both a “plan” to fully fund the Other Post Employee Benefits unfunded liability
within a reduced 15-year time period and implementation of a mechanism to review and analyze the status of
CalPERS retirement plan unfunded liabilities and pre-funding potential as a component of the annual budget
development process.
? Commitment to Transparency, Communication and Employee Engagement: Communication is a critical
aspect of everything we do; but, in recent years, how people communicate has changed significantly. Over
the course of the last year, Placer County has launched into social media, improved our website, started
using video and infographics to explain complicated government issues, and is now more proactive in sharing
information with our residents in the ways that they prefer to receive information. We also have increased our
internal communication efforts, because we know our employees will be happier and more productive if they
are better informed and understand that they are our most important asset.
? Completion of the Criminal Justice Master Plan: In coordination with the Superior Court and the Community
Corrections Partnership, the Criminal Justice Policy Committee concluded its two-year data collection and
planning process. Final recommendations developed by workgroups with representatives from the Sheriff’s
Office, District Attorney, Probation, Health and Human Services, the County’s indigent defense firms, the
County Executive Office, local law enforcement and the Superior Court identified nine recommendations to be
implemented over the next several years as funding is available. Collectively, these recommendations will
equip the justice system with the necessary correctional and rehabilitative resources necessary to protect the
public and continue its effective implementation of public safety realignment.
? Focus on Development: With the renewed vigor of the economy, real estate development projects are back
in full swing. Recent approvals of two specific plan amendments were completed to retool the projects in
West Placer County to make them financially feasible. These specific plans include for over 15,000
residential units and 3 million square feet of commercial / retail development that will build out over the next
20 to 30 years. Additional amendments to specific plans are in process for West Placer County which may
add another 4,000 residential units. Two major universities are currently being planned in West Placer and
an update to the Sunset Industrial Area Plan is underway that will balance the housing growth with growth in
the job sector and an educated labor force. In East Placer County, two major specific plans are in process
providing for a diversity of resort residential and commercial opportunities for the area.
? Phased Transition to Priority Based Budgeting: Adjusting to the “new normal” of limited resources requires a
well-thought-out plan for how to maximize the efficacy of funding allocations. Priority-Based Budgeting
provides a comprehensive approach to the entire organization, identifying every service offered, the costs for
these services and, ultimately, allocating resources based on the relevance of each service towards achieving
a stated priority or goal. During this past year, we have continued to work collaboratively with all departments
towards refining program and service inventories while creating and piloting the framework used in the
County’s financial system to budget and allocate costs. Over the course of the coming fiscal year, it is
anticipated that costs will be fully aligned to programs and the means for demonstrating their “compelling
public value” will be developed.
County Executive Office Initiatives
Identified in 2012 as priorities for the organization, these remain just as highly relevant today:
? Economic Development: As the economy continues to emerge from the recession, the County is partnering
with local and regional efforts to promote business investment and job growth.
? Priority Based Budgeting: A phased implementation approach focusing on increasing public communication
and transparency, and prioritizing services and programs based on results and within the sustainable level of
ongoing funding and resources.
? Employee Engagement: Excellent and innovative service delivery relies upon employees that are highly
motivated and connected with the residents and communities we proudly serve.
Approach to the FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget
Essential to the planning and development process for the Proposed Budget has been the guidance, participation,
and leadership of the Board. The Proposed Budget balances priorities to provide critical services to county residents
within the available resources. All involved with creating this document recognize that the county is in the business of
cost-effectively providing quality services to the public.
The Proposed Budget was developed within the multi-year budget framework previously directed by the Board and
consistent with the information presented in the “Challenges and Choices” discussion on May 19, 2015. The
framework continues the path towards long term sustainability of operations, while balancing between County
priorities, constrained available resources and anticipated future impacts of known significant cost drivers.
The Proposed Budget continues to build upon last year’s more targeted focus on communication to County residents
and businesses. Updates to the Spotlight on Critical Issues, Budget Overview chapter and the countywide inventory
of programs and services have been incorporated into the Proposed Budget document.
In summary, the FY 2015-16 Proposed Budget:
? Provides for core operations, services, and programs.
? Continues to fund capital infrastructure projects prioritized by the Board.
? Maintains appropriate fiscal contingency and reserve levels.
Additional information about the Proposed Budget can be found in the Budget Overview and Department Chapters.
Conclusion
The staff and I appreciate the steadfast leadership of the Board and the responsive cooperation of all our
departments, and look forward to working with the Board as we refine the FY 2015-16 Final Budget for Board
consideration in September.