Introduction
The County Executive Office presents Placer County’s Proposed Budget for Fiscal Year 2013-14 for your review
and consideration. This document is the culmination of a comprehensive effort on the part of county staff from all
departments to develop a budget that recognizes future obligations, protects the county from potential Federal and
State impacts to the extent foreseeable at this time, and maintains critical services that benefit our citizens.
The Proposed Budget represents the County’s legal authority to spend, provides a guide to county programs and
services for next year and sets the stage for long-term sustainability of County operations. The Proposed Budget
serves as the interim spending plan until the Final Budget is adopted by the Board of Supervisors (Board) in
September. It funds services and activities deemed critical and necessary, providing an annual, cohesive
framework that reflects the Board’s policy direction and priorities. Additionally, the fiscal decisions contained within
this document adhere to the County Financial Policies as well as incorporate Board direction received during budget
workshops held over the last several months. Finally, the Proposed Budget reflects the dynamic nature of the
County service delivery model which continues to evolve in order to meet ongoing service demands within limited
available revenues.
Executive Summary
The FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget is balanced and continues to provide core services to our constituents and meet
important obligations to the Placer County community. In addition, the Proposed Budget uses realistic and probable
revenue estimates, and maintains appropriate reserves and contingencies. Unanticipated revenues received
following adoption of the Proposed Budget will be brought to the Board for consideration. It includes known impacts
from Federal and State changes which will be revisited at Final Budget.
The economy continues to improve albeit at a modest pace. Property Tax, the County’s largest discretionary
revenue source, has begun to increase due to a welcome rise in property values. Targeted revenues in some
departments are improving, primarily Public Safety and Health and Human Services. Due to the continued steady
hand of the Board and the ongoing commitment of departments to deliver the most cost effective services, Placer
County remains prepared and favorably positioned to respond to the slowly growing economy.
The Proposed Budget meets our immediate locally-driven challenges in addition to preparing to the greatest degree
possible for the years ahead. The Proposed Budget maintains operations and provides for the phased opening of
the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility in 2014. As we look ahead, we are well positioned to respond to ongoing challenges. Our success is tied to our continued resolve to balance long-term fiscal integrity with the
strategic distribution of limited resources that address operational and service needs. This includes demands
related to the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility, adapting to changing revenues and cost drivers, and
leveraging resources to best meet priorities of our residents.
Accomplishments
The FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget comes as I complete my first year as County Executive Officer. I continue to
marvel at the great assets that the Board, employees, and residents bring to Placer County. As I reflect back on the
year, I’d like to highlight a few significant accomplishments:
? Focus on Priorities and Communication: A key ingredient to establishing public and employee trust is clear
communication of our priorities and how we intend to achieve them. Throughout this past year, I have
focused on the identification and communication of County priorities, fostering an open dialogue among
Board members, Department Heads, county employees, and the residents and businesses we serve. This
model will continue to grow and shape our culture of engagement and innovation in the way we do
business. Paramount is the integration of accountability directly connected to priorities, transparency, and
meaningful results for the community.
? Phased Opening of South Placer Adult Correctional Facility: Maintaining the safety of our residents is a
core function of the County. With the completion of the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility, the County
has a great opportunity to begin transitioning from our antiquated 1940s minimum security facility in Auburn
to a more appropriate facility co-located with other criminal justice functions. The transition will also
provide for an 80-bed increase in capacity to accommodate 2011 public safety realignment (known as AB
109) impacts on the inmate population.
? Multi-year Budget Framework: Long-term success for any public or private organization requires a keen
sense of its strengths and awareness and mitigation of the risks and challenges it faces. To best identify
and mitigate risks and challenges in the years ahead, we have developed a multi-year budget framework
based on County priorities that identifies policy choices for sustainability of operations. This is consistent
with Board direction, aligned to our County Financial Policies, and focused on delivering prioritized and
stable services to our community.
? Comprehensive Approach to Infrastructure: Infrastructure is an integral component of maintaining
sustainable service levels, supporting economic development, and meeting resident needs. It includes
construction and maintenance of buildings, trails, bridges, roads, information technology, open space,
sewer, water and other utilities and fire, each of which has its own considerations for planning and
prioritizing projects. Over this past year, we have worked collaboratively with departments to develop a
comprehensive approach to prioritizing infrastructure projects. This effort is nearing its final stages and will
be followed by the development of a funding framework that fits within long-term sustainability of operations.
It is intended to adapt to best fit Board and community needs as new projects are identified.
County Executive Office Initiatives
? Economic Development: As the economy gradually emerges from the recession, the County is partnering
with local and regional efforts to promote business investment and job growth.
? Priority Based Budgeting: A phased implementation approach focusing on increasing public communication
and transparency, and prioritizing services and programs based on results and within the sustainable level
of ongoing funding and resources.
? Employee Engagement: Excellent and innovative service delivery relies upon employees that are highly
motivated and connected with the residents and communities we proudly serve.
Approach to the FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget
Essential to the planning and development process for the Proposed Budget has been the guidance, participation,
and leadership of the Board. Staff worked within the Board-established County Financial Policies as well as guidance from the Board through February and March budget workshops. The Proposed Budget balances many
competing priorities continuing to provide critical services to county residents within the available resources.
As in previous years, those charged with creating this document recognize that the county is in the business of
efficiently providing high quality services to the public. Pursuant to Board direction and adherence to financially
sound fiscal policies, the Proposed Budget implements effective service delivery given limited resources.
The Proposed Budget was developed within the multi-year budget framework directed by the Board at the March
12, 2013 meeting. The framework continues the path towards long term sustainability of operations, attempting to
identify the most reasonable balance between County priorities and constrained available revenues.
The Proposed Budget also includes a more targeted focus on communication to County residents and businesses.
There are many changes throughout this budget book to more directly communicate what we do and the compelling
public value to those we serve. This includes adding the Spotlight on Critical Issues that provides a brief summary
of major policy and operational issues facing the County, along with other key changes that are highlighted in the
Budget Overview chapter.
In summary, the FY 2013-14 Proposed Budget:
? Protects core operations, services, and programs.
? Continues to fund capital infrastructure projects prioritized by the Board.
? Maintains appropriate fiscal contingency and reserve levels.
Additional information about the Proposed Budget can be found in the Budget Overview and Department Chapters.
Conclusion
The staff and I appreciate the steadfast leadership of the Board and the responsive cooperation of all our
departments, and look forward to working with the Board as we transition to the August Budget Workshops and
refine the Budget for further Board consideration of the Final Budget in September.