Introduction
The County Executive Office presents Placer County’s Proposed Budget for Fiscal Year 2014-15 for your review
and consideration. This document is the culmination of a comprehensive effort on the part of county staff from all
departments to develop a budget that recognizes future obligations, protects the county from potential Federal and
State impacts to the extent foreseeable at this time, and maintains critical services that benefit our citizens.
The Proposed Budget represents the County’s legal authority to spend, provides a comprehensive guide to county
programs and services for next year and sets the stage for long-term sustainability of County operations. The
Proposed Budget serves as the interim spending plan until the Final Budget is adopted by the Board of Supervisors
(Board) in September. It funds services and activities deemed critical and necessary, providing an annual, cohesive
framework that reflects the Board’s policy direction and priorities. Additionally, the fiscal decisions contained within
this document adhere to the County Financial Policies as well as incorporate any Board direction received over the
course of the year. Finally, the Proposed Budget reflects the dynamic nature of the County service delivery model
which continues to evolve in order to meet ongoing service demands within limited available revenues.
Executive Summary
The FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget is balanced and continues to provide core services to our constituents and meet
important obligations to the Placer County community. In addition, the Proposed Budget uses realistic and probable
revenue estimates, and maintains appropriate reserves and contingencies. Unanticipated revenues received,
changes to carryover fund balances, and other technical revisions following adoption of the Proposed Budget will be
brought to the Board for consideration with the Final Budget in September. Finally, the Proposed Budget
transparently aligns costs of delivering the array of countywide programs and services to departments as a means
to continue the phased transition towards a priority based budgeting concept.
The economy continues to modestly improve in the wake of the “Great Recession.” Property Tax, the County’s
largest discretionary revenue source, continues to increase due to the recovery in property values. Targeted
revenue sources in some departments continue to improve, primarily Public Safety and Health and Human
Services. Due to the continued steady hand of the Board and the ongoing commitment of departments to deliver
the most cost effective services, Placer County remains prepared and favorably positioned to respond to the
modestly improving economy.
The Proposed Budget meets our immediate locally-driven challenges in addition to preparing to the greatest degree
possible for the years ahead. The Proposed Budget maintains operations and provides for the phased opening of
the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility in June 2014. As we look ahead, we are well positioned to respond to
ongoing challenges. Our success is tied to our continued resolve to balance long-term fiscal integrity with the
strategic distribution of limited resources that address operational and service needs. This includes demands
related to the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility, adapting to anticipated changes in revenues and cost drivers,
and leveraging resources to best meet priorities of our residents.
Accomplishments
The FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget comes as I complete my second year as County Executive Officer. I continue to
marvel at the dedication that the Board, employees, and residents bring to Placer County. As I reflect back on the
year, I’d like to highlight a few significant accomplishments:
? Focus on Priorities and Communication: A key ingredient to establishing public and employee trust is clear
communication about our priorities and how we intend to achieve them. Throughout this past year, I have
focused on the identification and communication of County priorities, fostering an open dialogue among
Board members, Department Heads, county employees, and the residents and businesses we serve. This
model will continue to grow and shape our culture of engagement and innovation in the way we do
business. Paramount is the integration of accountability directly connected to priorities, transparency, and
meaningful results for the community.
? Phased Opening of South Placer Adult Correctional Facility: Ensuring the safety of our residents is a core
function of the County. With the completion of the South Placer Adult Correctional Facility, the County has
a great opportunity to begin transitioning from our antiquated 1940s facility in Auburn to a more modern
facility co-located with other criminal justice functions. The transition will provide for an 80-bed increase in
capacity to accommodate 2011 public safety realignment (known as AB 109) impacts on the inmate
population.
? Upgraded County Issuer Credit Rating: The ability for the County to secure debt financing at a
comparatively low borrowing cost in a competitive market is highly dependent on the issuer credit rating
assigned by an independent rating agency. In March 2014, an effort led by the Treasurer Tax Collector,
Auditor Controller and County Executive Offices enabled the County to receive an upgrade by Standard and
Poor’s of its Issuer Credit Rating to “AA+” during the course of completing a refinancing for two series of
outstanding Certificates of Participation. In the upgrade analysis, the County was noted for its broad and
diverse economy; financial flexibility and liquidity; budgetary performance and financial management
conditions; and debt and contingent liabilities profile.
? Focus on Organizational Fiscal Health: Long-term success for any public or private organization requires a
concentrated focus on maintaining fiscal health by demonstrating how resources are managed, used and
optimized. During the last year, the County has demonstrated its focus on fiscal health through continued
development of a multi-year budget framework, refined alignment of all costs to applicable departments,
performing budget-to-actual variance analysis, funding reserves and contingencies as policy levels, and
using one-time revenue sources for one-time expenditures.
? Infrastructure and Capital Planning and Funding: Infrastructure and capital planning and funding is an
integral component of maintaining sustainable service levels, supporting economic development, and
meeting resident needs. It includes construction and maintenance of buildings, trails, bridges, roads,
information technology, open space, sewer, water and other utilities and fire, each of which has its own
considerations for planning and prioritizing projects. Over this past year, the County’s Infrastructure and
Investment Committee and newly formed Capital Projects Team have worked with departments to develop
a Multi-Year Capital Plan that provides a comprehensive analysis of current and future capital and
infrastructure needs. The Multi-Year Capital Plan is provided as an accompanying document to the
FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget.
? Phased Transition to Priority Based Budgeting: Adjusting to the “new normal” of limited budgetary
resources requires a well-thought-out plan for how to maximize the efficacy of competing funding
allocations. Priority Based Budgeting provides a comprehensive approach to the entire organization,
identifying every program and service offered, the costs for these programs and services, and ultimately
allocating resources based on the relevance of each program and service towards achieving a stated
priority or goal. During this past year, we have worked collaboratively with all departments towards defining
programs and services provided to county constituencies in preparation for alignment of costs and expected
results of said programs and services during the upcoming fiscal year.
County Executive Office Initiatives
? Economic Development: As the economy continues to emerge from the recession, the County is partnering
with local and regional efforts to promote business investment and job growth.
? Priority Based Budgeting: A phased implementation approach focusing on increasing public communication
and transparency, and prioritizing services and programs based on results and within the sustainable level
of ongoing funding and resources.
? Employee Engagement: Excellent and innovative service delivery relies upon employees that are highly
motivated and connected with the residents and communities we proudly serve.
Approach to the FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget
Essential to the planning and development process for the Proposed Budget has been the guidance, participation,
and leadership of the Board. Staff worked within the Board-established County Financial Policies as well as
guidance from the Board provided throughout the year. The Proposed Budget balances competing priorities to
provide critical services to county residents within the available resources. Those charged with creating this
document recognize that the county is in the business of efficiently providing high quality services to the public.
The Proposed Budget was developed within the multi-year budget framework directed by the Board at the March
12, 2013 meeting. The framework continues the path towards long term sustainability of operations, attempting to
balance between County priorities, constrained available resources and anticipated future impacts of known
significant cost drivers.
The Proposed Budget continues to build upon last year’s more targeted focus on communication to County
residents and businesses. Accompanying updates to the Spotlight on Critical Issues and Budget Overview chapter
is a countywide inventory of programs and services and a stand-alone Multi-Year Capital Plan supplement to the
budget document.
In summary, the FY 2014-15 Proposed Budget:
? Protects core operations, services, and programs.
? Continues to fund capital infrastructure projects prioritized by the Board.
? Maintains appropriate fiscal contingency and reserve levels.
Additional information about the Proposed Budget can be found in the Budget Overview and Department Chapters.
Conclusion
The staff and I appreciate the steadfast leadership of the Board and the responsive cooperation of all our
departments, and look forward to working with the Board as we refine the FY 2014-15 Budget for Board
consideration of the Final Budget in September.