Attached for your consideration and approval is my FY 15/16 recommended budget
containing $5.27 billion in appropriations necessary for county spending authority
beginning July 1, 2015. Of that, $3.04 billion, or 58 percent, is for general fund
operations. Included in that is $738.3 million in discretionary general fund spending, of
which public protection receives 67.7 percent. The recommended budget allocates $20
million for general fund contingency.
Immediately after approval of the recommended budget, I recommend opening budget
hearings to take testimony from county departments and members of the public
regarding additional policy issues and funding priorities. After the Board closes budget
hearings and directs staff on those issues and priorities, I suggest further discussion in
a July budget workshop, and then would plan to return in September with further
recommendations for adopting the final budget once FY 14/15 year-end results are
known.
The resource constraints and escalating costs presented in this budget place the county
at a crossroads with respect to long-term strategic objectives. Since discretionary
revenues peaked in 2006, many departments have sacrificed greatly to maintain
essential service levels with reduced general fund support, and will continue to do so for
the foreseeable future. Meanwhile, nearly all the growth in discretionary revenue that
has occurred since the recovery began has been and will be channeled into public
safety and related functions. I am concerned that staying on such a path long-term will
perpetuate an imbalance in essential county services that will place the county at a
disadvantage. The county's investments in public safety have been ongoing. It is now
time to look at the wider sphere of county responsibilities and rebalance our efforts.

The recommended budget reflects a number of positive notes. In May 2015, Fitch's
rating agency lifted its negative watch on the County of Riverside. This improved rating
outlook should lower debt service costs when the county sells bonds, as it did in the
bond offering on the East County Detention Center.
The Governor's May Revision indicates the county is likely to receive as much as $64.5
million in one-time revenue from a combination of back-due SB90 reimbursements
totaling $40.8 million and a $23.7 million fire credit in FY 15/16 to compensate the
county for amounts owed by four newly incorporated cities, of which the general fund
portion will be $20.3 million. While these revenues are welcome, both are one-time and
should not be seen as solutions to support ongoing operations. At most, they might be
a bridge to the extent stable growth in ongoing discretionary revenue might be projected
to meet that need within the next few years.
The FY 15/16 recommended budget also addresses a number of pressing fiscal
challenges. Discretionary revenues continue to increase modestly at a projected 6
percent, and reports from economists project increasing growth rates for several years
to come. However, even with cautiously optimistic growth assumptions over the next
several years, discretionary revenues are not projected to keep pace with the costs of
the Board's long-term commitments and mandates imposed on the county. Current
projections indicate ongoing discretionary revenue will fall short of already-planned
spending commitments in FY 15/16 and the subsequent two fiscal years, and that
structural balance is not achievable until FY 18/19.
While adopting more optimistic assumptions would yield additional discretionary
revenue, projected incremental gains would be modest and will not result in the tens of
millions necessary to address departments' requests. Adding to these constraints is the
fact that most growth in discretionary revenue projected over the next four years already
is committed to the Board's five-year master plan.
Cost pressures include negotiated labor increases and pension obligations coming into
full effect, raising liability coverage, internal service cost increases, correctional health
cost increases, and the ongoing impacts of AB109 public safety realignment and Prop.
47 re-sentencing cases. Per budget policies the Board approved at midyear, my office
instructed departments to absorb these cost increases and submit budgets on target.
Most complied, but not without sacrifice. A number of departments - including the
Sheriff, District Attorney, and Assessor -- project budget deficits. The Department of
Public Social Services projects caseload growth that might require additional
discretionary funding to meet growing service demands.
In total, there are requests for nearly $136 million above the allocated general fund
target levels, of which 52 percent is attributable to the Sheriff's department. Meeting
expectations to increase the patrol ratio to 1.2 officers per thousand population and fully
staff the soon-to-be-constructed East County Detention Center in time for a December

2017 projected opening date have placed great strain on the Sheriff's budget. Clearly,
cost containment is essential. The largest opportunity for that are the assumptions
driving the Sheriff's requests for funding to ramp up the patrol ratio and to staff fully the
East County Detention Center in time for a December 2017 opening date.
In May, the Board agreed to hold the patrol ratio at its present level of 1.04 officers per
thousand population in the unincorporated area. That change in policy helps resolve a
portion of the Sheriff's projected deficit. I continue to work closely with the Sheriff to
craft staffing and cost assumptions for the new detention center based on the actual
construction schedule and a phased opening that reflects the operational realities of
bringing a complex facility of its type online. I plan to return to the Board with
recommendations for the final budget that reflect such a phased strategy, and anticipate
we will be able to drop the Sheriff's immediate need for such funding significantly.
I anticipate a number of other departments will also wish to present their funding
concerns to the Board during budget hearings. These include needed funding for
services addressing child abuse, neglect, and sexual exploitation, protecting our fragile
elderly population, providing essential nutrition services for the homebound and
congregate meals at senior centers, keeping the San Jacinto animal shelter open, and
confronting the drug cartels' cultivation of marijuana in our communities. In addition,
years of deferring core technology and other county infrastructure needs is contributing
to inefficiencies, as evidenced by the equipment and technology needs at the medical
center.
Adapting to the permanent, ongoing reality of the county's restricted discretionary
revenues will require adopting leaner, more efficient approaches to managing these
scarce resources. It will require investment in core services that promote and enhance
quality of life across the entire community. However, I must also recommend caution
and restraint in using potential one-time revenues to fund ongoing operations, as doing
so will compound currently projected deficits and tie up all revenue growth realistically
foreseeable over the next three years. This would leave the county little flexibility to
address urgent unforeseen needs, and vulnerable in the event of an economic
downturn.
Consequently, I urge the Board to limit any extra funding for additional requests to only
the most essential to preserve mission-critical services to the community, and place the
majority into the reserve for budget stabilization. This will both add to the cushion that
will be necessary over the next three years until structural balance can be achieved,
and limit exacerbating that funding shortfall. I look forward to a healthy discussion
regarding these policy issues and priorities, and potential options for addressing them.
Finally, in February the Government Finance Officers Association of the United States
and Canada (GFOA) presented a Distinguished Budget Presentation Award to the

County of Riverside for its annual budget for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2014, a
copy of which is attached. In order to receive this award, a government unit must
publish a budget document that meets program criteria as a policy document, as an
operations guide, as a financial plan, and as a communications device. This award is
valid for a period of one year only. We believe our current budget continues to conform
to program requirements, and plan to submit a copy of the FY 15/16 final budget to
GFOA for their consideration again this year.
IT IS THEREFORE RECOMMENDED that the Board of Supervisors:
1) Approve the attached FY 15/16 recommended budget to be effective for the fiscal
year beginning July 1, 2015, including all appropriations and estimated revenues,
increases and decreases of obligated fund balance, Resolution No. 440-9001
modifying position levels as indicated in Schedule 20, and requests for fixed assets
in Schedules 21 and 22, and requests for vehicles in Schedule 23 contained therein;
2) Immediately thereafter, open budget hearings; and,
3) Tentatively schedule adoption of the final budget for early September 2015.