Attached is the FY 13/14 recommended budget for your consideration and approval.
This budget provides needed spending authority to begin the fiscal year that
commences July 1, 2013. My staff will begin to construct the final budget after you
conclude budget hearings. The final budget, to be adopted September 10, 2013, will
build upon the recommended budget before you, with adjustments at your direction.
The county has survived the "Great Recession." However, the recovery has been
sluggish. Discretionary revenue will increase next year for the first time since FY 07/08,
but only by three percent. To continue our recovery, it will be important to control cost
increases so that we can maintain the balance between Net County Cost (NCC) and
discretionary revenue. Fiscal prudence remains necessary regardless of optimistic
forecasts by the economists at California State University, Fullerton, and Beacon
Economics of growth in the local housing market and unemployment rates sinking to
levels not experienced since 2008. Fiscal restraint is essential as we work toward
regaining structural balance while producing solutions to meet the Board's objectives.
Major initiatives next year include implementing the Affordable Care Act, continued
management of prison realignment under AB 1 09, construction of the East County
Detention Center, and implementing the Board's public safety initiatives. To the extent
possible, we must place a high priority on rebuilding depleted reserves. The Executive
Office will present a five-year plan to achieve these objectives.
There has been some concern about the financial challenges the Riverside County
Regional Medical Center faces. We will recommend the commitment of additional
general fund support once Huron Consultants, LLC has completed its evaluation of the
financial and operational performance of the hospital. This report is expected before the
final budget goes to the Board in September.

Although no general fund support was cut from departments, they will absorb all labor
increases, net of pension savings, without additional general fund support in FY 13/14.
Discretionary spending will increase by $17 million ove·r FY 12/13. About $15 million of
this increase is for ongoing operating costs. FY 13/14 ongoing, discretionary revenue is
projected to increase enough to cover these additional costs and allow us to maintain
our structurally balanced budget. This structural balance is fragile however, as we must
still determine if general funds will be needed to address the hospital's fiscal challenges,
public safety departments' ability to absorb salary increases, and the unforeseen
impacts of AB 109, among other issues.
During FY 12/13, we established a budget stabilization account to set aside one-time
revenue to fund expected shortages in funding for short-term costs. To date, we have
set aside $34 million in this account. The FY 13/14 budget uses $14 million of this setaside
to cover one-time costs.
Over the last year, we continued our drive for greater operating efficiencies countywide,
and searched for opportunities to achieve more with less. Over the next year, we will
continue information technology consolidation efforts at a measured pace, with
increased transparency for the county departments affected. Such changes will likely be
difficult at times, but are essential to achieve operational efficiency and fiscal
soundness.
The budget summary on the following pages details the differences between the
adopted FY 12/13 budget and the recommended FY 13/14 budget. The format of the
budget has been updated to be consistent with standards outlined by the Government
Finance Officers Association (GFOA) to allow both improved ease of use and
transparency within the budget.
IT IS THEREFORE RECOMMENDED that the Board of Supervisors:
1) Approve the enclosed FY 13/14 recommended budget effective July 1, 2013,
including all appropriations and estimated revenues, reserves and designations,
Resolution No. 440-8927 modifying position levels as indicated in Schedule 20,
and requests for fixed assets and vehicles contained herein;
2) Tentatively schedule adoption of the final budget for Tuesday, September 10,
2013; and,
3) Open budget hearings.


The FY 13/14 recommended budget is structurally balanced – although this
balance is fragile. Ongoing operating costs are supported with ongoing funding
sources. Funds set aside for budget stabilization will be used to fund $14 million in
one-time costs.
? Commitments for economic uncertainty and disaster relief total about 24 percent of
discretionary revenue ($140 million).
? No ongoing general funds are appropriated in the recommended budget for new
capital projects. Previously approved high priority projects will continue.
? The amount of discretionary revenue available for budget purposes showed growth
for the first time since FY 07/08. Discretionary revenue projections grew from $569
million in FY 12/13 to $586 million in FY 13/14, an increase of $17 million or 3
percent.
? Discretionary-revenue estimates were based on data available when the budget
was being prepared. Preliminary estimates from the Assessor indicate the
assessment roll will increase by 3.5 percent. Any changes to this estimate will
require additional adjustments to the final budget recommendations.
? General fund carryover at year-end, excluding reserves, was budgeted at $30
million. Additional beginning fund balance may be available when the final budget
goes to the Board for adoption in September 2013.
? The effect of state budget issues on the county budget remains difficult to predict.
Known impacts are reflected in this budget. The county will address any additional
impacts during the fiscal year.
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Countywide, the FY 13/14 recommended budget contains about $4.7 billion in appropriations,
a decrease of almost 6 percent from FY 12/13. The discretionary portion of the budget
includes $630 million in general fund expenditures. Discretionary revenue to fund this
spending totals $586 million, a 3 percent increase ($17 million) from last year’s budget.
Revenue increased primarily because of growth in property tax values. The difference
between discretionary spending and revenue is covered by general fund carryover balance
($30 million) and the budget stabilization set-aside ($14 million).
As in previous years, the Board requested a budget impact workshop. The workshop took
place in April and included testimony from public safety departments and the Riverside
County Regional Medical Center. In May, the independent economists hired by the county
provided the Board members with positive news about the area’s economic recovery. The
toughest of choices are behind the county but fiscally conservative decisions about spending
7
County of Riverside – Recommended Budget
Fiscal Year
2013/14
INTRODUCTION
continue to be a key factor in the county’s full fiscal recovery. A more comprehensive
overview of the FY 13/14 budget is available on page 37.
FEDERAL AND STATE BUDGET IMPACTS
Federal Sequestration
Sequestration, the process of applying automatic spending reductions to defense and nondefense
functions, was incorporated into the federal government’s FY 13 budget process.
The cuts began in March 2013 and will affect certain county departments during FY 13/14.
Impacted departments continue to evaluate the effect of sequestration. Approximately
$220,000 was included the Contributions to Other Funds budget to offset the anticipated
revenue loss for Office on Aging’s senior nutritional meals services. The Executive Office will
monitor and provide updates as appropriate.
State Impacts on the County Budget
The realignment of the criminal justice system continues to have significant impacts on
counties. In October 2011, our county assumed responsibility for the supervision of state
prisoners released to the county under the terms of realignment. This includes all monetary
allocations to the county for all realignment services as well as direct allocations to the
District Attorney, the Public Defender, and the Superior Court. Data submitted by county
departments indicate realignment allocations have been sufficient to provide planned
services to date and no additional general fund support is needed. It is impossible to quantify
the cost to the community for the early release of prisoners caused by realignment. There is
a potential future financial impact as the number of inmates returning to the county increase
and the county must expand public safety programs to protect the community.
In the state’s May budget revision, the Governor proposes providing additional funding to
county probation departments that demonstrate success in reducing the numbers of adult
felony probationers returning to state prison for new crimes or violating parole. The
increased funding would support our county probation department’s efforts to reduce
recidivism and find alternatives to incarceration. The May revise also includes a proposal
that would authorize the state prison system to house long-term offenders, provided the
county agrees to accept an equivalent average daily population of short-term offenders. The
Sheriff has indicated this would not reduce the risk of a negative future financial impact to the
county because the number of beds for prisoners would remain unchanged.
The county will continue to monitor state activities and provide updates as appropriate.
ACTIONS TAKEN TO DATE TO OVERCOME BUDGET CHALLENGES
This budget is conservative and recognizes difficult economic conditions. Steps taken over
the last few years to address some of the challenges include:

? Negotiating increased employee participation in retirement costs
? Negotiating a second retirement tier for new employees
? Implementing Board-approved furloughs
? Implementing countywide cost controls
? Reducing the workforce through early retirement
? Reducing the county’s vehicle fleet
? Delaying or canceling capital projects
? Improving business processes and cash management through Board policies
? Organizing committees to evaluate pension policies and recommend needed reforms
? Operational department restructuring that minimizes costs while promoting efficiencies
? County departments absorbing all labor increases for FY 13/14 without additional
general fund support