Attached is the FY 14/15 recommended budget for your consideration and approval. This
budget provides needed spending authority to begin the fiscal year that commences July 1,
2014. The past few annual budgets have included a mix of adversity, progress and change.
The county has responded with a continued commitment to being business-friendly and
focusing on residents' needs and the community's health. My staff will begin constructing the
final budget after budget hearings conclude today. On September 3, 2014, we will hold a
budget impact workshop to discuss the recommended budget's implications. The final budget,
set to be adopted September 23, 2014, will be built upon the recommended budget and any
adjustments you direct staff to make.
On May 6, economists from California State University, Fullerton, and Beacon Economics
presented optimistic forecasts for long-term growth in Riverside County. The residential and
nonresidential property markets continue to improve while unemployment rates sink to levels
consistent with strong economic recovery. Hinderliter, de Llamas & Associates, the county's
sales-tax consultant, confirmed the economists' predictions for increased sales-tax revenue.
While economic projections are rosy, we should remain fiscally prudent. Restraint is essential
as we work to regain balance between ongoing spending and revenue, all while developing
solutions to meet Board objectives.
Recent decisions by the state have reshaped the way the county delivers essential public-safety
services. The recommended budget includes an additional $33.9 million to fund Boardapproved
initiatives mostly related to the direct impacts of these decisions. These initiatives will
be funded with $12.1 million in general-fund discretionary revenue and $21.8 million in Prop.172
public safety sales-tax allocations. We continue to formally address the multi-year impacts of
these decisions during fiscal year quarterly budget updates.
During FY 14/15 we will continue to contend with other fiscal challenges countywide.
Departments were expected to absorb increased labor and operational costs without additional
general-fund support. While most departments proposed budgets that remained relatively
unchanged from the prior fiscal year, despite rising costs, many report that service levels
continue to deteriorate due to reduced revenue in the last five years. The budget impact
workshop in September will explore the effects that departments expect the recommended 

budget targets will have on service levels. Should the Board find it necessary to increase
authorized appropriations at that time, the budget stabilization account is available. Using those
funds will cause spending to further exceed revenue.
We continue to work aggressively to improve the fiscal conditions at Riverside County Regional
Medical Center (RCRMC). Huron is working with RCRMC staff to implement additional
initiatives expected to meet or exceed Huron's mid-range target of $55.5 million in recurring
annual benefits. The current budget reflects hospital spending that does not exceed revenue
that is generated. The hospital will likely require additional spending authorization to maintain
acceptable service levels. Once the picture of improvements to the hospital's financial health is
clearer, we will return with an updated budget, as well as a plan for addressing any additional
challenges.
Even with those challenges, we are making progress toward becoming a provider of choice in
the region. In addition to obtaining better operation efficiencies and services improvements at
RCRMC, we continue working to strengthen affiliations with university and health-provider
partners.
Other progress is being made countywide. The Emergency Operations Center in Indio has
been completed as has our Public Safety Enterprise Communication (PSEC) public-safety radio
project. The Sheriff is also reporting that there will be one sworn officer per 1,000 citizens in the
unincorporated area by the end of the fiscal year. As in previous years, we will continue to seek
operating efficiencies countywide and ways to achieve more with less. We also will continue to
manage major initiatives such as the Affordable Health Care Act, prison realignment under AB
109, and the East County Detention Center and Indio Law Center construction.
The budget summary on the following pages details the differences between the adopted FY
13/14 budget and the recommended FY 14/15 budget. The budget format continues to be
updated for consistency with standards outlined in the Government Finance Officers Association
(GFOA), which allows improved transparency and improved ease of use.
IT IS THEREFORE RECOMMENDED that the Board of Supervisors:
1) Approve the enclosed FY 14/15 recommended budget effective July 1, 2014, including
all appropriations and estimated revenues, reserves and designations, Resolution No.
440-8967 modifying position levels as indicated in Schedule 20, and requests for fixed
assets and vehicles contained herein;
2) Tentatively schedule Budget Impact Workshops for Wednesday, September 3, 2014;
3) Tentatively schedule adoption of the final budget for Tuesday, September 23, 2014; and,
4) Open budget hearings.

In the general fund unassigned fund balance, commitments for economic uncertainty ($124.7 million)
and budget stabilization ($53.9 million) total about 29 percent of discretionary revenue. The
commitment for disaster relief totals $15 million.
? No ongoing general funds are appropriated in the recommended budget for new capital projects.
Previously approved high priority projects will continue.
? General fund contingency is about 3.2 percent of discretionary revenue ($20 million). If additional
funding becomes available during the fiscal year, appropriations for contingency may be increased.
? The amount of discretionary revenue available for budget purposes continues to show growth.
Discretionary revenue projections grew from $590.7 million in FY 13/14 to $623.5 million in FY 14/15,
an increase of $32.8 million or 5.6 percent.
? Discretionary-revenue estimates were based on data available when the budget was being prepared.
Preliminary estimates from the Assessor indicate the assessment roll will increase by at least 4.5
percent. Any changes to this estimate may require additional adjustments to the final budget
recommendations.
? General fund carryover at year-end, excluding reserves, was budgeted at $25.6 million. Additional
beginning fund balance may be available when the final budget goes to the Board for adoption in
September 2014.
? The effect of state budget issues on the county budget remains difficult to predict. Known impacts are
reflected in this budget. The county will address any additional impacts during the fiscal year.
GENERAL BUDGET OVERVIEW
Countywide Revenue and Spending
Countywide, the FY 14/15 recommended budget contains about $4.8 billion in appropriations, an increase of 4.2
percent from the FY 13/14 projected spending. Most of this spending (86.4%) is funded by revenue sources that
are restricted to the purpose for which it was collected ($4.1 billion). The growth in countywide spending is
primarily attributable to funding countywide projects in progress (general government capital projects, flood
projects, and transportation projects) as well as expected increases in expenditures related to public assistance
and public protection.In May, the independent economists hired by the county provided the Board members with positive news about the
area’s economic recovery. The toughest of choices are behind the county but fiscally conservative decisions about
spending continue to be a key factor in the county’s full fiscal recovery. A more comprehensive overview of the FY
14/15 budget is available on page 37.
General Fund - Discretionary Revenue and Spending
The discretionary portion of the budget includes $646.8 million in general fund expenditures. Discretionary revenue
to fund this spending totals $623.5 million, a 5.6 percent increase ($32.8 million) from last year’s budget. Revenue
increased primarily because of growth in property tax values, sales tax, and the landfill lease agreements. The
difference between discretionary spending and revenue is covered by general fund carryover balance ($25.6
million).

Compared to the previous two fiscal years, regular filled position totals have remained at reduced levels for the
general government function. Public Protection positions have grown because of the Board’s direction to return
public safety staffing to previous levels. Public Assistance and Health and Sanitation have experienced growth due
to increases in non-county funding sources for positions and increase demand for services in the health related
function.
STATE IMPACTS ON THE COUNTY BUDGET
Criminal Justice System Realignment
The realignment of the criminal justice system continues to have significant impacts on counties. In October 2011,
our county assumed responsibility for the supervision of state prisoners released to the county under the terms of
realignment. This includes all monetary allocations to the county for all realignment services as well as direct
allocations to the District Attorney, the Public Defender, and the Superior Court. It is impossible to quantify the cost
to the community for the early release of prisoners caused by realignment. There is a potential future financial
impact as the number of inmates returning to the county increase and the county must expand public safety
programs to protect the community.
May Revise
In the state’s proposed budget released in January 2014, a multiyear plan developed that balanced the state
budget, paid down budgetary debt from past years, saved for a rainy day, and increased spending for education,
the environment, public safety, public works, affordable health care, and CalWORKs.
The May revise of the proposed budget reflects a $2.4 billion increase in forecasted state revenue due to by higher
than expected personal income tax withholding, partnership income, and dividend income. Some of the changes to
the proposed budget that directly impact the county include additional funding for unanticipated increases in Medi-
Cal costs related to the Affordable Care Act, increases in drought management costs, and costs related to pension
obligations. The Governor also reiterated his commitment to pay down state debt by 2017-18 including an
additional $100 million to repay a portion of mandate reimbursement claims owed to counties, cities, and special
districts prior to 2004.
COUNTY VISION AND INITIATIVES - FY 14/15
The Executive Office continues to work with departments to increase operating efficiencies countywide. The
Executive Officer will continue to meet with department heads to address ongoing budget challenges and build
relationships with neighboring cities and counties to work toward regional solutions. Below is a summary of some
new and ongoing initiatives that promote the county’s commitment to being business-friendly and focusing on
residents’ needs and the community’s health during FY 14/15:
Goal One – A Business Friendly County
Promotion of a “Business Friendly” Riverside County
Because businesses today enjoy great flexibility in deciding where to locate, Riverside County should be even more
welcoming to business of all sizes. As businesses thrive in the county, they create quality jobs and strengthen the

foundation of the local economy. The Executive Office and county departments are exploring ways to interact even
more with businesses and meet their needs.
Goal Two – A Citizen Centric County
Organizational Restructuring for Economies of Scale
Obtaining economies of scale allows the county to better use tax dollars paid by citizens. To date, corporate
restructuring efforts have reorganized the Community Health Agency. The Executive Office will continue to identify
opportunities for cost-saving restructuring.
Riverside County Information Technology Service Consolidation
The Consolidation Project centralizes County IT resources with the objective to realize savings in technology costs,
hardware maintenance and support, enterprise solutions, and efficiencies in services through a pooling of
resources and training. The project is divided into three phases: Phase 1 – Staffing Consolidation, Phase 2 –
Infrastructure Consolidation, and Phase 3 – Applications Consolidation. Phase 1 is at completion and RCIT has
progressed into Phase 2.
The consolidation of IT services is expected to improve constituent and customer access to county services and
information by consolidating the skills and talents of county information technology professionals, reducing the cost
and complexity of the county’s computing environment through a more streamlined core infrastructure, and
adopting business tools that will improve IT access, reliability, consistency throughout the organization.
East County Detention Center Construction
As part of a multi-phase public safety project in Indio that included a new emergency operations center and law
center, the new Eastern Riverside County Detention Center (ECDC) will replace the Indio Jail, triple the number of
inmate beds, and employ a few hundred people once fully operational. It will be located across the street from the
Larson Justice Center, which is logistically important for transporting inmates to and from court.
The new detention center is expected to help ease overcrowding caused by AB 109 -- the Public Safety
Realignment Act of 2011 which allows "non-serious, non-violent" offenders convicted of felonies unrelated to sex
crimes to serve their sentences in local detention facilities, rather than state prison. Reducing overcrowding and
keeping offenders jailed for their full sentences will promote a safer community. In December 2013, Riverside
County is moving ahead with its plans to expand the area’s jail facilities by approving the tentative ECDC spending
plan and the contractor that would complete demolition work.
Public Defender Building Remodel
In May 2010, the Board committed to remodel the former District Attorney building for the Public Defender’s use.
Despite unexpected fiscal challenges, including the need for seismic retrofits, the project is expected to be
completed November 2014.
Indio Emergency Operation Center Completion
Construction on the new Emergency Operations Center in Indio started July 2013 and was completed in May 2014.
The new Emergency Operations Center replaced the 14,400-square-foot former Indio sheriff’s station. The $11.1
million project added a beneficial function to a county-owned facility that sat vacant since the sheriff’s department
moved to the Thermal Sheriff’s Station. Previously, the emergency center was housed in the basement of the
County Administrative Center in the Riverside. Relocating the emergency operations center from a constricted
basement will also enable the use of cell phones and the most up-to-date emergency response equipment.
Indio Law Center Construction
Construction on the new Law Center in Indio started in early 2014 and is expected to be completed in early 2015.
The three-story, 90,000-square-foot facility will house the District Attorney, Public Defender, County Counsel, and
other related tenants at the corner of Highway 111 and Jackson Street in Indio. It will also be home to a county law
library.
Public Safety Enterprise Communication (PSEC) Project Completion
The successful completion of the PSEC project was a cooperative effort between the county’s Sheriff and Fire
departments, the Economic Development Agency (EDA), the county Executive Office, and the Riverside County
Information Technology (RCIT) department. The new communication system expanded coverage and added radio
links to other agencies that will help protect the public and public safety officers.
California Forward’s Partnership for Community Excellence
California Forward’s Partnership for Community Excellence selected Riverside County as one of three counties to
participate in a three-year effort to build capacity for data driven systems, improve governance through cross
system work, and find ways to reduce any negative impacts of public safety realignment. The county expects that
working with California Forward departments will strengthen the culture for data-based decision making. This
includes regular evaluation, implementation of successful alternatives to incarceration, and exploration of ways to
improve public safety outcomes - especially those that reduce the recidivism rate. California Forward is applying
for grant funding so there will be no additional costs to the county general fund.
Goal Three – A Healthy County
Riverside County Regional Medical Center (RCRMC) Initiatives and Operational Restructuring
In May 2013, the Board approved the execution of an agreement with Huron Consultants, LLC. The consultant
continues to work with hospital staff to implement additional initiatives that are expected to meet or exceed the
consultant’s mid-range target of $55.5 million in recurring annual benefits. RCRMC personnel also continue to
evaluate and restructure hospital processes to obtain operational efficiencies that will result in savings.
The current budget reflects hospital spending that does not exceed revenue that is generated. The hospital will
likely require additional spending authorization to maintain acceptable service levels. Once the picture of
improvements to the hospital’s financial health is clearer, RCRMC will return with an updated budget, as well as a
plan for addressing any additional challenges.
Promotion of a Health Community Initiative
The county intends to use partnerships, policies, systems and initiatives to improve the residents’ health and
promote livable communities. Baseline data will be assembled to identify strengths and weakness. An evaluation
framework that is flexible and relevant will be developed and used to measure progress. Removing barriers and
providing tools for individuals and families to manage their health will contribute to a healthier population.
Thrive Across America Challenge
In an effort to combat the chronic health conditions among county employees, the county launched the Kaiser
Permanente Thrive Across America program in October 2013. The online program promotes an active lifestyle by
challenging county employees to aim for at least 30 minutes of physical activity a day, five days a week. Physical
activity minutes are recorded in the online system and participants travel from Maine to Hawaii along a virtual route.
The route includes more than 50 of the nation's most treasured outdoor attractions through vivid pictures and
detailed descriptions. Accessing the Thrive Across America website provided lifestyle goal-setting guides, health
tips and articles, healthy recipes and fun competition among the teams formed by county employees.
The first eight week challenge ended December 2013 with more than 3,800 employees registered and 325 teams
formed. More than 5.5 million minutes of physical activity were logged by county employees. The second 8-week
Thrive Across America challenge ended in May 2014. Almost 5,400 employees registered and formed more than
350 teams. An impressive 8.3 million minutes of physical activity was logged.


