One year ago this was a very different County of San Diego. As we look ahead, I
am reminded of the saying that, “the more things change, the more they remain the
same.”
The past fiscal year has brought the County an evolution in leadership, unprecedented
new responsibilities as the State of California continues to reshape the way
counties deliver essential services, and an economy no longer in free fall - even the landscape of the historic
1930s-era County Administration Center is getting an overhaul. That we operate in an environment of
constant change has never been more apparent.
As we stand poised to begin a new fiscal year, the County of San Diego remains confident in our ability
to overcome the challenges ahead, thanks to the sound leadership of the Board of Supervisors and a
steadfast commitment to the proven success of the General Management System as our guide to running
an efficient, effective, award-winning government. With the County's Strategic Plan charting the course,
we also rely upon the vision for community health, safety and well-being laid out in the strategies of Live
Well, San Diego!
Accordingly, the CAO Recommended Operational Plan for Fiscal Years 2013-15 reflects modest
growth, primarily from the addition of staff to address new responsibilities of counties in the areas of public
safety and health, as well as increasing retirement costs. The recommended operational plan totals $4.97
billion, an increase of 2.5% over the prior fiscal year, and includes 16,601 staff years, representing 3.7%
growth in the County workforce.
Yet it is not the size of the County's budget that matters, but rather how we plan to use these public
dollars to serve and improve the region which we call home, and to position the County for continued
excellence in the decades to come.
This Operational Plan includes the County's response to new challenges. We continue to advance a
coordinated strategy to keep communities safe in the new paradigm of County responsibility for criminal
offenders with the implementation of Assembly Bill 109, Public Safety Realignment (2011). The County has
been a Statewide model of collaboration and leadership in this area. Also, as the nation looks toward the
implementation of healthcare reform through the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the
County is increasing capacity to manage the transition of low-income children from the State's Healthy
Families to Medi-Cal health insurance plans.
We also look forward to new opportunities. The County continues to earn grant funding for innovative
programs to improve service to the public, such as the Community Based Care Transitions Program which
seeks to reduce costs while improving outcomes for patients with chronic health conditions. And, we'll
ensure excellence in facilities to serve future generations by maintaining commitment to the County's capital
program through improvements to trails, parks and libraries across the County and opening critical
new facilities including the expanded Women's Detention Facility and the East Mesa Detention Re-Entry
and Rehabilitation Facility.
This Operational Plan also maintains the County's commitment to excellence and efficiency in carrying
out our continued responsibilities to taxpayers. First and foremost we will maintain the fiscal discipline and
prudent use of resources that have earned the County strong credit ratings year after year. We will maintain
our commitment to the highest standards of service, continually improving our business for responsiveness
to customer needs such as the reorganization of the County's land use process and creation of
the new Department of Planning and Development Services, as envisioned by the Board of Supervisors.
And we'll continue supporting growth in the skills of employees and progress on the journey toward wellness,
never losing focus on our organizational culture of integrity and ethical conduct.
It is the County's hallmark of stability and fiscal discipline, combined with our increasing ability to
adapt, improve and innovate that are reflected in the goals we've set for the coming year. Looking further
out, the Fiscal Year 2013-14 budget also prepares the County to address continually growing retirement
costs while maintaining the ability to face the challenges that lie ahead.
For the County, as in life, change is inevitable. What will never waver is the County of San Diego's
commitment to excellence in all that we do for the good of the people we serve. I invite you to read more
about the County's plans for continued excellence and innovation in the upcoming fiscal year included
throughout this document.