Throughout the last fiscal year, the County has reinforced our commitment to
maintaining the legacy of fiscal stability and operational excellence. When you
stop and think about how County services connect with so many parts of residents'
lives, it is inspiring. County employees are involved with and care about the
community we serve. From disaster preparedness to public guardianship, voting,
recreational programs, inspections, child support, foster care and much more, the
County remains committed to upholding public trust by conducting the public's
business with excellence and integrity.
In the coming year, the County will embark on an effort to make all County services
world class. This audacious goal will not happen overnight. The journey starts with the vision of a County
that is safe, healthy and thriving. It continues with the County's ongoing efforts to provide public services
that build strong and sustainable communities.
What do we mean by world class? Many County projects and services already are reaching this standard
of excellence. For instance, the Live Well San Diego ten-year strategy for regional health, safety and wellbeing
was featured in Forbes magazine. Its livewellsd.org website educates the community about the
power of collective impact using five areas of influence and ten indicators of health across the county,
state and nation. And the County's implementation of the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (ACA) continues with a new call center in place and increased staffing to help residents access
needed health coverage. The County's responsibilities in the era of public safety realignment have seen
the use of evidence-based practices connecting offenders to behavioral health and substance abuse
treatment services, along with vocational training for rehabilitation and reduced recidivism.
When the community visits the County Administration Center in the days ahead, a beautiful new Waterfront
Park will greet them, in place of decades-old asphalt parking lots. Creating this open space around
the historic 1930s-era building provides the public and employees with generations of enjoyment and
well-being. This project is just one example of the County's commitment to upholding the highest standards
of excellence in public facilities. This past fiscal year, the Board of Supervisors broke ground on a
new fire station in Boulevard where the County's volunteer firefighters will work alongside their counterparts
from the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE). The Rancho San Diego
Sheriff's Station was completed, providing law enforcement services to several unincorporated communities.
Construction of both the new East Mesa Reentry Facility and Phase I of the San Diego County
Women's Detention and Reentry Facility is nearly complete, providing much needed space for an increasing
detentions population brought on by public safety realignment. The Board of Supervisors also implemented
the County's Strategic Energy Plan, continuing its leadership role in energy conservation and
sustainability and creating taxpayer savings into the future. The plan builds on the County's substantial
progress over the last decade in water conservation, sustainable design, energy supply, transportation
and greenhouse gas emissions reduction.
Additionally, we're turning our attention to improving the customer experience, expanding and simplifying
technology applications and managing expectations for pent-up service demands resulting from years of
economic stress.
We're now over four years into recovery from the great recession. Despite a slow-paced recovery, unemployment
now is declining, the region's housing market has stabilized, County revenues are on the mend
and the overall outlook for our local economy is positive.
In this ever-changing environment, our journey to world class has only begun. To further the effort, the
CAO Recommended Operational Plan for Fiscal Year 2014–2015 includes seed funding to replace the
Sheriff's Crime Lab, to build a new library in Borrego Springs, additional law enforcement and detentions
staffing, resources for ongoing implementation of the ACA, and the final year of increases to retirement
contributions resulting from stock market losses in Fiscal Year 2008–09, as well as resources to support
negotiated labor agreements. The Fiscal Year 2014–15 CAO Recommended Operational Plan totals $5.06
billion, an increase of 1.6% over the prior fiscal year, and includes 17,037 staff years, an increase of 2.5%.
In the coming fiscal year, the County will uphold the commitment to fiscal stability by setting aside prudent
reserves and meeting our ongoing obligation to the San Diego County Employees Retirement Association
while maintaining the ability to face future challenges. San Diego County is the highest rated urban
county in California with a “AAA” issuer credit rating. We also have negotiated long-term labor agreements
with our largest employee unions. It is this ongoing fiscal stability that enables us to aim for world
class in all that we do.
I am proud to share more detailed descriptions of the County's accomplishments from the current fiscal
year and goals for the next two fiscal years in the pages ahead. Included are the many different ways
County departments support the community, as we make the journey to becoming world class.