On June 30, 201 1 , the Board of Supervisors and the San Bernardino Associated
Governments (SANBAG) Board adopted a Countywide Vision, which has since been
adopted by nearly every city and town in the County as well as many school, water, and
special districts. This fulfilled a key goal established by the Board of Supervisors, and has
provides County government with clearer direction as it makes budget decisions.
The Countywide Vision calls for the creation of a "complete county" that capitalizes on its
many assets to collaboratively establish a sustainable system of economic opportunity,
education, well-being and amenities. In this document you will see that the County
organization incorporated the Countywide Vision's elements and values into the 2012-13
Recommended Budget.
I hereby submit for the Board's consideration the 2012-13 Recommended Budget, guided by
the Countywide Vision. This budget of $4.06 billion lays the framework to achieve the
"complete county" by allocating resource·s to achieve Board priorities and objectives. The
2012-13 Recommended Budget has been balanced and is consistent with policy direction
received from the Board of Supervisors. No reserves are being used to fund ongoing costs.
There is limited use of one-time sources to fund costs as part of a multi-year plan to address
the five-year structural deficit, which is consistent with county policy. The 2012-13
Recommended Budget addresses the following key issues:
• A continuing structural budget deficit in both the General Fund and the Fire District;
• Underfunded programs/projects, in Land Use Services and Public Works which could
result in service deficiencies;
• Unaddressed needs for basic operating systems, such as maintenance, support, and
upgrade of countywide applications;
• Facility needs, such as the Downtown Building Project and the Sheriff/Coroner/Public
Administrator's Crime Lab and Aviation Facility.
In May 201 1 , a plan was implemented to eliminate the cumulative five-year structural deficit
for fiscal years 2011-12 through 2015-16. The County continues to focus on this five-year
period. The County has resolved tlhe 201 1 - 1 2 structural deficit, so the 2012-13
Recommended Budget focuses on the remaining $91.5 million cumulative structural budget
deficit though 2015-16, of which $33.2 million pertains to 2012-13. Significant ongoing
issues include declining revenues, previously negotiated salary and benefit increases,
retirement cost increases, a necessary increase to the County Fire subsidy, and additional
staffing requirements for the Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator Adelanto Detention Center
Expansion.

To address this deficit, the County Administrative Office has developed a strategic plan
which includes the following measures:
• Defer funding the $34.2 million Adult Detention Center Staffing cost by funding it
from non-general fund sources or mothball older, less efficient facilities and shift staff
to this facility;
• Implement departmental reductions of $1 1 . 8 million;
• Achieve employee compensation reductions of $8.9 million;
• Increase AB 109 revenue for jailed prisoners by $5.8 million;
• End funding of increased health care benefits after current labor agreement expires
estimated at $5.2 million;
• Reduce contributions to the 800 MHz Upgrade project by $4.0 million;
• Reduce the base allocation to the Capital Improvement Program by $3.3 million.
It is important to note that this strategic plan does not include any potential impacts
of the 2012-13 State Budget, which are unknown and unpredictable at this time.
Ongoing mitigations beginning in 2012-13 that have a departmental impact include a
reduction of discretionary general funding for the Economic Development Agency, Public
Defender, Regional Parks, County Counsel, and Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk. In
addition, reductions were achieved in the Information Services Department internal service
fund programs. The Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator will also have a departmental
impact as a result of anticipated employee compensation reductions not achieved in 201 1 -
12 and funding prior year MOU increases with one-time sources. County Fire also had to
make service reductions totaling $3.0 million to be in balance in 2012-13, despite increased
discretionary general funding of $4.6 million in 2012-13.
THE BUDGET IN BRIEF This budget book presents the general fund, special revenue funds, capital project funds,
internal service funds and enterprise funds of the County. The total spending authority for
these funds in 2012-13 is $4.06 billion. The general fund spending authority totals $2.3
billion and is funded by countywide discretionary revenues (primarily property taxes),
departmental revenues, and other funding sources of the General Fund. Of this $2.3 billion,
only $446.3 million is truly discretionary.

Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator-Detentions and the Probation Department, to
house/supervise inmate and parolee populations classified as low-level offenders, an
increase to the Human Services Administrative Claim due to continuing caseload growth,
and increased In-Home Supportive Services provider payments.
The $40.3 million decrease in Special Revenue Funds can be primarily attributed to a
reduction in projected costs in the Community Development and Housing and Mental Health
Services Act budget units due to the use of one-time funding in 201 1 -1 2 to complete
projects.
The increase of $13.9 million in Internal Service Funds is primarily due to an increase in
Risk Management's Insurance Funds resulting from costly settlements and increased liability
claims experience.

Recommended budgeted staffing for 2012-13 is 1 9,049, a total increase of 107 positions
from the 2011-12 modified budget. General Fund staffing has been increased by 28
positions, from 13,165 to 13,193 primarily resulting from increased staffing for the
Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator due to the implementation of AB 109 (Public Safety
Realignment). The additional staffing will help ensure the
'
overall safety for employees and
inmates of the County jail system. The staffing in all other funds has been increased by 79
positions from 5, 777 to 5,856, primarily resulting from ARMC's participation in the Low
Income Health Program and a Delivery System Reform Incentive Plan. Although staffing
increased significantly, many of the pos??tions are part-time and will allow ARMC to meet
required staffing ratios in addition to scheduling flexibility.
IDENTIFIED NEEDS
The County Administrative Office has identified and recommends the following critical areas
be addressed in 2012-13 in order to prevent unnecessary costs and risks:
• General Plan and Development Code updates, and development of
Specific Plans or Community Plans
• System related upgrade, maintenance, and support costs
• Replacement of buildings beyond their useful life
• Public Works and County Fire funding shortfalls
HIGHLIGHTS OF 2012-13 RECOMMENDED BUDGET
Following are programmatic and budgetary highlights in relation to the 2012-13 Countywide
Goals as adopted by the Board of Supervisors on April 1 0, 2012.

Create, Maintain, and Grow Jobs and Economic Value in the County
• In 2012-13, a key strategy of the Economic Development Agency (EDA) is to support
businesses coming into and currently existing in the County, by ensuring that
Workforce Investment Act (WIA) funding assists with layoff aversion, business
services and training for specific workforce skills. Through these efforts, EDA will
work to keep existing businesses thriving and create an environment that is
appealing to businesses looking to relocate.
Improve County Government Operations
• In 2011 -12, the County Administrative Office set aside $30.0 million to facilitate the
Downtown Building Project including the purchase of new buildings, the seismic
retrofit and modernization of certain existing buildings, and the demolition of older
facilities in which additional investment is not recommended. To support additional
square footage requirements and fund furniture, fixtures, and equipment, the County
Administrative Office recommends adding an additional $10.0 million in 2012-13.
• Due to budget reductions in 2008-09, the Information Services Department
Application Development Division eliminated 7 programmer positions. As a result,
the maintenance and support of locally funded applications has fallen behind. The
2012-13 Recommended Budget builds back $1.6 mill ion in ongoing discretionary
general funding (net county cost) into the base to fund 4 additional positions to move
toward supporting and maintaining locally funded applications and systems at "ideal"
levels, as recommended by the Information Services Department.
• Phase one of the San Bernardino County Electronic Procurement Network (ePro)
implementation was completed in May 2012, resulting in approximately 3,000
registered vendors and 1,000 county users across all County departments. Phase
two, funded by an additional $368,000 ongoing allocation of discretionary general
funding beginning in 2012-13, will include integration with the financial accounting
system (FAS) in order to eliminate manual entry of encumbrances and further
streamline the procurement process.
• For 2012-13, the Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator has established separate
budget units for its detention facilities and law enforcement contracts, thus providing
for more effective budget management, reporting and control of these functions.
• The 2012-1 3 recommended spending plan includes one-time discretionary general
funding of $700,000 for the provision of new permitting software for Land Use
Services to allow interfaces between Land Use Services, Public Works, and County
Fire to help streamline the permitting process; and $2.0 million to upgrade the Public
Works Financial Cost Accounting system, which provides tracking and reporting
information for projects to comply with federal and state requirements.
• An additional one-time allocation of discretionary general funding of $760,000 has
been included for Land Use Services, $400,000 to fund high-level consulting
services to identify efficiencies in business processes, streamline day-to-day
operations, assist with high profile project management, and provide staff training;
and $360,000 to enable the continuation of the Medical Marijuana enforcement
program.

Operate in a Fiscally Responsible and Business-like Manner
• The Human Resources Department is negotiating with four labor unions to obtain
employee concessions to address the five-year structural deficit. If achieved, these
concessions will generate $8.9 million in ongoing savings. The recommended
spending plan includes $4.5 million in bridge funding as reductions may not be
implemented until mid-year 2012-13.
• With the recent California Supreme Court decision pertaining to ABx1 26, a one-time
allocation of $300,000 in 2012-13 to fund costs associated with Oversight Boards
and the dissolution of Redevelopment Agencies is recommended for Economic
Development Agency.
• In December 2011, the Board approved additional funding for Land Use Services to
hire a consultant to conduct a Development Impact Fee analysis and recommended
fee structure. This project will continue in 2012-13, and a report is estimated to be
presented to the Board of Supervisors by the end of the fiscal year.
• The Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator decreased reliance on U.S. Marshal inmate
housing revenues by $7.0 million; this reduction is being offset by additional AB 109
funding.
• The 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes a $300,000 increase in ongoing
discretionary general funding to Flood Control to comply with current National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit activities in the
unincorporated areas outside of the Santa Ana River Watershed.
Ensure Development of a Well-Planned, Balanced. and Sustainable County
• Public Works- Transportation Proposition 1B projects in 2012-13 of $17.0 million
include rehabilitation of Sheep Creek Road; Yucca Lorna/Yates road widening:
Caughlin Road in Phelan and Hatchery Drive in Moonridge paving; and Valley
Boulevard and Cedar Avenue new median construction.
• Public Works - This budget funds Transportation at a level which will sustain the
pavement condition index (PCI) o f 76 for county maintained roads by doing surface
treatments on 45 miles and rehabilitating 5.9 miles of roads by providing a one-time
$5.0 million allocation of discretionary general funding; and will provide for the
installation of a signal at Valley Boulevard at Banana Avenue in the Fontana area
due to a one-time $250,000 allocation of discretionary general funding.
• The 2012-13 recommended spending plan also includes one-time allocations of $5.9
million to fund right-of-way, environmental, and construction costs for the Rim Forest
Storm Drain Project to avert runoff damage; and $4.0 million for Lake Gregory Dam
remediation to meet State seismic stability requirements and evacuation rates.
• In 2012-13, the County Library will be opening the Baker Family Learning Center in
the unincorporated Muscoy Community. Looking ahead to 2013-14, the Library
anticipates some serious financial challenges due to declining property tax revenues
and increasing costs. Therefore, the Library is exploring several cost savings
measures that may be implemented in early 2013, as a preemptive measure to
lessen the "all at once" impact in 2013-14.

The Regional Parks Department plans to improve and reopen the campground at
Glen Helen Regional Park and commit $100,000 in Capital Improvement Funds for
deferred maintenance projects at Calico Ghost Town. The department is planning to
have an increased number of special events and new activities through public/private
partnerships at Prado and Cucamonga-Guasti Regional Parks, and Calico Ghost
Town. Also planned is the construction of 3.5 miles of extension to the Santa Ana
River Trail in the San Bernardino/Redlands area.
• The 2012-13 Recommended Budget reflects an additional one-time allocation of $2.3
million for Land Use Services-Planning to update the General Plan, create more
specific plans to better reflect the unique character of all areas of the County, and to
amend the development code and master plans. These revisions will ensure the
most appropriate standards are being applied in all areas of the County.
Maintain Public Safety
• Construction commenced in June 2011 on the Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator's
Adelanto Jail Expansion Project, which is projected to add approximately 1 ,400 jail
beds to the county's Adelanto Detention Center by late August 2013. In order to help
fund the $120 million project, the Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator pursued and
was awarded $82.3 million from the State as part of its Assembly Bill (AB) 900
County Jail Lease-Revenue Funding Program.
• In 2012-13, the Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator's Aviation Division is negotiating
to move its operations to the San Bernardino International Airport, as the current
hangar used by the Aviation Division requires millions of dollars in repairs and
upgrades. Moving to the new location will result in increased square footage and an
updated facility. The new lease will be funded from the termination of existing leases
and federal asset forfeiture money will be used to fund one-time costs associated
with the move.
• The Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator is adding 38 new positions due to
implementation of AB 109 (Public Safety Realignment). These positions are needed
to manage the "low-level" offenders now being ordered to serve their sentence in a
county facility rather than the state prison system. The additional staffing will help
ensure the overall safety for employees and inmates of the County's jail system. The
costs of these positions are offset by AB 109 funding.
• A one-time allocation of $1.3 million is recommended in 2012-13 for redesign to
expand and remodel the Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator's existing Crime Lab
facility; and additional $0.7 million has been included for the Fire Station in Needles.
• The 2012-13 Recommended Budget includes a $4.6 million increase in the ongoing
County Fire subsidy for emergency vehicle replacement and operational needs due
to continued property tax revenue reductions. Despite this funding increase, County
Fire still has to reduce their budget by $3.0 million resulting in a reduction of 23
positions which includes replacing full-time fire fighters with paid call fire fighters at
two fire stations.
• The Probation Department's budget is increased by $5.7 million primarily due to
additional appropriation for the fuH year cost of implementing AB 109. These costs
include staffing, operation of day reporting centers, contracts with community based
organizations, and transitional housing needed to supervise and rehabilitate "low

level" adult offenders transferred to the County from state parole caseloads. The
department's 2012-13 budget also reflects the addition of $5.3 million in Juvenile
Probation funding from the state to support a broad spectrum of services targeting
at-risk youth, juvenile offenders and their families.
• Ongoing funding of $20.0 million has been included for the 800 MHz Upgrade project
to address the aging public safety 800MHz digital radio system and infrastructure
requirements. This is a reduction of $4.0 million a year which has been redirected to
other general fund needs and was made possible because of a projected fund
balance for this project from this fiscal year.
Provide for the Health and Social Services Needs of County Residents
• The County successfully implemented its Low Income Health Program, ArrowCare,
January 1 , 2012 which is intended to be a bridge to healthcare reform in 2014. This
program covers childless adults ages 1 9-64 not otherwise covered by Medi-Cal. By
implementing this program, the County's goal is to provide coverage to this
population through the health departments so that the County will be the provider of
choice in 2014. To this end, the Department of Public Health has begun providing
primary care services, and has received a Federally Qualified Health Center
designation for the Hesperia clinic to serve both the existing and new population.
The Arrowhead Regional Medical Center (ARMC), Behavioral Health, Public Health,
and Transitional Assistance departments will continue their collaborative
relationships to offer fully integrated care to County residents.
• Meeting the increased volume demands and to comply with regulations, ARMC
opened two additional nursing units in 2011 -12, and will be opening an observation
unit in 2012-13. ARMC continues to take the steps necessary to respond quickly to
the needs of County residents while maximizing reimbursements and controlling
costs. These steps will ensure ARMC's viability with healthcare reform.
• ARMC also successfully met the current milestones associated with the new
Incentive Plan, a new funding source in 2012-13 under the current Medi-cal waiver
that provides for infrastructure development, innovation redesign, population focused
improvement and urgent improvement in quality and safety. This funding is designed
to provide an innovative approach for an improved delivery system, patient
satisfaction and outcomes.
• Human Services (HS) continues to provide quality service to its clients despite the
tremendous burdens brought upon by the economic downturn. As a result, state and
federal funding increases in the HS - Administrative Claim, mostly in Transitional
Assistance programs, and subsistence programs of CaiWORKs, AFDC-Foster Care,
and Aid to Adoptive Children were made to assist residents in need. HS
departments are anticipated to serve an additional 381 CaiWORKs cases (1 %
increase), 4,521 Medi-Cal cases (4% increase) and 1 6,014 Food Stamp cases (15%
increase) over the prior year.
Pursue County Goals and Objectives by Working with Other Government Agencies
• In 2012-13, a $2.6 million one-time allocation of discretionary general funding has
been included for the potential amendment to the Sales Tax Agreement with the City
of Fontana for projects within the unincorporated area which would free-up over $1.5
million per year in ongoing revenue.

$268,250 one-time allocation in support of grants development and non-profit
capacity building initiatives is also recommended in 2012-13.
CHALLENGES IN FISCAL YEAR 2012-13 AND BEYOND
In the coming years, the county faces the challenge of continuing to provide quality services
to its residents while managing the impacts of reduced revenues and increased costs. In
addition to the general economy, other major challenges facing the County include state
budget impacts.
State Budget
In January, the Governor's Budget estimated that the State faced a $9.2 billion budget
deficit for fiscal year 2012-13. The May Revision, however, estimates that the deficit has
increased to $15.7 billion as a result of a reduced revenue outlook, a required increase in K-
1 2 education spending and decisions by the federal government and courts to block
previous budget reductions. The proposed budget attempts to close a portion of this gap
through a revenue proposal by imposing a temporary personal income tax increase on the
state's top income earners and a temporary quarter-cent increase in the State sales tax.
The May Revise proposes County impacts, including public safety and social services
realignment and requisite fundfng; changes to CaiWORKs, Calfresh, Child Support
Services, Juvenile Offenders, Preschool Services and In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS)
programs. While some state funding reductions are anticipated, adjustments for these
impacts will be made in the quarterly budget reports, after the fiscal year 2012-13 State
Budget is adopted and impacts are confirmed.
Retirement Costs
Due to the 2008-09 market losses, the County will still experience high retirement
contribution rates over the next three fiscal years to ensure retirement liabilities will be
funded at a proper level. Additionally, it is anticipated that the County could see an
additional $10.0 million in discretionary general fund retirement costs through 2015-16 as a
result of insufficient market earnings for the County's Retirement Fund in 2011-12. As of
March 31, 2012, the County's Retirement Fund had earned 0.6% for 2011-12, while the fund
is required to earn 7.75% each fiscal year in order to adequately fund retirement
liabilities. The County is continuing to actively seek to reduce future retirement costs
through proposed compensation reductions as detailed above.
CONCLUSION
The 2012-13 spending plan is structured to solve the remaining five-year $91.5 million
cumulative structural budget deficit. The strategic plan developed by the County
Administrative Office outlines measures to address the anticipated cost increases for the
next four years so that both the Board and staff can shift their focus to rebuilding the county.
This approach eliminates the need to continually focus on programmatic cuts and
mitigations, and creates a more positive dynamic.
The 2012-13 Recommended Budget focuses on major policy issues and key projects that
require additional funding in an economic climate that continues to cause reductions in
county programs and local government. The County is committed to making the most of its
funding to provide necessary public services in an effective and efficient manner and
fulfilling its role in the achievement of the Countywide Vision.