Dear Honorable Board Members,
I would like to express my gratitude for the support and selfless dedication of all the County employees who continue to serve the residents of San Benito County despite difficult economic times. All employees have been instrumental in the successes throughout the year. Their dedication has made so much possible, such as but not limited to, the Enterprise Resources Planning (ERP) project, new programs within Health and Human Services, and the continued safety of our County residents by the Sheriff’s Office and Emergency Services.
There are two goals for Fiscal Year (FY) 2014/15: operational efficiency and strengthening revenue streams. To accomplish these goals the FY 14/15 Budget focuses resources on key areas and relies on a third-party performance evaluation that will identify organizational efficiencies. These goals will help establish a sound foundation for thoughtful departmental growth.
This document outlines the County Administrative Officer’s FY 14/15 Recommended Budget. The budget totals $141 million and includes approximately $39 million from the General Fund (GF). This total does not include Risk/ISF or impact fees (For specific numbers see Schedules 5 and 7). This year’s request includes an increase of two-percent in expenses since the FY 13/14 Adopted Budget.
FY 14/15 POSITIONS:
The overall allocation of positions department wide for the FY 14/15 Recommended Budget is broken down as follows in Image One:

FY 14/15 budgeted personnel will increase by twenty-eight positions. Approximately fourteen of those positions are covered by subvented funds; and four of fourteen positions slotted for GF purposes will use GF monies, with the remainder funded by other means.

levels, and is incorporating a temporary-help pool for clerical relief.
It is important to note that new development in one year increases workload for that year, and also generates revenue for the following years. FY 13/14 had several major projects that will bring revenues to FY 14/15. True cash flow will be seen in following fiscal years (FY 15/16 and 16/17). Given this information, the hires made in FY 14/15 will be paid with revenue generated from a past fiscal year, and so it is essential that we strategically plan the placement of personnel in the Assessor’s, Planning, and Public Works departments to ensure the use of revenues that will be seen in future years.
2013/14 ACCOMPLISHMENTS:
Health Benefits: Through the evaluation of the three major components of employee benefits, and looking at how they impact the ability to meet its fiscal responsibility not only to employees, but the public as well, the County was able to reduce its unfunded liability.
ERP: Completed due diligence and current contract negotiations for the purchase and implementation of a new ERP system, thus providing the much needed workflow, human resources, position control, and budgeting modules to compliment the general ledger.
Fiber Optic Project: This project brings sound infrastructure to the County for safety and overall County communications.
Health and Human Services: Reorganization of the Health and Human Services agency was completed in FY 13/14. This accomplishment means more checks and balances and focus on operations, audit accountability and control, improved Program Division Support, and better County Administrative coordination.

Optimity Advisors: Optimity Advisors is performing a county-wide evaluation. This evaluation was approved by the Board of Supervisor to identify organizational efficiencies, and provide a foundation that will aid in future program growth. It is important that newly created programs return high-quality services to the public and are sustainable if funding ends.
ERP, Cost-Savings: The ERP system will bring cost-savings, workflow efficiencies, and is environmentally friendly. Project accomplishment in FY 14/15 will bring the County closer to its goal of paperless processes and financial transparency. Modules for Human Resources and Payroll will allow long-term expense reduction in print stock and paper; and provide access to detailed financial data, analysis, and reporting.
Five-Year Plan, Revenue: General Fund revenue enhancement is critical to long-term sustainability. The County Administrative Office will complete a report in FY 14/15 that quantifies revenues based on development, so more accurate projections can be made. Accurate projections mean we can strategically plan for sustainable county operations.
Vacation/Sick Accruals and OPEB: The County will use one-time Teeter funds to meet the yearly expenditure on OPEB obligation and make the County current for FY 14/15. In addition, in previous years employee retirements and terminations often meant high vacation/sick payouts that was not foreseeable. This year we will be utilizing Teeter funds to address a portion of this unfunded liability.
Technology and Social Media: We will need to take a detailed look at the use of social media throughout San Benito County to better meet the needs of the public. Expanding our outreach efforts will close the gap on response times and turn our attention to the concerns of the public regarding facility maintenance, safety, and programs that can help residents. Social media means more public involvement and communication
Impact Fees: A study is currently being conducted by an outside source to develop an impact fee ordinance for all county public facilities, and will update the County’s general language for impact fee ordinances.
2014/15 STATE BUDGET
The Governor hopes to commit $100 million to pay down debts owed to all counties in California. If his proposal is passed by the legislature and incorporated into the 2014-15 enacted budget, it could mean an additional $600,000 or more for the County over the next three years. Additionally, AB109 and AB 118 funds for San Benito County include

nearly $837,000 in FY 14/15 that will supplement the budgets for the Sheriff’s Jail Operation, the District Attorney’s Office, Public Defender, and Substance abuse.
The State will be making significant additions to Medicare and Social Services. As we look toward unexpected costs for the Affordable Care Act, we should be thoughtful on how these newly found revenues proposed by the Governor are used.
Finally, the May revision includes a total available of $20 million in FY 14/15 funding for drought-impacted communities with high levels of unemployment. The County will ready itself with a plan for application and expenditure of any drought relief funds given the Governor’s commitment to help farmer’s wherever possible in order to weather the drought.
In conclusion, it is my pleasure to present to your Board herein, a balance budget with a level of relief by adding positions to specific areas. The addition of staff translates to more service hours for the local community, residents allowing internal staff to focus on improving other areas of their programs as opposed to focusing on day-to-day operations. Although more staff is needed in many other key areas, the FY 14/15 Recommended Budget will bring some relief to the revenue-generating departments and benefit other departments in future years.