Vision. The Countywide Vision calls for the creation of a “complete county” that capitalizes on its many assets
to collaboratively establish a sustainable system of economic opportunity, education, well-being and amenities.
The Countywide Vision and the Board adopted County Goals and Objectives provide County government with
clear direction as it makes budget decisions.
In this document you will see that County departments, Board Governed Special Districts and Other Agencies
built their 2015-16 Recommended Budgets to achieve the Board’s policy direction. For 2015-16 each
department has reexamined performance measures to ensure they are attainable and relevant to the
department’s core mission, and that they tie directly to the 2015-16 County Goals and Objectives.
The 2015-16 Recommended Budget of $5.2 billion is balanced and, consistent with policy direction received
from the Board of Supervisors, no reserves are being used to fund ongoing costs and there is limited use of
one-time sources to fund operating costs. The 2015-16 Recommended Budgets address the following key
issues:
• Funding of medical and mental health services in County detention centers
• Funding to begin restoration of services reduced during the recession
• Ongoing funding for pavement condition maintenance
• Continues investment in capital improvement and transportation projects
• Maintains fiscal responsibility through contributions to reserves of $68.5 million
This budget book presents the County General Fund and County restricted general funds. It also presents
capital project funds, special revenue funds, enterprise funds, internal service funds and permanent funds for
all entities in the 2015-16 Recommended Budget book including the County, Board Governed County Service
Areas, San Bernardino County Fire Protection District, San Bernardino County Flood Control District, Big Bear
Valley Recreation and Park District, and Bloomington Recreation and Park District Other agencies presented
in this budget book include County Industrial Development Authority, Economic and Community Development
Corporation, In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority, and Inland Counties Emergency Medical Agency.
The total requirements for these funds in 2015-16 are $5.2 billion, which includes amounts budgeted as
contingencies or contributions to reserves. Excluding these amounts, total projected expenditures for 2015-16
are $4.7 billion.

General Fund requirements total $2.8 billion and are funded by Countywide discretionary revenues (primarily
property taxes), departmental revenues, and other funding sources of the General Fund. Of this $2.8 billion,
only $545.2 million is truly discretionary.

The $38.8 million net increase in General Fund requirements includes notable increases in the two largest
County operational groups: Human Services ($55.8 million) and Law and Justice ($18.9 million). The Human
Services Operational Group is anticipating increased State and Federal funding primarily to support increased
caseloads and provide additional services for participants of the Welfare to Work and Child Welfare Services
programs. The County is also allocating significant additional resources to meet the growing need for
augmented correctional services associated with Public Safety Realignment. This includes the need for
additional medical and mental health services for County inmates and improving span of control at West Valley
Detention Center.
The 2015-16 County General Fund budget also reflects the shift from budgeting for future infrastructure
projects and economic uncertainties in contingencies to instead contributing these amounts to reserves. This
change in approach better characterizes the multi-year nature of projects, economic impacts and other needs
to be addressed with limited General Fund resources. This has resulted in the net increase of $18.8 million in
General Fund Contributions to Reserves offset by a decrease in General Fund Contingencies ($59.3 million).
The $7.4 million decrease in Restricted General Funds is caused primarily by a reduction in the transfer from
the Health Realignment Fund to the Arrowhead Regional Medical Center as a result of State legislation (AB
85). This legislation requires a redirection of a portion of health realignment revenues, which will therefore not
be available for ARMC operations. However, overall operations of the hospital are not anticipated to be
impacted as net sources available to the department are increasing $10.9 million in 2015-16.
The increase of $18.3 million in Special Revenue Funds is primarily due to increases of available reserves
within the Flood Control District Budget Units as the result of the receipt of a settlement payment related to an
insurance coverage action ($14.0 million) and delayed capital projects ($6.1 million) in 2014-15. These
increases in 2014-15 are largely being set aside as reserves in 2015-16 for future planned capital projects and
for response to emergency storm events.
The $41.6 million decrease in Capital Project Funds is primarily due to a decrease in budgeted expenditures
for the 800 MHz Upgrade Project, the Sheriff’s Crime Lab Expansion Project, and the Buildings Acquisition and
Retrofit Project compared to 2014-15.

Budgeted staffing recommended for 2015-16 is 21,755, an increase of 289 positions from the 2014-15
Modified Budget. General Fund staffing is increasing by 263 positions, primarily due to net increases to the
Department of Behavioral Health (65) for Correctional and Clinical Mental Health services and Alcohol and
Drug services; to the Probation – Administration, Correction, Detention budget unit (43) for the expanded state
SB 678 supervision program, which aides in the reduction of County commitments to State prison; to the
Human Services Administrative Claim budget unit (28) primarily to provide for the oversight, mentoring, and
training of line staff in the Children and Family Services Department; and the Sheriff’s Department – Detentions
budget unit (18) to provide for increased level of health screenings for inmates and improve span of control at
West Valley Detention Center.
Staffing in Other County Funds is increasing by 63 positions primarily due to the expansion of Adult System of
Care programs within the Behavioral Health – Mental Health Services Act (29) budget unit and the Head Start
Program for the Preschool Services Department (14).
Special Districts and Other Agencies are decreasing by 37 positions primarily due to decreases within the Fire
Protection District, which has a net decrease of 38 positions mainly due to the deletion of vacant limited term
and paid call firefighter positions. These deletions will have no impact on operations.
HIGHLIGHTS OF 2015-16 RECOMMENDED BUDGET
Following are highlights of programmatic and budgetary proposals included in the Recommended Budget as
they relate to the 2015-16 County Goals as adopted by the Board of Supervisors on April 7, 2015.
Implement the Countywide Vision
• The County Administrative Office will coordinate the launch of a literacy initiative in support of the
Countywide Vision’s Cradle to Career Regional Implementation Goal.
• During 2014-15, Public Health’s Community Vital Signs Initiative continued to advance initiatives as
part of the County’s Wellness Element. Focus in 2015-16 will be on implementing the Community
Transformation Plan, which addresses Education, Economy, Access to Health and Wellness, Safety,
and developing a Vital Signs’ business intelligence data platform. The innovative development of this
platform using Geographic Information System mapping will quickly help partners and residents identify
trends, locate resources, evaluate effectiveness of community transformation strategies, identify where
improvement efforts are most needed, and leverage and align partner resources for sustainability.

Create, Maintain, and Grow Jobs and Economic Value in the County
• The 2015-16 recommended Architecture and Engineering capital budget includes 270 active projects
with total requirements of $221.6 million, including $67.7 million in new projects funded primarily with
Discretionary General Funding (Net County Cost). The $58.0 million of general funding includes an
ongoing base budget of $12.0 million for maintenance and non-major Capital Improvement Program
(CIP) projects, and $46.0 million for construction and major CIP projects. The major projects include
$26.4 million for the 800 Megahertz Upgrade Project, $11.2 million for the County Buildings Acquisition
and Retrofit Project, $5.8 million for various Sheriff facility improvements, and $2.6 million for various
other projects.
• The recommended Workforce Development Department (WDD) budget includes $3.1 million in Federal
funding for the placement of 750 Calworks Youth into paid work experience. This will be accomplished
through a partnership between WDD and the Transitional Assistance Department (TAD).
• Regional Parks continues to expand amenities at Calico Ghost Town Regional Park by utilizing Off-
Highway Vehicle funding to provide additional campground hook-ups and cabins. These improvements
are expected to generate additional revenue for the department and the concession operators, as well
as encourage new tourism.
Improve County Government Operations
• A team consisting of the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector, County Administrative Office,
Finance and Administration, Human Resources, and Information Services Department are evaluating
proposals for the County’s Enterprise Financial Management System and a vendor will be selected
through a competitive procurement. Implementation will begin in 2015-16. The new financial system
will streamline business processes and provide better management information.
• The Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector recommended budget includes funding for two
Accountant II’s in Internal Audits to perform mandated audits, and an Accountant III in Management
Services to prepare Indirect Cost Rate Proposals for County departments.
• A total of $16.0 million has been set-aside in reserves for two significant County Fire projects. The Fire
Consolidated Headquarters project ($13.5 million) will provide for a more efficient use of existing
resources through the consolidation of various County Fire functions/services at one location. The Fire
Training Center ($2.5 million) will enable County Fire to expand its current training capabilities. Both of
these projects will eliminate County Fire’s need for leased facilities.
• County Fire will receive an additional $2.1 million of ongoing General Fund support for the following
purposes to assist the department with achieving its mission of providing services for the health and
well-being of County citizens:
o $749,500 to contract with the Kern County Fire Department for fire protection services to the
underserved area of northwest San Bernardino County.
o $537,336 for annual fixed asset (excluding vehicles) replacement costs.
o $531,712 for costs related to the conversion of 12 limited-term positions (6 Engineers and 6
Firefighters) to regular positions.
o $300,000 to the Office of Emergency Services for non-grant funded costs such as
supervision of the volunteer program and the webEOC.

Finance and Administration will continue to implement strategies to improve efficiency and
effectiveness. In 2015-16, the Department established a Law and Justice – Finance and Administration
Division to provide for centralized analysis and oversight of the County’s Law and Justice Departments’
budget. This was done through a re-organization of existing budgeted positions and the addition of one
Discretionary General Funded Finance Analyst. The addition of this division will enable the Department
to provide oversight of Law and Justice funding and enable it to research and analyze broader
implications of State and Federal Law changes on the County’s Law and Justice Departments. The
Department will also continue to present accurate and timely budget and financial information to the
County Administrative Office and the Board of Supervisors.
• The Information Services Department Telecommunication Services division is in the process of
upgrading the County’s Regional Public Safety Radio System. The project is currently on schedule,
with an estimated completion date of 2020-21. The estimated cost of the project is $158.2 million.
Ongoing discretionary general funding in the amount $84.0 million has been allocated to the project to
date and an additional $26.4 million is recommended for funding in 2015-16. County Fire will be
contributing $8.5 million of this amount. Approximately $53.7 million has been expended to date. The
County has received and deployed radio equipment from Motorola at various sites. The primary focus
of this project for 2015-16 will be to receive and install microwave equipment to complete the upgrade
of the microwave system.
• In 2015-16, Public Health will continue its efforts to achieve and maintain National Accreditation,
through the Public Health Accreditation Board. The Department will continue to focus on quality and
performance improvement, transparency and accountability to all stakeholders, and to maintain the
capacity to deliver the core Public Health functions. The completion of Public Health’s five-year
strategic plan (currently in year two) will achieve a major milestone in the accreditation process by
providing overarching priorities for departmental alignment, establishing core values to provide a
blueprint for working collaboratively with the public, and identifying opportunities for alignment with the
Countywide Vision, Community Vital Signs Initiative, and the Community Transformation Plan to
improve the overall wellness and quality of life in the County.
• The County Library continues its plans to enhance service by replacing outdated computer hardware
and software over the next several years. Funding has been recommended in the 2015-16 budget for
the Library’s material budget and adding high demand items to the collection, including an expanded
digital book collection.
• Land Use Services is beginning pre-implementation work to upgrade its outdated permitting system to a
new enterprise solution, Accela Automation. The new solution will include a shared database, linking
together other County departments, precise digital maps and satellite images of land data that are
linked to the County’s GIS database, and the Accela Mobile Office platform which provides field staff
remote real-time access to the database. This solution will streamline the permitting process, offering
the public access to a web portal, Accela Citizen Access, to manage and monitor applications and
permits online.
Operate in a Fiscally Responsible and Business-like Manner
• The Regional Parks Department continues to reduce its reliance on County General Fund support. The
$1.4 million decrease in Discretionary General Funding for 2015-16 is due to cost savings resulting
from the following:
o A renegotiated contract with the Inland Empire Utilities Agency for water and sewer service
at Prado Regional Park.

o A partnership agreement with the operators of Lake Gregory Regional Park.
o A decrease in the number of days per week (from 7 to 5) open to the public at Mojave
Narrows Regional Park.
Ensure Development of a Well-Planned, Balanced, and Sustainable County
• The County Administrative Office and Land Use Services Department have initiated a complete
overhaul of the County’s General Plan, referred to as the Countywide Plan. This Countywide Plan will
be a comprehensive web-based system to document land use planning and organizational governance
policies. The Countywide Plan will be comprised of three basic components: The Policy Plan
(comprehensive general plan); the County Business Plan (system that defines and guides how the
County government operates and manages itself); and the Regional Issues Forum (web-based
resource center where information regarding shared Countywide issues exists).
• A team of County Departments will continue to monitor the drought and develop ways to reduce water
usage at County facilities to show good stewardship of this valuable resource. The Special Districts
Department, in collaboration with other County Departments, will continue to monitor drought
requirements and implement water conservation programs/strategies at various County Service Areas
and Districts throughout the County.
• The Board, through Special Districts Department Water Division will continue its commitment to
investment in water and sanitation infrastructure through a capital improvement budget totaling $19.8
million. Programmed projects include installation of radio read meters in several of the districts,
construction of a new water well in CSA 64 Spring Valley, design and construction of a pipeline, a
75,000 gallon water reservoir and a pump station in CSA 70 W-4.
• The Special Districts Department recommended 2015-16 budget includes $34.7 million of capital
improvement projects. Capital improvement projects programmed in the department’s construction
funds include the design and construction for the relocation of the Big Bear Alpine Zoo, additional
improvements at Kessler Park in Bloomington Recreation and Park District, design and construction of
Snow Drop Road and other road paving projects.
• Community Development & Housing is completing Phase 1 of the Bloomington Community and
Neighborhood Revitalization along Valley Boulevard. A total of 106 mixed generational units, and the
Bloomington Branch Library, is currently under construction and will be completed in 2016. The
Department is securing the remaining necessary financial resources in the form of redevelopment
bonds and private funding sources for Phase 2. If successful, construction will commence in 2016 on
Phase 2, consisting of an additional 84 units of multi-family affordable housing for a project total of 190
units.
Provide for the Safety, Health and Social Service Needs of County Residents
• During 2014-15, the Sheriff’s Department expanded unincorporated patrol operations by proceeding
with the hiring of 10 budgeted Deputy Sheriff positions. These positions historically have been kept
vacant to fund annual employee separation costs. The Discretionary General Funding portion of these
costs are now paid for as part of the County’s Earned Leave program.
• The County jail system was originally structured to provide short-term housing for pre-sentenced and
sentenced inmates. The 2011 Public Safety Realignment of State inmates with longer term sentences
Message from the Chief Executive Officer | Page 7 of 10
to County jail has required the Sheriff’s Department to provide detention related services that were
previously not necessary. To address this issue, $8.3 million in additional Public Safety Realignment
(AB 109) funding was included in the department’s recommended budget to augment both medical and
behavioral health services at the jails; to provide additional span of control at West Valley Detention
Center; and to provide for infrastructure maintenance at the expanded High Desert Detention Center.
• An additional $9.1 million of SB 678 funding has been allocated by the State to the Probation
Department for the purposes of reducing criminal recidivism. Probation will use $5.2 million (primarily
for 43 new positions) to expand evidence-based services/programs with the objective of further
reducing the number of County commitments to State prison. The remaining $3.9 million is being setaside
in Probation’s special revenue fund reserves for potential decreases in future state funding
allocations. Staffing levels will be monitored, and should funding reductions occur, there will be
sufficient reserves available to continue to provide program services at the same level until a
transitional plan is developed and implemented.
• The Public Defender will establish a new program that will integrate with other County programs to
assign Social Service Practitioners to attend school board attendance hearings with the goal of
reducing juvenile truancy and preventing minors from entering the criminal justice system as adults.
• Land Use Services Code Enforcement is piloting strategic initiatives to stop Illegal Dumping, a fast
growing problem with potentially significant environmental consequences. Increased enforcement
activity will result in a greater number of citations issued to those who are caught dumping illegally,
resulting in the public’s increased awareness of the penalties for this activity. The division will also
increase community outreach efforts, public education, and utilize other creative means to identify and
stop the sources of illegal dumping.
• Preschool Services Department is anticipating an increase in Federal funding sources that will be used
to provide services under the Early Head Start Child Care Partnership grant. In addition, the
department’s staffing levels will increase by nine new contract positions primarily to staff additional
classrooms at the Fontana Citrus Head Start school site and to ensure the Federally-mandated
student/teacher ratio is maintained. The department will have a decrease of $1.9 million due in part to
the reduction of one-time funding for the purchase of a warehouse.
• Through various partnerships, the Inland Counties Emergency Medical Agency is making significant
progress toward the integration of Emergency Medical Services into a Health Information Exchange
and, for the first time in 2014-15 data was submitted to the National database. The data is being utilized
at the local, State, and Federal levels to help determine best practices, resulting in improved patient
care and outcomes.
• The Department of Aging and Adult Services (DAAS) received approximately $335,000 in one-time
Federal funds to supplement Elderly Nutrition, Supportive Services, and Family Caregiver programs in
2014-15. Services to seniors are expected to return to previously-budgeted levels in 2015-16. The
recommended DAAS budget includes increasing staff by one contract Ombudsman Field Coordinator
to oversee and monitor seniors at nursing homes to ensure proper care is being provided.
• The recommended Department of Behavioral Health budget includes $2.9 million of Mental Health
Service Act Capital funds and $7.0 million of California Health Facilities Financing Authority grant
funding to purchase land and build crisis residential treatment facilities in the central valley and high
desert regions. By collaborating with local law enforcement, hospitals and community based providers,

the care facilities will be used to provide crisis residential services to individuals throughout the county
experiencing a mental health crisis in the least restrictive manner possible.
• The Arrowhead Regional Medical Center (ARMC) recommended budget includes the addition of 10
Registered Nurse Case Manager positions to continue strengthening Ambulatory Services and align the
three Family Health Care Clinics’ operations to have a greater emphasis on population health
management which provides specialized levels of care that focus on the most acutely ill ambulatory
patients.
• The Transitional Assistance Department will begin the first of a four year reduction to the State’s
CalFresh Match Waiver in 2015-16 pursuant to the phase-out agreement adopted in the current year
budget. This waiver allowed the County to draw additional Federal and half of the State funding without
increasing the County’s Maintenance of Effort. The recommended budget includes $1.28 million of the
$5 million set aside the Board approved in the current year budget for this phase-out period.
• The County Museum’s 2015-16 recommended budget of $3.3 million demonstrates the County’s
commitment to support the Museum through a time of transition. Net County Cost of $2.9 million
includes $588,097 of one-time bridge funding to support current operations and $95,000 of ongoing
funding for the addition of one Biology Curator position to oversee and preserve the Museum’s Biology
collections. The County Museum continues to implement the consultant study recommendations as
approved by the Board of Supervisors to address organizational and financial challenges.
• The Public Guardian is responsible to act as conservator for individuals found by the court to be gravely
disabled or who lack the capacity to manage personal affairs. In 2015-16, the department added two
Deputy Public Guardians to accommodate new functions and maintain ongoing caseload. The net
increase in estate fees allowed the Public Guardian to finance the positions and overcome the
reduction to AB 109 and Medi-Cal Administrative Activities (MAA) funding.
• On November 4, 2014 California voters approved Proposition 47, which reclassified certain nonviolent
drug and property crimes from felonies to misdemeanors. As the law applies to both existing and future
criminal offenders, County Law and Justice Departments and the Court immediately started the process
of resentencing affected offenders in the criminal justice system. Notable departmental impacts
associated with this change are as follows:
o A total of $1.3 million in additional one-time Discretionary General Funding was allocated in
the 2015-16 Recommended Budget to the District Attorney, Public Defender, and County
Indigent Defense budgets to assist with the large caseload associated with the process of
resentencing offenders.
o The Sheriff’s Department has shifted some resources from street-level narcotics and
focused efforts on proactive, targeted gang enforcement and violent crime suppression
operations as a result of Proposition 47’s lowering of the criminal penalty for certain drug
offenses.
Pursue County Goals and Objectives by Working with Other Government Agencies
• The current Medicaid Waiver will end October 31, 2015. ARMC will work collaboratively with the
California Association of Public Hospitals, the State, and the Federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) in the development of the next Medicaid Waiver in order to maximize future revenues.
There will be stringent clinical performance measures linked to the funding within the next Waiver,
Message from the Chief Executive Officer | Page 9 of 10
which will begin November 1, 2015 if the State Department of Health Care Services’ proposal is
approved by the CMS. The 2015-16 recommended budget includes $51.0 million in funding related to
the continuance of the Medicaid Waiver.
CHALLENGES IN FISCAL YEAR 2015-16 AND BEYOND
Costs continue to rise more rapidly than revenue, creating a challenge to provide adequate levels of service.
In addition, the fiscal uncertainty inherent in the State budget process continues to present a major challenge
to the County’s fiscal planning efforts.
State Budget
On May 14, 2015, Governor Brown released his revised $169 billion spending plan to the 2015-16 Proposed
State Budget, which includes $2.1 billion in total reserves and projects a $3.5 billion Rainy Day Fund balance.
The May Revise reflects a $6.7 billion increase in General Fund revenues compared to the January budget.
The May revision proposes to advance a multiyear plan that is balanced, pays down budgetary debt from past
years and saves for a rainy day. Notable County impacts from the Governor’s proposed budget are as follows:
• The County anticipates receiving $34.9 million associated with mandated health and human services
program restorations, operations and administration. Under the Affordable Care Act, the State is
redirecting 1991 Health Realignment funding for indigent care as healthcare coverage increases, which
will result in a $3 million loss to the County under this redirection. The County also anticipates an
increase of $1.6 million in Health and Human Services costs.
• The May Revise also includes a projected increase of $135.4 million in Public Safety Realignment Base
funding from 2014-15 to 2015-16 for all counties. For the County, this would result in an increase of
$12.7 million in Public Safety Realignment Base Funds available. Additionally, the State is projecting
$135.4 million in additional Public Safety Realignment Growth funding to be available to counties, which
would result in an estimated $9.5 million in one-time funds available to the County in 2015-16. If State
sales tax projections (which are the basis for this funding) are accurate, this would result in a total of
$22.2 million ($9.5 million one-time, $12.7 million ongoing) in additional Public Safety Realignment
funding. Due to the volatile nature of sales tax, the County has taken a conservative approach in
adding programs with these additional projected funds in 2015-16 by increasing ongoing base funding
by $10.7 million and not yet allocating any projected one-time funds (which may be used to establish
reserves).
• The Governor’s budget proposal included a 23.3% reduction in transportation funding from $1.89 billion
to $1.45 billion, which equates to a $6.0 million revenue reduction to the County. Additionally, the State
Board of Equalization changed the excise tax estimate, which will result in a further reduction of $4.0
million. This results in a $10.0 million reduction in 2015-16.
Sales Tax Volatility
Historically counties have been funded by relatively stable property taxes. The realignment of many state
services has made counties increasingly dependent on sales tax revenue. As a result, the portion of
requirements funded primarily with sales tax now represents 16.6% of the County budget and includes 1991
and 2011 Realignment revenues ($670.9 million), County sales tax ($21.6 million) and Proposition 172 Half
Cent Sales taxes ($164.8 million). While sales taxes are projected to experience a modest increase in 2015-

16, they tend to be much more volatile and quicker to react to changes in the economy, resulting in a higher
risk of funding losses in future years.
Retirement Costs
Retirement costs in 2015-16 are increasing primarily as a result of a change in actuarial assumptions, that
reduced the expected rate of return from 7.75% to 7.5% and adjusted mortality tables to reflect longer
lifespans. In addition, the County continues to see elevated retirement costs as a result of the continuing
amortization of investment losses in 2008-09. The County can expect to see increasing retirement cost
volatility as the amount of assets held by the pension plan grow faster than the County budget. The County
Administrative Office and the Retirement Association have an active dialog about monitoring, measuring, and
mitigating the growing volatility risk. The County has been able to achieve some cost savings through the
labor negotiation process as well as through the continued implementation of statewide pension reform.
CONCLUSION
The County fiscal plan developed by the County Administrative Office outlines anticipated cost and revenue
increases for the next five years so that both the Board and staff can continue to focus on rebuilding the
County. The 2015-16 Recommended Budget focuses on major policy issues and key projects that require
additional funding. The County is committed to making the most of its funding to provide necessary public
services in an effective and efficient manner and fulfilling its role in the achievement of the Countywide Vision.