The County of San Bernardino’s 2013-14 Recommended Budget covers the period from July 1, 2013 – June
30, 2014. The budget consisting of the general fund, restricted funds, capital project funds, special revenue
funds, internal service funds, and enterprise funds has a total appropriation of $4.0 billion. Each department is
responsible for operating within their budget and has the authority to spend up to the approved budget.
When developing their individual budgets, each department considers the following Countywide Vision and
goals and objectives of the County of San Bernardino approved by the Board of Supervisors:
Countywide Vision Statement
The following Countywide Vision statement, was adopted on June 30, 2011, by the County Board of
Supervisors and SANBAG Board of Directors.
We envision a complete county that capitalizes on the diversity of its people, its geography, and its economy
to create a broad range of choices for its residents in how they live, work, and play.
We envision a vibrant economy with a skilled workforce that attracts employers who seize the opportunities
presented by the county’s unique advantages and provide the jobs that create countywide prosperity.
We envision a sustainable system of high?quality education, community health, public safety, housing, retail,
recreation, arts and culture, and infrastructure, in which development complements our natural resources and
environment.
We envision a model community which is governed in an open and ethical manner, where great ideas are
replicated and brought to scale, and all sectors work collaboratively to reach shared goals.
From our valleys, across our mountains, and into our deserts, we envision a county that is a destination for
visitors and a home for anyone seeking a sense of community and the best life has to offer.
The County and SANBAG are now committed to facilitating discussions centered on how each of the nine
following core vision elements can be effectively focused to implement the Countywide Vision for a complete
community – one that affords all citizens an opportunity for healthy lifestyles, strong public safety and quality
amenities. These discussions involve diverse stakeholders representing residents, employers, educators,
community and faith?based organizations, and government.

Employee groups were established to organize internal Vision Element meetings and to develop a Paradigm
and Job Statement that would define County government’s role in achieving the Countywide Vision. On April
10, 2012, the County Board of Supervisors approved the Paradigm and Job Statement. The Paradigm states
that the County shall take responsibility for ensuring that efforts to achieve the Countywide Vision will be
pursued, and the Job Statement simply states, “Our job is to create a county in which those who reside and
invest can prosper and achieve well-being.” The first two Regional Implementation Goals developed through
the Countywide Vision process focus on cradle-to-career assistance and creating a business-friendly
environment. These goals were developed by external Vision Element groups and were jointly adopted by the
County Board of Supervisors and the SANBAG Board on May 2, 2012. The Countywide Vision statement,
report and related documents are available for review at www.sbcounty.gov/vision.

Implement the Countywide Vision
? Continue the County role of convening conversations on community collaboration and collective
action.
? Ensure that all County employees know the significance of the Countywide Vision, Job and
Paradigm.
Create, Maintain, and Grow Jobs and Economic Value in the County
? Focus Economic Development Agency (EDA) efforts on competing globally for investment, retraining
and finding employment for those who have lost jobs or are under-employed, developing a more
highly-educated and trained workforce, and creating an effective approach to tourism.
? Continue business retention and expansion programs while implementing office and industrial
attraction strategies emphasizing provision of high paying jobs.
? Provide stable governmental leadership, consistent decision-making and efficient processing to
inspire confidence in investors.
? Work with the Board to ensure that it has provided clear policy guidance for development, then create
a system that provides for implementation and decision-making at the lowest level of the organization
legally allowed.
? Review and revise fees, processes and decision-making to ensure a business friendly environment.
? Utilize County programs and resources to maximize job creation.
? Work with cities to explore programs and approaches to address the mortgage crisis.
? Actively participate in the statewide California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) reform efforts.
Improve County Government Operations
? Enhance and protect the Board of Supervisors’ policy-making role and ensure authority exists for
staff actions.
? Create clear lines of authority and clarify roles, responsibilities and governance of all County
departments and programs.
? Develop an approach to evaluate the performance of department heads who report to the Board.
? Incorporate the Board adopted County Goals and Objectives in the County budget document, tie
department performance measures to them and report progress in the quarterly budget updates.
? Develop consistent messaging for the organization.
? Ensure that employees know that they and their work are valued.
? Monitor and evaluate operations and implement strategies to continually improve efficiency and
effectiveness.
Operate in a Fiscally-Responsible and Business-Like Manner
? Develop a long-term budget plan which brings the County into operational and programmatic
balance.
? Live within our means, fully funding basic operating systems, liabilities and reserves, while forming
capital to strategically invest in the future.
? Invest County resources in ways which create more ongoing revenue to reinvest in maintaining
services.
? Eliminate silos and consolidate and centralize administrative functions, including financial
management and oversight.
? Implement information management best-practices that would unify technology platforms and move
toward a standardized enterprise approach.

Ensure Development of a Well-Planned, Balanced, and Sustainable County
? Take steps to ensure that the Land Use Services Department continues to make progress in terms of
operating more efficiently.
? Continue to identify and implement short-term solutions to systemic problems.
? Fund an update to the General Plan, update the Development Code and Master Plans, and create
more Community and Specific Plans in order to move away from a “one size fits all” approach and
recognize the unique character and needs of all unincorporated areas of the County.
? Work with cities to ensure that County zoning and development standards in their spheres of
influence are more compatible.
Maintain Public Safety
? Work with all elements of the County’s public safety services to reduce costs while maintaining the
highest level of service that funding will support.
? Develop a better understanding of the effects of increases or decreases of resources in one area of
law and justice on all other areas.
Provide for the Health and Social Services Needs of County Residents
? Implement Federal Healthcare Reform.
? Maximize the utilization of Federal and State programs and funding to mitigate the effects of the
economic downturn on county residents.
? To the maximum extent legally allowed, utilize County programs to move participants to selfsufficiency.
? Promote public/private collaboration and projects that help to meet the health and human service
needs of county residents.
Pursue County Goals and Objectives by Working with Other Governmental Agencies
? Work with Federal, State and regional governments and organizations to ensure San Bernardino
County receives its fair share of resources and to help shape legislation and regulations which affect
the County.
? Work with all Federal and State agencies owning land in the County, to maximize the benefit to the
County.
? Support SANBAG’s efforts to expand its role as the Council of Governments in the County.
? Develop a closer working relationship with cities, tribes and other governmental agencies.
As part of the continuing effort to align resources with operational priorities, each department was asked to
review existing performance measures to ensure alignment with the 2013-14 County Goals and Objectives.
These measures should be realistic, easily quantifiable, and reflect progress on long-term multi-year strategic
initiatives or the accomplishment of shorter-term tactical goals, that directly correlate to the identified County
objectives and reflect activities within the department’s control. In addition, performance measurement
progress will be updated and reported as part of each quarterly budget process.
The 2013-14 Recommended Budget book includes prior year accomplishments, departmental strategies to
achieve County Goals and Objectives, and departmental performance measures to demonstrate if
departments are meeting the County Goals and Objectives. The following page provides a brief synopsis of
the County Goals and Objectives and a sample of specific department performance measures for 2013-14.