The best organizations in the nation evolve. They don't stand still. A world class
organization knows what it does better than anyone else and keeps advancing its
strategy and challenging its operations to reflect the ever-changing environment. The
County of San Diego is maturing into a world class organization precisely because it is a
County in Motion. The County continues to focus on character, fiscal stability, a positive
customer experience, operational excellence and a commitment to service
improvement.
A County in Motion sets audacious goals for the greater good. Our vision—a region that
is Building Better Health, Living Safely and Thriving: Live Well San Diego—embodies our
culture. Over the last year, the County increased momentum and built stronger
partnerships across the region to help realize our vision and stay grounded in the
communities we serve.
Highly respected governments do not shy away from difficult topics like Alzheimer’s, mental health treatment
shortages, substance abuse, domestic violence, veterans’ homelessness, human trafficking and affordable
health care. The County’s Board of Supervisors formed collaborative partnerships throughout the region to
tackle all of these issues to ensure we are building better health as a community.
As the face of public safety changed following the implementation of Assembly Bill 109, Public Safety
Realignment (2011); the passage of Proposition 47, Criminal Sentences. Misdemeanor Penalties. Initiative
Statute. (2014), kicked off new challenges. Our outstanding public safety team jumped on those challenges to
keep our communities safe. Legal changes downgrading certain crimes from felonies to misdemeanors required
a smooth transition for those in custody as well as our citizenry. Additionally, County juvenile populations
experienced radical changes. Benchmarks and best practices led us to a team approach with community
partners assisting us in wraparound treatment and family strengthening to keep young people out of juvenile
hall and on to a more productive path to adulthood. The County’s commitment to living safely continues to be a
number one priority.
A region that is healthy and safe is crucial. But so is the environment and focusing on the quality of life for our
residents. Energy efficiency, open space, trails, libraries, parks, solar power usage, air and water quality, and
smart growth are just a few of the areas where we continue to push innovation and resource focus. We
recognize that we must remain vigilant in our efforts to provide community enhancements that ensure our
region is thriving.
Fiscal discipline is the foundation upon which the best governments in the nation are built. Financial excellence
is at the center of everything we do. From our healthy reserves, to our AAA credit rating, to our low debt/payas-
you-go capital philosophy, to our disciplined approach to addressing our maintenance needs, and early risk
identification and management, we maintain an unwavering commitment to being good stewards of the
public’s money. The Fiscal Year 2015–16 CAO Recommended Operational Plan totals $5.40 billion, an increase
of 6.1% over the prior fiscal year, and includes 17,036.50 staff years. The County remains focused on improving
services to meet community needs, remaining strident in addressing our ongoing obligation to the San Diego
County Employees Retirement Association while sustaining our fiscal strength.
The coming fiscal year will keep us in motion. A few of our enhancements include expanding language services
during disasters, increasing support for veterans and their families, implementing Laura’s Law, adding advanced
life support personnel and EMS services in the back country, rolling out another helicopter to our firefighting
capability, upgrading the Regional Communications System, completing the design of a new crime lab to deliver
cutting edge forensic services to the region, and tackling road infrastructure repairs in the unincorporated area.
I invite you to read this Operational Plan for a better understanding of each department’s contribution to the
Enterprise-Wide Goals that support the County of San Diego's four Strategic Initiatives of Healthy Families, Safe
Communities, Sustainable Environments and Operational Excellence.
The best organizations in the nation evolve. This evolution takes place through bold vision, sharing objectives,
making tough choices and an unwavering commitment to being a County in Motion today and every day into
the future.