At last, the elusive, long-awaited local economic recovery has finally
reached San Joaquin County. The proposed 2013-14 budget anticipates
property tax revenue growth the County has not seen for four years since
the beginning of the Great Recession. A modest 4% increase in assessed
valuation reflects the gradual rebound of the housing market and
increased development activities in the County. Home prices have stabilized
and property devaluation experienced in the past years has come to
a halt.
Program expansions continue in four major areas that are primarily
funded by federal and State funds or dedicated revenues. These expansions
represent either voter approved initiative, realignment of State-
County responsibilities, new services, or federal mandates. The budget
includes an additional 200 positions for these programs.
~ Mental Health Services Act (Proposition 63)
~ Public Safety Realignment (AB 109)
~ San Joaquin General Hospital
~ The Affordable Care for America Act (federal Health Care
Reform)
The 2013-14 budget continues to invest limited local resources to the
highest priority program areas. Additional staff positions are restored to
the offices of the District Attorney, Public Defender, Sheriff, and

Probation Department reflecting the Board's priority on law and justice
operations/programs. A few positions are also added in support services
departments to address program/staff expansions in certain functional areas
of the County organization.
Adhering to the Board's long-standing budgetary guidelines and policies,
the budget is built with caution and optimism to ensure the long-term viability
and fiscal health of the County. The budget strategies include:
~ Preserve and balance public services;
~ Maximize federal and State funds, and avoid overmatches;
~ Allocate one-time funds for one-time uses/needs;
~ Preserve scarce General Fund dollars to meet mandated responsibilities
and critical service priorities; and
~ Invest in employee training, automation, equipment, and facilities to
improve public service delivery and responsiveness.
During the Great Recession, the County had to use over $168 million in
capital and reserve funds to balance the General Fund budgets. Use of these
one-time funds allowed the County to avoid more drastic service reductions
and employee layoffs. In recognition of the need to rebuild the capital
improvement program and the reserves, in October 2010, the Board
adopted the funding and reserve policy directing the use of the General
Fund year-end balances and limiting the transfer from the Reserve for Contingencies
for ongoing expenses. The 2013-14 budget further reduces the
reliance on one-time funds for ongoing expenses and includes a small sum
of funds to~ard the rebuilding of the Capital Improvement Program and
Reserve for Contingencies. However, it will be a long road of rebuilding to
re-establish the Capital Improvement Program and the Reserve at the
pre-Great Recession level.
Financial Overview
The appropriation in the proposed 2013-14 budget totals $1.33 billion. This
represents an increase of $60.3 million from the 2012-13 budget. For the
first year since the Great Recession, the assessed valuation of properties in
San Joaquin County is expected to increase modestly at 4%. Revenues
from both local and Statewide sales tax continue to improve, however, at a
slower pace than the previous two years.
The 2013-14 budget eliminates the one-time labor concession savings but
includes ongoing savings resulting from cost sharing of employee benefits
reached with 90% of the County's workforce. The budget also provides for
increases in wages and benefits stipulated in the existing labor agreements.
In addition, the budget includes significant federal and State funding for

law and justice activities, transportation projects, and health and human
services programs. Finally, a modest General Fund support is recommended
for the Capital Improvement Program and Reserve for Contingencies,
but a significant amount of General Fund year-end balance will still
need to be used to balance the 2013-14 budget.
As a political subdivision of the State, the County's role is to deliver the
services mandated by the State and federal governments. Consequently, the
Board of Supervisors does not determine which government functions the
County performs. Health, welfare, criminal justice, elections, recording of
documents, weights and measures, and agricultural enforcement are some
examples of these State-prescribed and County -administered functions.
Many of these programs mandate performance standards and require
County funding participation from our local revenue base.
The graphic effect of mandated programs is illustrated in the pie chart
which follows. It is based on the 2012-13 Approved County Budget
totaling $1.26 billion. The graph highlights several key points:
~ Revenue-specific programs account for $1.04 billion, or 82%, of the
County's budget. These areas cannot be adjusted without losing offsetting
revenues.
~ Only $227.7 million, or 18%, of the County budget is funded by
General Purpose Revenue, including available General Fund and
Contingency Fund balances of $30.8 million.
~ Mandated matches, maintenance-of-effort requirements for
Public Safety programs, and contractual debt services totaling
$67.8 million, or 5.4% of the County budget funded by General
Purpose Revenue, cannot be reduced.
~ $159.9 million, or 12.6%, of the budget is available to absorb any
general federal/State budget cuts and local cost increases. However,
even the areas subject to possible cuts are virtually all mandated and
controlled by law and State regulations.
~ Public Safety programs consume $75.7 million, or 47.3%, of the
areas subject to possible cuts. When combined with the maintenanceof-
effort requirements, a total of$120.2 million, or 52.8%, of the
County's General Purpose Revenue is allocated to Public Safety programs.
~ The Property Tax and Fiscal Systems, Health Services, Public
Health, Children's Shelter, General Assistance, and Elections comprise
$37.3 million, or 23.3%, of the areas subject to possible cuts.
~ Many of the non-Public Safety Program areas provide direct support
or revenues to Public Safety programs (Administration/Support and
Property Tax and Fiscal Systems).

On May 14,2013, the Governor released his 2013-14 May Revision
which includes a General Fund budget totaling $96.3 billion and a
year-end reserve of $1.1 billion. The centerpiece of the Governor's
budget that will have major impacts on the County is the continued
implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) building on the
establishment of the California Health Benefits Exchange and the
early coverage expansion through the "Bridge to Reform" (1115
Waiver) approved in 2010.
Under the federal ACA, expanded health care coverage is provided
through: 1) a mandatory expansion for existing population who are
eligible for Medi-Cal by simplifying rules. affecting eligibility, 2) an
optional Medi-Cal expansion to uninsured adults with income under
138% of the federal poverty level (FPL), and 3) a health insurance
exchange where individuals can purchase health insurance and access
federal tax credits. In summary, the Governor proposes to implement
the ACA through the following programs and approaches:
~ Mandatory Expansion - The Governor's budget includes
$350 million to implement mandatory changes to expand and
retain coverage for those who are currently eligible for Medi-
Cal by simplifying eligibility determination, streamlining the
enrollment processes, and enhancing outreach activities. Major
changes include: 1) establishing standards for determining
income eligibility based on federally-established Modified
Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI), 2) eliminating asset tests for
those who are eligible under MAGI, and 3) conducting "ex
parte" reviews when making annual redetermination of eligibility
for existing participants.
~ Optional Expansion - Beginning January 1,2014, California
will expand Medi-Cal coverage to uninsured adults with income
under 138% ofFPL (also known as Expanded Medi-Cal) whose
health care costs are largely funded by counties. The Governor
proposes a State-based approach for the Expanded Medi-Cal
program with the State assuming financial responsibility for the
expansion. In exchange, the May Revision proposes to shift the
1991 Realignment - Health Services funds designated for
medically-indigent health services to pay for certain local social
services program costs that are currently funded by the State.

The proposed funding shift and the potential impact to San Joaquin
General Hospital (SJGH) are summarized below:
Potential
Impact to
SJGH
$3.6M
$10.9 M
$15.7 M
$15.7 M
~ Health Insurance Exchange - Under the ACA, some low-income
individuals will transition back and forth between Medi-Cal and
private insurance as their income levels change. The Governor proposes
a "Medicaid Bridge Program" for these individuals to ensure
continuity of care and affordability. California Health Benefits
Exchange (also known as Covered California) will administer this
bridge program that will allow individuals with income between
138% to 200% FPL to obtain no-cost or low-cost coverage through
the Medi-Cal Managed Care program. Covered California will begin
open enrollment October 1, 2013, and health coverage will begin
January 1,2014.
In addition to the ACA proposals, the Governor's budget also includes
reform to the Enterprise Zone as follows:
~ Enterprise Zone - The Governor proposes to change the nature of
the Enterprise Zone program by shifting resources currently available
to local Enterprise Zone businesses to other geographical areas,
to be determined by the Administration. In summary, the Governor's
proposal redirects roughly $700 million annually from the existing
Enterprise Zone program to three new business incentive programs -
two of which will be available Statewide: 1) Sales Tax Exemption for
businesses located in Enterprise Zones will be expanded Statewide
on manufacturing equipment or research and development equipment
purchases by firms engaged in manufacturing or biotechnology
research and development; 2) Hiring Credit for Businesses located in
census tracts with the 25% highest share of both unemployment and
poverty in the State (this will include some areas both inside and outside
existing Enterprise Zones); and 3) The California Competes
Credit will be created and will be administered by the Administration's
GO-Biz. Businesses will compete for available tax credits
based on specified criteria including the number of jobs to be created
or retained, a minimum compensation limitation, and a set job retention
period. The Governor's Proposal, as currently stated, could
eliminate the existing Enterprise Zone program in San Joaquin
County.

Legislative Budget Subcommittees have been holding budget hearings.
Staff will continue to monitor State budget activities and attempt to influence
the outcome of the budget to minimize its impact on local governments.
Any necessary budget changes to the County budget will be
submitted to the Board for consideration after the analysis of the final State
budget actions is completed.
Financial Analysis
The 2013-14 Proposed County Budget (excluding Special Districts) totals
$1.33 billion, which represents an increase of $60.3 million from the
2012-13 Approved Budget. These appropriations are primarily based on
the current State/County funding relationship. In the event State funding is
less than the anticipated amounts as a result of the final State Budget, a
commensurate reduction in local expenditures will be necessary.
Budget totals for Special Districts governed by the Board of Supervisors
have been added to the County budget figures to show the total scope of
the Board of Supervisors' responsibility. The grand total of all budget
elements, including Special Districts, is $1.35 billion.
The recommended appropriations by function are as follows:

Notable changes in the 2013-14 appropriations include the following:
>- A net increase of $7.6 million for negotiated employee salary and
benefits adjustments. This includes projected savings from the
implementation of the Public Employees Pension Reform Act and
health insurance premiums, partially offset by increases in retirement
contributions and salary increases scheduled for 2013-14.

General Government is increased by $3.2 million, primarily reflecting
increases of$2.3 million in Tobacco Settlement funds for capital uses;
$1.3 million of General Fund support for the Airport, Capital
Improvement Program, and Reserve for Contingencies; and $630,000
for additional staffing to address increased workload. Partially offsetting
the increases is a reduction of $700,000 in election costs as only
one major election is anticipated in 2013-14.
~ Capital Maintenance is decreased by $3.2 million largely due to the
deletion of $3.3 million redirected from the Capital Improvement
Program to the General Fund in 2012-13 and a reduction of
$1.0 million in federally-funded infrastructure projects in lowincome
neighborhoods. No further de-funding of previously funded
capital projects are recommended in 2013-14. Partially offsetting
these reductions is an additional $1.6 million in Tobacco Settlement
funds for capital projects.
~ Environmental Protection is increased by $424,000 primarily due
to additional staffing and related costs of $743,000 to address
increased development activities. Partially offsetting this increase
is a reduction of $417,000 in Homeland Security grant program
expenses.
~ Law and Justice function is increased by $18.7 million, primarily
consisting of $4.0 million in negotiated salary and benefits adjustments,
a net staffing cost increase of $1.5 million, and $11.7 million
in additional staff, programs, and operating costs related to Public
Safety Realignment CAB 109).
~ Roads and Facilities programs are increased by $14.9 million,
reflecting $10.3 million in additional construction and road maintenance
work; $1.3 million in engineering services; and $2.6 million
for a solar carport.
~ Health Services programs are increased by $23.2 million. Major
increases include $12.0 million in staffing costs for positions added
midyear 2012-13 and recommended in 2013-14 primarily for Mental
Health Services and SJGH; $5.0 million in negotiated salary and benefits
adjustments; $4.7 million in community provider contracts and
automation equipment related to Mental Health Services Act programs;
and $1.8 million in Trauma Center equipment for SJGH.
~ Human Services programs are decreased by $1.9 million. Major
changes include reductions of $7.2 million in public assistance aid
payments; $2.3 million in subsidized child care services for welfare
recipients; $1.2 million for In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS)
program costs; $867,000 in federal pass-through for Head Starts program;
$1.4 million in employment and training for dislocated
employees and disadvantaged population; and $497,000 in lowincome
housing assistance. Partially offsetting these reductions are
increases of $10.2 million in staffing costs for positions added

midyear 2012-13 and recommended in 2013-14 for Human Services
Agency and negotiated salary and benefits adjustments; and
$473,000 in foster care out-of-home placement costs.
>- Education is increased by $378,000 primarily reflecting projected
available funds for library services.
>- Reserve for Contingencies is increased by $4.6 million reflecting the
recommended reserve level of$19.5 million for 2013-14.
The relative sizes of the 2013-14 appropriations by function are shown
below:

Overall, available revenues are expected to increase by $60.3 million, or
4.8% from the 2012-13 budget level. Notable changes in 2013-14 available
funds are as follows:
>- Aid from Other Governmental Agencies is projected to increase by
$26.6 million. This consists primarily of increases of $11.8 million in
federal and State reimbursements for public assistance administration;
$8.2 million in State funds for Mental Health Services
programs, including MHSA and Drug Medi-Cal pass-through payments
to providers; $6.3 million in federal and State funds for road
construction projects; $2.4 million in State realignment revenues for
social services programs; $3.7 million in Proposition 172 State sales
tax for public safety departments; and $880,000 in Federal Aviation
Administration grants for airport improvement projects. It also
includes $17.5 million in Local Community Corrections - AB 109
funds for Public Safety Realignment programs, of which $3.8 million
is due to reclassification from Other Revenues.
Partially offsetting these increases are reductions in federal and State
funds of$7.0 million in CalWORKs reimbursements; $2.3 million
for subsidized child care programs; $2.3 million for IHSS program;
$1.8 million for employment and training program for dislocated
workers; $1.4 million in Community Development Block Grant;
$5.0 million in State Realignment revenue for SJGH and Mental
Health Services; $867,000 in Head Start grant due to federal sequestration;
and $690,000 in prior years' federal stimulus funds for infrastructure
improvements in low-income neighborhoods.
>- Charges for Services are increased by $17.0 million. Major changes
include increases of $14.5 million in patient revenues at SJGH;
$2.5 million in mental health service charges; $2.3 million in refuse
disposal fees at the County's landfills; and $674,000 in permit and
inspection fees from increased development activities. Partially offsetting
these increases are reductions of $1.3 million in Property Tax
Administration Fees; and $2.2 million in reimbursements from cities
and special districts for the June and November 2012 election costs.
>- Revenues derived from Current Property Taxes are projected to
increase $9.3 million. The recommended budget assumes a 4%
growth in assessed valuation of the current secured and supplemental
tax rolls.
>- The $4.0 million decrease in Other Revenues reflects reclassification
of$3.8 million in AB 109 funds to Aids from Other Governmental
Agencies and deletion of $3.3 million in funds redirected from Capital
Outlay to the General Fund. Partially offsetting these reductions is
an increase of $2.3 million in Tobacco Settlement Funds.
>- Other Taxes are up by $8.9 million reflecting increases of $2.7 million
in local sales tax revenues and $6.3 million in Measure K sales
tax allocation for transportation projects.

Available year-end Fund Balances are estimated at $92.1 million, an
increase of $2.5 million from 2012-13. This primarily consists of
increases of $4.0 million in Reserve for Contingencies balances; and
$2.8 million in Road Fund attributable to funds re-budgeted for
transportation/infrastructure projects. Offsetting these increases are
reductions of $1.7 million in Capital Outlay Fund; $1.6 million in
Road Districts; and $400,000 in Recorder's Modernization fund balances.
The mix of available funds is depicted below:

The County budget presentation is developed to show the "Net County
Cost" for each departmental budget. Net County Cost is computed by
subtracting program-generated revenue, offsetting grants, or cost sharing
by other levels of government from the appropriation requirements for
each budget. The remaining Net County Cost is funded by General Purpose
Revenue.

The most significant changes in Net County Cost are:
~ General Government has increased $6.2 million. This is primarily
attributable to increases of $859,000 to property tax administration
departments to backfill losses of Property Tax Administration Fees
due to recent court decisions; and $623,000 for additional support
staff. It also eliminates the use of the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust
of $2.5 million for the Jail and Sheriff's Operations Center Project
debt payment and the deletion of $2.2 million reimbursements from
cities and special districts for 2012 election costs.
~ Capital Maintenance has increased $2.3 million. This consists
primarily of increased Tobacco Settlement Funds allocation of
$1.6 million for the Hospital Phase II Project and ongoing maintenance
of County facilities. In addition, a General Fund support of
$500,000 is recommended for the Capital Improvement Program.
~ Environmental Protection has increased $223,000 mainly due to
negotiated salary and benefits adjustments and an additional staff for
the Office of Emergency Services.
~ Law and Justice shows an increase of $1.8 million. Significant
changes for programs funded with General Purpose Revenue include
$2.7 million in salary and benefits adjustments, addition of a net
$1.2 million for new positions, and a reduction of $1.1 million in
federal grant funding for Deputy Sheriffs; offset by an increase in
Proposition 172 revenue of $3.7 million.
~ Roads and Facilities has increased $157,000 in additional General
Fund support to the Airport and Tobacco Settlement fund for Deltarelated
activities.
County of San Joaquin 2013-14 Budget Message
General Purpose
Revenue
~ Health Services has increased $472,000 mainly due to negotiated
salary and benefits adjustments.
~ Human Services has decreased $2.1 million largely reflecting a
$2.4 million increase in State Realignment revenues for public assistance
programs.
~ Parks and Recreation programs have decreased $58,000 primarily
attributable to reduction in Parks staffing and increased park fees.
~ Reserve for Contingencies has increased to $19.5 million. This
represents approximately 1.5% of the proposed budget.
Changes in the General Purpose Revenue sources which support the
recommended $241.3 million Net County Cost include:

As shown in the table above, Current Property Taxes and Sales Taxes are
the two main sources of the County's General Purpose Revenue. Combined,
they represent almost 90% of the total ongoing General Purpose
Revenue, excluding Fund Balance and Transfer from Capital Fund. These
revenue sources are extremely sensitive to the economic upswings and
downturns.
The County's assessed property valuation started declining in 2008-09
following the collapse of the housing market. The decline continued over
the next four years and annual property tax revenue dropped by $40.4 million,
or 20%, between 2007-08 and 2012-13. The County is finally experiencing
the economic recovery happening throughout the Nation. For the
first time since the Great Recession, the assessed valuation is expected to
increase by 4% in the budget year. While this is a positive sign, the
recovery will likely be slow and take many years to rebuild the property
tax revenue base back to the 2007-08 level.

The Great Recession had also negatively impacted sales tax receipts for
several years. The decline also affected the State sales taxes dedicated to
public safety (Proposition 172) and social services (also known as 1991
Realignment) programs. Unlike the property tax revenue trend, sales tax
receipts were stabilized sooner and continue to improve. While sales tax
revenues for 2013-14 are projected to increase to $97.9 million, it is still
$6.6 million, or 6.3%, less than 2006-07. The following chart depicts the
Sales Taxes, including the County's General Purpose Revenue, Proposition
172, and Realignment.,Social Services, for 2006-07 to 2013-14.

Although at a lesser degree compared to the last four years, the proposed
budget continues to be balanced with one-time budget solutions that will
not be sustainable for future years' budgets. The use of these one-time
funds, totaling $16.1 million, allows the County to maintain most General
Fund-supported programs at the current level. This is approximately
$6.2 million, or 28%, less than 2012-13. A number of positions are
restored, primarily in those departments that provide support services to
other County departments and law and justice activities, to address workload
demand.

The County workforce is comprised of employees who hold permanently
allocated positions and those who work in temporary, extra-help, and
contract capacities. The following table illustrates the recommended
changes in overall staffing for 2013-14:

Several points should be noted:
>- There is an overall increase of232.9 full-time equivalent (FTE)
positions. This still represents a net loss of 444.2 FTE positions from
2007-08.

237 new full-time allocated positions are recommended:
128 positions for Human Services Agency to address caseload
growth in public assistance programs primarily for the implementation
of the ACA; costs are fully funded by federal and
State allocations
24 positions for San Joaquin General Hospital to support the
implementation of the expanded health care coverage initiatives
and trauma center operations; costs are fully funded by
federal, State, and patient revenues
46 positions for Behavioral Health Services primarily to implement
the additional components of the Mental Health Services
Act programs/activities funded by Proposition 63 revenues
5 positions for Public Health Services to address workload
demand
1 position for Correctional Health Services to address AB 109
program workload
5 positions for Probation to restore Community Accountability
Program targeting at-risk youths and to expand the Probation
Officers on Campus program
4 positions for Sheriff's Office to provide management support
and to address AB 109 program workload
4 positions for District Attorney to address increased workload
- 2 positions for Public Defender to address increased workload
- 5 positions for Community Development to support increased
development activities; costs are fully funded by permit/
inspection fees
3 positions for Public Works for engineering support and fleet
services
1 position for Cooperative Extension to support University of
California advisors assigned to San Joaquin County
9 positions for administration/support services departments to
address workload demand
~ 7 full-time allocated positions are recommended for deletion
primarily due to reductions in federal/State funding, and completion
of one-time projects:
- 2 positions for Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk
2 positions for Public Health Services
- 2 positions for Neighborhood Preservation
- 1 position for Employment and Economic Development

San Joaquin County has 16 represented bargaining units and 11 unions or
associations, which comprises approximately 96% of the County's workforce.
Contracts for nine of the County's represented bargaining units are
set to expire on June 30, 2013; these units represent 75% of the County's
workforce. The County is in active negotiations with these units for successor
contracts. The agreement for the Correctional Officers bargaining unit
expired June 30, 2012; no negotiation sessions have been scheduled yet.
As of May 20, 2013, there were 5,538 full-time allocated positions, of
which 506, or 9.1%, were vacant positions. Of the 506 vacant positions,
265 were actively under recruitment.
As previously noted, the 2013-14 budget proposes to delete seven allocated
full-time positions, of which one is filled. The budget also adds 237 new
positions. If these changes are approved, this will bring the full-time allocated
positions to 5,768 and the number of vacant positions to 737. Over
80% of the vacancies will be in the following County departments whose
operations are primarily funded by federal, State, or service charges:
~ Human Services Agency - 232
~ San Joaquin General Hospital - 119
~ Behavioral Health - 108
~ Sheriff - 72
~ Public Works - 49
~ Probation - 38
The Information System Division (ISD) budget totals $16.2 million and
includes the addition of 8.0 FTEs. At the request of the Assessor-Recorder-
County Clerk (Assessor), ISD will assume responsibility for all information
technology services in the Assessor's Office effective July 2013. The
recommended budget transfers the Assessor's existing information technology
staff (one manager and five staff) to ISD. Currently, ISD manages
the property tax system for the Auditor-Controller and Treasurer-Tax
Collector whiie the Assessor maintains a separate property tax system.
Centralization of this function will allow ISD to more effectively manage
and integrate data for both systems.
The recommended overall budget for law and justice functions increases
by $18.7 million, largely reflecting an increase in funding to continue
implementation of public safety realignment, otherwise known as AB 109.
Aside from AB 109 changes, a limited number of new staff is added for
law and justice departments in 2013-14, although most represent restoration
of positions that were deleted as part of previous budget reductions. In
total, a net of fifteen new positions are added to the offices of the District

Attorney, Public Defender, Sheriff, and Probation Department. Following
is a brief summary of the departmental impacts:
~ Probation: The overall budget for the Probation Department
increases by $13.2 million, primarily due to AB 109 implementation.
Three positions are restored in the recommended budget for the
Community Accountability Program for at-risk youths and two positions
are added for the Probation Officers on Campus program.
~ Sheriff-Coroner-Public Administrator: Total budget for the
Sheriff's Office increases by $3.9 million. Major increases include
twelve positions added midyear 2012-13 for AB 109, four new positions
in the recommended budget, and negotiated salary and benefits
adjustments.
~ District Attorney: The overall budget for the District Attorney's
Office increases by $819,000. Four positions are restored in the recommended
budget, as well as the costs for two positions added midyear
2012-13 for Real Estate Fraud Prosecution.
~ Public Defender: The Public Defender's Office budget increases by
$398,000. Two positions are restored in the recommended budget.
The 2013-14 SJGH budget totals $243.2 million, and includes the addition
of 30.8 FTEs to support the anticipated increased patient volume due to
Trauma Center operations and the opening of the California Health Care
Facility (CHCF). The General Fund contribution to SJGH remains at
$11.6 million for ongoing operations.
The Hospital anticipates receiving Level III Trauma Center designation in
the Summer of2013. SJGH has focused on this initiative since December
2011. Start-up costs, including operating expenses and capital, were provided
in the 2012-13 budget. In January 2013, the Hospital began a soft
start of the Trauma program. In February 2013, the Hospital responded to
the Trauma Request for Proposals from Emergency Medical Services
(EMS). In March 2013, EMS conducted a site visit to assess SJGH's readiness.
SJGH will continue to work with EMS to plan and prepare for the
anticipated designation. Once designated, all appropriate trauma cases will
be directed to SJGH. Daily census at SJGH is projected to increase by 8.6
inpatient with an estimated gross revenue of $5.9 million annually. The
recommended budget adds 13 positions to accommodate this additional
volume.
In July 2013, California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation
(CDCR) is expected to begin admitting patients to the new 1,722-bed subacute
CHCF in Stockton. CDCR plans to consolidate its existing sub-acute
and psychiatric prisoners from around the State into the new CHCF. As
those patients have medical needs requiring acute care level hospitalization,
SJGH anticipates that CDCR will refer those patients to the Medical
Guarded Unit at SJGH. The recommended budget projects an average daily census of 16.6 patients from CDCR and a gross revenue of $10.6 million.
The budget also adds 6 FTE nursing staff to address the additional
CDCR volume.
In November 2010, the federal government approved the 1115 Waiver,
which is California's five-year "Bridge to Healthcare Reform." Through
the 1115 Waiver, California will advance Medi-Cal program changes that
will help the State transition to the Affordable Care Act that will take effect
in January 2014. Changes under the 1115 Waiver will include coverage
expansion to newly eligible Medicaid populations, delivery system reform
for the most vulnerable residents, administration simplification, and payment
reform. SJGH participates in the two coverage expansion programs:
Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool (DSRIP) and Low-Income Health
Program (LIHP).
~ Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool - DSRIP is anticipated to
be a significant source of funds to SJGH over the term of the 1115
Waiver (November 2010 - October 2015). Over that time period,
SJGH can potentially receive additional funding totaling $93.8 million
if certain milestones are achieved as they relate to improvements
in service delivery and quality of patient care. Thus far, SJGH
received a total of$45.1 million through 2012-13. The 2013-14
SJGH budget includes $19.7 million in DSRIP funding and 44.6
FTEs to support the program.
~ Low-Income Health Program - LIHPs allow counties to draw
down federal matching dollars to provide coverage to childless
adults if they meet certain requirements. Some patients enrolled in
LIHP will transition from the current Medical Assistance Program.
Services offered include routine and emergency care provided at
SJGH, clinics, and other hospitals when authorized. Under this program,
patients must be assigned to a patient-centered medical home
with coordinated care. SJGH, working in conjunction with the
Health Care Services Agency, started the LIHP in June 2012. The
program is slated to sunset in December 2013 when this population
is moved to the Expanded Medi-Cal program. The 2013-14 SJGH
budget includes $2.3 million in LIHP revenue.
The Human Services Agency's Administration budget totals $134.8 million
and includes an additional 120.2 FTEs. This represents a net increase
of 245 positions, or 30%, since 2010-11, to address caseload growth in
public assistance programs as well as the implementation of the ACA
which will substantially expand the number of individuals eligible for
Medi-Cal, change the Medi-Cal eligibility determination requirements, and
streamline the Medi-Cal redetermination processes for existing participants.
In addition, the State mandates counties to establish a local call center
to receive a "warm" transfer from the State's call centers for individuals
who may be eligible for the Expanded Medi-Cal program. HSA's call
center will be operational by October 1,2013.

The Mental Health Services (MHS) budget totals $99.2 million and adds
63.6 FTEs to continue the implementation of Mental Health Services Act
(MHSA) programs. The overall purpose of MHSA is to reduce the longterm
adverse impact on individuals, families, and State and local budgets
as a result of untreated serious mental illness. The recommended budget
includes $28.9 million ofMHSA funds, an increase of$3.2 million from
2012-13. New planned activities/programs for 2013-14 are as follows:
~ Innovation - A Children and Youth Services Innovation project is
dedicated to improving the long-term outcomes for children and
families either at risk of or involved with the Juvenile Justice System.
The model improves communication and reduces conflict in
families, and produces positive youth outcomes of reduced risk
behaviors, reduced substance abuse, and decreased juvenile justice
involvement. A secondary goal of the project is to promote interagency
collaboration among the partners serving the families.
~ Capital Facilities & Technological Needs - First year funding of
$2.9 million is provided to begin an integrated information systems
upgrade that will prepare MHS for full implementation of an electronic
health record system by December 2014, as required by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
Through an agreement between the County and City of Stockton, the City
operates the City/County Library System which serves the cities of
Escalon, Lathrop, Manteca, Ripon, Stockton, and Tracy as well as the unincorporated
areas of the County. The County's funding base for library services
is comprised primarily of property taxes. The overall increase in
home prices and fewer foreclosures resulted in a 4% increase in the
County's property tax collections for Library services. The City of Stockton
Library staff has indicated that weekly hours will be maintained and
Library branches will be open two additional weeks during 2013-14 due to
the elimination of City of Stockton furloughs. The proposed weekly hours
for County branches, including hours funded by both the County and the
respective cities, are shown in the following table:

The City/County Library System is staffed by the City of Stockton's
employees. The City plans to close all branches, including County
branches, the following 13 days:
>- July 4, 2013
>- September 2, 2013
>- October 14,2013
>- November 11,28, and 29,2013
>- December 25,2013
>- January 1 and 20, 2014
>- February 10 and 17,2014
>- March 31, 2014
>- May 26, 2014
The proposed 2013-14 Public Improvement program totals $11.3 million
and includes the following capital improvement and deferred maintenance
projects:
>- Facility Reuse: Structural upgrades for the Human Services Agency;
and address facilities compliance with Americans with Disabilities
Act.
>- Mathews Road Complex: Replacement of water heaters; heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning units; roofs; and other improvements
at the Sheriff's Operations Center, Honor Farm, and Juvenile
Hall.
>- Facility Planning: Preliminary design for the future replacement of
SJGH's Old Towers Building; and a new morgue and forensic
pathology facility.
>- Community Development Block Grant: Gianone Park drainage
improvements; Ardell Avenue sidewalks improvements; and Woodbridge
Street improvements.
>- Other Projects: Sealing and patching of several parking lots; additional
upgrades at County regional parks; installation of a handrail to
improve safety at the Administration Building; and completion of the
Facilities Master Plan Update.
Sixty-nine requested projects totaling $157.2 million are not funded in the
proposed budget.
Ninety vehicles have been identified for replacement and purchase in
2013-14 at an estimated cost of$2.8 million, which will be funded from
the Fleet Services' Vehicle Replacement Reserve. These vehicles are allocated
to Fleet Services as part of the County's fleet and have reached their
optimal service life. In addition, 18 new vehicles, totaling $642,000, are 

Prior to finalizing the list of replacement vehicles, Fleet Services will
evaluate the conditions and usefulness of vehicles turned in by departments
in 2013-14, which may result in fewer purchases.
County support and contributions to the following community-based
organizations that provide community services or promote economic development
within San Joaquin County are recommended at the current levels:
» Child Abuse Prevention Council
» Community Partnership for Families
» San Joaquin County Historical Society
» San Joaquin Economic Development Association
» San Joaquin Partnership
» Women's Center - Youth & Family Services
The County also continues to support the revitalization of downtown
Stockton through continued upgrades of County facilities and allowing use
of the County-owned Hunter Street Parking Garage for downtown events.
Several departments, especially the Sheriff, District Attorney, and Probation,
have numerous grants totaling millions of dollars. This creates a
dilemma for the County. On one hand, one of our overarching fiscal
strategies is to leverage non-County funding resources to meet community

needs. On the other hand, there is a downside to reliance on grants,
especially in the grant-dependent criminal justice system. There is cause
for concern for two reasons:
~ State and federal grant funding tends to be offered on a year-to-year
basis and in some cases, local agencies are required to continue funding
beyond the grant period. Accordingly, it cannot be considered a
stable source of ongoing revenue. Indeed, economic fluctuations can
and have resulted in grant reduction and/or termination as measures
to curb spending. Should State or federal grant levels change, local
program reductions would be the likely consequence.
~ Grant-funded programs, especially in the public safety area, often fail
to recognize that the addition of resources in one area sometimes
upsets the delicate resource balance of the overall system. This
results in local funding demands to maintain system balance. Grantfunded
programs usually involve staffing and an evolving
constituency that will resist staffing and service reductions. It is,
therefore, essential that we continue to monitor the effects of grant
program resources to minimize adverse impact when reduction and
termination occurs.
In many public service areas, the State has distinguished between general
public services and special public services. Examples of general public
services would be the Jail, welfare, and certain health programs. Examples
of special (or user beneficial) public services would be those related to
property development, conducting a business, or animal ownership. The
distinction between these types of services is who benefits (general public
or private party) or whose activity imposes the cost for assuring the
public's welfare. General public services are funded from general revenues
(i.e., sales and property taxes). Special public services are funded by
special revenues (i.e., user fees, license fees, and penalty assessments).
County government is prohibited from charging more than actual costs for
the service provided. However, failure to increase special revenue rates to
keep pace with increased costs deprives the County of resources required to
cover general service costs. Such shortages can be resolved by several
techniques:
~ Reducing special service delivery costs.
~ Reducing special service delivery levels.
~ Increasing special service revenue consistent with cost (user fees).
~ Reducing general service levels to subsidize inadequately funded
special public services.
During the Final Budget Hearing, some fee increases will be recommended
to keep pace with costs and avoid shifting the costs of special services to
the general taxpayer.

The General Reserve is a cash resource for financing during the dry period
between the beginning of the fiscal year and the receipt of property taxes in
December and April. Additionally, it acts as a contingency for the County
in extreme emergencies. For 2013-14, it is recommended that the General
Reserve be maintained at the current level of $10.0 million.
The Reserve for Contingencies covers day-to-day unforeseen budgetary
needs and has been used by your Board sparingly in the past. In conformation
with the Board's reserve policy (R-l 0-525), the Reserve for
Contingencies is recommended to be set at $19.5 million in 2013-14 which
represents approximately 1.5% of the proposed budget. This is an increase
of $4.6 million from the 2012-13 level and provides a hedge against
adverse federal and State budget impacts; and use as interim funding to
address local emergencies/disasters.
Fund Balance Management
In governmental budgeting language, Fund Balance is the excess of assets
and estimated revenues of a fund over its liabilities, reserves, and appropriations.
The portion of this balance that is free and unencumbered for
financing the next year's budget is called Available Fund Balance.
Management of Fund Balance shortages is a critical factor in stabilizing
County finances and is carefully evaluated by rating agencies when the
County seeks debt financing. To assure prudent overall budget management,
the Board adopted guidelines for departmental budget change requests that
occur after budget adoption. Budget change guidelines are as follows:
~ Requests are to be minimized;
~ Requests are to be revenue offset; and
~ Non revenue-offset requests are to be limited to emergencies or to the
support of critical Board priorities.
The consequence of not adhering to such guidelines is to risk proliferation
of budget change requests to authorize staffing and programming increases
during the year from one-time departmental budget savings. Frequently,
this results in ongoing full-year costs the following fiscal year without
revenue support, which means cuts elsewhere are needed to keep the
budget balanced. Such budget change requests during the year are counterproductive
because such incrementalism erodes the Board's funding flexibility
outside of the comprehensive annual budget review process when all
program priorities are reviewed together.

As noted earlier in this budget message, the downturn of the economy has
negatively impacted the County's revenue sources in the recent years. A
significant amount of funds has been redirected from the Reserve for
Contingencies and the Capital Improvement Program to help bridge the
budget gaps in the last four years. Recognizing the unsustainability of these
one-time funds and the need to rebuild the County's Capital Improvement
Program, the Board established the funding guidelines designating the
General Fund year-end fund balances as one-time resources for one-time
uses (B-lO-965). However, due to the severity of this year's funding shortfall,
the proposed budget recommends suspending the policy and includes
$14.9 million in the projected year-end fund balance for operations. This
represents 92.5% of the projected year-end fund balance.
Supplemental Requests
Department Heads and community-based organizations submitted
$840,722 in requests for supplemental funding which are not provided for
in the recommended budget. Sixty-nine capital projects at a preliminary
estimated cost of $157.2 million are also not funded. While the 2013-14
Proposed Budget contains labor cost savings resulting from negotiations
over the last two years, it continues to be balanced with one-time funds
totaling $16.1 million. The State budget continues to pose significant risk
to the County's financial health, specifically with the unknown impacts
from the Governor's Health Realignment proposals and the implementation
of the Affordable Care Act. In an effort to adhere to the Board-established
fiscal policies, some departmental wants and needs are unaddressed.
As a result of the funding recommendations which comprise the 2013-14
Proposed County Budget, the Board may hear requests by departments,
special interest groups, community-based organizations, and the general
public to add funding during the budget hearing. In providing policy
guidance on desired budget adjustments, the Board will also need to provide
policy guidance as to which areas of the County budget should be
reduced to offset any added costs. Supplemental requests are outlined in
Attachment A and detailed in individual budget narratives.
Final Budget Hearing
Our office has identified several significant individual budget unit
recommendations for Board review during the Final Budget Hearing.
When particular functional areas are scheduled for discussion, the Board
may wish to examine other areas as well. Department Heads and members
of the public will have an opportunity to comment. Additionally, some
community-based organizations may desire to make presentations. Supplemental
budget requests will be presented.

The impacts of State Budget actions are unknown at this time. It may be
necessary to return to the Board to re-open budget considerations after the
2013-14 Final Budget is adopted, should additional funding become
available or should major funding/program reductions be imposed based
upon the adopted State Budget.
Appreciation
There were insufficient resources to address all requests for funding and to
maintain the County services or operations. Accordingly, some departments
are expected to explain their concerns about service levels, and
facility and technology needs, and make appeals for supplemental funding
during the Final Budget Hearing. Despite these concerns, County
Administrator's staff has received excellent cooperation and is grateful to
Department Heads and their staff.
Appreciation is particularly extended to the Auditor-Controller's Office,
Information Systems Division, and Purchasing and Support Services for
the production of the document. Finally, the County Administrator's staff
is recognized for the hard work, professional evaluation, and long hours
they contributed to the preparation of the document.
Recommendations
It is recommended that your Board:
1. Approve the proposed County and Special Districts budgets for
2013-14. This action does not constitute final approval of any of the
proposals prior to the Final Budget Hearing. It does, however,
provide the document that will be presented to your Board for the
Final Budget Hearing and give Department Heads and the public
information from which other requests or recommendations can be
made.
2. Set Tuesday, June 25, 2013, at 1:30 p.m. as the time to begin the
Final Budget Hearing on the adoption of the County and Special
Districts budgets and authorize the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
to publish the required hearing notice.