The Proposed Budget does very much the same as last year with cautious
growth in staffing and programs in strategic areas and areas of necessity
for the delivery of services to our community. The largest expansions are
occurring in health and human services and to a lesser degree in law and
justice. My goal for the organization in this budget is to continue evaluating
our current services delivery and spending plan and ask "Why". It is
important as an organization we are not just focused for today but for our
future sustainability in all areas. As Albert Einstein said,
"To raise new questions, new possibilities, to regard old problems
from a new angle, requires creative imagination and marks real
advance in science. "
I believe our organization's possibilities are achievable. It is important
we continue to effectively utilize the tools we have already invested in
and understand the ones we need. Fiscal prudence is necessary to meet
the budget challenges in our future
For the second consecutive year, the Proposed Budget is structurally-balanced,
where ongoing revenues are sufficient to fund ongoing expenses.
Of the projected $12.9 million General Fund year-end fund balance, only
$2.6 million has been programmed for operations. Pursuant to Board policies,
the remaining $10.3 million has been used to replenish and rebuild
the Reserve for Contingencies ($7.8 million), and to establish the
Reserve for Unfunded Pension Liabilities ($2.5 million) and the Reserve
for Economic Development ($95,000).

The County's budget growth continues in health and human services. Of
the additional 170 recommended full-time positions, 130 are being added
to support the health and human services programs which are due to
increases in caseload and new initiatives. These programs are primarily
funded from State and Federal resources.
One of the County's largest increases in operational costs remains retirement
expenses. Approximately 52% of the Proposed Budget is for salary
and employee benefits. The County has consistently paid its annual cost of
retirement. However, based on the last valuation report, the funded ratio of
the retirement plan was at 64.2% as of January 1, 2014 with a growing
unfunded liability exceeding $1.3 billion; San Joaquin County's share is
estimated at $1.2 billion. To ensure the financial health of the County as
well as the retirement system, a funding plan will need to be developed to
address this unfunded obligation.
The implementation of Affordable Care Act not only impacted the programs
and workload of San Joaquin General Hospital and Human Services
Agency, it also has significant financial and operational implications on the
County as an employer. Changes in benefits coverage for part-time
employees will require major system modifications to ensure annual compliance.
In addition, the "Cadillac Tax", a 40% excise tax on health insurance
costs over the mandated threshold, will become effective 2018.
Without mitigation measures, this would cost the County $2.5 million in
2018 and over $40 million in ten years.
Currently, the County has six labor agreements that have either expired or
will expire at the end of June 2015. These labor agreements impact 744
positions and the County is currently negotiating with these units for successor
agreements. The agreement with another unit with 435 positions will
expire in December 2015 and negotiations for a successor agreement will
begin in fall of 2015. The potential costs resulting from these negotiations
are not known and, therefore, are not included in the Proposed Budget.
In 2014-15, an internal third quarter financial review was implemented to
provide a greater level of accuracy in projecting the organization's year-end
fiscal position. Also, additional management tools were developed to assist
Department Heads to monitor their spending and staffing resources. The
goal is to enhance departmental accountability and transparency as well as
to ensure essential County services are delivered in the most effective and
cost efficient manner.
Financial Overview
The appropriation in the proposed 2015-16 budget totals $1.42 billion. This
represents an increase of $63.4 million from the 2014-15 budget. The
assessed valuation of properties in San Joaquin County is expected to grow
by 5.0%, following increases of 5.1% and 9.2% in 2013-14 and 2014-15
respectively. Revenues from both local and Statewide sales tax continue to
Improve.

The budget provides for increases in wages and benefits stipulated in the
existing labor agreements. In addition, the budget includes significant Federal
and State funding for law and justice activities, transportation projects,
and health and human services programs. Overall, departmental revenues,
including Federal and State funding, provides over 80%, or $1.14 billion of
the budget. The remaining $276.3 million is funded by General Purpose
Revenue and available year-end fund balances.
As a political subdivision of the State, the County's role is to deliver the
services mandated by the Federal and State governments. Consequently,
the Board of Supervisors does not determine which government functions
the County performs. Health, welfare, criminal justice, elections, recording
of documents, weights and measures, and agricultural enforcement are
some examples of these State-prescribed and County-administered functions.
Many of these programs mandate performance standards and require
County funding participation from our local revenue base.
The graphic effect of mandated programs is illustrated in the pie chart
which follows. It is based on the 2015-16 Proposed County Budget totaling
$1.42 billion. The chart highlights several key points:
~ Revenue-specific programs account for $1.14 billion, or 80.5%, of
the County's budget. These areas cannot be adjusted without losing
offsetting revenues.
~ Only $276.3 million, or 19.5%, of the County budget is funded by
General Purpose Revenue, including available General Fund and
Contingency Fund balances of $41.8 million.
~ Mandated matches, maintenance-of-effort requirements for Public
Safety programs, and contractual debt services totaling $77.2 million,
or 5.4% of the County budget funded by General Purpose Revenue,
cannot be reduced.
~ $199.1 million, or 14.1%, of the budget is available to absorb any
general Federal/State budget cuts and local cost increases. However,
even the areas subject to possible cuts are virtually all mandated and
controlled by law and State regulations, where the Board of Supervisors
has some discretion over the level of services.
~ Public Safety programs consume $92.3 million, or 46.4%, of the
areas subject to possible cuts. When combined with the maintenanceof-
effort requirements, a total of $140.9 million, or 51.0%, of the
General Purpose Revenue is allocated to Public Safety programs.
~ The Property Tax and Fiscal Systems, Health Services, Public
Health, Children's Shelter, General Assistance, and Elections comprise
$35.4 million, or 17.8%, of the areas subject to possible cuts.
~ Many of the non-Public Safety Program areas provide direct support
or revenues to Public Safety programs (Administration/Support and
Property Tax and Fiscal Systems).

State Budget Status
On May, 14,2015, the Governor released his 2015-16 May Revision to his
January budget proposal, with health and education being the stated focus
of the budget. The revised expenditure plan totals $169 billion, which
includes $115 billion from the State's General Fund. General Fund revenue
sources increased by $3.7 billion compared to the 2014-15 budget. Of the
$6.7 billion in unexpected 2015-16 General Fund revenue, $5.5 billion will
go to K-12 education pursuant to Proposition 98; $633 million will be
saved in the Rainy Day Fund pursuant to Proposition 2; and $633 million
will pay down debts and liabilities, also pursuant to Proposition 2. Major
components of the Governor's proposed budget include:
~ Pre-2004 State Mandated Debt Repayment - The May Revision
includes full repayment of the pre-2004 State mandated debt totaling
$765 million to local governments Statewide. Counties will receive
77% of the payment, or approximately $589 million. The Department
of Finance is expected to distribute the monies within 45-days; San
Joaquin County's share is approximately $6 million.
~ Medi-Cal County Administration Funding - The Governor proposes
$150 million to address time-consuming workarounds for
determining Medi-Cal eligibility due to problems with the State's
CalHEERS system. The $150 million allocation does not cover the
full-year costs of counties' Affordable Care Act (ACA) associated
workload, and may result in longer response times for beneficiaries,
decreased oversight, and delayed redetermination activities. The
inadequate State funding means counties will incur additional costs
related to these ongoing problems.
~ 2015-2020 Section 1115 Waiver - In late March 2015, the State submitted
its 1115 Waiver Renewal and is now pending review at the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The deadline for the
State and Federal government to renew the Waiver is October 2015.
The Waiver provides critical funding that allows the County to pro- .
vide safety net health care services; provides for Delivery System
Reform Incentive Payment Program funding; and provides for local
governments to manage the needs of its behavioral health delivery
system.
~ President's Immigration Actions - The May Revision estimates a
$62 million cost for 2015-16 to address implementation delays due to
Federal Immigration Actions currently being decided in the courts. If
the Obama Administration prevails in court, it is estimated that there
would be $200 million annual costs for individuals (undocumented
immigrants) newly eligible for Medi-Cal. The Governor's budget
also includes $5 million to the Department of Social Services for
grants to non-profit organizations for application assistance to eligible
undocumented immigrants to apply for the new Federal program.
County of San Joaquin 2015-16 Budget Message 5
6
~ In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) - In January 2015, a Federal
court ruled against the U.S. Department of Labor rule requiring overtime
pay for IHSS workers under the Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA). The Governor's Budget included $184 million for 2014-15
and $316 million in 2015-16; however, no funds have been spent to
date due to the Federal court ruling. Pursuant to SB 855 (Chapter 29,
Statutes of2014), the unspent FLSA-related funds are to be used for
other purposes within the IHSS program. The Governor's May Revision
uses these funds to partially offset increased IHSS caseload
costs.
~ SB 678 Funding - The California Community Corrections Performance
Incentives Act of2009, otherwise known as SB 678, provides
performance-based incentive funding to County Probation Departments
based on reducing the number of probationers sent to State
Prison, either for a probation violation or conviction of a new crime.
Funding is generated through a portion of the State savings realized
from lower prison costs and allocated to counties based on performance
compared to a baseline goal. Counties are required to track
and report on outcomes in reducing recidivism through use of evidence-
based programming.
In San Joaquin County, SB 678 funding is used for various local program
needs, including support of the Adult Day Reporting Center
and supervision of high-risk offenders. The current State funding formula
is highly variable, with annual allocations ranging from
$200,000 to millions of dollars for "high-performance" counties.
Although San Joaquin County was allocated $3.1 million as a highperformance
county in 2014-15, the wide variability from year-toyear
makes it difficult to commit to ongoing programs.
The Governor's May Revision proposes changes to the SB 678 funding
formula that will make annual allocation amounts more stable by
incorporating both past performance and incentives for future
improvements as well as expanding the population to also include
commitments to State Prison for Post Release Community Supervision
offenders and Mandatory Supervision offenders. A Statewide
total of$125.8 million is allocated for SB 678, of which $2.2 million
is projected for San Joaquin County.
~ Cap-and- Trade Funding - Cap-and- Trade proceeds are higher than
projected, with the vast majority of the $1.6 billion revenue going
towards High Speed Rail and Transit. Counties are only eligible to
compete for funding under the Alternative Transportation Program
($360 million over three years), which largely favors urban projects.
With only approximately $120 million available Statewide annually,
it is an extremely competitive program. Hybrids and electric vehicles
have become an increasingly popular choice on California roadways,
assisting in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.

Workforce Investment - The Governor's May Revision proposed
investing approximately $1.4 billion into California's workforce programs.
These funds would support Adult Education Block Grants,
Career Technical Education, Workforce Investment Act, Apprenticeship
Program Funding, and the Enhanced Non-Credit Rate Change.
~ Emergency Drought - In January 2015, the Governor declared a
State of Emergency for Drought, marking California's fourth consecutive
drought year. The Governor has been aggressive to enact emergency
orders through the State's Water Resources Control Board to
provide Statewide regulations including reducing usage by 25% for
urban users and issuing curtailment notices for agricultural water
users. The Governor's May Revision proposes $2.2 billion in onetime
funding for drought-related programs. The programs include
$1.8 billion to protect and expand local water supplies, $245 million
for water conservation, and $124 million for emergency response
activities. The Governor also proposes legislation to enhance local
enforcement authority by providing all water agencies and local governments
with consistent, minimum enforcement capabilities to
achieve required water conservation.
In April 2015, the Governor called for the expedited installation of
an emergency temporary barrier in the Delta to mitigate for a worstcase
circumstance this summer in which upstream reservoirs lack
sufficient water to meet the minimum outflow requirements to limit
Delta salinity intrusion, with construction beginning in May 2015.
~ EcoRestore Program - The May Revision proposes a total of $65
million, including $40 million in additional Cap-and- Trade funds, for
Delta habitat restoration to support the Administration's California
EcoRestore program, which was proposed along with the California
Water Fix (formerly the Bay Delta Conservation Plan Twin Tunnels
project).
~ Bay Delta Water Quality Control Plan - The Governor proposes
to provide an additional $7.8 million and 16 positions to complete a
comprehensive update of the plan, which will develop flow criteria
and an adaptive management framework that identifies water quality
objectives needed to protect and balance competing uses of water,
including municipal and agricultural use, hydro power, fishery protection,
and recreational uses.
The Legislature is mandated by law to approve a budget by a simple majority
vote by June 15th. Once the budget is approved by the Legislature, it
goes to the Governor for his review and signature. The budget goes into
effect upon the Governor's approval of the budget bill. By law, the new
budget must be enacted on July 1, 2015. It is reasonable to expect that a
budget will be presented to the Governor and signed into law in time to
meet this Constitutional deadline.

The 2015-16 Proposed County Budget totals $1,415,347,801, which is an
increase of $63,377,737 or 4.7% from 2014-15. This includes the General
Funds, Special Revenue Funds, Capital Project Funds, and three Enterprise
operations.

The 2015-16 proposed expenditure plan (excluding Special Districts) totals
$1.42 billion, which represents an increase of $63.4 million or 4.7% from
the 2014-15 Adopted Budget. These appropriations are primarily based on
the current State/County funding relationship. In the event State funding is
less than the anticipated amounts as a result of the final State Budget, a
commensurate reduction in local expenditures will be necessary.
Appropriations for Special Districts governed by the Board of Supervisors
have been added to the County budget figures to show the total scope of
the Board of Supervisors' responsibility. The grand total of all budget elements,
including Special Districts, is $1.44 billion.

Notable changes in the 2015-16 appropriations include the following:
~ A net increase of $18.2 million for negotiated employee salary and
benefits adjustments. This change reflects salary increases implemented
midyear 2014-15 as well as those scheduled for 2015-16,
increases in retirement contributions, and full-year costs of 35 positions
added midyear 2014-15.
~ General Government is increased by $6.8 million, primarily reflecting
a $7.8 million transfer from the General Fund to the Reserve for
Contingencies; and increases of$1.0 million in negotiated salary and
benefits adjustments; $1.2 for financial, payroll, and human
resources systems upgrades; $1.1 million in debt payments; and 

$200,000 in Tobacco Settlement funds for capital uses. Partially offsetting
these increases is an increase of $4.5 million in Cost Allocation
Plan reimbursements.
~ Capital Maintenance is decreased by $5.0 million largely due to an
appropriation reduction of $5.3 million for the Capital Improvement
Program; partially offset by increases in staffing costs and rental of
Lodi offices for the District Attorney, Public Defender, and Sheriff.
~ Environmental Protection is increased by $943,000 primarily consisting
of negotiated salary and benefits of $316,000, staffing cost of
$273,000 for positions added in Community Development Department
to address increased development activities, and Department of
Water Resources' Flood Emergency Response Grant-related
expenses of $272,000.
~ Law and Justice is increased by $12.2 million, primarily consisting of
$7.3 million in negotiated salary and benefits adjustments; a net staffing
cost increase of $2.4 million; increases in allocated insurance
costs of $1.3 million; and a one-time funding of $813,000 for
upgrades/replacement of Computer-Aided Dispatch/Records Management
System software.
~ Roads and Facilities programs are decreased by $3.6 million, largely
attributed to a $4.7 million reduction in the Community Infrastructure
Program primarily reflecting an accounting change in 2014-15
(unspent budget appropriations are encumbered rather than re-budgeted
to more accurately reflect annual revenues). Also contributing
to the overall decrease are reductions of $1.1 million for Road District
projects and $2.3 million for Airport improvement projects. Partially
offsetting these decreases are increases of $4.0 million for road
construction and maintenance projects, and $595,000 in negotiated
salary and benefit adjustments.
~ Health Services programs are increased by $43.8 million, primarily
reflecting increases of $3.7 million in negotiated salary and benefits
adjustments; $15.5 million in additional staff and related costs; $6.3
million in community provider contracts and inpatient hospital costs
related to Mental Health Services Act programs; $5.6 million in Hospital
medical supplies and maintenance costs; $10.0 million in Intergovernmental
Transfers program costs; and $1.1 million in Solid
Waste landfill projects.
~ Human Services programs are decreased by $6.1 million. Major
changes include decreases of$25.3 million in Federally-funded Head
Start program as the County ceases to be the grantee on June 30,
2015; $434,000 due to the elimination of the State's Enterprise Zone
program; and the deletion of $3.7 million in one-time Federal stimulus
for the Neighborhood Stabilization programs. Partially offsetting
these decreases are increases of $1.7 million in negotiated salary and 

related to Medi-Cal Expansion and the implementation of the ACA;
$11.3 million for caseload growth and cost-of-living adjustments in
CalWORKs, Foster Care, and Adoptions Assistance payments; and
$867,000 in In-Home Supportive Services program costs due to restoration
of hours and caseload growth.
~ Education is increased by $301,000 primarily reflecting projected
available funds for library services.
~ Parks and Recreation is increased by $93,000 largely due to a recommended
County contribution of $134,000 to support the Micke Grove
Zoological Society's educational program at the Zoo.
~ Reserve for Contingencies is increased by $13.9 million reflecting
the recommended reserve level of$39.7 million for 2015-16.
The relative sizes of the 2015-16 appropriations by function are shown 

Overall, available revenues are expected to increase by $63.4 million, or
4.7% from the 2014-15 budget level. Notable changes in 2015-16 available
funds are as follows:
~ Aid from Other Governmental Agencies is projected to decrease by
$15.3 million. This change is primarily attributable to the expiration
of the 2014 Head Start grant with a net change of $25.3 million and
the Federal COPS Hiring Program grant of $1.6 million; and reductions
of $14.7 million in waiver-related reimbursement and Disproportionate
Share Hospital funding for San Joaquin General Hospital
(SJGH), $3.5 million in Federal funds for Neighborhood Stabilization
programs, and $1.9 million for road construction projects. It also
includes the reclassification of the Youthful Offender Block Grant of
$2.5 million from revenue to cost reimbursement and the deletion of
$2.1 million in one-time Federal Aviation Administration grants for
Airport improvement projects.
Partially offsetting these decreases are increases of $18.9 million in
Federal and State reimbursements for public assistance administration
and programs; $5.2 million in State funding for Local Community
Corrections; $3.5 million in State funding for mental health!
substance abuse services programs; $2.7 million in State Realignment
revenues for health and human services programs; $2.3 million
in Proposition 172 State sales tax for public safety departments
reflecting a 4.5% growth from 2014-15 estimated actual; $1.8 million
for public health programs; and $750,000 in Public Safety
Realignment AB 109 funds.
~ Charges for Services are increased by $75.3 million. Major changes
include increases of $66.2 million in patient revenues at SJGH; $9.5
million in mental health and substance abuse service charges; $1.7 

million in solid waste gate fees, and $579,000 in reimbursements for
Lathrop and Mountain House Police Services. Partially offsetting
these increases are reductions of $1.6 million in election services
reimbursement from cities and special districts; $506,000 in data
processing charges to the Superior Court as the Court migrates off
the County's system; and $500,000 in fees related to the elimination
of the State's Enterprise Zone program.
~ Revenues derived from Current Property Taxes are projected to
increase $9.1 million. The recommended budget assumes a 5%
growth in assessed valuation of the current secured and supplemental
tax rolls.
~ The $22.3 million increase in Operating Transfers In reflects transfers
of $10.0 million from the Hospital's Replacement Reserve to the
General Fund for the Intergovernmental Transfer program; $7.8 million
from the General Fund to the Reserve for Contingencies; and
$1.2 million from the County System Automation Reserve Fund for
the planned upgrades of the County's financial, payroll, and human
resources systems. It also includes increases of $1.0 million in reimbursements
from Probation for mental health/substance abuse services
for AB 109 clients, $650,000 in General Fund support to Public
Guardian/Conservatorship for probate services, and $523,000 from
Trial Court Security Fund and Local Community Corrections Fund
for services provided by the Sheriff's Office.
~ Sales Taxes are down by $1.9 million primarily reflecting the deletion
of one-time advances of $5.0 million in Measure K sales tax
allocation for transportation projects; partially offset with increases
in local sales tax revenues for General Purpose.
~ Other Taxes/Revenues are decreased by $4.0 million primarily
reflecting the reduction of General Fund support to SJGH from $9.6
million to $5.1 million recommended in the 2015-16 budget.
~ Revenues from Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties are projected to
decrease by $848,000 largely attributable to penalties and costs levied
on delinquent property taxes, and court fees and fines.
~ Available year-end Fund Balances for operations are estimated at
$45.9 million, a decrease of $21.3 million from 2014-15 and is primarily
due to a budgeting change for SJGH from a cash to an accrual
basis which reflects a projected net income of $29.1 million. It also
includes reductions of $5.5 million in Capital Outlay Fund, $4.4 million
in Community Infrastructure Fund, $3.9 million in Local Community
Corrections Fund, $1.4 million in Road Districts, and
$485,000 in Supplemental Law Enforcement-AB 109 Fund. Offsetting
these reductions are increases of $10.9 million in Road Fund,
$6.9 million in General Fund, and $6.1 million in Reserve for Contingencies
balance.

The County budget presentation is developed to show the "Net County
Cost" for each departmental budget. Net County Cost is computed by subtracting
program-generated revenue, offsetting grants, or cost-sharing by
other levels of government from the appropriation requirements for each
budget. The remaining Net County Cost is funded by General Purpose
Revenue.

The most significant changes in Net County Cost are:
> General Government has decreased $493,000. This change is largely
attributable to the deletion of $1.6 million in reimbursements from
cities and special districts for 2014 election costs; partially offset by
an increase of $1.1 million in debt service payments.
> Capital Maintenance has increased $520,000. This consists primarily
of additional Tobacco Settlement Funds allocation of $140,000 for
the Hospital Expansion/Health Care Facilities Project and ongoing
maintenance of County facilities, an additional position for General
Services to provide facility maintenance services at the Jail, and a
decrease of $116,000 in Cost Allocation Plan reimbursement.
> Environmental Protection has increased $334,000 mainly for negotiated
salary and benefits adjustments.
> Law and Justice shows an increase of $12.8 million. Significant
changes for programs funded with General Purpose Revenue include
$6.4 million in salary and benefits adjustments, addition of a net $2.4
million in new full-time and part-time positions, $1.1 million in allocated
insurance costs, and revenue decreases of $2.3 million from
Federal grants and $818,000 for court-related activities; offset by an
increase in Proposition 172 revenue of $2.3 million.
> Roads and Facilities has increased $138,000, reflecting an additional
$118,000 General Fund support to the Airport and $20,000 in
Tobacco Settlement funds for Delta and water-related activities.
> Health Services has decreased $4.2 million reflecting a decreased
General Fund contribution of $4.5 million to SJGH; offset by an allocation
of $476,000 for inmate health care reflecting the additional
Jail bed capacity resulting from the Double Bunking Project.
> Human Services has increased $1.5 million for required County
match for social services programs.
> Parks and Recreation programs have increased $47,000 primarily
due to the recommended County contribution to the Micke Grove
Zoological Society of $134,000; partially offset by a funding reduction
of $47,000 to the San Joaquin Historical Society.
> Reserve for Contingencies has increased by $13.9 million to $39.7
million. This represents approximately 2.89% of the proposed budget.
County

As shown in the table above, Current Property Taxes and Sales Taxes are
the two main sources of the County's General Purpose Revenue. Combined,
they provide $213.5 million in support of the County budget and
represent over 91% of the ongoing General Purpose Revenue, excluding
Fund Balance. These revenue sources are extremely sensitive to the economic
upswings and downturns.
The County's assessed property valuation started declining in 2008-09 following
the collapse of the housing market and the mortgage crisis. The
decline continued over the next four years and annual property tax revenue
dropped by $40.0 million, or 20%, between 2007-08 and 2012-13. The
local housing market started turning around modestly in 2013-14. For the
third consecutive year since the Great Recession, the assessed valuation is
expected to increase by 5% in the budget year. While the upward trend
continues, the projected property tax revenues for 2015-16 is still below
the 2007-08 level by $6.7 million.

The Great Recession had also negatively impacted sales tax receipts for
several years. The decline also affected the State sales taxes dedicated to
public safety (Proposition 172) and social services (also known as 1991
Realignment) programs. However, unlike the property tax revenue trend,
sales tax receipts were stabilized sooner and continue to improve and are
projected to increase to $103.3 million in 2015-16.
The following chart depicts the Sales Taxes, including the County's General
Purpose Revenue, Proposition 172, and Realignment-Social Services,
for 2007-08 to 2015-16.

Several points should be noted:
>- There is an overall increase of 195.4 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.
This represents a net loss of 22.7 FTE positions from 2007-08;
however, the growth in the Health and Human Services programs
masks the staffing reductions in other functional areas, including the
Law and Justice and administrative/support services departments.
>- 170 new full-time allocated positions are recommended:
- 53 positions for Human Services Agency to address caseload
growth in public assistance programs primarily for the implementation
of the ACA; costs are fully funded by Federal and
State allocations
- 52 positions for SJGH to support the Federally Qualified
Health Centers-Look A Like (FQHC-LAL) clinics, trauma center
operations, and the Medical Guarded Unit volume growth;
costs are fully funded by Federal, State, and patient revenues
23 positions for the Sheriff's Office, including 15 to provide
relief coverage at the Jail, 5 for continued expansion of the
Community Car Program, and 3 for background investigation
and arrest warrant support
- 13 positions for Public Health, including 3 positions to address
increased workload related to the recent tuberculosis outbreaks
and the remaining 10 positions are primarily funded by grants 

12 positions for Behavioral Health Services primarily to support
Mental Health Services Act and FQHC-LAL clinic programs
5 positions for District Attorney to address Proposition 47 (4)
and Consumer Fraud (1) workloads
2 positions for Community Development to support increased
development/inspection activities; costs are fully funded by
permit/inspection fees
- 2 positions for business retention and employment training programs;
costs are fully funded by Federal and State allocations
1 position for Correctional Health to address increased workload
for court-ordered Addiction Severity Index Assessments
7 positions for administration/support services departments to
address workload demand
~ 17 full-time allocated positions are recommended for deletion; of
which 12 are vacant and 5 are filled positions:
5 positions for SJGH due to the elimination of the Medically
Indigent Adult Program
- 4 positions for Probation due to decrease in Federal grant reimbursement
- 2 positions for District Attorney grant-funded programs
- 2 positions for Child Support Services due to cost increases
combined with flat Federal/State funding
2 positions for Treasurer-Tax Collector due to the Court's termination
of collections services from the County
- 1 position for Head Start
- 1 position for Stockton Metropolitan Airport
Budget Highlights
San Joaquin County has 16 represented bargaining units which comprises
approximately 96% of the County's workforce. Contracts for six of the
County's represented bargaining units either expired or are set to expire on
June 30, 2015. In addition, the contract for the Registered Nurses will
expire on December 31, 2015. These units represent approximately 19% of
the County's workforce. The County is in active negotiations with these
units for successor contracts. Impacts from these negotiations are unknown
at this time, therefore, no funds have been included in the recommended
departmental budgets. 

As of May 1,2015, there were 5,966 full-time allocated positions, of which
645, or 10.8%, were vacant positions. Of the 645 vacant positions, 312
were actively under recruitment.
As previously noted, the 2015-16 budget proposes to delete 17 allocated
full-time positions, of which 5 are filled. The budget also adds 170 new
positions. If these changes are approved, this will bring the full-time allocated
positions to 6,119 and the number of vacant positions to 803.
Approximately 83% of the vacancies will be in the following County
departments whose operations, with the exception of the Sheriff-Coroner
and Probation, are primarily funded by Federal, State, or service charges:
~ Human Services Agency - 255
~ San Joaquin General Hospital- 138
~ Behavioral Health - 102
~ Sheriff-Coroner - 77
~ Probation - 40
~ Public Works - 37
~ Economic Development and Employment - 19
In November 2014, California voters passed Proposition 47 which became
effective immediately upon its passage. This law changes certain felonies
to misdemeanors and provides a three-year window to petition for reduction
of sentences in both pending and closed cases. Since its implementation,
Proposition 47 has had an immediate, significant impact on the
County's Law and Justice agencies. The volume of re-sentencing petitions
generated by inmates, parolees/probationers, and other individuals affected
by the initiative has required reassignment of staff in various departments
to address the added workload, with subsequent requests to backfill the
reassigned staff. Four positions were added midyear 2014-15 to the Public
Defender's Office for Proposition 47 workload, and the recommended budget
similarly adds four new positions for the District Attorney's Office. For
now, the Probation Department is using existing staff from other areas to
cover the Proposition 47 workload and the Sheriff's Office is in the process
of tracking potential impacts on Jail population. There is a time limitation
on filing Proposition 47 petitions, so this workload is expected to decrease
over the next few years; however, positions that have been added will assist
in addressing future anticipated needs, such as the opening of the new
Stockton Courthouse (scheduled for late 2016).
Collectively, the recommended budget for the Sheriff's Office totals $147.3
million, which is an increase of $9.9 million from 2014-15. The budget
includes the addition of 23 positions primarily to continue the Community
Car Program and to provide relief coverage for the Jail.

Community Car Program - The program was initiated in 2008 as a
community-oriented policing approach to law enforcement in the
unincorporated areas. Currently, there are 14 Community Car Deputies
assigned to Boggs Tract, Country Club, Garden Acres, Linden,
Lockeford, Morada, Tracy, Woodbridge, and Thornton. Five additional
Deputies will be added in January 2016 and will be deployed
to Kennedy, Northeast Stockton, and Lincoln Village. This represents
the third year of the five-year implementation plan which is designed
to be staffed with a total of35 positions. In 2016-17, the Sheriff will
provide a report on the effectiveness of the Community Car Program.
~ Correctional Officer Overtime Costs - In an effort to reduce overtime
costs in the Sheriff's Custody Division, 15 new Correctional
Officer positions are included in the recommended budget. This addition
of staff will provide relief coverage at the Jail and decrease the
amount of mandatory overtime. Full-year cost for the positions and
related expenses is approximately $1.6 million, but is projected to
decrease overtime costs by approximately $1.3 million, in addition to
reducing employee burnout, use of sick leave, and improving morale.
During the upcoming year, the Sheriff's Office will monitor actual
reductions in Custody overtime expenditures to evaluate the effectiveness
of requesting additional positions in the future.
~ Computer Aided DispatchlRecords Management System (CAD/
RMS) Upgrade - The recommended budget includes one-time funding
of $811,000 for CAD/RMS replacement/upgrade. The current
system used by the Sheriff's Office for all Dispatch, Records Management,
and CLETS (California Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System) functions will no longer be supported by the vendor in
2017.
During 2014-15, the Jail Double Bunking Project was initiated. The project
converts single beds in various housing units at the Jail to bunk beds,
increasing the overall capacity by 242 beds. The work is anticipated to be
completed by July 2015, with full occupancy reached in fall of2015. The
recommended budget includes funding for nine months totaling $1.2 million
for increased inmate housing costs, operating and medical expenses,
and facility maintenance.
County staff is working with a consultant to prepare an SB 863 Adult Criminal
Justice Facilities funding application to the Board of State and Community
Corrections (BSCC) for State financing of an Honor Farm
replacement facility. A total of $500 million is available Statewide for
county criminal justice facility needs. San Joaquin County is considered a
"large" county and is therefore eligible to compete for a maximum award
of $80 million (10% County match required) out of a total $240 million
earmarked for the large county group. The Request for Proposals is scheduled
to be issued by the State in mid-June 2015. The Sheriff's Office will 

review the funding proposal with the Board, including overall construction
cost, matching funds, and any additional operational costs, in advance of
submitting the application to BSCC in August 2015. It is expected that the
BSCC will finalize funding decisions in November 2015.
The Delta continues to be a County priority. Since the passage of the 2009
Comprehensive Water Package, the County has maintained active participation
in advocating on the adopted Board positions and policies regarding
the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. On July 8,2014, the Board of Supervisors
authorized the County to submit comments on the Bay Delta Conservation
Plan (BDCP) Environmental Impact Report/Environmental Impact
Statement (EIRlEIS), and approved a resolution to reaffirm the County's
opposition to the BDCP.
On April 30, 2015, the Governor announced a revised BDCP called the
California Water Fix, which would replace the previous State proposed
twin tunnels alternative to move Sacramento River water under the Delta
and to restore 100,000 acres to habitat. The California Water Fix similarly
promotes a twin tunnels alternative, but removes the 100,000 acre-habitat
requirement, and reduces the 50-year permit to a 10-year permit. The
EcoRestore program is actively engaging local Delta communities to initiate
projects in order to meet its goal of restoring 30,000 acres to habitat in
the Delta. At this time, there is only one EcoRestore project proposed in
San Joaquin County. It is anticipated additional comments will be provided
on this proposal after the release of the Notice of Preparation/Intent in
summer of2015.
It is critical to preserve the County's ability to influence these new projects
and/or pursue legal remedies in the future, along with the ability to communicate
the County's position of opposition to the former BDCP, and preserves
the County's right to comment on future proposals. Due in part to
the recent shift in the Governor's BDCP strategy, invasive weeds issues in
the Delta, and the expected recirculation of twin tunnels related environmental
documents in summer of 2015, Delta activities are expected to
remain high during 2015-16. Depending on the Board of Supervisors'
directive, additional resources beyond those provided in the recommended
budget, totaling $600,000, may be required.
The Water Investigation Zone 2 assessment sunsets on June 30, 2015.
During 2014-15, Public Works staff conducted extensive public eduction
and outreach on the renewal of the Zone 2 assessment. In May 2015, the
County completed the Proposition 218 protest process with the majority of
the property owners passing the Zone 2 fees for the next five years through
2019-20. The estimated revenue totals $1.3 million annually which will be
used to implement the 2015 San Joaquin County Strategic Plan to Meet
Water Needs.

The San Joaquin General Hospital (SJGH) budget totals $268.1 million
and includes the addition of 46 positions to support the FQHC-LAL clinics,
Trauma Center, and Medical Guarded Unit (MGU) volume growth.
For 2015-16, SJGH anticipates a net income from operations of $29.1 million,
including the General Fund contribution of $5.1 million.
~ Federally Qualified Health Centers-Look A Like (FQHC-LAL)-
In July 2014, the Department of Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA) designated six SJGH primary clinics as
FQHC-LAL. The clinic costs for 2014-15 will be calculated and a
cost rate will be determined on a per visit basis. The rate is retroactive
to the date of designation. Actual costs will be evaluated annually.
An interim rate of approximately $120 per visit was applied
until the actual rate is determined. The actual rate is estimated to be
over $224 per visit resulting in an additional revenue of approximately
$8.3 million annually.
~ 1991 Health Realignment Take-Back - 1991 Health Realignment
funding was designed to provide counties local funding to care for
the indigent. In recognition of the fact that counties would realize a
financial savings due to the implementation of the Affordable Care
Act (ACA) and the majority of those indigent now being covered
through Medi-Cal Expansion (MCE), the 2013-14 State Budget
included a mechanism to take back a portion of the 1991 Health
Realignment funds through AB 85. The Board of Supervisors
approved the Savings Formula option, in which a four-year historical
base was established and the counties would give back 80% (70% in
2013-14) of the savings attributed to MCE for a ten-year period up to
the amount of Realignment utilized for hospital indigent care. For
2015-16, the State determined. that approximately $11.7 million in
Realignment funding will be diverted from SJGH during the fiscal
year. A true-up will be made approximately 18 months after the fiscal
year end. The 2015-16 budget includes the State diversion of the
$11.7 million and the remaining $7.8 million to be received will be
categorized as a liability due to the State.
~ California Department of Corrections & Rehabilitation (CDCR)
- The 25-bed MGU at SJGH has an averaged daily census of 19.5
over the first eight months of 2014-15. CDCR patients requiring a
higher level of care are sent to the Intensive Care Unit for an overall
CDCR average of 25.4 over the same period. The recommended
budget includes $55.8 million in CDCR revenue, which represents
18.8% ofSJGH's total revenue.
~ 1115 Waiver Renewal- Supplemental funding through the Waiver
provides SJGH approximately $42.5 million annually. The Waiver
ends October 31, 2015, and the State is currently negotiating with the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for a new Waiver that
may include a successor Delivery System Reform Incentive Pool 

component. The recommended SJGH budget includes $27.0 million
in Waiver-related funding, which represents 63.5% of the current
funding level.
The Mental Health Services (MHS) budget totals $122.9 million and
includes the addition of 10 positions primarily to support Mental Health
Services Act and System Redesign and Expansion, and FQHC-LAL clinic
programs.
~ Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) - California voters passed
Proposition 63, MHSA, in November 2004. The overall purpose is to
reduce the long-term adverse impact on individuals, families, and
State and local budgets as a result of untreated serious mental illness.
MHSA funding and principles have been increasingly integrated into
all MHS services and remains an important driver of sustained and
improved mental health services, including for those with co-occurring
disorders (mental health and substance use disorders). MHSA is
now the largest single funding source for MHS. The recommended
budget includes $31.7 million of MHSA funds, which represents
nearly 30% of the MHS budget.
~ FQHC-LAL - Three positions are added to support SJGH's FQHCLAL
clinics. A Psychiatrist will perform assessment and medication
treatment services in the care of the mentally ill and will be instrumental
in facilitating referrals, as needed, between the FQHC-LAL
and MHS. Two Clinical Social Workers will interview clients, collect
and compile extensive social case histories for use by the medial
staff, screen, and make diagnostic impressions and determinations for
clinical treatment. They will also provide short-term individual and
group treatment, and participate in multidisciplinary team conferences
for treatment planning.
The Human Services Agency's (HSA) Administration Budget totals $163.1
million and includes an additional 45.6 full-time equivalent positions. This
represents an increase of 393 positions since 2010-11 to address caseload
growth in public assistance programs as well as the implementation of the
ACA and Medi-Cal Expansion, which has substantially increased the number
of individuals eligible for Medi-Cal. In March 2015, the Medi-Cal caseload
surpassed 108,000 cases, representing a 24% increase from March
2014. During the most recent ACA Open Enrollment period, which began
on November 15,2014 and ended on February 15,2015, HSA's call center
received more than 13,000 calls and referrals from Covered California for
applicants who were screened and determined to be potentially eligible for
Medi-Cal. Due to unprecedented caseload growth, with the Board's
approval, HSA has initiated the development and expansion of training
space in the County Administration Building. This space is expected to be
ready for occupancy in November 2015, and will allow HSA to train eligibility
workers to meet the anticipated community need.

On June 30, 2015, the County will cease its Head Start program grantee
responsibilities, as will the County's delegate agency (Head Start Child
Development Council, Inc.). The County will facilitate and complete Head
Start program close-out activities by January 31, 2016. In May 2015, the
Office of Head Start named two new grantees (San Joaquin County Office
of Education and Community Action Partnership of Kern) and is currently
in negotiation with the grantees to determine how the program services
will be allocated. The formal announcement of new grantees is anticipated
by July 1, 2015. Annual Head Start funding to serve children and their families
in San Joaquin County will remain at $26 million under the new grantees.
Through an agreement between the County and the City of Stockton, the
City operates the City/County Library System which serves the cities of
Escalon, Lathrop, Manteca, Ripon, Stockton, and Tracy as well as the unincorporated
areas of the County. The County's funding base for library services
is comprised primarily of property taxes. The 2015-16 County
Library budget totals $6.1 million, which includes a funding increase of
$297,000 to Library services and $250,000 towards the Library reserve.
For 2015-16, the hours of service for all County branches will be increased
by five hours per week. Additional bookmobile stops to underserved
County areas will also be added, extending the reach of Library programs
and materials. The proposed weekly hours for the County branches, including
hours funded by both the County and the respective municipalities are
listed in the table below: 

The proposed 2015-16 Public Improvement program totals $7.1 million
and is primarily funded by Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG), Tobacco Settlement allocations for both capital and health carerelated
facilities projects, transfers from departments with specific projects,
and the Capital Outlay Fund balance. In addition, $40.9 million of previously
programmed projects will be carried over from 2014-15. Approximately
$20.2 million of the Capital Outlay Fund balance has not been
programmed. Following are the planned and funded capital improvement
and deferred maintenance projects for 2015-16: 

Facility Re-use - Structural upgrades for the Registrar of Voters,
Fleet Services, and Probation, and address facilities compliance with
Americans with Disabilities Act.
>- Mathews Road Complex - Additional security improvements at the
Sheriffs Honor Farm.
>- Facility Planning - Hospital expansion plans and other healthrelated
facilities. Also included are funds to assess programming,
design, engineering, and construction cost estimates for the re-use of
the Stockton Courthouse upon the relocation of Superior Court, the
Lodi Courthouse in the Lodi Finance Department, and the District
Attorney's Office support space for the Manteca Courthouse.
>- Community Development Block Grant - Gianone Park drainage
improvements and Ardell Avenue sidewalks improvements.
>- Other Projects - Flooring and parking lot assessments of Countyowned
facilities and repair/replace high priority areas, Micke Grove
Zoo perimeter fencing and children's play area, and replacement of
boilers at the Public Health Services building.
Seventy-seven requested projects totaling $35.4 million are not funded in
the proposed budget.
Seventy vehicles have been identified for replacement and purchase in
2015-16 at an estimated cost of $2.3 million, which will be funded from the
Fleet Services' Vehicle Replacement Reserve. Also, 13 units of Road
Maintenance equipment will be replaced at an estimated cost of $1.6 million.
These equipment will be funded with a combination of Fleet Services'
Replacement Reserve and a donated contribution of $626,000 from Public
Works. In addition, five new vehicles, totaling $134,500, are recommended
for the Sheriff's Office.

Prior to finalizing the list of replacement vehicles, Fleet Services will evaluate
the conditions and usefulness of vehicles turned in by departments in
2015-16, which may result in fewer purchases.
Twelve non-County organizations submitted requests for County contributions
totaling $1.2 million. Based on the Board's directive, the 2015-16
funding recommendations for non-County organizations were determined
using a zero-based budgeting approach. As a result, organizations that
received County contributions in 2014-15 may see a reduction since the
prior year's "base" amount is no longer applied. The recommended budget
includes County contributions, totaling $816,030, to the following non-
County organizations that provide community and cultural services, or promote
economic development within San Joaquin County:

The County also continues to support the revitalization of downtown
Stockton through continued upgrades of County facilities and allowing use
of the County-owned Hunter Street Parking Garage for downtown events.
Several departments, especially the Sheriff, District Attorney, and Probation,
have numerous grants totaling millions of dollars. This creates a
dilemma for the County. On one hand, one of the County's overarching fiscal
strategies is to leverage non-County funding resources to meet community
needs. On the other hand, there is a downside to reliance on grants,
especially in the grant-dependent criminal justice system. There is cause
for concern for two reasons:
~ State and Federal grant funding tends to be offered on a year-to-year
basis and in some cases, local agencies are required to continue funding
beyond the grant period. Accordingly, it cannot be considered a
stable source of ongoing revenue. Indeed, economic fluctuations can  

and have resulted in grant reduction and/or termination as measures
to curb spending. Should State or Federal grant levels change, local
program reductions would be the likely consequence.
~ Grant-funded programs, especially in the public safety area, often fail
to recognize that the addition of resources in one area sometimes
upsets the delicate resource balance of the overall system. This
results in local funding demands to maintain system balance. Grantfunded
programs usually involve staffing and an evolving constituency
that will resist staffing and service reductions. It is, therefore,
essential that we continue to monitor the effects of grant program
resources to minimize adverse impacts when reduction and termination
occurs.
County departments are expected to manage their reliance on grant funds
and to adhere to the County's Grant Funding Policy Guidelines. Specifically,
the Policy requires that departments seek replacement funding from
non-County sources or to eliminate/phase-out programs when grant funding
is reduced or eliminated. The 2015-16 budget includes two requests
from the District Attorney totaling $479,933 to backfill the reductions of
grant funding (Violence Against Women Act, Sexually Violent Predator,
Anti-Drug Abuse, and Victim/Witness Program) in past years. Pursuant to
the Grant Funding Policy Guidelines, no General Fund backfill is recommended
in the 2015-16 budget.
In many public service areas, the State has distinguished between general
public services and special public services. Examples of general public services
would be the jail, welfare, and certain health programs. Examples of
special (or user beneficial) public services would be those related to property
development, conducting a business, or animal ownership. The distinction
between these types of services is who benefits (general public or
private party) or whose activity imposes the cost for assuring the public's
welfare. General public services are funded from general revenues (i.e.,
sales and property taxes). Special public services are funded by special revenues
(i.e., user fees, license fees, and penalty assessments).
County government is prohibited from charging more than actual costs for
the service provided. However, failure to increase special service revenue
rates to keep pace with increased costs deprives the County of resources
required to cover general service costs. Such shortages can be resolved by
several techniques:
~ Reducing special service delivery costs.
~ Reducing special service delivery levels.
~ Increasing special service revenue consistent with cost (user fees).
~ Reducing general service levels to subsidize inadequately funded
special public services.

During the Final Budget Hearing, some fee increases will be recommended
to keep pace with costs and avoid shifting the costs of special services to
the general taxpayer. Departments with proposed fee adjustments for 2015-
16 include: Agricultural Commissioner, Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk,
Emergency Medical Services, Behavioral Health Services, Probation,
Parks and Recreation, Public Health, Public Works, Sheriff-Coroner- Public
Administrator, and Treasurer-Tax Collector.
Reserves & Contingencies
The General Reserve is a cash resource for financing during the dry period
between the beginning of the fiscal year and the receipt of property taxes in
December and April. Additionally, it acts as a contingency for the County
in extreme emergencies. For 2015-16, it is recommended that the General
Reserve be maintained at the current level of $10.0 million.
The Reserve for Contingencies covers day-to-day unforeseen budgetary
needs and has been used by the Board sparingly in the past. In conformation
with the Board's reserve policy (R-l 0-525), including a goal of setting
the reserve at 5% of the County budget by 2020-21, the Reserve for Contingencies
is recommended to be set at $39.7 million in 2015-16, which
represents approximately 2.89% of the proposed budget. This is an
increase of$13.9 million from the 2014-15 budgeted level and provides a
hedge against adverse Federal and State budget impacts, and use as interim
funding to address local emergencies/disasters and unforeseen expenses.
Two new reserves are recommended in the 2015-16 Proposed Budget as
follows:
>- A Reserve for Unfunded Pension Liabilities has been established to
start addressing the County's unfunded retirement contribution liabilities
(B-15-135). The most recent actuarial report prepared by the
San Joaquin County Employees' Retirement Association identified
an Unfunded Actuarial Liability totaling $1.3 billion and San Joaquin
County's share is approximately $1.2 billion. For 2015-16, the
budget sets aside an initial $2.5 million in this reserve. An actuarial
consultant will be retained to assist the County in the evaluation and
development of funding options to address this unfunded County
obligation. The County Administrator will present a report with recommendations
for Board consideration in fall of 20 15.
>- A Reserve for Economic Development is recommended to support
the County's promotional/marketing efforts and economic development
activities/programs, including incentives for businesses to relocate
and/or expand in San Joaquin County. For 2015-16, the budget
directs $95,000 of the Transient Occupancy Tax (Hotel/Motel Tax or
TOT) to this reserve. This represents the amount of the projected
County of San Joaquin 2015-16 Budget Message 29
30
TOT that has not been programmed in the proposed budget for economic
development-related activities and programs. The County
Administrator will present a comprehensive economic development!
business incentive program for Board consideration in fall of 20 15.
Fund Balance Management
In governmental budgeting language, Fund Balance is the excess of assets
and estimated revenues of a fund over its liabilities, reserves, and appropriations.
The portion of this balance that is free and unencumbered for
financing the next year's budget is called Available Fund Balance.
Management of Fund Balance shortages is a critical factor in stabilizing
County finances and is carefully evaluated by rating agencies when the
County seeks debt financing. To assure prudent overall budget management,
the Board adopted guidelines for departmental budget change requests that
occur after budget adoption. Budget change guidelines are as follows:
> Requests are to be minimized;
> Requests are to be revenue offset; and
> Non revenue-offset requests are to be limited to emergencies or to the
support of critical Board priorities.
The consequence of not adhering to such guidelines is to risk proliferation
of budget change requests to authorize staffing and programming increases
during the year from one-time departmental ,budget savings. Frequently,
this results in ongoing full-year costs the following fiscal year without revenue
support, which means cuts elsewhere are needed to keep the budget
balanced. Such budget change requests during the year are counter-productive
because such incrementalism erodes the Board's funding flexibility
outside of the comprehensive annual budget review process when all program
priorities are reviewed together.
During the 2007 Great Recession, a significant amount of funds were redirected
from the Reserve for Contingencies and the Capital Improvement
Program to help bridge the budget gaps. Recognizing the unsustainability
of these one-time funds and the need to rebuild the County's Capital
Improvement Program, the Board established the funding guidelines designating
the General Fund year-end fund balances as one-time resources for
one-time uses (B-I0-965). Currently, approximately $20.2 million of the
Capital Outlay Fund balance has not been programmed; therefore, the recommended
budget does not include additional General Fund contributions
to the Capital Improvement Program.

Department Heads initially submitted requests for supplemental funding
totaling $13.3 million. Subsequent to the County Administrator/Department
Head budget meetings, Department Heads withdrew a total of $7.5
million of their initial requests. As a result, the supplemental funding
requests were reduced to $5.8 million, of which $4.1 million are included
in the recommended budget leaving a residual unfunded amount of $1.7
million. Seventy-seven capital projects at a preliminary estimated cost of
$35.4 million are also not funded. Lastly, 12 non-County organizations
submitted requests for County funding totaling $1.2 million. Based on the
Board-directed zero-based budgeting approach in funding the non-County
organizations, the recommended budget includes $816,030 for these organizations,
leaving an unfunded amount of$377,000.
In an effort to adhere to the Board-established fiscal policies, some departmental
wants and needs are not addressed. As a result of the funding recommendations
which comprise the 2015-16 Proposed County Budget, the
Board may hear requests by departments, special interest groups, non-
County organizations, and the general public to add funding during the
budget hearing. In providing policy guidance on desired budget adjustments,
the Board will provide direction as to which areas of the County
budget should be reduced to offset any added costs. Supplemental requests,
both funded and unfunded, are outlined in Attachment A and detailed in
individual budget narratives.
Final Budget Hearing
Our office has identified several significant individual budget unit recommendations
for Board review during the Final Budget Hearing. When particular
functional areas are scheduled for discussion, the Board may wish
to examine other areas as well. Department Heads and members of the
public will have an opportunity to comment. Additionally, some non-
County organizations may desire to make presentations. Unfunded supplemental
budget requests will also be presented.
The impacts of State Budget actions are unknown at this time. It may be
necessary to return to the Board to re-open budget considerations after the
2015-16 Final Budget is adopted, should additional funding become available
or should major funding/program reductions be imposed based upon
the adopted State Budget.
County of San Joaquin 2015-16 Budget Message 31
32
Appreciation
During the budget development process, County Administrator's staff has
received excellent cooperation and is appreciative of the support and assistance
from Department Heads and their staff. Appreciation is particularly
extended to the Auditor-Controller's Office, Information Systems Division,
and Purchasing and Support Services for the production of the document.
Finally, the County Administrator's staff is recognized for the hard work,
professional evaluation, long hours they contributed to the preparation of
the document, and willingness to raise the bar in the outcomes.
Recom mendations
It is recommended that your Board:
1. Approve the proposed County and Special Districts budgets for
2015-16. This action does not constitute final approval of any of the
proposals prior to the Final Budget Hearing. It does, however, provide
the document that will be presented to your Board for the Final
Budget Hearing and give Department Heads and the public information
from which other requests or recommendations can be made.
2. Set Tuesday, June 23, 2015, at 1:30 p.m. as the time to begin the Final
Budget Hearing on the adoption of the County and Special Districts
budgets and authorize the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors to publish
the required hearing notice.
3. Direct the Human Resources Director to issue layoff notices to
impacted employees based on recommendations included in the
2015-16 Proposed Budget.