"Fire is the test of gold: adversity, ofstrong men. "- Seneca, Epistles
Roman dramatist, philosopher, & politician (5 BC - 65 AD)
The proposed 2012-13 budget is the fourth consecutive austere budget.
Three years of grappling with global, national, state and local economic
adversity has made us stronger and better prepared to respond to economic
pressures that might arise in the future. Already, many employees
have made painful concessions in order to keep the County vital and able
to provide services at a relatively high service level. Much of the shortfall
in the last three years has been addressed by using one-time funds available
from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, by diverting
funding from the County's Capital Improvement Program, and by
dipping into the Reserve for Contingencies. As a result of these actions,
San Joaquin County should feel Less pain next year thanks in great part to
the employee concessions. In fact, next year's budget includes the net
addition of 73 positions and a small but meaningful increase in the
Reserve for Contingencies consistent with the Board's resolution to
reestablish a reserve that can withstand the potentially enormous need
due to a natural catastrophe.
It must be recognized that although we can see the comer of recovery
from where we are today, we have not yet turned the comer. It is critically
important to further recognize sacrifices still are needed from those who
have not yet accepted the new paradigm of sharing in the cost of the
health and retirement benefits we all receive.

Still, the wonderful fact is that we will soon have 73 new employees to help
provide services to 700,000 County residents. The preponderance of the
new positions will occur in health and human services programs/activities
in response to an overwhelming need generated by the Great Recession. A
small number of positions will be added to support several other departments
in an effort to respond to tremendous workloads. To everyone who
has endured the hardship to resolve the revenue shortfall over the previous
three years, I am exceedingly grateful. Uncomfortable times will continue,
probably for several more years but your sacrifices are helping to tum the
comer. Four years of adversity has made us stronger and wiser and more
capable of dealing with future needs.
"A mans character is his fate. " -Heraclitus (540 BC - 480 BC),
On the Universe
Numerous traits define a person's character. A small sample of traits
include: courage, integrity, responsibility, respect. These are admirable
traits we should all aspire to but there is one trait you see mentioned in the
media a lot lately because of the economy: perseverance. I venture to say
most if not all of us have a friend or relative who has been affected by the
financial meltdown. Many have been without a job for months or even
years. But they keep on keeping on. They are the ones who possess that
innate character of perseverance that makes them pick themselves up, dust
themselves off, and start all over again. Others have struggled. Sadly some
have given up. Most have persistence and perseverance, so they just keep
going, believing positive change is coming.
Organizations also have characteristic qualities we see and admire. Qualities
to realistically deal with harsh realities and not sink into the quagmire.
A character in an organization is as apparent as it is in a person. San
Joaquin County has perseverance as one of its hallmarks. The difficulties
this County has faced over many years have helped it cope with trying
times. Starting with a huge change in how services are delivered because of
Proposition 13 in the late seventies, San Joaquin County has also persevered
through several recessions, major water-grab efforts from Central
Valley and southern California interests, the negative impact of State budget
shortfalls and a huge shift in the allocation of local funds to the State.
Those challenges have developed a positive character that perseverance
builds. The County has emerged better suited to handle future problems.
But none has been as difficult as what we're facing today because of the
depth and breadth of the Great Recession. Four years of reductions have
been a test of fate. Fortunately, the long-term vision of this, and previous
Boards of Supervisors, has given this County the character to address the
problem with wisdom and passionate care. Character counts!
County of San Joaquin 2012-13 Budget Message
"Depend not on fortune, but on conduct. " - Publilius Syrus ( ?? 100 BC)
Really, the question is, where do we go from here? I am optimistic things
are changing for the better and am hopeful next year will be better than this
year and the following year even better yet. Nevertheless, budgets, like fortunes,
cannot be built on hope; our conduct today will determine how well
we stand in the future. We cannot lose hope, but we cannot rely on it. It is
vitally important to cling to the fundamental tenets that have helped us
reach this juncture in relatively good stead. W hat are those tenets that have
gotten us here?
First, we must always remember that we have an obligation to provide the
services the people in this County deserve and expect. The proposed budget
acknowledges that mandate, and is built to provide for it. The budget
attempts to ensure that spending is prudent and systemically sustainable. It
is imperative that long-term trends are identified and addressed. A segment
of this budget presents a multiyear outlook. We are far from our goal of a
sound budget in which revenues are at least as large as expenditures. The
Board of Supervisors has directed one-time funds be used for one-time
needs. General Fund dollars are precious and need to leverage critical service
priorities. If our conduct takes us to a point where staff increases are
feasible, we need to invest in training to continuously improve the
knowledge, skills, and abilities of our most precious commodity, staff. It
will be necessary, at some point, to revisit the compensation packages
available to staff and make thoughtful, well-considered adjustments to
recruit and retain existing highly-skilled employees, while ensuring the
compensation practices and packages do not create unsustainability for
future generations. Our fortunes seem to be improving. Our previous conduct
is the basis for an improved outlook. Our future conduct, especially
the next two or three years, will confirm we are correct in how we set about
to fix the future.
"Concern should drive us into action and not into a depression. "
- Pythagoras quote
It has been difficult to meet the needs with limited resources and many are
understandably weary. Like a seriously ill patient, harsh medicine has been
required but the patient remains in a serious condition. There will be more
bitter pills to swallow. We must be concerned and vigilant to ensure a good
outcome. We must act with determination to improve, at least locally, the
damage resulting from a global financial meltdown. In addition to the elimination
of hundreds of positions (fortunately mostly vacant), over the last
fifteen months, the Board has consolidated five departments into larger
ones to maximize efficiencies and reduce costs. There have been numerous
internal reorganizations in many departments. A lot of effort has gone to
squeeze as much juice from the fruit as possible. The strategy has been to
do whatever it takes to make the most of the sparse resources available to
provide services for the community.

I have met with virtually every department head over the last couple of
years about their efforts to develop innovative methods of delivering services
with reduced resources. Many have been implemented, more are
being considered. I have faith that all such efforts will ultimately pay off in
a better system doing more good for more people. It is recognized that
some of the actions have been disturbing to many. Had the patient not been
properly treated, he would certainly be in grave condition now. We should
all be energized to continue, not depressed for what had to be done, but
looking forward to what we will do to improve things.
"Wait for that wisest of all counselors, Time. " - Pericles
( 495 BC - 429 BC), from Plutarch, Lives.
Perhaps in five or ten years, some will look back and see things we should
have done but didn't, while others might see things we did but shouldn't
have. Hindsight is so wise. Today, I see consistency and wisdom in the
actions taken by the Board. In recent years, the Board of Supervisors has
faced major difficulties and has made hard decisions and given insightful
direction. The Board's actions are based on principles that consider
utilizing the reserves only when absolutely needed; permitting capital
improvements only to protect and preserve the County's infrastructure; and
most importantly, ensuring the least possible reduction of County
employees in order to build a budget structure to withstand the test of time.
In time, I believe the difficulties of today will be seen as an opportunity to
fix a system that was structurally unsound. The Board's leadership and
frugal approach prior to the Great Recession will be judged as anticipatory
and visionary. The proactive steps already taken and those that will be
taken in response to the fiscal crisis will be appreciated as imperatives for a
carefully-crafted path to a healthy recovery. That's what I believe; time
will tell.
Financial Overview
The appropriation in the proposed 2012-13 budget totals $1.26 billion.
This represents an increase of $9.0 million from the 20 1 1-12 budget. The
local economy continues feeling the impacts from the Great Recession.
The assessed valuation of properties in San Joaquin County is still
dropping, albeit at a slower pace. While the resale market has improved in
the last 12 months, properties were generally sold at a significant lower
amount than the value previously recorded on the tax roll. On the other
hand, revenues from both local and Statewide sales tax continue to
Improve.
The 2012-13 budget contains labor cost savings resulting from concessions
reached with 80% of the County's workforce as well as increases in wages
and benefits stipulated in the existing labor agreements. The budget also
County of San Joaquin 2012-13 Budget Message
includes significant federal and State funding for law and justice,
health, and human services programs/activities. Finally, for the fourth
year, the budget continues to utilize a significant amount of the
reserve and funds previously allocated to capital projects, although at
a reduced level than prior years.
As a political subdivision of the State, the County's role is to deliver
the services mandated by the State and federal governments. Consequently,
the Board of Supervisors does not determine which government
functions the County performs. Health, welfare, criminal justice,
elections, recording of documents, weights and measures, and agricultural
enforcement are some examples of these State-prescribed and
County-administered functions. Many of these programs mandate performance
standards and require County funding participation from our
local revenue base.
The graphic effect of mandated programs is illustrated in the pie chart
which follows. It is based on the 20 1 1-12 Approved County Budget
totaling $1.25 billion. The graph highlights several key points:
Y Revenue-specific programs account for $ 1.02 billion, or 81.5%,
of the County's budget. These areas cannot be adjusted without
losing offsetting revenues.
Y Only $23 1.8 million, or 18.5%, of the County budget is funded
by General Purpose Revenue, including available General Fund
and Contingency Fund balances.
Y Mandated matches, maintenance-of-effort requirement for
Public Safety programs, and contractual debt services totaling
$73.1 million, or 5.8% of the County budget, funded by General
Purpose Revenue, cannot be reduced.
Y $ 158.7 million, or 12.7%, of the budget is available to absorb
any general federal/State budget cuts and local cost increases.
However, even the areas subject to possible cuts are virtually all
mandated and controlled by law and State regulations.
Y Public Safety programs consume $77.8 million, or 49.0%, of the
areas subject to possible cuts. When combined with the maintenance-
of-effort requirement, a total of $122.8 million, or 53.0%,
of the County's General Purpose Revenue is allocated to Public
Safety programs.
Y The Property Tax and Fiscal Systems, Health Services, Public
Health, Children's Shelter, General Assistance, and Elections
comprise $39.8 million, or 25.1 %, of the areas subject to possible
cuts.
Y Many of the non-Public Safety Program areas provide direct
support or revenues to Public Safety programs (Administration/
Support and Property Tax and Fiscal Systems).

On May 14, 2012, the Governor released his 2012-13 May Revision
including his proposals to address the $15.7 billion projected State budget
deficit. Comparing with the Governor's January Budget, the May Revision
reflects significant revenue deterioration, cost increases to schools, and
unfavorable decisions by the federal govemment and comis that blocked
certain cuts included in the 2011-12 State budget.
The Governor's 2012-13 budget continues the 2011 State-Local Realignment
programs initiated last year, which shifted $5.9 billion of State program
responsibilities to local governments in public safety, mental health,
and social services programs. The budget relies on voters' approval of two
temporary taxes, totaling $8.5 billion (of which, $5.6 billion will be used
toward the budget deficit), in November 2012: 1) a five-year 0.25%
increase in State sales tax through December 2016, and 2) a seven-year
increase in personal income tax for those who earn $250,000 and more
through tax year 2018. Also included in the November ballot initiative is a
constitutional guarantee of funding to support the Public Safety Realignment
programs. ln addition to the new taxes, the May Revision is balanced
with $8.3 billion program cuts and $2.5 billion fund transfers/borrowings.
It also includes '<trigger cuts" totaling $6.1 billion in the event voters reject
the tax initiative. These cuts primarily affect funding for schools and
higher education.
Following is an update of the 2011 Realignment and a summary of other
issues of note for San Joaquin County:
?? Realignment - Public Safety (AB 1 09) - In 2011-12, the State
shifted various public safety functions to local government.
Although counties have been supportive of greater programmatic
control at the local level, concerns have been expressed about ensuring
sufficient, reliable funding to offset implementation costs.
Although specific statutory language is not included in the May
Revision, State budget trailer bills are anticipated to establish the fiscal
structure for continued funding of Public Safety Realignment,
including a temporary allocation methodology to be used for the next
two years until a permanent formula can be developed.
Based on preliminary estimates, Statewide funding for county
AB 109 activities is projected to increase fi·om $354.3 million in
2011-12 to $842.9 million in 2012-13. San Joaquin County's share
increases from $6.8 million (nine months' funding) in 2011-12 to
$14.8 million in 2012-13 (in addition to one-time funds and separate
revocation hearing allocations to the District Attorney and Public
Defender).

Realignment - Mental Health/Substance Abuse Services
(AB 118)- The 2012-13 allocation for Existing Community Mental
Health Programs increased fi·om $1.08 billion to $1.12 billion, which
represents the amount that would have been avai I able under the 1991
Realignment. The Governor proposes to increase the Early and
Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment; the Mental Health
Managed Care; and the Substance Abuse Treatment program allocations
from $912.5 million to $964.5 million. The increase to San
Joaquin County is approximately $1.7 million.
;;;.. Realignment - Juvenile Justice- The California Department of
Corrections and Rehabilitation/Division of Juvenile Justice (DJJ),
formerly known as California Youth Authority, will continue to
house and treat the most serious and violent juvenile offenders.
Proposed operational changes include reducing the maximum age of
offenders housed by DJJ from 25 to 23 and accelerating the shift of
juvenile parole to counties on January 1, 2013 instead of July 1, 2014
as previously scheduled. The current, but yet to be implemented,
$125,000 per offender annual fee to cotmties sending juveniles to
DJJ is proposed to be replaced with a lower, but still significant
$24,000 per offender annual fee. Since Probation is no longer recommending
to the Court that offenders be placed with DJJ, a cost
decrease has been reflected in the 2012-13 Proposed County Budget.
However, if the DJJ fee is implemented as proposed and increased
costs cannot be absorbed within the existing budget, adjustments
may be needed during the year.
?? Child Support Services - The May Revision reduces funding for
Local Child Support Agencies by $14.7 million associated with a
change in how local agencies perf01m complaint resolution. This
could amount to approximately $288,000 less for San Joaquin
County unless local funding is used to backftll the State share in
order to access federal monies.
The May Revision suspends the county share of child support collections
for a second year. This amounts to an annual revenue loss of
$600,000 for San Joaquin County.
)> CaiWOR.Ks Redesign -The May Revision continues the Governor's
January Cal WORKs Redesign proposals: 1) Cal WORKs Basic
would establish eligibility time limit to 24 months with an assessment
of participants' progress after 12 months; 2) Cal WORKs Plus
would move CalWOR.Ks Basic recipients who maintain a certain
level of unsubsidized employment to receive a higher level of grant;
and 3) Child Maintenance Program would provide aid to children
whose parents are not eligible for aid under the restructured
Cal WORKs program.
In addition, the May Revision includes changes that would count any
combination of State allowable activities in the first 24 months on
assistance, and federally allowable activities up to 48 months toward
work participation. If enacted, these changes would increase the
number of eligible participants for Cal WORKs.
> In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS)- The Governor proposes a
permanent 7% across-the-board cut to IHSS hours effective
August 1 , 2012. (However, the December 201 1 trigger cut of20%
has not been implemented due to a court injunction.) The May
Revision also proposes to eliminate domestic and related services to
recipients living with other adults who are not IHSS participants.
> Medi-Cal Program - The Governor proposes to reduce supplemental
payments to hospitals, eliminate public hospital grants, and eliminate
increases to managed care plans for supplemental payments to
designated public hospitals for a combined savings of $150 million.
> Unexpended Federal Waiver Funds- The 1 1 1 5 Medi-Cal Waiver
provides the State and designated public hospitals access to over
$750 million in federal funds for providing care to individuals who
are uninsured and who are not eligible for full-scope Medi-Cal benetits.
Designated public hospitals can draw down federal funds using
their certified public expenditures. Unspent prior year federal waiver
funds can be rolled over. The May Revision redirects 50% of the
unspent public hospital waiver funds to the State.
The Governor has been advocating his budget plan as well as his tax initiative
on the November 2012 ballot. Legislative Budget Subcommittees have
been holding budget hearings. Staff will continue to monitor State budget
activities and attempt to influence the outcome of the budget to minimize its
impact on local governments. Any necessary budget changes to the County
budget will be submitted to the Board for consideration after the analysis of
the final State budget actions is completed.
Financial Analysis
The 2 0 1 2 - 1 3 Proposed County Budget (excluding Special Districts) totals
$1.26 billion, which represents an increase of$9.0 million from the
20 1 1 - 1 2 Approved Budget. These appropriations are primarily based on the
current State/County funding relationship. In the event State funding is less
than the anticipated amounts as a result of the final State Budget, a
commensurate reduction in local expenditures will be necessary.
Budget totals for Special Districts governed by the Board of Supervisors
have been added to the County budget figures to show the total scope of the
Board of Supervisors' responsibility. The grand total of all budget
elements. including Special Districts, is $1 .29 billion.

Notable changes in the 20 1 2 - 1 3 appropriations include the following:
)> A net decrease of $8.4 million for negotiated employee salary and
benefits adjustments. This includes concession savings reached with
80% of the County's workforce, partially offset by increases in
health insurance premiums, retirement contributions, and salary
increases scheduled for 20 12-13.
)> General Government is increased by $5.2 million, primarily reflecting
an additional $ 1 .6 million in Tobacco Settlement funds for capital
uses and an increase of $248,000 in election costs. This also includes
a reduction of $3.1 million in cost reimbursements from federal/Statefunded
programs for County administration and support.
l> Capital Maintenance is decreased by $5.1 million largely due to the
redirection of $2.3 million from the Capital Improvement Program
back to the General Fund. This represents a decrease of $8.5 million
from 20 1 1 - 1 2, partially offset by an increase of $3.7 million programmed
for Hospital Replacement Phase II Project.
)> Environmental Protection is decreased by $1.6 million primarily
due to reductions of$993,000 in Homeland Security grant program
expenses and $ 148,000 in State-funded Glassy-Winged Sharpshooter
Prevention program activities.
)> Law and Justice function is increased by $ 1 0.7 million. This consists
primarily of changes that occurred during 201 1 - 1 2, inc I uding
$ 1 .5 million for the addition of 1 4 grant-funded Deputy Sheriffs, and
$9.0 million in staff and operating costs related to 201 1 Public Safety
Realignment.
County of San Joaquin 2012-13 Budget Message
> Roads and Facilities programs are increased by $2.6 million,
reflecting an increase of$3.7 million for development-related traffic
mitigation/transportation projects, partially offset by a reduction of
$760,000 in improvement projects at Stockton Metropolitan Airport.
?? Health Services progran1s are increased by $4.4 million. Major
increases include $8.7 million in staffmg costs for positions added
midyear 201 1 - 1 2 and recommended in 2012-13 primarily for Mental
Health Services and San Joaquin General Hospital (SJGH); $5.4 million
in State pass-through funds for Dmg Medi-Cal Methadone
maintenance treatment providers; and $ 1 .2 million in services and
community provider contract expenses related to Mental Health Service
Act (MHSA) programs. Partially offsetting the increases are
decreases of $4.3 million in negotiated salary and benefits adjustments;
$3.3 million due to the completion of the Medical Guarded
Unit renovation project at SJGH; and $3.7 million in fund transfers
to Mental Health Services due to AB 1 1 8 accounting changes.
> Hun1an Services programs are decreased by $7.9 million. Major
changes include reductions of$3.9 million in public assistance aid
payments; $2.6 million for foster care out-of-home placements;
$3.5 million in subsidized child care services for welfare recipients;
$864,000 in subcontractor services for weatherization and energy
assistance programs for low-income families; and $3. 1 million in
negotiated salary and benefits adjustments. Partially offsetting these
reductions are increases of$4.8 million in staffing costs for positions
added midyear 201 1 - 1 2 and recommended in 20 1 2 - 1 3 for Human
Services Agency and Employment and Economic Depmi:ment; and
$1.4 million in general relief, adoption assistance, and home care/
supportive services programs.
};> Education is decreased by $243,000 reflecting projected available
funds for library services.
> Parks and Recreation is decreased by $549,000 resulting from
staffing reductions in the Parks and Recreation Division.
};> Reserve for Contingencies is increased by $ 1 .4 million reflecting the
recommended reserve level of $ 1 5.2 million for 20 1 2- 1 3.
Overall, available revenues are expected to increase by $9.0 million, or
0. 7% from the 20 1 1 - 1 2 budget level. Notable changes in 20 1 2 - 1 3 available
funds are as follows:
?? Aid from Other Governmental Agencies is projected to increase by
$5.2 million. This consists primarily of increases of$5.3 million in
Proposition 172 State sales tax for public safety departments;
$ 1 . 5 million in federal COPS grants for hiring/retaining 1 4 Deputy
Sheriffs; $5.2 million in State realignment revenues for social services
programs; $3.7 million in federal and State reimbursements for
public assistance administration, Adoption, IHSS programs; and
$8.5 million in State funds for MHSA programs and Drug Medi-Cal
pass-through payments to providers.
Partially offsetting these increases are reductions in federal and State
funds of$4.9 million for road construction projects; $3.5 million for
subsidized child care programs; $3.8 million in CalWORKs reimbursements
due to State programmatic changes; $2.0 million in
Community Development Block Grant; $ 1 .7 million for weatherization
and low-income energy assistance programs; $ 1 . 1 million in
Homeland Security Grant; $976,000 in Federal Aviation Administration
grants for airport improvement projects; and $890,000 for child
support services.
, Charges for Services are decreased by $5.0 million. Major changes
include the reclassification of $8.2 million in court security charges
as Other Revenues reflecting AB 1 09 changes; and reductions of
$923,000 in patient revenues at SJGH and $930,000 in refuse disposal
fees at the County's landfills due to reduced volume. Partially
offsetting these reductions are increases of$3.5 million in mental
health and substance abuse service charges; and $2.2 million in
reimbursements from cities and special districts for the June and
November 20 1 2 election costs.
;,. Revenues derived from Current Property Taxes are projected to
decrease $3.8 million. The recommended budget assumes a 2.0%
decline in assessed valuation of the current secured and supplemental
tax rolls.
;... The $6.4 million increase in Other Revenues reflects increases of
$9.0 million in Local Community Corrections - AB 109 funds for
Public Safety Realignment programs; $ 1 .6 million in Tobacco Settlement
Funds; and $2.4 million in facility trust ftmds for automation
and capital projects. It also includes the reclassifications of $8.2 million
in court security charges from Charges for Services. Offsetting
these increases are decreases of$8.5 million in funds redirected from
Capital Outlay to the General Fund; $1 .7 million in fines and penalties;
$650,000 in transfer from Parks trusts; and $3.7 million in ftmds
transfer to Mental Health Services reflecting AB 1 1 8 accounting
changes.
?? Other Taxes are up by $ 1 .3 million reflecting a $2.7 million increase
in local sales tax revenues, offset by a $ 1 .4 million reduction in
Measure K sales tax allocation for transportation projects .
.> Available year-end Fund Balances are estimated at $90 . 1 million, an
increase of $4.9 million from 201 1 - 1 2. This primarily reflects
increases of$2.4 million in General Fund and $ 1 .5 million in
Reserve for Contingencies balances. It also includes increases of
$5.6 million in Road Fund and $3.6 million in Community

General Government has increased $2.0 million primarily attributable
to a $3.1 million reduction in State/federal Cost Allocation Plan
reimbursements for administration/support services; and a $854,000
decrease in use of the Criminal Justice Facilities Trust for the Jail and
Sheriff's Operations Center Project debt payment. Offsetting these
changes is an anticipated $2.2 million reimbw-sements for the June
and November 2012 election costs.
> Capital Maintenance has increased $ 1 .4 million. This consists
primarily of increased Tobacco Settlement Funds allocation of
$ 1 . 1 mil.lion for the Hospital Replacement Phase fi Project and an
additional $300,000 for ongoing maintenance of County facilities.
> Environmental Protection has decreased $31 0,000 mainly due to
labor cost savings resulting from negotiated concessions.
;. Law and Justice shows a decrease of$3.0 million. Significant
changes include an increase in Proposition 1 72 revenue of$5.3 million,
offset by $ 1 .9 million in negotiated salary and benefits adjustments,
and decreases in various State revenues and court-related
fines and penalties.
> Roads and Facilities has increased $223,000 in additional General
Fund support to the Airport.
;,... Health Services has decreased $794,000 mainly due to labor cost
savings resulting from negotiated concessions.
?? Human Services has decreased $5.9 million. This reflects increases
of$5.2 million in State Realignment revenues for public assistance
programs, and $ 1 .0 million in federal funding participation for
In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) program costs, as well as a
$ 1 .4 million decrease in Cotmty expenses for foster care out -of-home
placements due to caseload reduction. Partially offsetting these
savings are increases in County costs of $1 .0 million for general
relief and public assistance aid payments, and $962,000 in public
assistance administration expenses.
> Parks and Recreation programs have decreased $ 1 4 1,000. This
reflects reduction in Parks staffing and increased park fees. The use
of Parks trust funds to support the County's park system has also
been decreased by $650,000.
> Reserve for Contingencies has increased to $15.2 million. This
represents approximately 1 .2% ofthe proposed budget.

As shown in the table above, Current Property Taxes and Sales Taxes are
the two main sources of the County's General Purpose Revenue. Combined,
they represent almost 90% of the total ongoing General Purpose
Revenue, excluding Transfer from Capital Ftmd and Fund Balance. These
revenue sources are extremely sensitive to the economic upswings and
downturns.
During the housing market boom in the mid-2000's, San Joaquin County
experienced tremendous growth in property taxes. The County had doubledigit
assessed valuation increases in 2005-06 and 2006-07. The revenue
growth peaked in 2007-08 and started declining in 2008-09 following the
collapse of the housing market in 2007. The decline in assessed property
value has continued over the last four years and is anticipated to drop
another 2% in the budget year. Since 2007-08, property tax revenues have
decreased by more than 2 1 %, or $42.4 million. The recovery, when it
occurs, will likely be very slow and take many years to rebuild the property
tax revenue base back to the 2007-08 level.

37 full-time allocated positions are recommended to be deleted
primarily due to reductions in federal and State funding, and completion
of one-time projects:
1 2 positions for Human Services Agency
7 positions for Public Works
4 positions for District Attorney
3 positions for Sheriff-Coroner-Public Administrator
2 positions for Child Support Services
2 positions for Agricultural Commissioner
3 positions for Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk
- 4 positions for General Services
;.. A net of29.8 prut-tirne/temporary positions are added primaril y for
the subsidized employment training and summer youth programs
,. 1 10 new full-time allocated positions are recommended:
- 39 positions for Human Services Agency to address caseload
growth in public assistance programs; costs are fully funded by
federal and State allocations
- 1 8 positions for San Joaquin General Hospital to support the
implementation of the expanded health care coverage initiatives
and to prepare for a potential trauma center designation;
costs are fully funded by federal, State, and patient revenues
- 1 8 positions for Behavioral Health Services primarily to implement
the additional components of the Mental Health Services
Act programs/activities funded by Proposition 63 revenues
- 7 positions for Public Health Services to address workload
demand
- 1 position for Emergency Medical Services to coordinate
quality improvement activities and investigations; costs are
funded by fees and grants
- 2 positions for Environmental Health Services to enhance
program oversight and coordination
- 5 positions for Probation to staff restored beds at Juvenile Hall
and to transport juveniles to Superior Court for court proceedrngs
- 4 positions for Sheriff's Office to provide management and
information technology support
2 positions for Public Defender to handle homicide cases and
to provide clerical support
1 position for District Attorney's Investigation Unit
3 positions for Aviation Department to provide security coordination/oversight
and administrative/fiscal support
3 positions for Informations Systems Division to support
Human Services Agency and Behavioral Health Services;
costs fully reimbw·sed by federal and State funds
7 positions for administration/support services departments to
address workload demand
Budget Highlights
San Joaquin County has 16 represented bargaining units and 1 1 unions or
associations, which comprises approximately 95% of the County's workforce.
Contracts for four of the County's represented bargaining units
either expired or are set to expire by June 30, 2012; these units represent
1 5.4% of the County's workforce. The County is in active negotiations
with these units for successor contracts to include long-tenn savings in
areas such as health care and retirement, similar to those agreed to by units
representing 80% ofthe Cotmty's workforce during 201 1 - 1 2 .
A s ofMay 2 1 , 2012, there were 5,408 full-time allocated positions, of
which 5 1 7, or 9 .5%, were vacant positions. Of the 5 1 7 vacant positions,
299 were actively under recrujtment.
As previously noted, the 20 1 2- 1 3 budget proposes to delete 3 7 allocated
full-time positions, of which 8 are filled positions. The budget also adds
1 1 0 new positions. If these changes are approved, this will bring the fulltime
allocated positions to 5,481 and the number of vacant positions to
598. Over 80% of the vacancies will be i n the following County departments
whose operations are primarily funded by federal, State, or service
charges:
> Human Services Agency - I 48
r San Joaqwn General Hospital - 120
)> Behavioral Health - 86
J;. Sheriff- 52
)> Public Works - 4 1
)> Probation - 36
Human Resources will work closely with departments and County
employees affected by the layoff in filling vacant positions. For the most
part, laid-off employees will be given first consideration when filling
vacant positions, provided mffijmum qualifications are met.
Over the last few years, the County has had several departmental organizational
changes that have resulted in fewer County departments and a reduction
in department head positions. The County Administrator and
County of San Joaquin 2012-13 Budget Message
Law & Justice
System Impacts
department heads continue to analyze and evaluate inter- and intra-departmental
reorganization and consolidation opportunities to assure cost-effectiveness
and efficient provision of public services.
In 20 1 1 - 12, a review of the Stockton Metropolitan Airport was conducted.
In March 2012, the Board accepted staff's report and approved the concept
of placing Airport operations under the Public Works Department pending
an organizational review when the Public Works Director position
becomes vacant. In anticipation of a future consolidation, the Airport
Deputy Director senior management position was retained with a salary
adjustment and a working title of Airport Director. The executive classification
of Airpmi Director was eliminated. The consolidation, when it
occurs, will enhance the management and fiscal support for the Airport
functioning as a division of the larger Public Works Department.
The recommended overall budget for Law and Justice departments
increases by $10.7 million, largely resulting from implementation ofPublic
Safety Realignment, otherwise known as AB 109. The two County departments
mostly affected by this shift in State responsibility are Probation and
the Sheriff's Office. Otherwise, departmental budgets remain generally at
the 201 1 - 1 2 levels, except for programs with significant decreases in revenue,
such as some of the federal and State grants. Although there are some
staff reductions and position transfers, departments have attempted to
absorb reductions by deferring the filling of vacant positions and restructuring
operations to take advantage of efficiencies. A few position restorations
are recommended to address some critical areas, however, staff levels
are still significantly lower than the peak attained just a few years ago.
Following is a brief summary of the departmental impacts:
Ji:> Probation: The overall budget for the Probation Department
increases by $5.4 million, due to AB 109 implementation. Funding is
included to partially restore operational capacity at Juvenile Hall and
address high-risk youth offender transportation issues.
>- Sheriff-Coroner-Public Administrator: Total budget for the
Sheriff's Office increases by $6.7 million. Major increases include
14 new grant-ftmded deputies added during 20 1 1 -12, costs associated
with implementation of AB 109, and negotiated salary and
benefits adjustments.
:;> District Attorney: The overall budget for the District Attorney's
Office decreases by $867,000, largely resulting from reductions in
various State grants. A net reduction of three full-time positions is
offset by an increase in extra-help staff.
,. Public Defender: The Public Defender's Office budget increases by
$348,000. Two positions are restored in the recommended budget, as
well as the costs for an attorney added during 20 1 1 - 1 2 for AB 109
revocation hearings.

ChiJd Support: Funding for Child Support Services decreases by
$572,000, reflecting continued reductions in State and federal
funding offset by an increased use of available fund balance monies.
The recommended budget includes a net decrease of two full-time
positions and elimination of one-time funding for extra-help records
imaging staff.
The 2012-13 SJGH budget totals $228.2 million, and includes the addition
of 1 3 .9 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions. General Fund support to
SJGH remains at $ 1 1 .6 million, of which, $8.8 million will be used to support
ongoing Hospital operations and $2.9 million will be programmed to
accumulate funding for an eventual Hospital Replacement Phase II Project
to relocate services currently housed at the Old Towers Building by 2020.
In December 201 1 , the Board directed SJ GH staff to pursue a trauma center
designation. The 2012-13 SJGH budget provides additional resources to
establish the infrastructure required. A Trauma Program Manager, a
Trauma Registrar, and a Trauma Medical Director/Surgeon will need to be
in place prior to SJGH receiving trauma center designation. The recommended
budget adds a Deputy Director ofNursing to serve as the Trauma
Program Manager, and a Management Analyst. A SJGH Surgeon will
cover the Trauma Medical Director/Surgeon role on a part-time basis.
Healthcare Reform In November 2010, the federal government approved the new Waiver,
which is California's :five-year "Bridge to Healthcare Reform." Through
the new Waiver, California will advance Medi-Cal program changes that
will help the State transition to the Affordable Care Act, or Healthcare
Reform, that will take effect in January 2014. Changes under the new
Waiver will include coverage expansion to newly eligible Medicaid
populations, delivery system reform for the most vulnerable residents,
adminish·ation simplification, and payment reform. SJGH participates in
the two coverage expansion programs: Delivery System Reform Incentive
Program (DSRIP) and Low-Income Health Plan (LIHP).
22
;.> Delivery System Reform Jncentive Program - DSRIP is anticipated
to be a significant source of funds to SJGH over the term of the
new Waiver (November 201 0 - October 201 5). Over that time period,
SJGH can potentially receive additional funding totaling $93.8 million
if certain mnestones are achieved as they relate to improvements
in service delivery and quality of patient care. Thus far, SJGH
received a total of $26.4 million in 2010-1 1 and 20 1 1 -I 2. The
2012-13 SJGH budget includes $19.2 million in DSRIP funding and
42.6 FTE to support the program.
)> Low-Income Health Plan - LIHPs allow counties to draw down
federal matching dollars to provide coverage to childless adults if
they meet certain requirements. Some patients enrolled in LIHP will
County of San Joaquin 2012-13 Budget Message
Mental Health
Services
Human Services
Park System
transition from the current Medical Assistance Program. Services
offered include routine and emergency care provided at SJGH,
clinics, and other hospitals when authorized. Under this program,
patients must be assigned to a patient-centered medical home with
coordinated care. SJGH, working in conjunction with the Health Care
Services Agency, has been involved in extensive implementation
planning for LIHP, which is anticipated to be operational in June
2012. The 2012-13 SJGH budget includes $3.7 million in LIHP
revenue with projected expenses at $3.8 million. Approximately
$600,000 in federal matching funds will be received in 2013-14.
The Mental Health Services budget totals $88.5 million and adds 1 6.6
FTEs. In 2010- 1 1 , the System Redesign and Expansion (SRE) project was
implemented for two key reasons: 1 ) increase opportunities to bi l1 MediCal;
and, 2) expand the menu of services available in the adult outpatient
system to reduce the incidences of, and reliance on, involtmtary treatment
in the Psychiatric Health Facility (PHF). The recommended budget
includes six positions dedicated to SRE in the new Crisis Stabilization Unit
(CSU) and to the Crisis Community Response Team to increase service
hours towards the 24 hours a day, 7 days a week program.
With remodeling completed in 201 1 , the 40-bed PHF was redesigned into
two separate programs that are both eligible for Medi-Cal reimbursement.
The new programs are a 1 2-bed locked CSU and a 1 6-bed PHF. The new
CSU brought greater than anticipated results and the project was modified
to include six additional off-site Crisis Residential Treatment beds. In
2012-13, MHS intends to complete an analysis to determine the number of
psychiatric inpatient adult beds needed above the 1 6-bed PHF and develop
a strategy for securing those beds. The increased revenue from SRE is
projected to be $2.5 million since its inception.
The Human Services Agency's Administration budget totals $ 1 25.6 million
and adds a net of37.9 FTE. This represents a net increase of 1 22 positions,
or 14. 7%, since 2010- 1 1 , to address case load growth in public assistance
programs. With continued high unemployment in the County, coupled with
a stagnant economy, it is projected that requests for assistance will continue
to increase.
The proposed budget reduces the use of the Parks trust fund for operations
by $650,000, to $ 1 .2 million. The transfers will deplete most of the trust
fund balances except for the Park Endowment Trust, which is projected to
have a year-end balance of $2.3 million by June 30, 2013. The Parks and
Recreation Division is reducing costs as well as increasing certain fees to
help offset the decreased use of the trust funds.
In 2012-13, Parks staff will continue to evaluate possible operational
changes and funding opportunities. The goal is to develop measures to  

reduce impacts to trust fund balances and to work within the earnings of the
trust funds. It is anticipated that Parks and Recreation will provide a
balanced budget by 20 1 4 - 1 5 .
Through an agreement between the County and City o f Stockton, the City
operates the City/County Library System which serves the cities of
Escalon, Lathrop, Manteca, Ripon, Stockton, and Tracy as well as the unincorporated
areas of the County. The County's funding base for library services
is comprised primarily of property taxes. In 2012-13, a continued
decline in assessed valuation of properties will impact funding for the
Library System. The City of Stockton Library staff has indicated that
weekJy hours will be maintained, however, material and book purchases
will be limited to funds from the Matching Materials Program. The proposed
weekJy hours for County branches, including hours funded by both
the County and the respective cities, are shown in the following table:

FaciJity Reuse: Fire alarm system upgrades and replacement boiler
for the Human Services Agency; and address facilities compliance
with Americans with Disabilities Act.
)> Mathews Road Complex: Replacement of multiple roofs; interior
cell doors; and other improvements at the Sheriff's Operations
Center, Honor Farm, and Juvenile Hall.
)> Facility Planning: Preliminary design for the future replacement of
San Joaquin General Hospital's Old Towers Building; and a new
morgue and forensic pathology facility.
)> Community Development Block Grant: Gianone Park drainage
improvements; Ardell Avenue sidewalks improvements; Thornton
ground water exploration; and initial construction of Woodbridge
Street improvements.
)> Other Projects: Replacement of several building roofs at County
facilities; completion of a Lake Bank Stabilization Study at Oak
Grove Park; additional upgrades at County regional parks; upgrades
of heating/air conditioning systems at Public Health and Public
Works buildings; and design/administration of energy conservation
projects.
Sixty-one requested projects totaling $ 1 52.0 million are not funded in the
proposed budget. In addition, the proposed budget reverts $2.3 million
from the Cotmty's Capital Improvement Program back to the General
Fund.
Seventy-eight vehicles have been identified for replacement and purchase
in 2012-13 at an estimated cost of $2.1 million, which will be funded from
the Fleet Services' Vehicle Replacement Reserve. These vehicles are allocated
to Fleet Services as part of the County's fleet and have reached their
optimal service life. In addition, five new vehicles, totaling $267,000, are
recommended for the Sheriff's Office and Solid Waste operations.

Prior to finalizing the list of replacement vehicles, Fleet Services will
evaluate the conditions and usefulness of vehicles hrrned in by departments
in 2012-13, which may result in fewer purchases.
County support and contributions to the following community-based
organizations that provide community services or promote economic
development within San Joaquin County are recommended at the current
levels:
» Child Abuse Prevention Council
);> Community Partnership for Families
)> San Joaquin County Historical Society
)> San Joaquin Economic Development Association
);> San Joaquin Partnership
)> Women's Center of San Joaquin County
The Cotmty also continues to support the revitalization of downtown
Stockton through continued upgrades of County facilities and allowing use
of the Cow1ty-owned Hunter Street Parking Garage for downtown events.
Several departments, especially the Sheriff, District Attorney, and Probation,
have numerous grants totaling millions of dollars. This creates a
dilemma for the County. On one hand, one of our overarching fiscal
strategies is to leverage non-County funding resources to meet community
needs. On the other hand, there is a downside to reliance on grants,
especially in the grant-dependent criminal justice system. There is cause
for concern for two reasons:
)> State and federal grant funding tends to be offered on a year-to-year
basis and in some cases, local agencies are required to continue funding
beyond the grant period. Accordingly, it cannot be considered a
stable source of ongoing revenue. Indeed, economic fluctuations can
and have resulted in grant reduction and/or termination as measmes
to cmb spending. Should State or federal grant levels change, local
program reductions would be the likely consequence.
)> Grant-funded programs, especially in the public safety area, often
fail to recognize that the addition of resources in one area sometimes
upsets the delicate resource balance of the overall system. This
results in local funding demands to maintain system balance. Grantfunded
programs usually involve staffmg and an evolving
constituency that will resist staffing and service reductions. It is,
therefore, essential that we continue to monitor the effects of grant
program resources to minimize adverse impact when reduction and
termination occurs.

In many public service areas, the State has distinguished between general
public services and special public services. Examples of general public
services would be the Jail, welfare, and certain health programs. Examples
of special (or user beneficial) public services would be those related to
property development, conducting a business, or animal ownership. The
distinction between these types of services is who benefits (general public
or private party) or whose activity imposes the cost for assuring the
public's welfare. General public services are funded from general revenues
(i.e., sales and property taxes). Special public services are funded by
special revenues (i.e., user fees, license fees, and penalty assessments).
County government is prohibited from charging more than actual costs for
the service provided. However, failure to increase special revenue rates to
keep pace with increased costs deprives the CoW1ty of resources required to
cover general service costs. Such shortages can be resolved by several
techniques:
?? Reducing special service delivery costs.
?? Reducing special service delivery levels.
?? Increasing special service revenue consistent with cost (user fees).
?? Reducing general service levels to subsidize inadequately funded
special public services.
During the Final Budget Hearing, some fee increases will be recommended
to keep pace with costs and avoid shifting the costs of special services to
the general taxpayer.
General Reserve & Contingencies
The General Reserve is a cash resource for financing during the dry period
between the beginning of the fiscal year and the receipt of property taxes in
December and April. Additionally, it acts as a contingency for the CoW1ty
in extreme emergencies. For 2012-13, it is recommended that the General
Reserve be maintained at the current level of $ 1 0.0 million.
The Reserve for Contingencies covers day-to-day unforeseen budgetary
needs and has been used by your Board sparingly in the past. In confOimation
with the Board's reserve policy (R-1 0-525), the Reserve for
Contingencies is recommended to be set at $ 1 5.2 million in 2012-13 which
represents approximately 1 .2% of the proposed budget. This is an increase
of $ 1 .4 million fi:om the 201 1 - 1 2 level and provides a hedge against
adverse federal and State budget impacts; and use as interim funding to
address local emergencies/disasters.

In governmental budgeting language, Fund Balance is the excess of assets
and estimated revenues of a fund over its liabilities, reserves, and appropriations.
The portion of this balance that is free and unencumbered for
financing the next year's budget is called Available Fund Balance.
Management of Fund Balance shortages is a critical factor in stabilizing
County frnances and is carefully evaluated by rating agencies when the
County seeks debt frnancing. To assure prudent overall budget management,
the Board adopted guidelines for departmental budget change requests that
occur after budget adoption. Budget change guidelines are as follows:
? Requests are to be minimized;
?? Requests are to be revenue offset; and
?? Non revenue-offset requests are to be limited to emergencies or to the
support of critical Board priorities.
The consequence of not adhering to such guidelines is to risk proliferation
of budget change requests to authorize staffmg and programming increases
during the year from one-time departmental budget savings. Frequently,
this results in ongoing full-year costs the following fiscal year without
revenue support, which means cuts elsewhere are needed to keep the
budget balanced. Such budget change requests during the year are counterproductive
because such incrementalism erodes the Board's funding flexibility
outside of the comprehensive annual budget review process when all
program priorities are reviewed together.
As noted earlier in this budget message, the downturn of the economy has
negatively impacted the County's revenue sources in the recent years. A
significant amount of funds has been redirected from the Reserve for
Contingencies and the Capital Improvement Program to help bridge the
budget gaps in the last three years. Recognizing the unsustainability of
these one-time funds and the need to rebuild the County's Capital Improvement
Program, the Board established the funding guideLines designating
the General Fund year-end ftmd balances as one-time resources for onetime
uses (B-1 0-965). However, due to the severity of this year's funding
shortfall, the proposed budget recommends suspending the policy and
includes $16.0 million in the projected year-end fund balance for operations.
Supplemental Requests
Department Heads and community-based organizations submitted
$ 1 . 5 million in requests for supplemental funding which are not provided
for in the recommended budget. Sixty-one capital projects at a preliminary
estimated cost of $ 1 52.0 million are also not funded. While the 2012-1 3
Proposed Budget contains salary and benefits savings resulting from recent
County of San Joaquin 2012-13 Budget Message
negotiations, it continues to be balanced with one-time funds totaling
$22.3 million. Further cost containment measures must be identified and
implemented in order to achieve a structurally-balanced budget, where
ongoing expenses are supported by ongoing revenues. The State budget,
with its projected $ 1 5.7 billion deficit, continues to pose significant risk to
the County's financial health. In an effmi to adhere to the Board-established
fiscal policies, some departmental wants and needs are unaddressed.
As a result of the funding recommendations which comprise the 2012-13
Proposed County Budget, the Board may hear requests by departments,
special interest groups, community-based organizations, and the general
public to add funding during the budget hearing. In providing policy
guidance on desired budget adjustments, the Board will also need to provide
policy guidance as to which areas of the County budget should be
reduced to offset any added costs. Supplemental requests are outlined in
Attachment A and detailed in individual budget narratives.
Final Budget Hearing
Our office has identified several significant individual budget unit
recommendations for Board review during the Final Budget Hearing.
When particular functional areas are scheduled for discussion, the Board
may wish to examine other areas as well. Depruiment Heads and members
of the public will have an opportunity to comment. Additionally, some
community-based organizations may desire to make presentations. Supplemental
budget requests will be presented.
The impacts of State Budget actions are unknown at this time. It may be
necessary to return to the Board to re-open budget considerations after the
2012-13 Final Budget is adopted, should additional funding become
available or should major funding/program reductions be imposed based
upon the adopted State Budget.
Appreciation
There were insufficient resources to address all requests for funding and to
maintain the County services or operations. Accordingly, some departments
are expected to explain their concerns about service levels, and
facility and technology needs, and make appeals for supplemental funding
during the Final Budget Hearing. Despite these concerns, County
Administrator's staff has received excellent cooperation and is grateful to
Department Heads and their staff.
Appreciation is particularly extended to the Auditor-Controller's Office,
Information Systems Division, and Purchasing and Support Services for
the production of the document. Finally, the County Administrator's staff
is recognized for the hard work, professional evaluation, and long hours
they contributed to the preparation of the docwnent.

I t is recommended that your Board:
1 . Approve the proposed County and Special Districts budgets for
2012-1 3. Tll is action does not constitute fmal approval of any ofthe
proposals prior to the Final Budget Hearing. It does, however,
provide the document that will be presented to your Board for the
Final Budget Hearing and give Department Heads and the public
infom1ation from which other requests or recommendations can be
made.
2. Set Tuesday, Jw1e 26, 2012, at 1 :30 p.m. as the time to begin the Final
Budget Hearing on the adoption of the County and Special
Districts budgets and authorize the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
to publish the required hearing notice.