This year's Proposed Budget was composed based upon the Board of
Supervisors' 2016-2019 Strategic Priorities. A new feature I am very
proud of this year, is in each Departmental summary budget narrative is
an explanation of how their program areas align with the Board's priorities.
The services we deliver as an organization are the core and passion
of San Joaquin County government and is a fine example of why
"Greatness grows here. "
In the Proposed Budget, we continue to demonstrate our ability to present
to the Board of Supervisors and public this County's ability to once again
present a structurally-balanced budget and even better, no use of one-time
revenues to fund ongoing operations. I am appreciative the Board has
made "Ensure Fiscal Responsibility" one of the five strategic priorities. I
believe this Proposed Budget meets that priority. This County's wise fiscal
policy provides meaningful goals for reserves that will assist greatly
in the event there is another economic downturn. I believe the service
enhancements that are recommended in the Proposed Budget, funded by
the General Fund, will most likely not occur at the same level in future
years due to projected limited growth in general purpose revenues. The
largest increases within the General Fund are in Contingencies and within
Law and Justice programs including the addition of 63.9 new jobs.
General Fund year-end fund balance is projected to be $15.8 million at
June 30,2016. Pursuant to Board policies, it is recommended that.$14.0
million be added to replenish the Reserve for Contingencies to meet the
Boards' goal of 5% by 2020-21, $107,158 be added to the Economic
Development Reserve, and $1.7 million be added to the Unfunded Pension
Liability Reserve. An additional $6.1 million was added to the Unfunded
Pension Liability Reserve with General Purpose Revenue for a total contribution
of $7.8 million. This amount represents the Net County Co~t portion
of the annual cost to pay down the unfunded pension liability by 5% of payroll
for calendar year 201 7.
The County's budget growth continues in Law and Justice and Health Services.
Of the additional 154 recommended full-time positions '(182 positions
added, less 28 positions deleted), 30 are being added to support the
District Attorney's programs, 21 for Sheriff's programs, and 39 at San Joaquin
General Hospital.
One of the County's largest increases in operational costs remains
retirement expense. Approximately 52% of the Proposed Budget is for salary
and employee benefits. The County has consistently paid its annual cost
of retirement. In March 2016, the Board adopted a policy to contribute up
. to 5% additional toward the County's unfunded retirement liability. At the
5% contribution level, the annual additional cost would be $20.8 million
with a Net County Cost of $7.8 million. For 2016-17, it is anticipated that
additional contributions would begin January 1,2017, in conjunction with
the 2017 calendar year rate set by the San Joaquin County Employees'
Retirement Association Board.' After the 2016-17. budget is structurallybalanced
and the Contingency Reserve contribution ha~ been met, a portion
of the remaining year-end projected budget savings will be set aside for the
Unfunded Pension Liability Reserve. The Proposed Budget includes $7.8
million to be added to the Unfunded Pension Liability Reserve. Midyear
2016-17, appropriations from the General Fund would be increased to fund
the Net County Cost portion of the additional contributions for the remaining
six months of the fiscal year as necessary among General Fund department
budgets. The six-month cost for an additional contribution of 5% of
payroll in 2016-17 is $10.4 million with a Net County Cost of$3.9 million.
Currently, the County has 13 (of 21 bargaining .units ) labor agreements that
have either expired or will expire at. the end of June. These labor agreements
impact 5,399 positions or 88.1% of our workforce and the County is
currently negotiati~g with these units for successor agreements. The poten-
. tial costs resulting from these negotiations are unknoWn and,' therefore, are
not included in the Proposed Budget. Our organizations focus on service
delivery will continue t~ be enhanced by evaluating for efficiency, innovation,
and'collaboration.
Financial Overview
The appropriation in the 2016-17 Proposed Budget totals $1.49 billion.
This represents an. increase of $79.2 million from. the 2015-16 budget. The
assessed valuation of properties in San Joaquin County is expected to grow
by 6~0%, following increases of 9.2% and 6.2% in 2014-15 and 2015-16
respectively.
County of San Joaquin 2016-17 Budget Message
The budget provides for increases in wages and benefits stipulated in the
existing labor agreements. This accounts for only 11.9% of our total workforce.
In addition, the budget includes significant State and Federal revenues
for law and justice activities, transportation projects, and health and
human services programs. Overall, departmental revenues, including State
and Federal funding, provide over 80.1%, or $1.2 billion of the budget. The
remaining $297.5 million is funded by General Purpose Revenue and
available year-end fund balances.
As a political subdivision of the State, the County's role is to deliver the
services mandated by the State and Federal governments. Consequently,
the Board of Supervisors does not determine 'which government functions
the County performs. Health, welfare, criminal justice, elections, recording
of documents, weights and measures, and agricultural enforcement are
some examples 'of these State-prescribed and County-administered functions.
Many of these programs mandate performance standards and require
County funding participation from our local revenue base. Tp.e Board of .
Supervisor maintaining the limited discretion they have when it comes to
general purpose revenues is critical in the ability to address the diverse
needs of the community.
The graphic effect of mandated programs is illustrated in the pie chart
which follows. It is based on the 2016-17 Proposed County Budget totaling
$1.49 billion. The chart highlights several key points:
~ Revenue-specific programs account for $1.2 billion, or 80-.1%, of the
County's budget. These areas cannot be adjusted without losing. offsetting
revenues.
~ Only $297.5 million, or 19.9%, of the County budget is funded by
General Purpose Revenue, including available General Fund and
Contingency Fund balances of$47.9 million.
~ Mandated matches, maintenance-of-effort requirements for Public
Safety programs, and contractual d_ebt services totaling $70.9 million,
or 4.7% of the County budget funded by General Purpose Revenue,
cannotbereduced.
~ $226.6 million, or 15.2%, of the budget is available to absorb any
general State/Federal budget cuts and 10ca1cost increases. However,
even the areas subject to possible cuts are virtually all mandated and
controlled by law and State regulations, where the Board of Supervisors
has some discretion over the level of services.
~ Public Safety programs consume $93.1 million, or 41.0%, of the
areas subject to possible cuts. When combined with the maintenanceof-
effort requirements, a total of $147.6' million, or 49.6%, of the
General Purpose Revenue is allocated to Public Safety progr8:ills.

The Property Tax and Fiscal Systems, Health Services, Public Health,
Children's Shelter, General Assistance, and Elections comprise $41.1
million, or 18.1%, of the areas subject to possible cuts.
~ Many of the non-Public Safety Program areas provide direct support or
revenues to Public Safety programs (Administration/Support and Property
Tax arid Fiscal Systems).
County

On May 13, 2016, the Governor released his May Revision to his Proposed
2016-17 State Budget, noting that since January the State's revenues have
dropped by nearly $2 billion, and that, as the economy has recovered since
the Great Recession, the State has made additional significant increases in
permanent spending obligations which include: (1) an incremental increase
in the Statewide minimum wage up to $15 per hour, (2) augmentations for
health al1d human service programs, and (3) increased costs associated
with new collective bargaining agreements. These commitments, along
with the lower estimates of revenues and reserves mean there is now less
capacity than there was in January for additional budgetary commitments.
The State's revised expenditure plan for 2016-17 totals $173.1 billion,
which includes $122.2 billion from the State's General Fund. General
Fund revenue increased by $4.6 billion compared to the 2015-16 budget,
which reflects a tax revenue forecast of nearly $2.0 billion lower than the
level proposed in January. Because tax estimates are down, the State's
requirement for diverting funds to the Rainy Day Fund are reduced by
nearly $1.3 billion, and the pay down of various debts and liabilities are
reduced by $264 million.
The Governor reports that, barring any significant changes, the State budget
over the next two years, is in balance. However, in the coming years,
the State's commitments will exceed expected revenues. By 2018-19, the
annual shortfall between expenditures and revenues will be $1.7 billion,
and by 2019-20, over $4 billion. This shortfall does not take into account
the likelihood of an economic slowdown or recession. The May Revision
explains that the emerging shortfall is in large part - but not entirely -due
to the expiration of Proposition 30 (Prop 30), a temporary tax on California
residents with an annual income over $250,000 to fund education, which is
due to expire on December 31, 2018. Should voters pass an extension on
Prop 30 in November, the longer-term budget outlook would be "barely
balanced." The cost of any additional new programs or obligations beyond
the May Revision would need to be paid for through cuts in other programs
or further tax increases beyond the Prop 30 rates. If instead, the voters do
not pass the extension of Prop 30, the State will need to cut spending. And,
if the taxes are extended, the State will still need a sizable Rainy Day Fund
given the volatility of the income taxes on the State's wealthiest residents.
Without an extension of Prop 30, the State will have less ongoing tax revenues
to support its current fixed commitments, meaning that a strong Rainy
Day Fund is even more important to protect against significant budget cuts.
Major components of the Governor's proposed budget include!:
1.CSAC Budget Action Bulletin, May 13,2016
County of San Joaquin 2016-17 Budget Message
According to the new revenue estimates, the State budget will run into
deficit when the Prop 30 - tax cuts expire and even if voters in November , approve increased taxes on high-income individuals, the budget would
only barely balance. With a lengthy period of economic recovery likely
coming to a close and a large amount of volatility in key revenue sources,
the Governor urged fiscal restraint in order to avoid more drastic cuts in the
I years to come.
,The Governor is therefore continuing to advocate for Increasing the size of
the State's Rainy Day Fund, using current revenue on one-time items and
to payoff debt, and most importantly, avoid new on-going commitments.
As if to support his calls for pruclence, the State's top two revenue sources
- income tax and sales tax - have both disappointed this year. The May
Revise now estimates that tax revenues will be $1.9 billion lower than previously
estimated. ~
Additionally, the Legislature and Governor passed significant changes in
recent months: the Managed Care Organization (MCO) fix, a Statewide
minimum wage increase, and additional funding for developmental disability
services, Medi-Cal Providers, and debt reductions. While the May
Revision includes funding for the State to implement the new minimum
wage law; counties should note that they will not be impacted due to home
rule provisions within the California Constitution, which states that any
Statewide changes to minimum wage do not apply to counties and that
~ounties are exempt from mandatory compliance to Statewide minimum
wage Increases.
Because tax estimates are down, the State's requirement for diverting
funds to the Rainy Day Fund has also declined. Compared to the Governor's
January budget proposal, the automatic payments to the Rainy Day
Fund are reduced by nearly $1.3 billion and the pay down of various debts
and liabilities are reduced by $264 million. Some of the highlights of
changes brought in May:
Affordable Care Act - $177 million to true up AB85/ Affordable -Care
Act.
Human Services - $127.3 million for counties to implement'group home
reform, an increase of$59.9 million from January.
Cal Fire - $11 million for tree removal and disposal.
Local Correctional Facilities - The Administration maintains the $250
million for jail construction and rehabilitation projects. While the May
Revision does not contain a specific proposal, it does provide a continued
opportunity for a proposal.

majority
vote by June 15th. Once the budget is approved by the Legislature, it
goes to the Governor for his review and signature. The budget goes into
effect upon the Governor's approval of the budget bill. By law, the new
budget must be enacted on July 1, 2016. It is reasonable to expect that a
budget .will be presented to the Governor and signed into law in time to
meet this Constitutional deadline.
Recommended County Budget
The 2016-17 Proposed County Budget totals $1,493,661,218, which is ali
increase of $79,213,871 or 5.6% from 2015-16. This includes the General
Funds, Special Revenue Funds, Capital Project Funds, and three Enterprise
.operations. The Appropriations and Sources of Funding are summarized
below:

The 2016-17 proposed expenditure plan (excluding Special Districts) totals
$1.49 billion, which represents an increase of $79.2 million or 5.6% from
the 2015-16 Adopted Budget. These appropriations are primarily based on
the current State/County funding relationship. In the event State funding is
less than the anticipated amounts as a result of the final State Budget, a
commensurate reduction in local expenditures will be necessary consistent
with the County's Grant Funding Policy Guidelines. The guidelines are as
follows:
~ Funding over-matches for State and Federal grants shall be avoided ..
~ Grant funding resources should be maximized to meet community
ne~ds, and to minimize Net County Cost.
~ Program managers threatened with grant funding reduction or elimination
will seek other non-County funding sources.
~ When outside resources run out, program managers will be directed
to eliminate ongoing costs and/or develop plans for short-term program
phase out.
~ Any exceptions to these guidelines shall be limited to emergencies or
to the support of critical Board priorities, and must be reviewed and
approved by the Board of Supervisors on a case-by-case basis.
Appropriations for Special Districts governed by the Board of Supervisors
have been added to the County budget figures to show the total scope of 

the Board of Supervisors' responsibility. The grand total of all budget elements,
including Special Districts, is $1.52 billion.

Notable changes in the 2016-17 appropriations include the following:
~ A net increase of $5.4 million for negotiated employee salary and
benefits adjustments. This change reflects salary increases implemented
in 2015-16 as well as those scheduled for 2016-17.
~ General Government is increased by $11.6 million, primarily reflecting
a: $6.4 million transfer from the General Fund to the Reserve for
Contingencies; and increases of $944,000 in salary and benefits
adjustments; staffing cost of $802,000 for nine positions added; $.1.8
milli_onfor property tax system upgrade; $482,000 for financial, payroll,
and human resources systems upgrades; Google Innovation project
costs of $500,000; and data processing charges and equipment of
$821,000. Partially offsetting these increases is a decrease of
$200,000 in Tobacco Settlement funds for capital uses.
~ Capital Maintenance has increased by $4.9 million largely due to a
$4.4 million increase for the Capital Improvement Program.
~ Environmental Protection is increased by $1.1 million, primarily consisting
of $412,000 in salary and benefits adjustments and additional
net staffing costs, $358,000 for flood fight supplies and mapping, and
$195,000 for radio software. 

Law and Justice is increased by $11.4 million, primarily consisting of
$2.3 million in salary and benefits adjustments, which includes
$500,000 for Child Support Services' additional pay period in 2016-
17; a net staffing cost increase of $5.4 million; increases of $500,000
in overtime and part-time costs; $1.0 million in professional and contract
services; $800,000 in radio maintenance and data processing
charges; $500,000 in allocated insurance costs; and one-time funding
of $800,000 for vehicle purchases/replacements.
~ Roads and Facilities programs are increased by $3.6 million, primarily
consisting of$2.5 million in increased road improvement projects.
~ Health Services is increased by $26.9 million, primarily consisting of
$3.7 million in salary and benefits adjustments, a net staffmg cost
increase of $8.5 million, $10.8 million for increased hospital costs,
$3.1 million in increased Vehicle License Fee matching funds for
health and mental health services, $2.5 million for increased landfill
costs, and $2.0 million for intergovernmental transfer payment, offset
by a decrease of $3.0 million in transfer to the Hospital Enterprise
Fund and net reduction of $914,000 in fixed asset purchases.
~ Human Services programs are increased by $5.4 million. Major
changes include increases of $3.4 million in additional staffing, $1.9
million increase in professional contracts as well as seven funded
positions in the District Attorney's Office for the Public Assistance
Fraud program.
~ Education is decreased by $1.2 million primarily reflecting use of
fund balance for library services.
~ Parks and Recreation is increased by $343,000. This is primarily due
to $52,000 in salary and benefits adjustments, $258,000 allocated
service costs from the General Services Administration budget, and
$50,000 for a professional audit consultant for the Parks system.
~ Reserve for Contingencies is increased by $15.3 million reflecting
the recommended reserve level of $54.1 million for 2016-17.

Overall, available revenues are expected to increase by. $79.2 million, or
5.6% from the 2015-16 budget level. Notable changes in 2016-17 available
funds are as follows:

~ Aid from Other Governmental Agencies is projected to increase by
$7.4 million and is attributable to increases in the following areas:
$237,000 increase' in State revenue from .Pesticide Mill Fees,
$184,000 increase in Fed~ral grant revenue for flood response and
emergency management, increase for Child Support Services of
$700,000 in State and Federal funding based on electroriic data processing
allocation and an additional pay' period in 2016-17, increase
of $400,000 for Probation State/Federal revenue (Juvenile, Adult,
and AB109), and $1,447,77'6 increase in State funding for Local
Community Corrections, offset by $846,249 decrease in Public
Safety Realignment growth funds; Health Services increase of $3.1
milljon in Vehicle License' Fee revenues for health and mental health
services, offset by a net decrease of $2.9 million in State/Federal
funding for health programs.
~ Charges for Services are increased by $48.4 million. Major changes
include: $33.0 million net increase in Hospital revenues, $4.9 million
for mental health and substance abuse services, and $2.7 million in
landfill fees reflecting increased customer volume, $131,030
increase iil reimbur~ements for Lathrop Police Services, and
$148,600 increase in Custody for law enforcement services.
~ Revenues derived from Current Property Taxes are projected to
increase $14.2 mi~lion. The recommended budget assumes a 6%
growth in assessed valuation of the current secured and supplemental
tax rolls.
~ Operating Transfers In is increased by $7.6 million. Major changes
include a $6.8 million incre,ase in transfers to Reserve for Contingency
and $1.0 million increase in District Attorney budgets from
State Realigllment, trust funds, and the Environmental Protection
Prosecution fund.
~ Sales Taxes are up by $0.5 million reflecting a slow down in local
sales tax revenue growth.
~ Other Taxes/Revenues are decreased by $3.0 million reflecting the
reduction of General Fund support to SJGH from $5.1 million to
$2.1 million recoinmended in the 2016-1 7 budget.
~ Revenues from Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties are projected to
decrease by $0.1 million attributable to penalties and costs levied on
delinquent property taxes, and court fees and fmes.
~ Available year-end Fund Balances for operations are estimated at
$50.1 million, an increase of $4.2 million from 2015-16 and is primarily
due to a $5.3 million increase in the General Fund, and $1.2
million in the Library Fund offset by $2.0 million in Local Community
Correction - AB 118,.

The County budget presentation is developed to show the "Net County
Cost" for each departmental budget. Net County Cost is computed by subtracting
program-generated revenue, offsetting grants, or cost-sharing by
other levels of government from the appropriation requirements for each
budget. The remaining Net County Cost is funded by General Purpos~
Revenue.

The most significant changes in Net County Cost are:.
~ General Government has increased $2.3 million. This change is
attributable to the additional $1.8 million for the property tax system
upgrade; $500,000 for Google Innovation projects; $804,000 for the
addition of nine positions; and $944,000 for salary and benefits
adjustments. The increase is partially offset by a decrease of $1.8
million in reimbursements from cities and special districts for 2016
election costs.
~ Capital Maintenance has decreased by $556,000. This change is primarily
due to Cost Allocation Plan adjustment decrease for Facilities
Management of $1.3 million offset by an increase in Airport lease
costs of $688,000.
~ Environmental Protection has increased $293,000 mainly due to salary
and benefits adjustments ..
~ Law and Justice has a Net County Cost increase of$6.3 million. Significant
changes for programs funded with General Purpose revenue
include $700,000 in salary and benefits adjustments, addition of a net
$4.6 million in new full-time and part-time positions, $800,000 in
professional and contract services, $700,000 in radio maintenance
and data processing charges; and $500,000 in allocated insurance
costs, which is offset by a revenue increase of $1.0 million from
State and Federal grants, State Realignment, and trust funds.
~ Roads and Facilities has decreased $200,000, reflecting a reduction
in overall net county cost by the Airport Fund.
~ Health Services has a decrease of $2.8 million mainly due to a reduction
of $3.0 million in General Fund contribution for hospital operations,
partially offset by increases in salary and benefits cost~ for
General Fund budgets.
~ Human Services has increased a net of $200,000 for required County
m~tch for social services programs.
~ Education has decreased $181,000. This change is primarily due to
reimbursements for library services previously paid from the General
Fund that are now paid from the Library Fund.
~ Parks and Recreation programs have increased $400,000 due to
increases for salary and benefit adjustments ($52,000), increases in
extra help ($62,000), increases in services. and supplies ($142,000)
and a decrease in expenditure reimbursements for public improvement
projects ($161,000). .
~ Reserve for Contingencies has increased by $15.3 million to $54.1
million. This represents approximately 3.76% of the proposed budget.

As shown in the table above, Current Property Taxes and Sales Taxes are
the two main sources of the County's General Purpose Revenue. Combined,
they provide $228.2 million in support of the County budget and
represent over 91% of the ongoing General Purpose Revenue, excluding
Fund Balance. These revenue sources are extremely sensitive to the economic
upswings and downturns.
The County's assessed property valuation started declining in 2008-09 following
the collapse of the housing market and the mortgage crisis. The
decline continued over the next four years and annual property tax revenue
dropped by $40.0 million, or 20%, between 2007-08 and 2012-13. The
local housing market started turning around modestly since 2013-14. The
assessed valuation is expected to increase by 6% in the budget year. For the
first time, the projected property tax revenues for 2016-17 will exceed the
2007-08 level by $6.8 million. One of the supplemental requests recommended
is for a new property tax system for the Assessor- Recorder-County
Clerk. This system will enhance staffs' ability to project property tax
growth more accurately.

The Great Recession had also negatively impacted sales tax receipts for
several years. The decline also affected the State sales taxes dedicated to
public safety (Proposition 172) and social services (also known as 1991
Realignme~t) programs. However, unlike the property tax revenue trend,
sales tax receipts were stabilized sooner and continue to improve and are
projected to increase to $106.0 million in 2016-17. -
The following chart depicts the Sales Taxes, including the County's General
Purpose Revenue, Proposition 172, and Realignment-Social Services,
for 2007-08 to 2016-17.

The County workforce is comprised of employees who hold permanently
allocated positions and those who work in temporary, extra-help, and contract
capacities. The following table illustrates the recommended changes
in overall staffing for 2016-1 7

Several points s)1ould be noted:
>- There is an overall increase of228.6 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions.
>- 182 new full-time allocated positions are recommended:
- 47 positions for Human Services Agency, including 23 to support
Assembly BiI1403-California-'s Child Welfare Continuum
of Care Reform mandates to achieve improvements in child
experiences and outcomes by ensuring that families who provide
foster care receive targeted training and support to better
- prepare them to support foster and relative youth, 11 for Mary
Graham Shelter, 5 for In-Home Supportive Services program,
and 8 for various program expansion
- 41 positions for San Joaquin General Hospital to support Medi-
Cal Waiver programs and volume growth in trauma, clinics,
and the Medical Guarded Unit
- 30 positions for the District Attorney, including 20 in the Main
DA budget to assist the Public Integrity Unit (6), the Major
Crimes Unit (5), the Subpoena team (5) and the Witness Coordination
and Intake Unit (4). In addition, 3 Victim Witness
Advocates were added to the Victim Witness budget and the
Human Services Agency has provided funding for 7 new positions
to support the Public Assistance Fraud budget
County of San Joaquin 2016-17 Budget Message
21 positions for the Sheriff's Office, in~luding 7 for the continued
expansion of the Community Car Program, 4 Eviden,?e
Technicians, 3 Inmate Labor ~pecialists, 3 Deputy Sheriffs, a
Medical Technician, a Personnel Analyst, and a Management
Analyst "all to support workload demands, and a Senior Office
Assistant to staff the Civil Office at Lodi Court
7 positions for Public Health Services
6 positions for Behavioral Health Services including 4 positions
for Mental Health Services and 2 positions in Behavioral.
Health Administration
5 positions for the Probation Department, including a Social
Worker .for the National Guard Discovery ChalleNGe Academy
program funded by the County Office of Education; a Probation
Unit Supervisor dedicated to a Field Training Officer;
and 3 positions funded by Local Community Corrections AB
109 to support the' Administrative Division of Probation to
assist in managing and overseeing the Public .Safety Realignment
funds for the County
- 3 positions for Information Systems Division for additional
support
3 positions for Correctional Health Services
- 3 positions for Public Works departments
2 positions in Child Support Services
- 2 positions for Emergency Medical Services
- 1 position for Community Development to assist with administration
of the Planning Division
- 1 position for Facilities Management for additional engineering
support
- 1 position for Environmental Health
- 1 position for Employment and Economic Development
.Department
1 position for Solid Waste
7 positions for administration/support services departments to
address workload demand
~ 28 full-time allocated positions are recommended for deletion; of
which 26 are vacant and 2 are filled positions:
7 positions for Employment and Economic Development.
Department

5 positions for Environmental Health due to end of the Local
Oversight Program
- 5 positions for Child Support Services due to cost increases
combined with flat State/Federal funding
- 2 positions for San Joaquin General Hospital due to programmatic
changes
- 2 positions for Public Health Services due to a reduction in
Cal-Learn funding
- 2 positions for Head Start program
- 2 positions for Public Works
- 1 position for Facilities Management
- 1 position for Community Development"
- 1 position for Treasurer-Tax Collector due to the Court's termination
of collections services from the County
Budget Highlights
San Joaquin County has 16 represented bargaining units which comprise
approximately 96% of the County's workforce. Contracts for 13 of the
County's" represented bargaining units either expired or are set to expire on
June 30, 2016. The County is in active negotiations with these units for successor
contracts. Impacts from these negotiations are unknown at this time,
therefore, no funds have been included in the recommended departmental
budgets. "
As of April 30, 2016, th~re were 6,133 full-time allocated positions, of
which 674, or 10.9%, were vacant positions. Of the 674 vacant positions,
358 were actively und~r recruitment.
As previously noted, the 2016-1 7 budget proposes to delete 28 allocated
full-time positions, of which 2 are filled. The budget also adds 182 new
positions. If these changes are approved, this will bring the full-time allocated
positions to 6,287 and the number of vacant positions to 802.
Approximately 92% of the vacancies will be in the following County
departments whose operations, with the exception of the Sheriff-Coroner,
Probation, and District Attorney are primarily funded by.State, Federal, or
service charges:
~ Human Services Agency - 232
~ San Joaquin General Hospital- 153
~ Behavioral Health ~83
~ Sheriff-Coroner - 113
County of San Joaquin 2016-17 Budget Message
Sheriff-Coroner
Jail Double
Bunking Project
Honor Farm
Replacement
Project (SB 863)
~ Probation - 48
~ District Attorney - 39
~ Public Works - 38
~ Public Health - 32
Collectively, the recommended budget for the Sheriff's Office totals $149.2
million, which is an increase of $1.7 million from 2015-16. The budget
includes the addition of 21 positions primarily to continue the Community
Car Program, add Evidence Technicians, Inmate Labor Specialis"ts, a Medical
Technician, and Analysts.
Community Car Program - The program was initiated in 2008 as a community-
oriented policing approach to law enforcement in the unincorporated
areas. There are currently 14 Deputy Sheriff-Community Car
allocations assigned to Boggs Tract, Country Club, Garden Acres, Linden,
Lockeford, Morada, Tracy, Woodbridge, and Thornton. Five Deputy Sheriff
positions added in January 2016 have not yet been deployed due to a
high vacancy rate in the Deputy Sheriff ranks, but are scheduled to be
deployed to Kennedy, Northeast Stockton, and Lincoln Village.
The 2016-17 Proposed Budget includes the addition of six dep.uties plus
one sergeant to be assigned to the Community Car and Community Special
Enforcement Team programs, and will complete the fourth year of the five- -
year implementation plan. The Sheriff will provide a report to the Board in
June 2016, on the effectiveness of the Community Car Program. To complete
the five-year plan, seven additional Deputy Sheriff positions and a
Lieutenant should be added in 2017-18.
During 2015-16, the Jail Double-Bunking Project was completed, which
converted single beds in various housing units at the Jail to bunk beds,
increasing overall capacity by 242 beds. Full occupancy was expected by
fall 2015; however, the Department has not yet received approval for the
new rat~d capacity from the State Board of Community Corrections
(BSCC) that is anticipated to occur in May 2016. A full 12 months of
increased costs for inmate housing has been included in the 2016-1 7 recommended
budget to accommodate the increase in inmate population as a
result of double bunking.
In 2015-16, Custody division submitted an application for $80 million ~n
jail construction funds under Senate Bill (SB) 863 Adult Local Criminal
Justice Facilities Construction Financing Program in order to replace the
Honor Farm with secure housing and increased program space. Unfortunately,
the County's application did not rank high enough to secure fundil}g
under .SB 863. However, in February 2016, the Sheriff's Office was notified
of its eligibility to receive funding under SB 1022. In 2013, the County
originally submitted an application under SB 1022 for $40 million in jail

construction funds to replace the Honor Farm with a medium security
facility. At the time, the County's application just missed ranking high
enough to qualify for funds. A recent decision by another grantee to
decline SB 1022 funds has resulted in BSCC's offer of $32.3 million in
funding to San Joaquin County. The Custody ,division Realignment Unit is
working with the County Administrator's Office and the General Services
department to develop a revised proj ect scope, time line, and budget to be
approved by the Board prior to submittal to the BSCC.
The Delta continues to be a County priority. Since the passage of the 2009
Comprehensive Water Package, the County has maintained active participation
in advocating on the Board's adopted positions and policies regarding
the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. With two-thirds of the Delta
located in San Joaquin County, it is an important natural resource of local,
State, and .national significance which the Board of Supervisors ha's historically
protected. The California WaterFix and EcoRestore Projects, the latest
monikers for the Twin Tunnels and the conversion of agricultural land
into shallow water habitat formally known as the Bay Delta Conservation
Plan (BDCP), threaten the economic, social, and environmental viability of
the Delta. Responding to State administrative, legislative, and regulatory
actions regarding the Delta ,has involved a variety of efforts requiring coordination
8:mongvarious County departments, including the County Administrator's
Office, County Counsel, Office of Emergency Services, the
Community Development Department, the Agricultural Commissioner,
and the Public Works Department. The Recommended Budget includes
,$590,000 to fund the County's '2016-17 Delta Activities. The Public Works
Director has submitted a supplemental request to fund increased staff time,
consultant support, outside legal counsel, and technical experts related to
Delta Activities for $500,000'. Funding for this request has not been
included in the 2016-1 7 recommended budget.
The Human Services Agency's (HSA) Adm~p-istration Budget totals
$167.6 million and includes an additional 35 full-time equivalent positions.
This represents an increase of 428 positions since 2010- 1''1to address caseload
growth in public assistance programs as well as the implementation of
the ACA and Medi-Cal Expansion, which has substantially increased the
number of individuals eligible for Medi-Cal. Due to unprecedented caseload
growth, with the Board's approval, HSA has initiated the develop-
~ent and expansion of training space in the County Administration'
Building. This ~pace was occupied in April 2016, and allows HSA to train
eligibility work~rs to meet the anticipated community need.
On January 1, 2016, Continuum of Care Reform (CCR) was passed into
law through the approval of State Assembly Bill 403 (AB 403) and is
scheduled for full implementation by January 1,2017. The intent of CCR
is to comprehensively reform placement and treatment options for youth in
foster care by ensuring that families providing foster care receive targeted



training and support and are better prepared to support youth living with
them. Upon full implementation of AB 403, Mary Graham Children's
Shelter (MGCS) will be required to apply for a new license to transition
from a "Transitional Shelter Care Facility" under a Group Home license, to
a "Temporary Shelter Care Facility" under a Temporary Shelter Care
license. The primary impact to MGCS related to the licensing transition
will be a, new time limit for children to stay no longer than 10 calendar
days in the Shelter.
Due to an increase in the average daily population primarily attributed to
the enactment and implementation of AB 403, the recommended budget
adds 11 staff to meet mandated staffing levels of 1 staff for every 6 children.
Once the regulations are released and the plans can be completed for
any changes to the physical and organizational, structure of MGCS, the
Human Services Agency will return to the Board to seek approval for additional
budget and administrative changes prior to the January 1, 2017, AB
403 implementation date.
The ,2016-17 recommended budget for San Joaquin General Hospital
(SJGH) totals $289.7 million, including a net increase of 39 new full-time
positions and 40.6 full-time equivalent extra-help staff. General Fund support
for the Hospital Enterprise Fund is reduced to the Maintenance of
Effort level of $2,138,053, representing a reduction of $3.0 million from
2015~16. Net income for SJGH in 2016-17 is projected at approximately
$39.0 million, including the $2.1 milljon General Fund contribution. Overall,
the Hospital Enterprise Fund b~lance is projected to be $230.1 million
on June 30,2016, of which $89.2 million is available for SJGH operational
costs and the remainder designated for, capital costs or repayment set
asides. For 2016-17, a total of'$42.8 million in capital expenditures are
planned, including $27.2 million for the Health Information 'System/Electronic
Health Record project, $9.2 million for medical equipment and other
SJGH technology needs, and $6.4 million in -debt payments.
Through an agreement between the County and the City of Stockton, the
City operates the City/County Library System which serves the cities of
Escalon, -Lathrop,- Manteca, Ripon, Stockton" and Tracy as well as the
unincorporated areas of the County. The County's funding base for library
services is comprised primarily of property taxes. The 2016-1 7 County
Library budget totals $4.9 million, which includes a funding increase of
$71,000 to Library services and $1.5 million towards the Library reserve.
For 2016-17, the hours of service remain at the 2015-16 level. T1).epro-
. posed weekly hours for the County branches, including hours funded by
both the County and the respective municipalities are listed in the table
below:

The proposed 2016-17 Public Improvement program totals $12.3 million
and is primarily funded by Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG), Tobacco Settlement allocations for both capital and health carerelated
facilities projects, transfers from departments with specific projects,
and the Capital Outlay Fund balance. In addition, $38.1 million of previ-
.ously programmed projects will be carried over from 2015-16. Approximately
$20.4 million of the Capital Outlay Fund balance has not been
programmed. Following are the planned and funded capital improvement
and deferred maintenance projects for 2016-17:
~ Facility Re-use - Courthouse repairs, Remodel Third Floor of the
Canlis Building for Probation and address facilities compliance with
Americans with Disabilities Act.
~ Mathews Road Complex - Additional security improvements at the
Sheriffs Honor Farm and Jail facilities.
~ Facility Planning - Health related expansion and maintenance plans.
Al~o included are funds to assess programming, design, engineering,
and construction cost estimates for a new Morgue, and the potential
SB"1'022 project for Sheriff facilities.
~ Community Development Block Grant - Gianone Park drainage
improvements, Woodbridge Street and Storm Drain Improvements,
East Stockton Storm Drain Improvements, and Ardell Avenue sidewalks
improvements .
. ~ Other Projects - Flooring and parking lot assessments of Countyowned
facilities and repair/replace high priority areas, Micke Grove
Zoo perimeter fencing and children's play area, and replacement .of
boilers at the Public Health Services building.
One hundred and six projects totaling $42.8 million are not funded in the
proposed budget.

Forty-nine vehicles have been identified for replacement and purchase in
2016-1 7 at an estimated cost of_$1.7 million, which will be funded from
the Fleet Services' Vehicle Replacement Reserve. Also, eight units of
Road Maintenance equipment will be replaced at an estimated cost of $1.1
million. These equipment will be funded with a combination of Fleet Services'
Replacement Reserve and a donated contribution of $626,000 from
Public Works. In addition, 26 new vehicles, totaling $878,328, are recommended
for the District Attorney, Sheriff, Substance Abuse and Aging and
Community Services.
Community/
Cultural Support
Thirteen non-County organizations submitted requests for County contributions
totaling $1.3 million. Based on the Board's directive, the 2016-17
funding recommendations for non-County organizations were determined
using a zero-based budgeting approach. The recommended budget includes 

The County also continues to support the revitalization of downtown
Stockton through continued upgrades .of County facilities and allowing use
of the County-owned Hunter Street Parking Garage for dow:ntown events.
Several departments, especially the Sheriff, District Attorney, and Probation,
have numerous grants totaling millions of dollars. This creates a
dilemma for the County. On one hand, one of the County's overarching fiscal
strategies is to leverage non-County funding resources to meet community
needs. On the other hand, there is a downside to reliance on grants,
especially in the grant-dependent criminal justice system. There is cause
for concern for two reasons:
~ State and Federal grant funding tends to be offered on a year-to-year
basis and in some cases, local agencies are required to continue funding
beyond the grant period. Accordingly, it cannot be considered a
stable source of ongoing revenue. Indeed, economic fluctuations can
and have resulted in grant reduction and/or termination as measures
to curb spending. Should State or Federal grant levels change, local
program reductions would be the likely consequence.
);> Grant-funded programs, especially in the public safety area, often fail
to recognize that the addition of resources in' one area sometimes
upsets the delicate resource balance of the overall system. This
results in local funding demands to maintain system balance. Grantfunded
programs usually involve staffing and an evolving constituency
that will resist staffing and service reductions. It is, therefore,

essential that we contjnue to monitor the effects of grant program
resources to minimize adverse impacts when reduction and termination
occurs.
County departments are expected to manage their reliance on grant funds
and to adhere to the County's Grant Funding Policy Guidelines. Specifically,
the Policy requires that departments seek replacement funding from
non-C<?~ty sources or to eliminate/phase-out programs when grant funding
is reduced or eliminated. During 2016-1 7, departments will be asked to
identify those grants that have lost extem':ll funding and have remained
active and effective programs along with identifying a plan for the sustainability
of the program.
In many public service areas, the State has distinguished between general
public services and special public services. ~xamples of general public services
would be the jail, welfare, and certain health programs. Examples of
special (or user beneficial) public services would be those related to property
development, conducting a business, or animal ownership. The distinction
between these types of services is who benefits (general public or
private party) or whose activity imposes the cost for assuring the public's
welfare. General public services are funded from general revenues (i.e.,
sales and property taxes). Special public services are funded by special revenues
(i.e., user fees, license fees, and penalty assessments).
County government is prohibited from charging more than actual costs for
the service provided. However, failure to increase special service revenue
rates. to keep pace with increased costs deprives the County of resources
required to cover general service costs. Such shortages can be resolved by
several te~hniques:
~ Reducing special service delivery costs.
~ Reducing special service delivery levels.
~ Increasing special service revenue consistent with cost (user fees).
~ Reducing general. service levels to subsidize inadequately funded
special public services.
During the Proposed Budget Hearing, some fee increases will be recommended
to keep pace with costs and avoid shifting the costs of special services
to the general taxpayer. Departments with proposed fee adjustments
for 2016-17 include: Behavioral Health Seryices, Emergency Medical Services,
Environmental Health, Parks and Recreation, Probation, Public
Health, Public Works, and Sheriff-Coroner-Public Administrator.

The General Reserve is a cash resource for fmancing during the dry period
between the beginning of the fiscal year and the receipt of property taxes in
December an,d April. Additionally, it acts as a contingency for the County
in extreme emergencies.. For 2016-17, it is recommended that the General
Reserve be maintained at the current level of $10.0 million.
The Reserve for Contingencies covers day -to-day unforeseen budgetary
needs and has been used by the Board sparingly in the past. In conformation
withthe Board's reserve policy (R-10-525), including a goal of setting
the reserve at 5% of the County budget by 2020-21, the Reserve for Contingencies
is,recommended to be set at $54.1 million in 2016-17, which represents
approximately 3.76% of the proposed budget. This is an increase of
$15.3 million from the 2015-16 budgeted level and provides a hedge
against adverse State and Federal budget impacts, and use as interim funding
to address local emergencies/disasters and unforeseen expenses.
In 2015-16, a reserve for Unfunded Pension Liabilities was established to
start addressing the County's unfunded retirement contribution liabilities
(B-15-135). The most recent actuarial report prepared by the San Joaquin
County Employees' Retirement Association identified an Un:fun:ded Actuarial
Liability totaling $1.3 billion and San Joaquin County's share is
approximately $1.2 billion. The balance as of April 30,2016 is $4.1 million.
For 2016-17, the budget sets aside an additional $7.8 million in this
reserve.
In 2015-16, a reserve for Economic Development was established to support
the County's promotional/marketing efforts and economic development
activities/programs, including incentives for businesses to relocate
and/or expand in San Joaquin County. The balance as of April 30, 2016 is
$30,000. For 2016-17,. the budget directs $107,158 of the Transient Occupancy
Tax (HoteUMotel Tax or TOT) to this reserve. This represents the
amount of the projected TOT that has not been programmed in the proposed
budget for economic development-:related activ~ties and programs.
Fund Balance Management
In governmental budgeting language, Fund Balance is the excess of assets
and estimated revenues of a fund over its liabilities, reserves, and appropriations.
The portion of this balance that is free and unencumbered for
financing the next year's budget is called Available Fund Balance:
Management of Fund Balance shortages is. a critical factor in stabilizing
County finances and is carefully evaluated by rating agencies when the
County seeks debt fmancing. To assure prudent overall budget management, 

the Board adopted guidelines for departmental budget change requests that
occur after budget adoption. Budget change guidelines are as follows:
~ Requests are to be minimized;
~ Requests are to be revenue offset; and
~ Non revenue-offset requests are to be limited to emergencies or to
the support of critical Board priorities.
The consequence of not adhering to such guidelines is to risk proliferation
of budget change requests to authorize staffing and programming increases
during the year from one-time departmental budget savings along with
deteriorating the budget from being structurally-balance~. Frequently, this
results in ongoing full-year costs the following fiscal year without revenue
support, which means cuts elsewhere a~e needed to keep the budget balanced.
Such budget change requests during the year are counter-productive
becau~e such incrementalism erodes the Board's funding flexibility outside
of the comprehensive annual budget review process when all program priorities
are reviewed together.
During the 2007 Great Recession, a significant amount of funds were redirected
from the Reserve for Contingencies and the Capital Improvement
Program to help bridge the budget gaps. Recognizing the unsustainability
of these one-time funds and the need to rebuild the County's Capital
Improvement Program, the Board established the funding guidelines designating
the General Fund year-end fund balances as one-time resources for
one-time uses (B-10-965). Cmently, approximately $20.2 million of the
Capital Outlay Fund balance has not been programmed; therefore, the recommended
budget does not include additional General Fund contributions
to the Capital Improvement Program.
Supplemental Requests
Department Heads initially submitted requests for supplemental funding
totaling $12.2 million. Subsequent to the County Administrator/Department
Head budget meetings, Department Heads withdrew a total of $4.2
million of their initial requests. As a result, the supplemental funding
requests were reduced to $8.0 million, of which $6.6 million are included
in the recommended budget leaving a residual unfunded amount of $1.4
million. One hundred and six capital proj ects at a preliminary estimated
cost of $42.9 million are also not funded. Lastly, 13 non-County organizations
submitted requests) for County funding totaling $1.3 million. Based
on the Board-directed zero-based budgeting approach in funding the non-
County organizations, the recommended budget includes $1.0 million for
these organizations, leaving an u~funded amount of$291,456.

In an effort to adhere to the Board-established Strategic Priorities, some
departmental wants and needs are not addressed. As a result of the funding
reconimendations which comprise the 2016-17 Proposed County Budget,
the Board may hear requests by departments, special interest groups, non-
County organizations, and the general public to add funding during the
budget hearing. In providing policy guidance on desired budget adjustments,
the Board will provide direction as to which areas of the County
budget should be reduced to offset any added costs. Supplemental requests,
both funded and unfunded, are outlined in Attachment A and detailed in
individual budget narratives.
Final Budget Hearing
Our office has identified several significant individual budget unit recommendations
for Board review ~uring the Final Budget Hearings. When particular
functional areas are scheduled for discussion, the Board may wish to
examine other areas as well. Department Heads and members of the public
will have an opportunity to comment. Additionally, some non-County organizations
may desire to make presentations. Unfunded supplemental budget
requests will also be presented.
The impacts of State Budget actions are unknown at this time. It may be
necessary to return to the Board to re-open budget considerations after the
2016-17 Final Budget is adopted, should additional funding ~ecome available
or. should major funding/program reductions be imposed based upon
the adopted State Budget.
Appreciation
County Administrator's staff have received excellent cooperation and is
appreci~tive of the support and assistance from Department Heads and their
staff. Appreciation is particularly extended to Human Resources and Information
Systems Division for their analysis and insight in the preparation of
this document. The County Administrator's staff are incredible at what
they do in getting the job done, for the hard work, professional and thorough
evaluation, long hours they contributed to the preparation of the document,
and willingness to continuously raise the bar in the outcomes.
Recortl.mendations
It is recommended that your Board:
1. Approve the proposed County and Special Districts budgets for
2016-17. This action does not constitute final approval of any of the
proposals prior to the Final Budget Hearing. It does, however,
provide the document that will be presented to your Board for the 

Final Budget Hearing and give Department Heads and the public
information from which other requests or recommendations can be
made.
2. Set Tuesday, June 28, 2016, at 9:00 a.m. as the time to begin the
Final Budget Hearing on the adoption of the County and Special Districts
budgets and authorize the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors to
publish the required hearing notice.
3. Direct the Human Resources Director to issue layoff notices to
impacted employees based on recommendations included in the
2016-17 Proposed Budget