Honorable Board of Supervisors:
It has been 4 years since I last submitted a Recommended Budget to your Honorable Board. The environment in which
the County of San Mateo operates has changed significantly. Despite this, the twin beacons guiding our work remained
fixed and immutable--to protect the public health and safety of the community and to be good stewards of the
resources entrusted to us.
The County has responded to the Great Recession by reducing services, improving productivity, restructuring labor
costs and reorganizing operations. Our response has assumed that as the economy strengthened operations would
return to normal. But the depth and breadth of this recession has exposed long-term economic, political and societal
problems that remain.
In California the recession has revealed the institutional weakness in the governance of the state. These weaknesses
have resulted in the state failing to balance the demands of a rapidly growing, multi-cultural population with available
resources in order to keep pace with the world’s most innovative economy. This is due to the long-term consequences
of Proposition 13, ballot-imposed earmarks creating new spending obligations, the super-majority requirements to
close costly special interest loop holes or enact new taxes and extreme partisanship. What remains, is a dysfunctional
state, lacking the vision and the institutional means to move adeptly and with alacrity to ameliorate the impacts of the
recession.
The Great Recession, a decade of war in the Middle East and an aging population have left the Federal government
with unsustainable deficits. We should expect in the coming years the Federal government to shift more responsibilities
to state and local governments without the necessary funding to fulfill the obligations.
The result of all this is an increasingly disillusioned citizenry that believes that governments, at all levels, have
promised much more than they can deliver.
In the 1980’s the General Synod of the Church of England was debating the controversial question of admitting women
to the priesthood. A speaker from the floor of the Chamber spoke passionately, “In this great matter,” he cried, “as in so
much else in our country why cannot the status quo be the way forward?” What we are experiencing are changes for
which the past is not a prelude to the future. As much as we may wish it wasn’t so, we can’t go back to the way things
were, it is up to us to make our own future.
Overview
The Recommended Budget and Financial Plan for FY 2012-13 is $1.835 billion, an increase of 4.5 percent over the
budgeted amount for the current fiscal year and $18.4 million less than the actual amount spent in FY 2010-11. The
General Fund is $1.225 billion, an increase of 2.9 percent over FY 2011-12 and $28.4 million less than the actual
amount spent in FY 2010-11. We estimate that the General Fund will end the fiscal year with a small surplus of $3.9
million, for a total fund balance of $258 million. The Net County Cost (NCC) will increase by approximately $22.6
million over the prior year, including $17.1 million in one-time expenses for the closure of the Burlingame Long-Term
Care (BLTC) facility. The Capital Projects Budget in Non-departmental will increase from $15.5 million to $41.9 million.
This budget is consistent with the Five-year Budget Plan and with the Board’s subsequent directions during the
Preliminary Budget Review in March. Revenue and expense estimates for the next fiscal year are within the ranges
given to the Board in January. The County will be using $40 million in ERAF funds to balance the budget rather than

the $53 million that had been projected due to increasing tax receipts and a larger fund balance. This assumes the
passages of Measures T, U and X in June and negotiating labor agreements resulting in lower salary and/or benefits
costs. The County will realize most of the cost savings from the business process re-engineering projects now
underway.
In the May Revise, Governor Brown reports a continued diminution in state revenues. This has caused the gap to grow
from January’s estimate of $9.2 to $15.7 billion. The Governor proposes significant reductions in health, human
services, corrections and to overall state operations. These reductions, for example, will directly impact the care
provided to our most vulnerable -- seniors, children and the mentally ill. Additionally, the Governor proposes reducing
the number of permanent state employees by 15,000, to 341,106 and reducing the work week to four days totaling 38
hours. If the Governor’s proposed tax measures fail in November, additional reductions will be required
Budget Changes
This budget reflects key changes in how the County conducts its business. These changes are part of an ongoing
reassessment of all County services, costs and organization:
1. Criminal Justice
Public safety is one of government’s most important responsibilities. Yet in an era of diminished resources the County
must decide how best to allocate funds to ensure the provision of both public safety and other essential services. It is
not an either or proposition! How do we achieve the goal of having less crime and fewer victims while using public
resources wisely?In recent years the Board has had to consider this question in connection with the need to replace the aging woman’s
jail, and reduce jail overcrowding while working to create the capacity to house inmates formerly sentenced to state
prison. After careful deliberation the Board decided to construct a new jail and to make a concerted effort to rehabilitate
those incarcerated.
Last year the Governor signed into law Assembly Bills 109 and 117 which represent sweeping changes to state prisons
and County jail systems. Together, public safety realignment provides for the early release of some inmates from state
prison and requires people convicted of less serious felonies to be incarcerated in county jails instead of state prisons.

These bills help the state alleviate prison overcrowding and reduce state expenses by shifting the responsibility to local
governments.
As part of the legislation the County is required to adopt a Local Implementation Plan (LIP) and Budget for managing
this population. Next year we anticipate that the County will receive $10 million from the state for criminal justice
realignment. To date there have been 228 inmates returned to the County under the supervision of the Probation
Department and 148 inmates have been sentenced to County jail for crimes that previously would have resulted in
state prison sentences. The average sentence is 18 months in jail and 17 months on probation.
By using evidence-based correctional sanctions and programming, criminal justice realignment gives counties the
opportunity to break the cycle of building and filling more jails. We must seize this opportunity! According to experts, 70
percent of offenders commit a new crime within three years of release. The Community Corrections Partnership (CCP)
has identified reducing recidivism (defined in the LIP as an arrest for a new crime within three years of release) as a
key factor in improving public safety and reducing the jail population and its attendant costs.
This budget includes $5.1 million for additional reentry services. These funds are critical to reducing recidivism. The
strategy of the CCP in implementing reentry programs is, “a collaborative approach that seeks to reduce recidivism and
ensure public safety by coordinating services and in/or out-of-custody supervision. In this approach, multidisciplinary
teams (MDT) work together to engage supervisees as early as possible and ensure that supervision and services are
complementary in order to help supervisees succeed.”
The Court’s policies on pre-trial incarceration and post-trial sentencing have a major impact on the jail population. It is
critical that we continue to engage the Court to identify and resolve any systemic problems that impede its ability to
make timely decisions that affect the length of stay of inmates. We also need to work with the Court and the Sheriff to
identify those tools that will give the Sheriff the most flexibility in managing the jail population.
The Court should be commended for its innovation in implementing Drug Court, Mental Health Court and Veterans
Court. The Court has also worked with the County to design and utilize programs like Bridges and Choices that have
helped those under Court supervision to achieve and maintain sobriety and become productive citizens.
The Recommended Budget includes $44.2 million for the design of the new jail. Important considerations include
constructing a facility that meets our minimum needs while providing additional space for expansion should that
become necessary and adequate space for reentry services and transitional beds.
My office is working with the Sheriff to prepare a revised operating budget that will include the costs of financing the
facility. We will be analyzing a different (and less costly) skill mix for staffing the facility, and examining different
approaches for the delivery of auxiliary services. We will present that budget to the Board in the autumn.
The Sheriff should be commended for aggressively working with the cities of San Carlos, Half Moon Bay and Millbrae
to provide County law enforcement services to these communities. These new contracts along with the existing Portola
Valley and Woodside contracts, have improved law enforcement services in these communities and saved the cities
and the County money by achieving economies of scale.
I believe that the future success of local governments depends on our willingness to share services for the benefit of
mutual constituents. There are continuing discussions between the City of Pacifica and the Sheriff regarding law
enforcement services. The County and cities are also discussing the feasibility of consolidating law enforcement
dispatch services into the County’s Emergency Dispatch Center (there will be sufficient space in the new Emergency
Dispatch Center to accommodate this possibility).
The County should facilitate shared services agreements wherever feasible. The goal should be to maintain or improve
fire, police and emergency medical service and reduce costs. This can be accomplished by ensuring that the
governance structures for these arrangements enable the individual agencies to control service levels and costs. 

Protecting the health and well-being of the community is also a primary responsibility of County government. Both the
Health System and the Human Services Agency provide essential services to our County’s most vulnerable
populations. The Great Recession has dramatically increased demands for many of these services but diminished
resources have hampered the County’s ability to respond.
Today, in the United States we spend an average of $8,200 per person per year on medical conditions and health
insurance. In 1950, health care expenses represented about 4.6 percent of GDP, by 2009, that figure had jumped to
seventeen percent. Thirty percent of the total cost of health care is generated by only one percent of the population and
fifty percent of the cost is generated by five percent of the population. Despite the enormous amount of money spent
on health care, the leading health care indicators in the U.S. lag behind many other nations. The dramatic rise in health
care costs has significantly increased the County costs.
The chart below shows the impact of these increases on the County’s budget. Taken together, they limit our ability to
respond to other social problems, diminish our prevention efforts and reduce our ability to provide other essential
services. We must find a way to reverse or at the very least moderate these trends.

Recently Professor Walter Bortz, author of The Next Medicine: The Science and Civics of Health, spoke at the SMMC
Medical Staff Annual Dinner about the need for a paradigm shift in the delivery of health care away from a “diseasecentric
to a health-centric” model focusing on prevention and exercise.
According to Bortz, less than two percent of all health care expenditures are devoted to prevention and yet prevention
is intrinsic to good health. He believes that prevention and exercise can reduce the incidence of heart disease, many
forms of cancer, diabetes, arthritis and brain diseases, thereby saving billions of dollars in unnecessary costs.
Bortz also believes that modern medicine causes needless suffering and expenses by rushing to intervene in too many
conditions. For instance he cites a recent study of prostate cancer patients in which one of four treatments were used:
surgery, radiation, chemotherapy and watchful waiting. The results revealed that there was no difference in clinical
outcomes between the most aggressive and most conservative approaches to treatment despite the huge differences
in cost, time and effort. 

There has been no area of the economy that has received more scrutiny nor undergone more changes than the health
care industry and the practice of medicine. These changes have had and will continue to have a profound impact on
the County. In response we need to accelerate our work to move from a “disease-centric to a health-centric” model of
health care. We need to think through how we are organized and staffed to deliver health care to our patients and to
nurture and develop long-term, strategic partnerships with other providers that can reduce costs and improve patient
care.
The San Mateo Medical Center relies heavily on an extensive system of outpatient clinics to keep patients healthy and
reduce expensive hospitalizations for acute and psychiatric care and emergency room visits. The Health System
continues to emphasize the importance of prevention and early intervention through programs such as: Pre-Three,
HIV/Aids, Teenage Pregnancy Prevention, the Children’s Health Initiative, Childhood Obesity Prevention and Diabetes
Management. Altogether prevention and early intervention programs make up approximately 2.6 percent of the
Recommended Budget.
The Health System should be commended for being one of only a few counties in the State with a reduction in obesity
rates over the past 5 years. While nearly one-third of children are still overweight or obese, the rate in the County has
gone down by 5.6 percent. This is an indication that the work conducted by Get Healthy San Mateo County to create
environments where the healthy choice is the easy choice is making a difference.
We know that our population is aging, and given a choice, everyone would prefer to stay out of institutions for as long
as possible. We also know that many of the home and community based programs that we have operated historically
through the Health System, for example In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS), Behavioral Health full service
partnerships, and the Ron Robinson Senior Care Center, have been successful at keeping people out of institutions.
Unfortunately, for Medical patients the only option is to place them in an institution because their Medi-Cal health
coverage will only pay for hospital and long-term nursing care, not the supports that allow people to remain in the
community.
Through the County’s advocacy, and the advocacy of many others, the state is changing course. San Mateo County
and the Health Plan of San Mateo (HPSM) have received approval from Federal and state authorities to be one of four
pilot programs for long-term care integration for Medi-Cal/Medicare “Dual” beneficiaries. Long-term care integration will
allow many more Medi-Cal/Medicare beneficiaries to remain at home.
The Duals Pilot benefits will not be immediate and may be delayed due to the state’s reluctance to allow counties more
flexibility in managing this program. The Duals Pilot will not change the requirement that the County provide 17 percent
of the cost of the IHSS program to draw down 83 percent of the funding from the Federal and state governments. The
expected County cost of the program for FY 2012-13 is $11,658,548. The County’s General Fund contribution remains
at $3,702,306 ($4.0 million from Realignment Reserves will be used in FY 2012-13 to help pay for the County’s cost of
the program). The County match will draw $54.8 million in Federal and state IHSS funding to San Mateo County. At the
current funding level, the IHSS program will exhaust all of its reserves by March 2014. Therefore, to meet its legal
obligation, it is projected the County will need to contribute an additional $1.2 million in FY 2013-14 and an additional
$5 million in FY 2014-15. The Health System will continue to manage utilization of the program and advocate for more
financial flexibility in managing the program. 

There are several initiatives underway at SMMC that will improve efficiency, increase revenue and/or reduce costs:
revenue cycle improvements to increase the speed with which bills are sent out, improve the accuracy of the bills, and
respond more effectively to denials of bills, (increased revenue-$5.9 million); purchasing efficiencies (e.g., by limiting
selections to generic products or to items with volume discounts) at SMMC (services and supplies cost savings-$1.9
million); and improved patient throughput at SMMC clinics to increase visits (increased revenue- $1.7 million).
The Health System continues to work with the Sequoia and Peninsula Health Care Districts to fund programs and
projects that benefit the residents of their districts. The Recommended Budget includes funding from Sequoia for the
Children’s Health Initiative ($1.35 million) and health care for uninsured adults ($2.0 million) and from Peninsula
$165,000 for psychiatric programs. The Peninsula Health Care District Board is still considering a County proposal for
$2.3 million to fund health care for uninsured adults.
Assemblyman Gordon’s Bill, AB 2418, is in the Assembly Appropriations Committee. If the bill becomes law all health
care districts without hospitals would have to spend a minimum of 95 percent of their annual property tax revenue on
health care related programs and projects. As greater demands are placed on the County’s Health System, it is critical
that the health care districts support the community’s greatest health care needs.
The Health System and Human Services have begun the process of change in planning for the implementation of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Health Care Act (ACA) passed by Congress in 2009. The Recommended Budget
includes the necessary funds to complete the redesign of the intake eligibility determination process for all clients
including the estimated 42,000 residents who will qualify for coverage under the Act, by ensuring the enrollment
process is user friendly and efficient. This includes funds for remodeling HSA offices to accommodate the redesigned
business processes and additional clients.
If the Supreme Court upholds the law 8,000 to 13,000 previously uninsured County residents will have health
insurance and potentially relieve the County of its fiscal responsibility for health care for these patients. However, the
Health System will still have to provide care to approximately 20,000 adults and children who are not covered by the
reform, as well as people who are unable or unwilling to apply for Federal coverage. In addition, the Health System
faces the loss of $46 million as the Federal government moves monies it currently spends to support public hospitals to
pay for coverage. While it is difficult to predict the impact of the law on County costs, our best estimate is that it will be
revenue neutral. 

One of the goals of ACA is to moderate the rate of increase in health care costs. However, even if the Court upholds
the law we cannot be sure it will achieve this goal. Therefore, the County must continue to implement programs that
emphasize prevention and healthy living as a strategy for improving public health and reducing County costs.
No place is this more evident than in the availability of affordable, quality child care and early learning. The continued
state budget reduction in CalWORKS is particularly problematic to high-cost counties like ours. The CalWORKS
reductions to child care are dramatic and could have long-lasting consequences. As a result, in partnership with our
schools and the Silicon Valley Community Foundation, I will bring back to you in the fall, a comprehensive redesign of
early learning and child care program delivery. For each child, for every parent working towards self-sufficiency, and for
the strength of our economy, nothing is more important than an educated and skilled workforce. That begins with
opportunities for meaningful early learning.
3. Parks
Since FY 2008-09 the Parks budget has declined by approximately 15 percent and its staff reduced by about 20
percent. As funding has declined our facilities have suffered from deferred maintenance. 

Although Parks does not fall into the category of public health or safety, many residents value County Parks and
believe it is a vital service. The Parks system is funded almost exclusively from the General Fund and competes for
funding with many other important County services. This has resulted in a Parks system that is woefully underfunded.
We need to re-think our approach to parks and open space. The County expects to assume responsibility for the
operation of Devil’s Slide as a pedestrian and bicycle trail next spring, adding new responsibilities to a Parks system
that is already struggling.
The Board has established an ad hoc committee that is working with the County Manager’s Office and Public Works to
take a comprehensive look at the Parks system. This review should include an analysis of how the Parks should be
operated in the future and how to tackle the growing list of deferred maintenance projects now estimated at more than
$100 million.
There are at least two different approaches to this task. The first is to assume that Parks will continue to operate as we
have and to rebuild its most pressing infrastructure needs by dedicating a greater portion of General Fund revenue for
this purpose. To accomplish this, the Board would have to reduce funding for other General Fund services or identify a 

major new funding source or sources. The second approach is to radically redefine the nature of the Parks system so
that it can be operated within available fiscal resources. This would undoubtedly result in a Parks system that is much
more passive and less robust than in prior years. (Similar to the Mid-Peninsula Open Space District operating just
trails.)
I am convinced that any long-term strategy for Parks must include seeking out strategic partnerships with cities, the
Golden Gate National Recreation Area, the Mid-Peninsula Open Space District and the State of California. Although all
these agencies are operating with constrained resources we share common constituents and patrons, value
preserving the natural environment and understand the importance that open space and recreational opportunities play
in the health and well-being of the community.
Despite the County’s severe financial constraints the Board may want to consider providing some additional, limited,
short-term funding to ensure the safe and adequate operation of the Parks system pending the ad hoc committee’s
review. The Recommended Budget does include sufficient funds to keep Flood Park open for one more year.
4. Streets and Transportation
The County is responsible for maintaining 315 miles of public roads. Some roads are in rural areas some are in urban
neighborhoods. As can be seen from the following chart the value per mile of gas tax for road maintenance has
declined dramatically over the last three years. This is due to improving vehicle gas mileage and rapidly increasing
costs for materials and maintenance. These trends will continue as the cost of petroleum products escalate and more
hybrids, alternate fuel and electric vehicles use the roads. 

The gas tax is the primary revenue used to finance road maintenance and improvements. The Recommended Budget
includes $11 million in gas tax revenue for the next fiscal year. Gas taxes were originally intended to pay for the public
costs necessary to build and maintain a network of streets and roads for use by private vehicles. This was intended to
be a pay-as-you-go system funded by the users. This tax has been in place since the 1920s and is levied on a per
gallon basis. The tax rate has not been increased since 1947.
In light of California’s extensive system of freeways and streets, the impact of AB 32, the Global Warming Solutions Act
of 2006, on mileage fleet standards and the continued dependence of the economy on vehicular transportation, we
need a new strategy for raising funds for street maintenance. This strategy needs to be statewide because of the
complicated network or freeways, streets and roads that must be seamlessly interconnected. 

In the meantime, the County’s road system continues to deteriorate and the potential liability for accidents and damage
to vehicles caused by poor road conditions grows. Until the state develops a comprehensive infrastructure strategy for
transportation the County needs a new strategy for road maintenance that can be implemented within the existing
Road Fund resources.
Public Works uses a Pavement Condition Index to determine the condition of road surfaces. The County uses this
information to prioritize road projects. The County needs to re-think the standards used to maintain roads. The
standards should reflect the available resources and the intensity of road way use. For some neighborhood streets this
might mean that the basic standard of maintenance would be lower than it is today. Under this scenario if residents
want a higher level of maintenance it would have to be financed through assessment districts.
5. Fire
The Fire Fund is financed by a property tax levy in the unincorporated area of the County not covered by fire protection
districts. In recent years escalating costs and a significant decline in unsecured property taxes have resulted in deficits
in the Fund. In the current fiscal year $1.8 million from the General Fund was used to balance the Fire Fund.
The use of General Fund money to supplement the Fire Fund raises a question of equity. The General Fund is
supported by property taxes collected from all County residents including those living within cities and fire protection
districts. These residents are also taxed for fire protection by their own jurisdictions. It can be argued that using County
General Funds to supplement fire protection for residents living in the unincorporated area forces city and fire district
residents to pay twice for fire protection.
In order to reduce the deficit in the Fire Fund the Recommended Budget eliminates a County funded engine company
at the Tower Road Station. This will save $1.1 million a year. Two other engine companies--one funded in part by
residents of the Highlands and one funded by CalFire will remain housed at this station. In addition, the City of San
Mateo has an engine company located within one-half mile of the Tower Road Station with automatic deployment
responsibilities to this neighborhood.
The County is also in discussions with the Cities of Redwood City and San Carlos over the possible consolidation of
three nearby fire stations into one centrally located station. If successful it would be possible to close the Cordilleras
Station with a possible savings of $500,000 a year. The soonest that any savings could be realized is in one to two
years. Until then a General Fund subsidy of the Fire Fund will be necessary.
6. Capital Improvements
The total cost of the FY 2012-13 Capital Projects budget is $87 million. The total budget includes $27.8 million in reappropriated
capital projects from the prior fiscal year, including $9.7 million for Circle Start tenant improvements and
seismic upgrades, $44.2 million for the new jail, $15 million for new projects. The new projects include Alpine Trail
($2.0 million), Devil’s Slide ($2.0 million), Seal Cove paving ($400,000), and the San Mateo Medical Center ground
floor remodel to add long-term care beds ($2.1 million).
The Capital Projects budget in Non-Departmental Services will increase from $15.5 million to $41.9 million due
primarily to the aforementioned Circle Star improvements, the new jail, parks and trails improvements, and SMMC
long-term care beds.
The County is planning on issuing lease revenue bonds this autumn to refinance $40 million in outstanding tax-exempt
lease revenue bonds from 1997, 1999 and 2001. It is anticipated that by refinancing these bonds in today’s market, the
County could generate approximately $5 million in savings over the next twenty years. In addition, the County will
reimburse itself approximately $33 million for the purchase, seismic upgrade and tenant improvements for Circle Star
South. The County will also explore the option of issuing $20 million in taxable bonds to reimburse itself for the
purchase of Circle Star North. Finally, the County is also planning on financing the replacement of the 78 year-old
Skylonda Fire Station at approximately $3 million. The station is barely functional in its current state of disrepair.

CalFire will reimburse the County for one-half of the replacement cost in annual lease payments. Replacement of the
53 year-old Pescadero Fire Station will be recommended after the flooding issues in the area have been resolved.
Depending on the final decision with regard to Circle Star North, the financing will range between $75 - $95 million. The
financing for the new jail, which may include reimbursement for the purchase of the Woodhouse site, will likely occur in
the summer or early fall of 2013. My staff is currently working on an RFP to establish a financing team for both
issuances.
The County also utilizes a Five-year Facilities Capital Plan, which serves as a planning tool to track all future capital
projects and their estimated costs. In September, my office will present your Board with a Five-Year Facilities Capital
Plan for your consideration and approval.
Redevelopment Agencies
The dissolution of redevelopment agencies will have long-lasting impacts on local governments. In the short-run the
financial impact on the County appears to be revenue neutral. However, I am worried about the long-range impacts of
dissolution on revenue growth.
Redevelopment has long been a point of contention between cities and other property taxing agencies. Throughout
California there are many examples of abuses of redevelopment law and lax state oversight. However, the process to
dissolve Redevelopment Agencies has pitted local agencies against one another, weakened the bonds of community
and made more difficult the ability of local governments to work together in the future. It has shifted discussions away
from community-wide needs as each agency focuses on maximizing its own revenues.
The state’s action to dissolve redevelopment agencies, as necessary as it may have been, has left unanswered
several critical questions about the future of economic development funding, low and moderate housing and local
government revenue growth. The future prosperity of our region depends on finding new ways to promote and
incentivize economic development that will require local governments to work together as partners.
Two-Year Budget and Performance Management
Beginning in 2013, we will be transitioning to a two-year budget cycle in order to direct resources toward the
accomplishment of the community’s most important outcomes identified through Shared Vision 2025. To do this we
must be able to define what’s most important, get better at knowing what works and what doesn’t, and allocate our
resources accordingly.
During the “off-budget” years, we will focus County resources on program reviews and performance improvement
initiatives. We need to identify a short list of progress measures that the Board finds useful in fulfilling its oversight
responsibilities. These measures will be used to set goals and prepare the budget for the next two years. We will report
on progress during the year through the Director’s Reports and semi-annual Board workshops.
Organizational Change
Three years ago when I spoke at the commencement of San Francisco State University MPA Graduates, I said that
local governments would need to be more proactive, creative and nimble to succeed. To these attributes I would now
add more collaborative, resourceful and focused.
The challenges the County faces are both deep-seated and interrelated. It is not just about lack of resources. It is about
the changing needs and priorities of the community. It is about the fundamental problems facing society and
government’s role in dealing with them. In essence, it is about how County government is organized and delivers public
services.
This budget represents a transition in how the County will respond to the profound challenges that confront us as we
move from short-term, stopgap measures to more strategic and fundamental actions. For the County to fulfill its
mission we need a paradigm shift in thinking about the challenges before us. We need to re-conceptualize everything
that we do. We need re-think the very nature of the organization that we call “County government” as well as our

relationships with other organizations. This will not be an easy or a comfortable process--change never is. But we must
confront the world as we find it, not as we would like it to be.
We need to focus our efforts on the primary mission of County government: protect the health and safety of the
community and be good stewards of the resources entrusted to us. To do this we must be both financially stable and
viable. This means we need to re-think what we do, why we do it and how we do it. We need to distinguish between the
roles of policy and service delivery. In their 1992 book Reinventing Government, David Osborne and Ted Gaebler
described this dichotomy as “steering rather than rowing,” This powerful concept has profound implications on the
County’s approach to service delivery in the future.
Salaries and benefits represent about forty percent of all County expenditures. It is the single largest expense item in
the budget. While most employees of the County have not received a cost-of-living increase in four years, the cost for
this line item will have increased thirteen percent by the end of FY 2012-13 due to merit increases, health care
premium increases and retirement system contribution increases. During this same period tax revenues were
essentially flat. This is not sustainable. Ultimately, salaries and benefits have to be consistent with available resources.
They also have to be consistent with comparable jobs in the community.

This notwithstanding we should resist a disturbing trend in the private sector--for too many jobs there seems to be a
race to the bottom in wages. Declining wages, automation and off-shoring of jobs have resulted in a shrinking middle
class and the growing gap between the rich and poor. This too has profound implications for our society.
Historians have often observed that a strong middle class has contributed to the financial and political stability of our
country. In 1914, Henry Ford astounded the business world by effectively doubling the wages of his assembly-line
workers to $5 a day and reducing their workday from 9 to 8 hours. Ford reasoned that since it was possible to massproduce
inexpensive automobiles more of his employees would buy them if their wages were raised. The $5 day
helped better the lot of all American workers and contributed to the emerging middle class. In the process he changed
manufacturing forever.
So we are left with what appears to be a conundrum--pay fair and competitive wages and reduce services or provide
robust services and reduce wages. Ford said, “It’s not the employer who pays the wages. Employers only handle the
money. It’s the customer who pays the wages.” So it is for government--the taxpayers pay the wages for public 

employees. I believe the way to solve this dilemma is for the County to re-think the nature of County government. This
may mean that in the future there will be fewer County employees, performing different tasks, in a different way.
Restructuring requires changing how work is done. The County is well along in its business process re-engineering. As
we begin to change how work is done we also need to restructure the organization through which work gets done.
As I reflect on the nature of County’s government I can envisage an organization that is like a tree. 

The tree trunk or core is made up of those whose work is directly linked to the development and enactment of public
policies and those who deliver mission-critical services. Branching out from the core I foresee work being performed by
workers whose affiliation with the County is lessened by their distance from the core. The six branches emanating from
the core represent the different employment relationships the County could have with its work force.
1. Policy/Core Work
This could be a smaller group than the present County workforce of approximately 5,300 permanent full and parttime
employees. These are people who are essential to the organization and with whom the organization expects to 

have a long-term relationship. Salaries and benefits for this group should be commensurate with their importance to
the operation of the organization and the level and complexity of the work expected of them.
2. Fixed Term Work
The next category would include workers performing work that needs to be performed by public employees, but
who would do so for a fixed term, similar to military enlistments. Some of these jobs would be much like the work
done by today’s permanent employees, except in this model, employment would end at a certain point in time. The
County would have the option to extend the term or rehire the person, depending upon need. We would expect a
more rapid turnover of employees in this category due to the more temporary nature of the relationship between the
employee and the organization. There would also be costs associated with training a more transient workforce.
Some workers in this category might resemble apprentices who join the organization to learn or enhance a skill and
then move into the core or move on to another organization. Other workers might be more mature, experienced
individuals who bring skills to the County that they have developed in other organizations. Salaries and benefits for
these workers would reflect the more temporary nature of their affiliation with the organization.
3. Long Term Contract Work
This category would include long-term contractors whose workers are employees of private organizations that have
an on-going relationship with the County. These arrangements would be similar to contracts the County has with
the Private Defender Program, Humane Society, CalFire and Community-Based Organizations (CBOs).
4. Temporary Caseload/Project Work
This category would consist of temporary workers hired to either meet intermittent caseload demands or undertake
special projects. This category would also include contractors hired for special projects i.e., construction,
technology or professional engagements.
5. Volunteer Work
This relationship with the organization would include organized volunteers providing a variety of services. Currently,
the Sheriff’s Department and Library make extensive use of volunteers.
6. Self Help Work
The last category is work I would describe as “self-help.” Over the years governments have undertaken
responsibilities that were formerly within the purview of families and individuals. With diminished resources we will
need to re-engage citizens in such work.
The changes that I have described above cannot be accomplished overnight and will be unsettling, even painful, for
some. The County will need to engage the unions and the employees in meaningful and ongoing discussions about the
future nature of work and how we should organize to accomplish it. Ultimately, some of these changes would require
voter approval of a charter amendment.
Conclusion
Over the course of the last five years the Board has made many difficult decisions regarding service levels, and
employees have made significant sacrifices by foregoing salary increases and having benefits reduced. By the end of
FY 2012-13 the County will have eliminated a net of 766 positions or about a one-sixth of its work force. While there is
some improvement in the local economy and stabilizing of revenues the County still faces many financial challenges.
We must confront these challenges while navigating the unchartered waters of change.
There is a story about Sherlock Holmes and Watson going camping. In the middle of the night Holmes wakes up
Watson and says, “Watson what do you see?” Watson said, “I see all the beauty and wonders of the universe.” Holmes
said, “Watson you fool our tent was stolen!” Like Holmes’ tent the world we once knew is gone. It is up to us to design
the world of tomorrow. We can no longer assume that what once worked well will work well in the future. Help will not
be forthcoming from Washington, D.C. or Sacramento. 

I am convinced that the only way forward is to remake the organization in a way that will provide financial stability and
flexibility to meet the uncertainties ahead of us. The way we are organized and staffed to meet our responsibilities is a
means not an end. The organizational structure must facilitate our work and not inhibit us. As an organization we will
need to be both surefooted and nimble, strategic and focused with laser-like precision on our core businesses and
clients. We will need to understand that we will not be able to do everything we once did and certainly not everything in
the same way it was done before. We will need to utilize all available resources in the best way possible to meet the
greatest needs of our community.
Charles Handy wrote in the Age of Paradox, “Change comes from small initiatives which work, initiatives which,
imitated, become the fashion. We cannot wait for great visions from great people, for they are in short supply at the end
of history. It is up to us to light our own small fires in the darkness.”
I want to thank the men and women who work for San Mateo County for their sacrifices and commitment to public
service and to the people of our community. I want to thank the County’s management team for leading by example
and continuing to do more with less. I want to thank the men and women that work in the County Manager’s Office -
Dave Holland, Reyna Farrales, Peggy Jensen, Mary McMillan, Jim Saco, Joanne Ward, Betsy Jack, Jack Yaco,
Michael Bolander, Shanna Collins, Danielle Lee, Deanna Haskell, Beverly Thames, Connie Juarez-Diroll, Alicia Garcia,
Marshall Wilson, Mina Lim, Joy Limin, and Rebecca Romero for their hard work in putting together this document and
for always providing timely and accurate information on a myriad of subjects. Finally, I want to thank the Board of
Supervisors for the nearly impossible job that you do in setting the direction and making tough decisions on complex
matters. Most of the public does not see the long hours that a Board Member works or how conscientious you are in
deliberating public policy. I also want to thank you for asking me to return for “one final lap” as County Manager. It’s
been a privilege to work for this County and for the Board of Supervisors. I look forward to working with you in the
coming year to begin the process of transforming the organization to successfully meet the challenges ahead of us.