RECOMMENDATION:
Adopt a Resolution approving the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget submitted by the
County Manager.
BACKGROUND:
The County Budget Act (Government Code §§ 29000-29144 and § 30200) requires that
counties have a Recommended budget, approved by the Board of Supervisors, in place on
July 1 of each fiscal year.
On September 22, 2015, as part of the two year budget process, the Board of Supervisors
approved the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget and received the FY 2016-17 Preliminary
Recommended Budget. The purpose of this budget transmittal is to seek formal approval of
the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget. This Budget has been amended from the one
received last September to include adjustments that are deemed necessary to ensure
uninterrupted services and operations through September 2016. The Board will consider the
FY 2016-17 Adopted Budget, including September revisions and final Fund Balance
adjustments, on September 20, 2016.
County Manager’s Message
The Recommended Budget for FY 2016-17 is approximately $219 million or 9.2 percent
more than anticipated last September. Most of these increases are for capital and
infrastructure projects, rollovers and Measure A initiatives. To meet these requirements
General Fund reserves will be drawn down to $154 million, the lowest level in 10 years. This
is particularly worrisome since most economists believe we may see a mild downturn in the
local economy in the next 18-24 months. This is usually a time when we are replenishing
our reserves, not depleting them.
The Road Fund reserves are also declining as many unanticipated projects have been
added to the capital program over the last year. If this trend continues, the Road Fund
reserves will be depleted within 4-5 years. Once this happens the conditions of the roads in
the unincorporated area will quickly deteriorate because gas taxes, the primary source of funding for roads, is not sufficient to meet the on-going maintenance needs of the County
roads system and the continuing increase in capital projects requests.
I will submit a new 5-year Capital Improvement and Infrastructure Program to the Board
next year along with the FY 2017-19 Recommended Budget. Once adopted it will be
prudent for the Board to not make significant changes without identifying new sources of
funding, eliminating projects or both.
Measure A is scheduled to sunset in 2023. If the Board anticipates placing a measure on a
future ballot asking the voters to renew this tax it will be important to demonstrate a record
of success in using existing Measure A funds to replace deteriorating infrastructure and
capital facilities and filling gaps in health and safety services that can achieve savings or
improved social conditions.
The County is making good progress in accelerating the pay-down of unfunded pension and
retiree health liabilities despite volatile market conditions during the last 12 months. At the
present rate of advanced funding, the County’s unfunded pension obligations should be
paid off by 2023, after which time the County’s continuing obligations should be reduced by
$106 million annually. The debt schedule on the Maple Street Correctional Facility is
structured so that by 2020 it will be $5.3 million less than this year with further declines
throughout the remaining life of the bonds.
With the economy slowing and perhaps entering a recession in the next two-years and with
health care funding showing unusual volatility the County needs to be very cautious in
initiating new programs or capital/IT projects going forward.
DISCUSSION:
The FY 2016-17 Preliminary Recommended Budget received by the Board last September
totaled $2,383,795,853 with 5,408 authorized positions. With ongoing adjustments made
during the course of the current fiscal year, the FY 2016-17 Preliminary Recommended
Budget was revised in February 2016 to reflect an increase to $2,384,771,391 with 5,418
authorized positions (the “FY 2016-17 Revised Recommended Budget”). The FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget now presented to the Board for approval totals $2,603,794,834 with
5,438 authorized positions, representing an increase of $219,023,443 or 9.2% and 20
positions over the Revised Recommended Budget. The increases, which are described in
greater detail below, are primarily related to the net increase of position adjustments
including position reclassifications and add/deletes ($3.5 million), County pension and
retiree health liabilities ($18.7 million), capital and infrastructure projects including rollovers
($94.3 million), operating transfers from Non-Departmental Services and the Accumulated
Capital Outlay Fund to fund capital projects ($55.2 million), and Measure A initiatives
including rollovers ($56.4 million); these increases are partially offset by other adjustments,
including the elimination of one-time expenditures ($9.1 million).
The following tables display the Total Requirements and Authorized Positions for All Funds
and the General Fund for the FY 2016-17 Preliminary, Revised and Recommended
budgets. The Position Adjustments can be found in Attachment A and Budget Unit
Summaries can be found in Attachment F. 

The decrease in Reserves from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget to the FY 2016-17
Recommended Budget is $61.8 million. This decrease can be segmented into four
categories: ongoing, loans, short-term, and onetime. The ongoing segment is $27.1 million
and includes Net County Cost adjustments and increases to Retiree Health (also known as
Other Post-Employment Benefits – OPEB). These increases are offset by general purpose
revenue adjustments and the elimination of the Children’s Health Initiative contribution. The
increase in OPEB costs was not anticipated. CalPERS fell short of its earnings assumption
by 7.1% during FY 2014-15 which resulted in an ongoing increase in the County’s Annual
Required Contribution (ARC) beginning this year. We’ll be taking an ATR to the Board on
June 21 to appropriate additional funding to cover the FY 2015-16 ARC. 

The County loans total $18 million. Of this amount, $7.7 million should be returned to the
General Fund within two years for the loan to Peninsula Clean Energy for start-up costs and
lending collateral. Loans to Half Moon Bay and Brisbane for the library projects will have
longer payback arrangements made from future property tax allocations, as will the loan to
the County Airports Fund, which will be paid back from future hangar rental income. The
loans are listed in the table below. 

The short-term items total $16.1 million and include an increase in the Retirement
Prepayment of $14.1 million and the first of a three-year contribution to the new Enhanced
Flood Control Zone of $2 million. The increases in the Retirement Prepayment are based on 

the differential payment that is required to fund the fixed rate of 37.14%. The current
statutory rate is 32.4%. The total differential payment will be $23.6 million next year,
compared to $9.5 million in the current year. The County Manager’s Office will be working
with SamCERA on analyzing and possibly restructuring the current MOU as the differential
payments are substantially outpacing the retirement savings. We need to make sure that
this prepayment structure is sustainable from a reserves and cash flow perspective. 

Finally, the onetime items, which are listed in the table below, represent $584,460 and
include the new capital projects, as well as the Affordable Housing Task Force and Climate
Action Plan / Sea Level Rise initiatives. It should be noted that we changed the funding for
the Old Maguire office renovation from the General Fund to the Accumulated Capital Outlay
Fund, which currently holds the Circle Star sale proceeds. A complete list of Capital
Projects, including new and rollover projects, can be found in Attachment D. 

The amount of Measure A funds appropriated in this budget total $162 million. Of that
amount, $117 million is new spending and $45 million is projected rollover from the FY
2015-16. The chart below only shows budgeted allocations as the inclusion of rollover
amounts would overstate total Measure A allocations. It should be noted that there remains
$12.5 million set aside in FY 2016-17 for health and children services.
The assumptions included for the ongoing allocations for FY 2017-18 are $10 million for
countywide Capital projects, $5 million for Parks projects, $5 million for countywide IT
projects, $2.5 million for Board loans and grants, $1 million for Board District-specific
allocations, and $33 million for existing ongoing initiatives such as The Big Lift, Prevention
and Early Intervention, paratransit services (SamTRANS), etc. The out years are adjusted
upwards by 2%. There is a complete list of funded Measure A initiatives in Attachment C. 

The Road Fund, managed by the County’s Public Works Department, is the County’s
funding source for maintaining and managing the County’s road infrastructure (316 miles of
roads), including road surfacing, sidewalks, roadside vegetation management, and
associated storm water drainage facilities. Funding revenues are primarily derived from gas
taxes, which were last increased in 1994.
In FY 2015-16, gas tax revenues will approximate $14.7 million, which provides sufficient
funding to operate the Engineering and Road Divisions of Public Works and leaves $3.5
million for capital projects and field maintenance. This level of funding can generally
maintain overall pavement conditions at current levels if invested entirely in prioritized road
maintenance activities and projects. However, it is not sufficient to cover emergency repairs,
discretionary projects or address 40 miles of failed roads, which are estimated to cost $24
million to restore. In FY 2015-16 alone, spending levels exceeded revenues by more than
$6 million; an unsustainable trend that would exhaust the Road Fund reserves balance of
$27 million in four to five years. Further complicating matters is that Road Fund revenue is
expected to decline by approximately $1 million in FY 2016-17 due to improved gas mileage
of newer vehicles, the popularity of electric vehicles for which no gas tax is collected, and
the low price of fuel that has reduced the revenue gained from the sales tax component of
gas tax.
The tables below highlight and categorize several discretionary road projects within the past
three fiscal years and their estimated costs. Often projects require significant and costly
environmental permitting with mitigation, monitoring and reporting components that extend
for several years after the project is completed. For the Road Fund to remain financially 

viable, a State or Federal fix to the gas tax or a new way of financing road construction
repairs and restoration needs to be identified.

Significant budget adjustments made to the FY 2016-17 Preliminary Recommended Budget
include:
1. Capital Projects ($94.3 million) – Adjustments include rollover of previously funded
projects totaling $98.5 million (including $24.6 million in Measure A projects), new
projects totaling $12.8 million (including $400,000 in Measure A projects), and
removal of $17 million for renovations of County Office Building One pending
completion of the County Government Center Master Planning Study. New projects
include the Mirada Road erosion protection, replacement of the Pine Street
Warehouse, improvements to the Alpine Bike and Pedestrian Trail, restoration work at
the Hall of Justice South Entrance, replacement of a fuel tank at the Pescadero
Corporation Yard, replacement of the playing field at the Youth Services Center, and
various water supply and treatment studies on the Coastside. A complete list of
funded projects can be found in Attachment D.
2. Measure A Initiatives ($162 million) – Adjustments reflect the rollover of previously
funded projects totaling $45 million which includes $24.6 million for Capital Projects,
$11.9 million for the Big Lift, $4.2 million for unspecified Board loans and grants, $3
million for fire engine and safety equipment, $2.8 million for parks improvement, and
other miscellaneous projects. New projects include additional housing and community
development, homeless and safety net services, collaborative community outcomes,
parks improvements, active and alternative transportation, capital projects and county
facilities infrastructure improvements. A complete list of funded projects can be found
in Attachment C.
3. Pension Prepayment Contribution ($14.1 million) – Pursuant to the MOU entered into
between the County and SamCERA on November 19, 2013, the County agreed to
aggressively pay down its unfunded pension liability with a combination of lump sum
contributions totaling $140 million and maintaining a blended fixed rate contribution of
38% through FY 2022-23. The blended fixed rate was subsequently reduced to
37.14% to account for the employee 50% pick-up of Cost of Living Adjustments. The
differential payment, which will grow to $23.6 million next year, is the difference
between the blended fixed rate of 37.14% and the blended statutory rate of 32.4% for
FY 2016-17. As noted earlier, the County Manager’s Office will be working with
SamCERA and its actuary on analyzing and possibly restructuring this arrangement
as the differential payments are substantially outpacing retirement savings.
4. Retiree Health Contribution ($4.6 million) – In May 2008 the County entered into an
Agreement with CalPERS to establish an irrevocable trust to meet the County’s
funding requirements for ongoing retiree health benefits, otherwise known as Other
Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB). During FY 2014-15, CalPERS fell short of its
earnings assumption by 7.1%. This and other changes to plan and demographic
assumptions has resulted in a substantial increase of $3.9 million in the County’s
Annual Required Contribution (ARC) in FY 2015-16. The County’s actuary projects an
additional increase of $700,000 in FY 2016-17.

Half Moon Bay and Brisbane Library Loans ($7.7 million) – Loans to the cities of Half
Moon Bay ($6 million) and Brisbane ($1.7 million) will be provided to assist in the
development of new library facilities to be operated by the County Library System.
These loans are provided on a long-term basis, with low- or no-interest and will be
repaid out of the cities’ future property tax apportionments.
6. Peninsula Clean Energy Authority Loan ($7.5 million) – This loan, which should be
fully repaid within two to three years, will be used to fund start-up activities, including
power purchases and operating costs, and provide lending collateral until the revenue
stream of the Authority can sustain ongoing operations.
7. County Airports Loan ($2.8 million) – A loan will be provided to the Department of
Public Works to fund the replacement of two hangar rows at the San Carlos Airport.
Repayment of the 25-year loan will begin in FY 2017-18 using rental income
generated from tenants of the new hangars.
8. Enhanced Flood Control Zone ($2 million) – Funding is requested over the next three
fiscal years for administration costs of this new flood control zone, which was created
in FY 2015-16 to help address flood risks in the County’s unincorporated areas of
responsibility and enhance the County’s existing flood control efforts.
9. Commuter Bus Pilot ($2 million) – The County is currently in the process of
redesigning the Commute Alternative program (CAP). As part of that redesign,
proposals were solicited for a comprehensive employee commuter bus service. This
service would help reduce carbon emissions as well as traffic and parking congestion
in and around the County Government Center in Redwood City and the San Mateo
Medical Center. This funding will support a one-year pilot and evaluation.
10. Mental Health Pods ($1.7 million) – In accordance with action taken by the Board of
Supervisors on April 12, 2016, in response to the termination of the agreement with
Santa Clara County for two psychiatric inpatient beds, funding is added to support two
dedicated Mental Health pods to treat inmates with severe mental illness. One 24-bed
pod is located at the Maguire Correctional Center for male inmates and one 8-bed pod
is located at the Maple Street Correctional Center for female inmates.
11. Children’s Health Initiative Contribution Removed ($2.4 million) – As a result of the
State’s expanded Medi-Cal coverage for undocumented children, which shifts an
estimated 3,000 children from the Healthy kids Program to Medi-Cal, costs and
revenues have been adjusted accordingly and include the elimination of the County’s
annual Contribution to the Children’s Health Initiative.
12. Climate Resiliency / Sea Level Rise ($580,000) – Funding is requested for the
completion of the countywide vulnerability assessment to include the south coast of
the County and major County facilities, develop resilience strategies for multijurisdictional
sub-areas of the County that face heightened vulnerability to sea level
rise, and outreach and community engagement activities.

Affordable Housing Task Force ($500,000) – Funding is requested to build
partnerships with cities to support implementation of identified Affordable Housing
strategies and develop a community outreach, engagement and communications
infrastructure, including website design, content development, and interactive
graphics and tools.
14. Sunny Day Trials ($3.5 million) – The remaining balance of the County’s $5 million
agreement with the Private Defender Program for Sunny Day defense costs is
appropriated. In addition, two term Deputy District Attorney positions are requested as
the length of litigating these cases is expected to last two to three years. The term
positions will backfill the work of the more senior staff focusing on the Sunny Day
trials.
County Counsel has reviewed and approved the Budget Resolution as to form.
The approval of the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget contributes to the Shared Vision
2025 outcome of a Collaborative Community by ensuring that resources are allocated in
accordance with the law, that services to the community – especially the most vulnerable –
are maintained without interruption, and that the County’s financial future remains strong.
FISCAL IMPACT
With these revisions, the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for all funds totals
$2,603,794,834 and 5,438 authorized positions. Reserves amount to $322.3 million or
14.1%. The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget for the General Fund totals
$1,677,325,230 and 4,274 authorized positions. Reserves amount to $154 million or 10.1%.
Finally, Measure A appropriations amount to $162 million in FY 2016-17, including $104.8
million in the Preliminary Recommended Budget, $12.4 million in new spending and $45
million in rollovers, including $811,000 for Library Projects (not part of the County’s All Funds
budget).