I am pleased to submit the Recommended Budget for FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15. This budget represents a
significant change from prior year budgets in three distinct ways. First, it is a two year budget with both years prepared
at the detail level. Although the County Budget Act only allows the Board to formally adopt the Recommended FY
2013-14 Budget, the FY 2014-15 Budget was prepared in such a way that minimal revisions will be required next year.
This will save the County thousands of staff hours and provide the Budget and Policy Unit the time needed to conduct
in-depth performance reviews during the off-year. Second, this budget has a new section that aligns key performance
measures and community indicators with the Board’s adopted Shared Vision 2025 Community Outcomes. This will
begin the process of developing performance dashboards for the Community Outcomes and ultimately, County
programs. Third, this budget returns to the more traditional approach of displaying the budget in the agency format:
Criminal Justice, Health Services, Social Services, Community Services, and Administration and Fiscal.
In the coming year, we will work more closely with the departments to create a performance management culture that:
• Aligns employee goals with Shared Vision 2025 community impact goals;
• Measures outcomes and the most productive use of public resources;
• Uses evidence and data to make better operational and strategic decisions;
• Engages employees and other stakeholders to continuously improve performance; and
• Uses benchmarks to compare performance and learn from peers in other organizations.
The context in which this budget is developed is an improving local economy. The June unemployment rate of 5.4% in
San Mateo County is the second lowest of all 58 California counties. The median sales price for a single family
residence in San Mateo increased by 22% from June, 2012 to June, 2013. The San Francisco International Airport
estimates annual boardings at 44.7 million passengers, which exceeds pre-recession levels.
The continuing economic recovery and the new sales taxes (Measure A) and rental car taxes (Measure T) have
improved the County’s long-term fiscal outlook. Dissolution of the Redevelopment Agencies will increase on-going
property taxes by $5.6 million a year. Leasing the Circle Star complex will increase revenues by $1.7 million in FY
2013-14 and $5.8 million in FY 2014-15.
The Recommended Budget for FY 2013-14 is $2.1 billion, and in FY 2014-15 is $1.9 billion. This decline in the second
year represents a one-time $50 million pay down of unfunded retirement liability in FY 2013-14, reduced capital
requirements for the Maple Street Correctional Center (MSCC), completion of other capital and technology projects,
reduction in Affordable Care Act (ACA) “ramp up” expenses and reduced elections expenses. The General Fund
requirements reflect a similar trend declining by $119 million over the same period. We anticipate that the General
Fund’s fund balance will be approximately $300 million in FY 2013-14 (about the same level as it was in FY 2010-11)
and then decline to $242 million in FY 2014-15 reflecting the pay down of unfunded retirement obligations. The
General Fund contingencies/reserves are expected to decline slightly but still exceed the 10% required by Board
policy.
The Recommended Budget does not include Measure A sales tax revenues or expenditures. The tentative list of
Measure A proposals will be reviewed by the Board during the budget hearings. Once approved the appropriations and
revenues will be included in the final budget.
Measure A funds will be tracked in a separate fund in order to retain their identity for reporting purposes. Any
unbudgeted revenue or unspent appropriations will remain in this fund to be appropriated by the Board at a later date.
A-2
County of San Mateo Budget Message
FY 2013-15 Recommended Budget
The Controller believes this is the best way to achieve accurate reporting to the Measure A Oversight Committee and
the Board of Supervisors.
The number of new positions in the Recommended Budget total 112 in FY 2013-14 and 42 in FY 2014-15. The new
positions being recommended are primarily for the implementation of the ACA and the opening of MSCC. The overall
level of staffing is still approximately 10% less than in FY 2008-09.
Measure A Sales Tax
In November 2012, the voters overwhelmingly approved a one half-cent increase in countywide sales taxes for a
period of 10 years. It is anticipated that this will generate approximately $68 million in FY 2013-14 increasing to $88
million by FY 2021-22. There will be a slight decline in FY 2022-23 as the tax will only be collected for 9 months before
it terminates.

The Board directed that a process be established to engage the public regarding possible uses for Measure A funding.
Accordingly the Board held two public workshops and received input on the County’s “Speak Out” web-site. Based on
this feedback the Board directed the County Manager to submit recommendations for services and/or projects that met
the following criteria:
1. Consistent with the needs identified in the text for Measure A;
2. Fills gaps in services for vulnerable populations;
3. Leverages Measure A funds with other revenue;
4. Repairs county infrastructure;
5. Improves the efficiency/effectiveness of County operations resulting in long-term savings;
6. Utilizes evidence-based approaches to service delivery; and
7. Engages other stakeholders.

The Board received 22 separate reports and recommendations for Measure A expenditures. The County Manager was
directed to bring back those recommendations tentatively approved by the Board for consideration during Budget
Hearings.

It was the general consensus of the Board that not all of the anticipated Measure A funds would be appropriated in the
first year thereby providing the flexibility to meet unanticipated challenges/opportunities in the future. Accordingly, it is
estimated that the County will have generated $147 million in Measure A funds beginning in April, 2013 through June,
2015. Services/projects tentatively approved by the Board total $92 million leaving an unspent balance of
approximately $55 million.
Measure A was approved for 10 years. Therefore it is critical that the expenditure of these funds produce long-term
savings or result in future cost-avoidance so that the County does not have to make significant program reductions
should the Board not seek the reauthorization of these funds or a reauthorization is rejected by the voters.

Implementation of Assembly Bill 109 (Chapter 15, Statutes of 2011), or Criminal Justice Realignment, continues to
result in challenges and provide opportunities for the County. The following chart illustrates the increase in inmate days
and probation caseloads due to realignment. 

It is anticipated that the County will continue to experience growth in jail and probation caseloads due to Realignment.
The Court has helped to ameliorate the growth of inmate days by utilizing “split sentences” (jail time and probation).
Nevertheless the jail system continues to average approximately 1,046 inmates a day significantly over the systemwide
board-rated capacity of 834. It is estimated the County will receive $13.4 million from the State in FY 2013-14. 

The County’s long-term strategy for maintaining public safety, humanely housing prisoners and containing costs
include: building the Maple Street Correctional Center (MSCC), robust rehabilitation programming, and community
early intervention and prevention programs.
The MSCC is under construction and on track for a first phase limited opening in July, 2015. The construction costs are
within the $165 million budget. The County continues to work with the State to receive grant funding to offset some of
the construction costs. We should know later this fall if we are successful. The County is also working on a bond issue
(approximately $200 million) to cover construction and other related project costs.
The opening of MSCC will provide the necessary space to conduct extensive rehabilitation programs. The Sheriff is
implementing the recommendations in the Research Development Associates (RDA) report that will enable him to
provide necessary programming for inmates within MSCC and transition them to lower levels of custody as they
successfully complete programs. Hopefully this will result in a seamless reentry of inmates into the community under
probation supervision. If successful this approach should result in less recidivism (currently the State average is 70
percent), fewer crime victims and lower future jail and probation caseloads and costs.
The last component of this strategy but in many ways the most important is early intervention and prevention. This
strategy is larger than the County government. To be successful it will require the active engagement of the entire
community — schools, cities, faith-based organizations, non-profits, philanthropic foundations, service clubs,
businesses and parents. If it “takes a village to raise a child” all of us in San Mateo must join together to be that
“village!”
Measure A provides the County with the necessary “seed” funds to engage our community partners in this effort.
Tentative Measure A funding for the “Big Lift” (the early childhood learning initiative to achieve 80 percent of students
reading at grade level by the end of the 3rd grade), improved and expanded mental health services for young children,
and expanded summer reading programs to maintain reading proficiency; as well as continued funding for universal
children’s health care are all examples of programs that help children succeed in school. We know that when children 

succeed in school they are more likely to be law abiding, productive citizens and less likely to engage in anti-social,
unhealthy and non-productive behaviors that result in costly public programs.
What we need from our partners in this endeavor is a common commitment to shared goals, the reallocation of
resources to evidence-based programs designed to achieve these goals and a willingness to collaborate by looking
beyond organizational boundaries to the common good. None of this will be easy but it is necessary if we are to
achieve a community that is safe, healthy and just; and that meets the community’s needs by using its limited
resources wisely, enabling its citizens to thrive.
Affordable Care Act (ACA)
Both Health and Human Services have been working tirelessly for over a year to prepare for open enrollment
beginning October 1, 2013.
Over 47,000 San Mateo residents will be eligible for subsidized or free insurance. In addition to the start of Covered
California’s provision of private, subsidized insurance, the Medi-Cal program will be expanded for very low income
residents. We estimate that there are 13,000 San Mateo residents who are eligible for this expanded Medi-Cal
coverage. I am pleased to report that through the efforts of the Health System’s Health Coverage Unit, we have already
identified and enrolled 9,000 of these individuals.
The expansion of coverage will bring new challenges, as well as opportunities. It is important for the Health System to
retain patients with new coverage who will have more freedom to choose other providers. As one example of our
efforts in this area, the new clinic in South County will open in November, allowing us to consolidate three clinics
currently in substandard facilities into one modern, state-of-the-art facility.
Another major focus of the Health System is to improve the quality of, and patient’s experience with their care through
the LEAN improvement process. The San Mateo Medical Center has made impressive strides already, reducing wait
times for primary care appointments by 40% without additional resources. In the next two years, the LEAN process will
be used in other parts of the Health System, including Behavioral Health and Aging & Adult Services.
The Affordable Care Act will also bring financial challenges to the Health System. While more patients will have
insurance coverage and thus a source of revenue to pay for care, many patients are excluded from coverage entirely.
And many others will not enroll at first, unaware or wary of these new programs. The challenge for the Health System
is that there will be fewer insured patients requiring County subsidy, but this reduction may be more than offset by the
loss of State and Federal funds. Perhaps the most obvious threat is the large reduction in Health Realignment funds
that was forced upon counties by the State — the Health System will lose $4 million in FY13-14 and up to $17 million in
FY 14-15.
I am pleased to report that with the collaboration of the Health Plan of San Mateo, the Health System has been able to
generate sufficient funds through intergovernmental transfers to backfill behind these losses for the next two fiscal
years. At the same time, the Disproportionate Share Hospital payments from the Federal government are also
scheduled to decrease, though the amounts are uncertain. The Health System revenue projections are based on its
best estimates of how the ACA will play out. During the next two years, the Health System will be working hard to retain
paying patients and further increase its efficiency.



In addition to an increase in the availability of affordable insurance, the Affordable Care Act also brings new benefits.
Of particular importance is the inclusion of significant mental health and substance use treatment in all coverage. The
recognition that behavioral health issues affects millions, and that early intervention and treatment can save money
and lives is important.

The Capital Budget for FY 2013-14 is $136.4 million, and for FY 2014-15 is $82.9 million, which includes $158 million
for the Maple Street Correctional Center (MSCC) over two years. The 5-Year Capital Plan includes an additional $194
million in capital expenditures.
Measure A will enable the County to begin rebuilding its infrastructure. Even before the Great Recession the list of
“deferred maintenance” items was long and growing! The onset of the recession resulted in the virtual cessation of
capital spending, except for the new jail.
In the Information Age “infrastructure” involves more than brick and mortar. The following major technology projects are
being recommended for funding over the next two years:

In September, we will also be recommending $1.5 million over the next two years for five additional positions, three of
which will be part of the Agile Pilot, to ensure that approved capital projects are completed on-time and within budget.
Unfunded Retirement Liability
The Retirement system is currently funded at 72% of its total obligations. The County’s Unfunded Actuarial Liability
(UAAL) is approximately $960 million. Annual pension costs are approximately $150 million including the normal
contribution and the UAAL amortization.
On August 6, 2013 the Board voted to accelerate the UAAL amortization by contributing $50 million from reserves in
FY 2013-14 and $10 million a year for the next 9 years. The $10 million annual contribution will come from a
combination of Excess ERAF and departmental reserves. If all the actuarial assumptions are realized the retirement
system would be funded at 90 percent in 7 years and 100 percent in 11 years. The County’s annual contribution will be
reduced by $13 million in FY 2024-25. By accelerating the County’s contribution to the retirement system it is estimated
that County will save $304 million over the next 30 years.
Excess ERAF Vehicle License Fees (VLF)
The County has received $688 million in Excess Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund (ERAF) monies (returned
property taxes) since 2004. The amount the County receives each year varies based on a number of factors including
the number of school districts in the County that are “Basic Aid.” As school districts reach their basic aid thresholds,
property tax from the ERAF is returned to the County, cities and special districts in the same proportion as their
contributions. 

Up until FY 2010-11, the Board’s policy was to use Excess ERAF for non-recurring expenditures. In FY 2012-13 the
Board changed its policy to use 50% of the Excess ERAF anticipated to be received during the fiscal year as an ongoing
General Fund revenue source. At the end of the fiscal year any unspent Excess ERAF and/or additional revenue
over the budgeted amount becomes part of the year-end fund balance and is recognized as part of the subsequent
fiscal year’s reserves. The Board has wisely used these funds conservatively, as they are subject to legislative and
formulaic risk.
The Governor’s School Finance Reform Plan recently approved by the Legislature could have a significant adverse
impact on Excess ERAF property taxes. The plan would increase the State’s minimum funding requirements for school
districts thereby potentially reducing the amount of property tax to be returned to the County, cities, and special districts
as Excess ERAF. At this time the Controller doesn’t have sufficient information from the County Office of Education to
estimate the amount of property taxes that will be returned as Excess ERAF to local taxing jurisdictions for FY 2013-
14. His recommendation is for the County to anticipate the receipt of $61 million in Excess ERAF for FY 2013-14 which
is based on existing revenue in ERAF reserved for prior fiscal years. In light of the Board’s current financial policies,
this would result in budgeting $30 million in Excess ERAF for FY 2013-14. We view the Controller’s estimate as one
that is very conservative and only takes into account the distribution of prior year ERAF reserves. Given prior year
experience we believe it is reasonable to assume that additional Excess ERAF will be generated in FY 2013-14 and
that the $40 million appropriated in this budget is reasonable. (It should also be noted that the $40 million budgeted is
still well below the Controller’s estimate of $61 million.)
In November 2004, the State permanently reduced the VLF rate. VLF had been a significant revenue source for all
counties and cities. Therefore, to compensate counties and cities for this reduction in VLF monies, legislation was
enacted which reimbursed counties and cities for lost VLF from each countywide ERAF, with the State subsequently
“backfilling” school districts for any ERAF distributions those districts failed to receive. This fiscal maneuver has come
to be known as the “VLF Swap.”

This system worked for several years. However, because current statutes do not allow for the use of local property
taxes from Basic Aid school districts to pay the State’s VLF Swap obligations, a reimbursement problem has arisen in
counties where Basic Aid school districts are growing. In its FY 2013-14 budget, the Legislature approved a “one-time
fix” for counties adversely impacted by this deficiency in the law, including San Mateo County, for losses incurred in FY
2011-12. That year the County had a shortfall of approximately $180,000. In FY 2012-13, the County’s VLF shortfall
grew to $3.9 million. There have been no legislative or budget remedies to address the shortfall of VLF in FY 2012-13
or beyond and a more permanent solution is being sought.
Housing
The Department of Housing, which has traditionally been 100% funded with Federal funds from the Department of
Housing and Urban Development, has experienced declining funding due to Federal budget cuts.
Overall, sequestration has cut rental assistance programs delivered by the Housing Authority by approximately 6%.
The cut in Section 8 voucher funding in 2013 for San Mateo County is $3.6 million. This translates to 262 fewer families
receiving voucher assistance. Voucher program reserves are available to be used while the program is downsized
during the next year and therefore, no one currently receiving benefits is in danger of losing their assistance. However,
the County Housing department will cease calling families from the waiting list and ultimately serve 262 fewer families.
The administrative funding used to run the voucher program is also being cut by an additional 6%. Administrative
funding was already slashed this year by 25%. The Housing Authority will now receive just 69% of the cost of
administering Federal Housing programs. At this level, the Housing Authority’s rental programs will operate at a deficit.
Administrative reserves can be used for a transition period, but ultimately the Housing Authority must find additional
ways to reduce its administrative costs.
Other specialized rental assistance programs for persons with disabilities, such as Shelter+Care and Supportive
Housing have also been cut by 6% which translates to a loss of funding for 14 homeless, or in danger of becoming
homeless, individuals or families with disabilities. This cut will also be accomplished through turnover of clients and not
result in the loss of benefits to current recipients.
The CDBG and HOME grants were also subject to sequestration and have been the target of Federal budget cuts for
several years. The overall level of funding for these grant-funded programs has been cut by more than 50% over the
past ten years. As a result, grants for community and affordable housing have been cut and the administrative unit
staffing has also been reduced by approximately 50%.
The Recommended Budget includes County funds to help the department fill two critically needed positions that are
currently vacant and for which there is insufficient Federal funds. Specifically, in FY 2013-14, there will be a net County
cost of $354,785 that will enable the department to fill a vacant Housing Program Manager position and a vacant
Housing Program Specialist position. In FY 2014-15 the amount will be reduced to $200,198 as the department
becomes responsible for funding 50% of the manager position. During the course of FY 2013-14 the department will
produce a plan to change the business model of the Housing and Community Development Unit so that it can operate
without county assistance after FY 2014-15.
Agile Organization
The concept of the “Agile Organization” was first introduced a little over a year ago. The goals of the initiative are to
ensure the long-term financial stability of the County and attract a multi-generational workforce by investing in every
worker’s employability.
The aftermath of the Great Recession has significantly changed the cost structure of County government. The
County’s annual retirement contribution went from $78 million to over $150 million in just over five years. As previously
mentioned the Board authorized an additional $140 million over the next 10 years to accelerate paying down the 

UAAL. Criminal Justice Realignment has shifted State responsibility (and costs) for a certain category of felony
offenders to counties. Implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in California has resulted in the loss of State
Health Realignment funds and other revenues. Changes in State school funding formulas endanger Excess ERAF and
VLF revenues.
During the last 5 years wages for many County employees were frozen and workers have paid more for their
retirement and health care benefits. As the County’s workforce shrunk employees picked up the slack in many areas in
order to maintain service levels. The County has a responsibility to pay its workers fair and competitive wages. The
types of tradeoffs that have been made during the last few years to cope with the recession: paying for higher benefit
costs by freezing salaries and maintaining service levels while reducing staffing are not sustainable in the long run.
Although County resources are increasing they will not be sufficient to enable us to meet high demands for services
with adequate staffing, a fair and equitable wage package and rebuilding our infrastructure without making some
changes in how the County operates.
In the future to be financially stable, governments will need to be more nimble in responding to changes in public
expectations regarding services and taxes.
The “Agile Organization” is based on the belief that there is a way to maintain much of the benefits that came from for
the stability and permanence of a government organization without the rigidity that too often inhibits government from
being as responsive as it should.
For much of the 20th Century, the compact between employers and workers was about stability. The advent of
globalization and the Information Age changed this compact in the private sector. Millions of jobs were lost to “offshoring”
and automation. Some corporations have prospered while entire industries have disappeared. Jobs have
become less secure and the fortunes of the “middle class” in our society stagnated. Although workers desire job
security, no responsible employer, including the County, can promise lifetime employment to anyone.
The type of organization that is envisioned in the “Agile” concept is a hybrid between the traditional civil service
government organization and those found in many parts of the private sector today. It recognizes that governments
must be reliable and take the “long view” on public issues and projects. To do so government needs a significant
number of long-term permanent employees doing work that is by its very nature left to government. However, it also
recognizes that adaptability and agility require some types of work to be performed in a different way with workers that
have a different relationship to the County. The implementation of an Agile Organization will not only reduce operating
costs and result in more financial stability for County government, it will position the County organization to better
attract the future workforce.
Conclusion
For County government to be successful in the 21st Century it must re-engage the public in a new civic dialogue about
the scope of what they want from the County and how it’s paid for. People who are engaged with each other are better
able to find common purpose and develop better and more creative ideas and solutions. Civic engagement is really
about synergy - “the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.”
I am reminded of a story about a wise Cherokee who told his grandson,
“My son there is battle between two wolves inside all of us. One is Evil. It is anger, jealously, greed, resentment,
inferiority, lies and ego. The other is Good. It is joy, peace, love, hope, humanity, kindness, empathy and truth.” The
boy thought about it for a moment and asked, “Grandfather which wolf wins?” The old man quietly replied, “The one
you feed.”

Too often over the last 50 years civic dialogue has become more difficult as people have become more insular and
government less able to deal with the issues most important to them.
The political and philosophical underpinnings of our Nation go back to the “Age of Reason” and concepts such as
“enlightened self-interest” ---- people who act to further collective interests ultimately further their own interests.
I am very hopeful that through the Open Data Portal, redesign of the County’s website, Performance Dashboards,
Open Checkbook and more effective use of social media that the County can create a 21st Century version of the 19th
Century “Town Square” at which people can find a safe and convenient place to come together to discuss the events of
the day and find solutions to issues of concern. If we can achieve this perhaps we can feed the “Good Wolf” that
resides in all of us.
Preparing this document is a complex, arduous and at times tedious process. My thanks to all of those who worked on
the Recommended Budget. Particularly my appreciation to Jim Saco and his outstanding team – Danielle Lee, Shanna
Collins, Michael Bolander, Joanne Ward, Swati Deshpande and Garrett Dunwoody. I would also like to thank our
hardworking support staff Alicia Garcia, Mina Lim, Becky Romero, Betsy Jack and Raquel Barradas not only for the
their work on the budget but also for what they do for the County throughout the year. My office’s executive team led by
Dave Holland – Reyna Farrales, Peggy Jensen, Marshall Wilson and Connie Juarez-Diroll have each contributed
greatly to this document. My thanks also to Beverly Thames and Aja McCarthy-Bettencourt for their work on civic
engagement. A special thanks to John Beiers and Paul Okada for the hours they spent in working with Jim Saco and
the Controller to sort through the interrelated complexities of Excess ERAF and the VLF Swap and their impacts on the
Recommended Budget. Ultimately, the budget is an expression of the Board’s priorities for the future. The budget is
brought to life by the outstanding men and women who work for San Mateo County, led by their department heads.
Collectively, they never fail to amaze and inspire me. Thank you to the Board of Supervisors for your leadership and
direction that guided the preparation of the budget. Finally, I would like to recognize Deputy County Manager Mary
McMillan, who retired in August after a long and distinguished career in public service. Her contributions to this County
were inestimable. She will be greatly missed. I would like to dedicate this budget to her in appreciation for all that she
has accomplished in the service of the people of San Mateo County.