Dear Members of the Board:
This letter transmits the County Administrative Officer's Fiscal Year 2014-15 Proposed Budget
for your consideration during Budget Hearings which are scheduled for June 16 through June
24, 2014. The Proposed 2014-15 Budget totals $639 million and the total General Fund budget
of $414 million, a 1.7 percent increase over 2013-14.

Although the Economy is Improving. A Structural Deficit Still Remains
Since FY 2008-09, the County faced as a
Recession. These challenges were managed using several strategies including layoffs,
furloughs, retirement benefit changes and in services provided to the community.
County also upon fund balances and reserves for economic downturns to soften the
downward spiral caused by the reduction in revenues, particularly property tax revenues.

Managing through this tumultuous period required the leadership of the Board and tremendous
support of County management and our labor partners. We appreciate the cooperation of our
labor representatives during these challenging times and the exceptional work of the County
staff.
As we prepare for the upcoming year, there are notable changes reflected in the Proposed
Budget. Revenues are slowly improving; however, they have not recovered to a degree that the
County's expenditures and revenues are balanced. We continue to rely on fund balances to
address the shortfalls. This year's budget focuses on the restoration of the final hours of
furlough and stabilizing the County's services. Rebuilding reserves will commence when the
remaining structural deficit is eliminated in the next few years.
The structural deficit has been reduced from $9.8 million in 2013-14 to $6.7 million in 2014-15,
closing the gap by one-third. This was largely accomplished through the increase in general
purpose revenues and providing for prudent growth in operations and core reserves. As a result
of limited resources, recommendations in the Proposed Budget require:
• County departments to absorb increased costs,
• increases in fees and charges to reflect the actual cost of doing business, and
• modest increases in General Purpose revenues.
A total of 2,365 positions are recommended which represents a net increase of 14 positions.
The increase results from 17 mid-year additions mainly in Human Services to implement the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) and related health care programs offset by 36 deletions primarily in
Health Services due to the mid-year transfer of the Low Income Health Program under the ACA.
In addition, the budget includes 33 new positions primarily for increased needs in Health and
Human Services and Public Safety as detailed in the Personnel Summary included in the
Proposed Budget. Vacant positions are proposed to be eliminated July 1, 2014, and filled
positions will be deleted effective August 9, 2014. Affected employees will have access to the
County's placement services in hopes that placements can occur.
The recommended Proposed Budget meets the requirements of the County General Fund
Budgeting Principles adopted by your Board and prioritizes the public safety, health and welfare
of the residents of the County.
2014-15 STATE BUDGET
On February 25, 2014, we provided your Board with an overview of the Governor's Proposed
2014-15 Budget. A "mini-surge" of additional state revenue in mid-April bodes well for
California's overall fiscal status. State revenue appears to be adding up to almost $1 billion
more than the Governor anticipated in his January budget proposal, bringing the projected
budget surplus to about $8 billion total. The State is expected to release its May Revision on
May 141
h and we will include an updated report with our Supplemental Budget request.
2015FEDERALBUDGET
annual federal appropriations process is in progress, and appropriations committees in the
and Senate have been hearings on A of
programs importance to counties be addressed during this process, a possible
cap on the value of certain tax benefits, potential for changes to treatment of tax
bonds, reductions in Department of
Development and Development Block Grant Programs, 

and the proposed elimination of State Criminal Alien Assistance Program (SCAAP) funds, which
is a Department of Justice program that reimburses states and counties for the costs of
incarcerating undocumented individuals. Once the Federal Budget is finalized we will report
back on any departmental impacts.

Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector
The Auditor-Controller has begun implementing the replacement of the County's nineteen year
old Financial and Procurement System with an expected "go live" date twelve months later.
Effective January 5, 2015, the Auditor-Controller's office will consolidate with the Treasurer-Tax
Collector's office as approved by the Board of Supervisors on November 5, 2013. A detailed
report will be included in the Supplemental Budget to address this transition and reorganization.
Assessor-Recorder
Beginning in 2009 with the market disruption caused by the Great Recession and decline of the
housing market, and as required by State law, the Assessor began widespread downward
assessed value adjustments of real property within the County under Proposition 8 (approved in
197 8) thereby lowering property tax collections. In 2013, began restoring
Proposition 8 adjustments to recover a portion of the property tax loss. The Assessor has
indicated that he intends to continue to restore value in 2014 as the local real estate market
continues to improve. These restorations have been anticipated and the revenue is included in
Proposed Budget. In 2013-14, Recording Fee revenues statewide declined an estimated 30.

to 40 percent from the prior year and reduction in Recording Fee revenue of 38 percent for the
County is projected.
C<?unty Clerk-Elections
The County Clerk-Elections Department became certified by the Secretary of State's office to be
a ballot printer and will print supplemental vote-by-mail, counter and satellite office ballots for
the June 2014 Primary Election in an effort to lower ballot printing costs and to minimize wasted
resources. By June, the department will also automate the vote-by-mail ballot process to contain
extra help staff expenses and to improve the process for tallying and reporting election results.
Only one election, the November 2014 General Election, is scheduled for 2014-15.
County Library Fund
The County of Santa Cruz and cities of Capitola and Scotts Valley, which comprise the County
Library Fund, are in the process of working with the City of Santa Cruz to revise the Library Joint
Powers Agreement (JPA) that governs the provision of library services in these jurisdictions. A
new Library JPA will allow the City/County Library System to move forward with a revenue
measure to fund needed facility improvements, including new branches in Felton and Capitola
and major upgrades in Aptos, if approved by the voters.
Information Services
In 2014-15, the Information Services Department will start a multi-year deployment of the new
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoiP) phone system to County departments. The department will
also begin data migration from the County General Ledger and Purchasing mainframe systems
to the replacement system and complete new interfaces with County applications.
Animal Shelter
In 2013-14, the Santa Cruz County Animal Shelter received grants totaling $136,000, allowing
the organization to further its efforts to increase dog licensing compliance, responsible pet
ownership and public awareness and to provide low cost animal services to County residents.
These activities will continue through 2014-15.
District Attorney
The District Attorney and the County Administrative Officer have been unable to jointly review
budget recommendations for 2014-15. As a result, additional recommendations will be
addressed in the Supplemental Budget, if required.
Sheriff-Coroner
The Sheriff's Office is anticipating the completion of the Center for Public Safety mid-year FY
2014-15. Preliminary work for the construction of a 64-bed transitional housing unit and
program space to reduce recidivism for inmates will begin due to the award of $24.6 million from
State is on
rebuilding service capacity throughout the County. this end, four Deputy Sheriff positions
that were previously been funded for FY 2014-15. In
addition, new are in Investigations thereby
allowing the two and one currently performing those duties to return to Patrol
work. The previously unfunded Pathologist position has also been funded and the
current contract for this in June.

The Probation budget is focused on the completion of a number of initiatives for continuous improvement in the department. These include piloting the next generation of predictive pretrial risk assessment tool through the auspices of the Laura and John Arnold Foundation; the replacement of the current pre-trial data system with an integrated data system that will adequately measure pretrial outcomes; the completion of a cost/benefit analysis for services in conjunction with the Pew/MacArthur Foundation Results First Initiative and completing the implementation of a tool designed to match the needs of offenders with resources available by our local service providers. In addition, the department will be constructing an enclosed recreation facility at Juvenile Hall which was approved for grant funding by the State in 2009.

Health Services Agency (HSA)

The health care system is experiencing significant changes at the national, State, and local level, the highlights of which, for the Health Services Agency, include a substantial reduction in Health Realignment funds, anticipation of additional demand for behavioral health and primary care services as a result of Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) implementation, and impacts to serving the remaining uninsured not covered by the ACA.

•	Health Benefits will sustain a decrease of nearly $6.3 million associated with the cessation of matching federal funds due to the ending of the MediCruz Advantage Program and the loss of approximately $3.5 million in Health Realignment pursuant to Assembly Bill (AB) 85, which redirects this funding to social service programs.

•	As a result of ACA implementation, demand for primary care and behavioral health services is anticipated to increase substantially, including increased demand for Clinic services from the newly insured and projected increases in Drug Medi-Cal contracted services.

Human Services Department (HSD)

The recommended budget includes a $4.9 million increase in salaries and benefits primarily due to the addition of 24.5 full-time equivalent (FTE) positions, including 17.0 FTE positions added mid-year 2013-14. The added positions are primarily in support of implementation of the Affordable Care Act. There is a $4 million increase in revenues due to projected increases in 1991 and 2011 Realignment revenue and Medi-Cal revenue. The Leaps and Bounds federal grant in the amount of $740,018 has expired and is not reflected in the 2014-15 Budget. Staffing at the Watsonville Veterans Hal! was increased by one day per 'week in March.

Department of Public Works (DRW)

The recommended budget includes a reorganized Capital Projects division that is responsible for the administration of contracts for the construction of major public buildings projects and to ensure contract compliance with plans, specifications and applicable codes related to those projects. Staff in this division will provide oversight of various upcoming projects, including Twin Lakes Beach, Heart of Soquel and the renovation of the Rountree Medium Detention Facility.

Parks. Open Space and Cultural Services

As a cost saving measure in FY 2011-12, the Parks Department was temporarily reorganized as a Division of the Department of Public Works (DRW). While this arrangement has achieved the financial goals, and operational considerations underscore the importance of beginning to restore the Department. The 2014-15 Budget continues to place priority on maintaining core park services, facilities, and programs on a year-round basis and assumes a phased approach to


restoring the Department to an independent status. In addition, the budget transfers two positions to the DRW Capital Projects Division.

On June 3, 2014, the voters will be asked to approve a parcel tax of $8.50 on all improved parcels, replacing the expiring service charge within the County’s Park and Recreation District -CSA#11. The parcel tax on all improved parcels will provide approximately $355,000 per year for our County parks, maintenance, operations and programs. We will return to your Board with a Supplemental Budget report regarding the outcome of the measure.

Planning

Staffing levels for the Code Compliance section are proposed to increase and two Planner positions will team up with Code Compliance Investigators and a Planning Technician to implement a re-invented code compliance section. In additional to the regular caseload, the team will undertake a Legalization Assistance Permit Program (LAPP), and with Earth Sciences/Environmental Planning staff and Environmental Health staff, the team will undertake more environmental code compliance activities, especially enforcement of illegal grading in rural, open space and forested areas.

The Policy and Special Projects section is now designated as the Sustainability, Special Projects and Economic Vitality Division. The Principal Planner position has been designated as the County’s Sustainability Manager and will lead a team approach to implement the Climate Action Strategy (CAS) and other sustainability initiatives. Team members will include the Manager, a portion of a Planning III position in this Division, Resource Planner staff time from the Earth and Natural Sciences/Environmental Planning section and staff from the Environmental Health Division of the Health Services Agency, General Services, and Public Works Departments.

A key effort in 2014-15 will be the completion of a Strategic Plan in accordance with the Hearth Act, in collaboration with United Way of Santa Cruz County, and Smart Solutions, among others. This effort will bring together a number of existing organizations, agencies, and programs with the aim of formulating a coordinated, long term approach to homelessness in our community.

Redevelopment Successor Agency

In 2013-14, the Redevelopment Successor Agency continued winding down activities, including the preparation and submittal to the State of the Long Range Property Management Plan for the remaining three sites owned by the Successor Agency. These sites include Capitola Road at 17th Avenue, Brommer Street at 7th Avenue, and Commercial Way excess right of way. The State Department of Finance currently has the review of the Long Range Property Management Plan scheduled for the summer of 2014. The Asset Transfer Audit conducted by the State Controller’s Office was approved and staff expects the final report in May 2014.

LOOKING FORWARD

The 2014-15 Recommended Budget makes progress towards attaining financial stability and structural balance. The County faces uncertainty with several programs including the roll out of AC A, AB 109, Parks funding, Road Funding, and restoration of reserves. It is important to note that the budget does not provide funds to increase the County’s reserves, which remain at the minimum level established by your Board. County facility and park maintenance projects, currently estimated at a cost of approximately $27 million, are again being deferred into the


future. During the budget crises, the County used fund balances and resources previously allocated for capital projects infrastructure needs to pay for ongoing services. Departments absorbed cost increases and reductions in the NCC portion of their budgets while at the same time absorbing certain increases in costs. In the future, the Board will need to begin to strategically restore some of the curtailments through available future revenue.

CONCLUSION

The recommendations set forth below do not represent adoption of the County Budget, but the approval of the budget estimates as a basis for full consideration at the time of final budget hearings scheduled to begin on June 16, 2014.

IT IS THEREFORE RECOMMENDED that your Board approve the figures in this document as those that constitute the Proposed County Budget for 2014-15, order publication of the required notices, set June 16, 2014 as the date the Public Hearings on the 2014-15 Proposed County Budget will begin.

Very truly yours,
