The relief experienced last year with the approval of
a maintenance budget will be short lived. In
FY 2014 we are projecting a $67 million deficit.
Although the magnitude of this shortfall is less
than what the County experienced on an annual
basis from FY 2003 through FY 2012, it still creates
major challenges for our organization.
Even more threatening is the unprecedented level
of uncertainty that we must address from every
direction, State, Federal and legal. Proposals for the
expansion of the Medi-Cal program, the proposed
State claw back of 1991 realignment funding, the
impacts of sequestration and implementation of
Health Care reform, and lastly, litigation that
threatens our ability to collect Measure A revenue
approved by the voters could all thwart the
County’s desire to create a financially sustainable
organization.
In order to attain financial stability we need to
reduce the cost of a unit of service. The costs of our
benefit programs are rising much faster than our
discretionary revenues, and it will be important to
obtain the agreement of our labor partners to
shoulder more of the cost of pensions and retiree
health costs. This agreement occurred in the last
contract negotiation and will be a key aspect of the
negotiations that are pending. The County simply
cannot continue to absorb the rising costs of these
benefit programs without the participation of
employees.
Over the past 10 years, the Administration and the
Board have worked hard to solve close to $2 billion
in budget deficits and limit the impact on the workforce
as much as possible. One approach we have
used to balance expenditure reductions with
service reductions has been to reduce the contribution
to benefit programs like retiree health. At this
point in time, the unfunded liability for the retiree
health program has grown from $425million in
FY 2003 to $1.8 billion in FY 2012. We can no longer
choose to fund programs and services at the
expense of this growing funding requirement, and
must increase our contributions in order to smooth
our expenditure curve required to fund this benefit.
The Evolution of the Budget Balancing Strategy
for FY 2014
In December, the Office of Budget and Analysis
projected our General Fund deficit to be
$90million. We proposed a plan to solve one-third
of the deficit with departmental reductions, onethird
of the deficit with concessions from labor and
one-third of the deficit from “Countywide
solutions.”
Since that time we have seen modest improvement
in economically sensitive revenues like the public
safety sales tax and property taxes. Our initial estimate
for year-to-year growth in public safety sales
tax assumed a $14-$16million increase and current
projections have allowed us to increase this
revenue source by $15million. However, property
taxes are expected to increase beyond our initial
$10-$15million estimate. Instead, our current
assumption of a 3.79% roll growth will result in a
$32.9million increase in this crucial revenue
stream. Our local economy appears to be on the
upswing and we have pushed our revenue assumptions
to assume that the economy will continue to
expand over the next 18 months. The good news is
that our estimated deficit has declined to
$67million; the bad news is we still have a structural
deficit that must be addressed in order for us
to reach the level of financial stability that we have
been striving for over the past decade.
The first component of our budget balancing
strategy, departmental reductions, has been
achieved through solutions that total $28.7million.
Many of these solutions focus on the creation or
enhancement of revenue streams and do not result
in the elimination of positions or reduction in
services to clients. In fact on a net basis, we are
increasing the total number of General Fund positions
by 59. We have also been successful in
utilizing AB 109 funding to support criminal justice
programs to improve services for individuals that
are now the County’s responsibility. We have been
able to free up $5.1million in General Fund
resources (part of the $28.7million in department
solutions), while improving the services we are
providing to individuals that are spending time in
County jail instead of State prison or who are now
under the jurisdiction of the County’s Probation
Department instead of State Parole.
County departments continue to focus on
pursuing solutions that will increase efficiency,
reduce costs, or improve and enhance revenue
collections. Actions at the state level have also
resulted in changes in the way we can claim for
mental health costs, resulting in a significant
increase in revenue. From an overall perspective,
we feel very satisfied in being able to develop over
$28million in gap-closing solutions with little or no
impact on our service delivery systems.
A second critical component of our budget
balancing plan is the inclusion of projected
Measure A revenues in our assumptions even
though this initiative is being legally challenged as
this budget goes to print. Specifically, we are
recommending the following allocation of Measure
A funds:
¦ $20million will be used to assist in the
balancing of the budget (Countywide solution),
preserving existing services.
¦ A $15million reserve is recommended to
support new program initiatives, pending
further analysis by the Administration and
discussion in the Board’s policy committees.
¦ A $10million reserve is recommended pending
the outcome of healthcare reform, Medi-Cal
expansion and sequestration.
This approach to the allocation of Measure A revenues
is necessary due to the uncertainty
surrounding the measure. If the Court finds the 1/8
sales tax approved by the voters in 2012 to be
invalid, we will have to address an additional
$20million shortfall beyond that which we are
already projecting. While the money allocated to
new program initiatives and the unallocated
reserve will not be released until the case is fully
resolved, the $20million being used to balance the
budget will be spent incrementally from July 1, 2013
and represents a risk if the Courts determine the
initiative to be invalid.
The third component of the strategy is the need to
reduce the cost of a unit of service. In 2011 we
approached our labor organizations for help to
solve a $225million deficit, and we asked them to
consider concessions that totaled $75million in
net General Fund savings. Although the negotiations
were difficult, together we successfully
achieved our goals. The result was that in FY 2013
we were able to recommend a maintenance budget with no further reductions. In FY 2014 we are
facing a much smaller shortfall but a structural
deficit nonetheless. We are now targeting concessions
of $21.7 million, two-thirds less than the level
agreed upon in 2011. The County can no longer
absorb the increase in the cost of our benefit
programs including retiree health, pension and
health insurance programs. While we have set
aside $21.7million in one-time funds to allow for
an orderly negotiation process that could extend
beyond the contract expiration dates, we are
committed to presenting contracts to the Board
that are fiscally responsible and allow the County
to achieve a sustainable budget into the future.
If we are unable to reach agreement with our labor
organizations to eliminate our structural deficit
and are forced to utilize the one-time funds to
cover ongoing operations, we will only delay the
$21.7million deficit to FY 2015. The County has
been forced to use this strategy in the past and the
difficulty of getting back to a break-even point is
substantial, often resulting in debilitating program
reductions and stagnant wages.
A Continuing Commitment to Infrastructure
Recognizing that we have not made adequate
investments in our infrastructure, especially
facilities and information technology, we are
committing $29.8million for capital improvements
and major maintenance projects and $26.2million
for information technology including an additional
$16.3million investment in HealthLink. This
allocation of $56million in one-time funds is
critical to getting our organization back on track in
providing the facilities and tools that are necessary
to provide efficient and effective services to our
customers.
Last year we set a clear goal to take available onetime
funds and make investments in the infrastructure
of our organization. We simply cannot afford
to allow our facilities or IT equipment to live
beyond its useful life. We also made it clear that we
want to minimize covering ongoing costs with onetime
funds, as that approach leads to a downward
spiral of increasing deficits. Since we project $191.3
million in one-time funds, we are investing in our
maintenance and repair backlog, improvements at
our James Ranch Facility in Morgan Hill, and the
seismic upgrade of Buildings Two and Three at the
Berger Drive complex. The full list of the capital
projects we are recommending are included in
Table 1. The recommended General Fund allocation
of $29.8million is in addition to the
$13.75million approved by the Board in FY 2013.
An additional $2.5million in AB 109 funds will
support backlog maintenance projects in facilities
used by our AB 109 clients, to assure the health and
safety of both staff and clients. These allocations
confirm our commitment to investing in our
facility infrastructure in a manner that will reduce
costs in the future. Although this is a significant
allocation, the maintenance and repair backlog still
exceeds $32 million, so additional resources are
required and should be considered for this purpose
if they become available during the budget hearing
or the fiscal year.
In the case of information technology, we realize
that if the County organization is going to advance,
we have to dramatically increase our investment in
technology. Last year we dedicated $20million
from the technology bond to updating our equipment
and systems. These investments were
targeted in the following areas:
¦ Telecommunications/Mitel PBX Replacement
CLARAnet projects
¦ Server/Workstation/Storage/Backup/Printer
Replacement
¦ Enterprise Software/Mobility/Security
¦ County Communications 911 Equipment and
Radio Infrastructure
At the same time we embarked on the implementation
of the electronic health record at our Health
and Hospital System. The HealthLink system is on
the verge of going live as this document is being
released, and the level of investment, energy and
commitment has been outstanding. We are adding
an additional investment of $16.3 million to Health-
Link, based on information accumulated during
the project build. It is essential that we have
adequate resources in place when the system goes
live on May 4, 2013, and for the additional waves
that follow. We recognize that this is a significant
additional investment but one that will reap many
benefits for clients as our communication and
interaction with patients will improve significantly.
In addition, we are investing close to $10million in
other technology projects including $4.4million to
fully implement our Office 365 project with Microsoft.
This project has been carefully planned and
will provide significant benefits and services to
County departments. This project, along with the
Common Directory, will greatly improve the tools
available to County staff and enhance their ability
to communicate across departments. At the same
time we are recommending $3.4million to
continue our process of replacing IT equipment
throughout the County. By not providing adequate
resources during difficult financial times, we have
fallen behind in replacing obsolete equipment.
These investments are critical in providing County
staff with the tools to do their jobs in the most efficient
and effective manner possible.
Finally, we must recognize that we need additional
human capital to oversee and maintain the many
complex systems we are developing and using. The
Information Services Department has absorbed
substantial reductions over the past decade. At the
same time, technology has become an increasingly
important aspect of how we do business day in and
day out. Integrated information and communications
technology is no longer “nice to have,” but is a
prerequisite for keeping the promises that government
has made. We must maintain and improve
our technology as the demand for greater transparency
increases.
In reviewing our current ISD organization, we
realize that the structure needs to be changed and
new resources inserted to support the many new
and complex systems that will be or have been
implemented over the past 5 years. For that reason
we are recommending adding $1.5million to
support a restructuring of the department and the
addition of 7 new positions. This investment is critical
to improve organizational functioning, as well
as to build the bench strength we require as baby
boomers retire.
AB 109 – Public Safety Realignment
Public Safety Realignment was implemented on
October 1, 2011 and represents one of the most
significant changes in the criminal justice system
in recent memory. Santa Clara County has
embraced this change and developed an approach
and system that is being recognized as a model
throughout the State. This process has been
collaborative, with all members of the Public Safety
and Justice community at the table, seeking
alternatives that will reduce recidivism while
maintaining a safe community, and aiming for a
balanced approach to the new responsibilities that
have been delegated to counties. This balance has
been achieved through the allocation of resources
to address the needs of the individuals coming into
the system (services), changes in our jail system
housing inmates for extended periods of time, and
safely supervising individuals coming to the
County from State institutions.
Table 2 shows a pie chart reflecting that of the
$40million we are projecting to receive from the
State for this purpose in FY 2014, 31% is being allocated
to provide mental health, drug and alcohol
and health services to clients, 30% is being allocated
to the Sheriff and the Department of
Correction to provide staff and support changes, as well as programs, within the County Jail system and
at the Reentry Center to address the increase in
and changing demographics of the population, and
22.0% is being allocated to the Probation Department
to provide the resources to safely supervise
individuals coming from the State system that
were previously supervised by State Parole.
In 2012 the County opened the Reentry Resource
Center as a one-stop location for individuals to
obtain needed services and referrals. This facility
has become recognized for providing targeted,
compassionate assistance to the people who
request help. We are working closely with State
Parole and the Sheriff to make the services available
there open to all those that walk through the
front door.
After 20 months of operation, the realigned criminal
justice system is close to being fully
implemented. This budget recommends an allocation
of the majority of available resources based on
our experience to date, as one of the main goals of
the process has been to be flexible and respond to
the needs of the population. We have received our
first program evaluation in March of 2013 and
continue to pursue feedback to determine what
programs are working, those that need to be modified
and those that need to be replaced. We
recently released an RFP that will make available
an additional $1 million to community-based organizations
to provide a wide variety of services to
clients. In addition, we are recommending the allocation
of $4 million to provide additional housing
options to those individuals who are coming into
the community from the criminal justice system.
We believe this will begin to address one of the
most difficult problems for those released from
prison or county jail, the need to find stable
housing.
From an overall perspective, we feel very proud of
what we have accomplished as a County in relation
to Public Safety Realignment. The collaboration in
what can be an adversarial system is exemplary
and I would like to recognize the Executive Leaders
from all of the Public Safety and Justice departments
for what has been accomplished in this area.
Risks and Threats to the County Budget
As mentioned previously, we are presenting a
budget that has a number of significant risks that
could require the consideration of unpleasant
alternatives if decisions do not go our way.
Measure A
Based on the collection of sales taxes by other
jurisdictions within the County, we estimate that
Measure A will generate approximately $45million
in sales tax revenue in FY 2014. Earlier in this
message we provided a summary of our approach
to Measure A. Following this message in Section 1,
under the Special Programs and Reserve budget, is
a more detailed description of the initiatives that
are being recommended at this time. If the
measure is invalidated, we are at risk for the
$20million that has been used to avoid additional
General Fund reductions. In addition, our estimate
of FY 2013 fund balance includes $11.25million in
one-time resources from FY 2013 projected sales
tax collections to support our capital budget.
Although we are confident that our position will
prevail as it did in Superior Court, we need to be
aware of this very significant risk to almost onethird
of both our ongoing deficit solutions and our
one-time funding for capital projects in FY 2014.
Sequestration
Sequestration is the term used to describe the
practice of using mandatory spending cuts in the
federal budget if the cost of running the
government exceeds either an arbitrary amount or the gross revenue it brings in during the fiscal year.
After Congress failed to agree on a strategy of how
to reduce the deficit, sequestration was
implemented on March 1, 2013 and includes an
$85 billion cut equally divided between defense and
non-defense programs. Since sequestration was
delayed by five months, the effective percentage
reductions will be approximately 13 percent for
non-exempt defense programs and 9 percent for
non-exempt non-defense programs. Other
reductions include 2 percent in Medicare
programs, 5.1 percent to other non-exempt nondefense
mandatory programs.
We have had some difficulty determining specific
impacts at the County level but it is important to
know that the County receives about $1 billion in
federal aid annually. Medicaid reimbursement
(Medi-Cal) provides for 60 percent of this amount
with the remaining 40 percent coming from other
programs. A cursory review indicates that a
majority of the funds are from programs exempt
from the sequestration process and would be relatively
unaffected. At the same time, impacts to
Medicare are of concern in terms of how that will
affect the hospital and the already meager reimbursements
we receive from patients with this type
of health insurance coverage.
As the impacts of sequestration are more clearly
understood and pressure mounts on Congress to
agree on a more logical process, there is an
increased potential for reductions in programs like
Medi-Cal which, if carried out, create a real threat
to the financial stability of Valley Medical Center.
Medi-Cal Expansion
The proposed Medi-Cal expansion included in the
Governor’s FY 2014 budget is a high risk because
the State insists on either the claw back of 1991
realignment funds or giving counties more
responsibilities while taking funds. As much as we
have advocated to the State and gained support
from our local delegation and stakeholders, there is
still much uncertainty regarding what the
Governor and State legislature will ultimately
adopt. There are also other legislative proposals
under consideration that may present challenges
and/or opportunities. This will require the
continued close monitoring of SCVMC and other
departments through the next year and maintain
flexibility as ACA reforms are implemented.
Retiree Health – Unfunded Liability
As mentioned previously, the funding of our retiree
health benefit program is an area of great concern.
Although the FY 2014 budget funds 100 percent of
the normal cost, we are still not funding the
unfunded liability which has grown to $1.8 billion.
The Board has requested, and the Administration
will provide, funding options to address this issue,
but it is clear that dedicating any ongoing source of
funding to this liability will impact our ability to
provide direct services. The increase in the
unfunded liability resulted from our choice to
maintain services during the time of the great
recession, but now we face the consequences of
this action.
The Administration will present a series of alternatives
to the Board ranging from Board policies to
obligate future funding sources, to the development
of a funding plan that will direct the
Administration to fund an increasing portion of the
unfunded liability in the future.
Reserves
Consistent with our core value of maintaining a
strong financial foundation, this budget retains the
Contingency Reserve at 5 percent of General Fund
revenues, net of pass-throughs, or $104,250,000. In
recent years, we have been able to recommend a
Reserve for Economic Uncertainty and provide for
some contribution to the cash reserve. In this
budget we have used virtually all of our financial
flexibility to solve the General Fund deficit and
address our most critical needs and therefore have
not established similar reserves for FY 2014.
However, we have established a $10million reserve
supported by Measure A funds to address the
uncertainties described above.
Efforts to streamline work processes and
reorganize work units for efficiency and
effectiveness sometimes have the unintended
consequence of altering work responsibilities,
resulting in the need to review and revise job
classifications. A reserve of $800,000 is
recommended to provide a source of funding for
the costs associated with Board-approved
reclassifications and reorganizations in FY 2014.
While we know these funds may be allocated to
other higher priority needs, we are not in position
to set aside any other general reserves at this time.
In the case of AB 109 we have established three
reserves; we have retained $1million in ongoing
funds to provide the flexibility required to address
issues that come up during the course of the fiscal
year as we continue to evaluate the program as
currently structured; we have established a onetime
reserve of $4million to address housing needs
for the reentry population; and we have also established
a one-time reserve of $1.4million to provide
additional flexibility to address non-recurring
needs in this program.
Transforming County Government
Since its launch in 2010, the Center for Leadership
and Transformation (CLT) has continued to be a
source of inspiration for me and for our employees.
Over 48 cross-boundary teams have been formed,
and over 350 employees have been trained as part
of CLT project teams or at executive CLT classes
held at Stanford University. Included in this budget
is a report on each of the teams that are working on
current process improvement efforts, or those that
have operationalized and implemented their
innovative solutions in the last year.
Through the unique cross-functional team training
approach offered by CLT, teams of employees work
together to develop process improvements to
achieve desired program outcomes. Team efforts
have resulted in performance improvements that
otherwise might not have come to fruition. As it
creates bridges between Departments and
networks among employees, CLT serves as a
vehicle to develop the talent and competencies of
our employees. New programs, such as the onestop
approach used by the Re-Entry Resource
Center, and the partnership between the Probation
Department and the Social Services Agency in
maximizing the local placement of juvenile delinquents
so they can maintain contact with their
families, are the result of reaching across departmental
boundaries and taking time to explore
employees’ ideas for change.
In FY 2014, the CLT will be one aspect of transformation
in the County, serving as a tool for
employees to communicate with each other and
with management about new ways to serve clients,
engage one another, solve problems, be informed,
and achieve the results they desire in their jobs and
for their clients. Surrounding CLT are the County
mission, values and vision elements, which
together are the foundation of the County’s
commitment to an effective and transparent
organization.
Conclusion
The Board of Supervisors and this Administration
are committed to achieving a sustainable budget.
Last year we achieved a maintenance budget that
required no reductions, but we recognized at that
time that FY 2014 would be a difficult year. Even
though the economy has improved and delivered
improved revenue growth, our cost of doing
business continues to exceed revenue growth. We
must find lasting strategies for reducing the cost of
providing a unit of service and we are committed to
this goal. We know it will be difficult, but we really
have no choice. Due to the many uncertainties we
face, we must move forward thoughtfully and
carefully.
The impacts of sequestration or Medi-Cal Expansion
could impact the local economy in ways that
we cannot predict at this time. It would be foolhardy
not to plan for possible impacts resulting
from decisions made in Sacramento and Washington
D.C. Since we can only control expenditures,
we have little choice but to do so. This course is not
a pleasant one, but if we do not face up to these
difficult choices today, the road will become much more difficult in the future. Our history has shown
the negative consequences of using one-time funds
to support ongoing expenses, and it has taken us
years to recover from the resulting compound
deficits.
For FY 2014, we are proposing a budget that invests
our available one-time funds in the infrastructure
of our organization. We are making progress in
dealing with maintenance and backlog issues and
addressing seismic issues that require our attention.
We are also recognizing in this budget the
importance of information technology and the
need to increase our commitment in this critical
area of our organization. We are behind the curve
in terms of our ability to implement digital government,
and must allocate the resources necessary to
maintain and improve our efforts in this area.
We are facing an ongoing series of uncertainties
that change each year but never seem to disappear.
We are fortunate to have an outstanding group of
employees that are committed to our mission and
believe in public service. This commitment is critical
to ensuring that we provide the services that
our community needs and that they are available
and delivered in the most efficient and effective
manner possible.
