The Recommended Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 County of Santa Barbara Operating Plan is submitted for your
consideration, possible amendment and eventual adoption. This Operating Plan before you is the result of a
thorough development process which involved active participation from all departments and is based on budget
policies, budget development schedule and the General Fund allocation methodology approved by the Board of
Supervisors over the past several months.
In compliance with California Government Code (Section 29062) Santa Barbara County Code (Chapter 2, Section
2-71 k), I am submitting to you the Recommended Operating Plan and Capital Budget for FY 2013-14 and have
determined that the budget development process is compatible with approved County policies and long-range
plans through the thorough evaluation of departmental requests for expenditures, revenues and fund balance.
Recognizing significant interest in government spending, I’d invite the public to participate in the discussions
and decisions that affect the County’s spending priorities. Public hearings on the Recommended Fiscal Year
2013-14 Operating Plan are scheduled to be conducted on June 10, 12 and 14, 2013 and continuing thereafter, if
necessary. The public budget hearings will be conducted at the County Administration Building’s Fourth Floor
Hearing Room located at 105 E. Anapamu Street in Santa Barbara and will be able to receive remote testimony
from the Orcutt Room at 2125 S. Centerpointe Parkway in SantaIn adopting the last two budgets for the County of Santa Barbara, this organization successfully moved from
reacting to an unprecedented budgetary crisis to anticipating and preparing for upcoming challenges. This
financial turnaround has required leadership by the Board of Supervisors and County staff. This Fiscal Year’s
2013-15 County Executive Office (CEO) Recommended Operational Plan was developed with the understanding
that the County of Santa Barbara would need to have a financially disciplined operating budget. Now, through
the Recommended 2013-14 and Proposed 2014-15 Operational Plans presented on the following pages, we have
become an organization poised to Navigate Towards a Stable Future with a sustainable level of service.
Fiscal Years 2013-15 At-A-Glance
The CEO Recommended Operational Plan for Fiscal Years 2013-14 and 2014-15 (Plan) proposes a balanced budget,
with Operating Expenditures of $844.5 million for Fiscal Year (FY) 2013-14 and Operating Revenues of $839.5
million, with the balance funded by Other Financing Sources and/or use of Fund Balance (Figure 1) . The budget
is balanced with less use of one-time funds for ongoing operations than in the past, however many
departments are nearing the end of available financial reserves that have been used in recent years. The gap
between Operating Revenues and Operating Expenditures widens to a negative $13.7 million in the FY 2014-15
Proposed Budget, as other costs, primarily retirement are predicted to peak in this year.
Staffing levels are proposed to decrease by 32.5 Full Time Equivalents (FTEs) from the FY 2012-13 Adopted
Budget to 3,891.2 FTEs, down 572.5 FTEs since FY 2007-08. The Plan was prepared in accordance with the
Board’s adopted budget and General Fund allocation policies with consideration of the Board’s focus on
maintaining public safety, protecting children and families, and supporting sustainable communities. 
Navigating a Course to Stability
Future stability will require a structurally balanced budget. The County of Santa Barbara has made progress
toward structural balance, in which ongoing operating revenues equal ongoing operating expenses. With the
Fiscal Year 2013-14 Recommended, 99.4% of the County’s total budget is now structurally balanced at the
Operating level and General Fund departments operating revenue is budgeted to slightly exceed operating
expenditures. However maintaining and enhancing structural balance will necessitate growth in revenues to
balance expected increases in expenditures and the need to address issues such as: tax transfer to the Fire
District, operation of the Northern Branch Jail, deferred maintenance of critical infrastructure, increases in
retirement and healthcare costs, and uncertainty of Affordable Care Act (ACA) implementation impacts.
Expiration of Concessions and Other Salary Changes
Employee concession agreements from FY 2011-12 included both permanent and temporary salary
decreases and freezes on merit pay (step) increases. Expiration of these agreements will result in an
estimated additional $3.6 million of costs in FY 2013-14 and $0.8 million additional in FY 2014-15.
Also the Firefighters’ contract includes an additional $1.9 million of salary and benefit increases in FY
2013-14 and $0.9 million additional in FY 2014-15. Firefighter salary increases of 4% will occur during FY
2013-14, additional 4% in FY 2014-15 and additional 4.5% increase will occur at the beginning of FY 2015-
16.
Tax Transfer to the Fire District
In 2012, the Board of Supervisors approved a plan to transfer property tax revenue from the General
Fund to the Fire District. In FY 2012-13, the Fire District received an average of 11% of the property tax
collected within the District’s boundaries. The tax transfer plan established a gradual phase-in of the
transfer by assigning 25% of the County’s growth in property tax revenue each year to the Fire District
until the District was receiving 17% of the property taxes within its boundaries.
The resulting increased property tax allocations to the Fire District are projected to be $0.7 million in
FY 2013-14 and an incremental $0.9 million in FY 2014-15. The revenue increases will partially offset
rising District costs but are not projected to close the funding gap until FY 2016-17.
Northern Branch Jail Operations
The FY 2013-14 CEO Recommended Operational Plan maintains the commitment made by the Board of
Supervisors to a funding plan which sets aside sufficient discretionary revenue to prepare and
implement operations (staffing, services, and supplies) for the Northern Branch Jail. In FY 2013-14, $3.3
million will be set aside for future jail operations and $4.6 million in FY 2014-15. The Northern Branch
Jail is expected to open late in FY 2017-18, which is in line with the conditions of the capital funding
provided by the State of California.
Deferred Maintenance Backlog
The unfunded backlog for the County of Santa Barbara is estimated at $292 million. This includes:
Public Works estimated at just over $250 million; General Services Department, estimated at $35 million for County facilities; and Community Services Department, with estimated deferred
maintenance for County Parks of $7 million.
The unfunded backlog for County facilities and infrastructure are projected to continue to grow. The
CEO's office has revised its Capital Improvement Program to include a section on Ongoing Countywide
Maintenance Needs which will be the basis for developing a long term funding plan to address the
growing Countywide increase in unmet maintenance needs.
Escalating Retirement and Health Care Costs
The October 2012 Santa Barbara County Employee Retirement System (SBCERS) actuarial valuation
study, determined that the average contribution rates for General Plan members will be 31.7% and
Safety members will be 56.8%, resulting in a weighted average contribution rate of 38.3%. The new
rates result in a projected cost of $113.9 million for FY 2013-14. The increase over the FY 2012-13
adopted contribution of FY $105.8 million is anticipated to be $8.1 million.
The FY 2013-14 health insurance cost is anticipated to be $27 million. The projected health care
increase for calendar year 2015 is expected to be 12%, resulting in a net FY 2014-15 increase of $3.0
million. The cost of providing pension benefits and health insurance to employees in FY 2013-14 is
projected to increase to over $141 million. The total of all salary and benefit costs for employees has
increased significantly over the last several years. As can be seen in Figure 2, the rate of increase for
Public Safety employees is outpacing non-Public Safety employees and the spread between the
average cost per employee is widening.
Uncertainty of Affordable Care Act (ACA) Implementation Impacts
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), also referred to as Health Care Reform,
was signed into law on March 23, 2010, and established comprehensive health insurance reforms that
will roll out over several years with most changes taking place by January 2014.
The major element of the ACA is the expansion of health coverage to individuals who were previously
uninsured, including the expansion of Medicaid (in California Medi-Cal), the federal health insurance
for people with low incomes. The Medi-Cal expansion, which will take effect on January 1, 2014, will
impact the Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services (ADMHS), Social Services, and the Public Health
Departments, all of which provide enrollment, health services, and substance abuse services to Medi-
Cal and indigent beneficiaries.
The ACA will present many opportunities and challenges for these three County departments. These
changes include the possibility of an increase in demand for services, and increased expenditures to
provide services. All three departments anticipate higher revenues in future years related to increased
service demand as federal funds will cover 100% of costs for the first three years, and 90% thereafter.
However, sources of revenue to cover the future costs of providing services and funding for other
programs not related to the ACA are uncertain at this time.
The budget development and General Fund Allocation Policy adopted by the Board were closely followed
during the development of the FY 2013-15 Recommended Operational Plan. Policy-based budgeting provides
an increased level of transparency for the public and consistency throughout the organization. Application of
Board approved budget allocation policies resulted in the need for Service Level Reductions (SLRs) to balance
expenditures with revenues. These SLRs are summarized in Figure 3. The reductions will further diminish the
level of services provided to the public by many departments. Additional reductions are anticipated in coming
fiscal years to balance expenditures with available revenues.
As a result of available revenues and the expected increases to expenditures, it will be necessary to reduce
service levels by $8.3 million which includes an impact to 55.3 full time equivalent (FTE) positions. If the Board
elects to restore any service levels with one-time General Fund dollars this will further widen the funding gap
for the 2014-15 fiscal year.
In the FY 2013-14 CEO Recommended Operational Plan, the percentage of Public Safety expenditures from the
General Fund continues to be significantly greater than was spent ten years ago (Figure 4). Sixty cents of every
General Fund dollar are now going to Public Safety departments (Sheriff, Fire, Probation, District Attorney,
Public Defender, and Courts). If the tax transfer to the Fire District combined with the Northern Branch Jail
operations funding were included in the pie charts, the amount would increase to nearly sixty-five cents of
every discretionary revenue dollar.
Arriving at a Stable Future
Many organizations, including the County of Santa Barbara, are pursuing a budget that provides the resources
needed for the short term necessities, such as providing core public services, and anticipates long-term needs
such as infrastructure investment. The Board of Supervisors can be proud of the tough choices and reforms
made in the past which focused on the delivery of core public services. County staff, with clear policy direction
from the Board, is prepared to follow a course, avoiding hazards along the way, and arrive at a stable and
sustainable future state where services we provide are aligned with the needs of our residents.
Continued Focus on County Goals and Values
The Board of Supervisors adopted six goals on April 21, 1998, and revised them on November 21, 2006. These
adopted organizational goals help to unify, focus, and align the wide variety of services provided by the County
of Santa Barbara and identifies how the organization should operate. The goals are:
Goal 1: EFFICIENT AND RESPONSIVE GOVERNMENT: An efficient professionally managed government
able to anticipate and to effectively respond to the needs of the community;
Goal 2: HEALTH AND SAFETY: Safe and healthy communities in which to live, work, and visit;
Goal 3: ECONOMIC VITALITY: A community that is economically vital & sustainable;
Goal 4: QUALITY OF LIFE: A high quality of life for all residents;
Goal 5: CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT: A County government that is accessible, open, and citizen-friendly; and
Goal 6: FAMILIES AND CHILDREN: A community that fosters the safety and well-being of families and
children.
Financial Overview – Discretionary Revenue and Expenditures
Discretionary revenues are synonymous with General Revenues, which are shown on Schedule C-22 and are
primarily property taxes, sales taxes, and transient occupancy taxes. These revenues are those tax dollars
available for appropriation by the Board of Supervisors. Non-discretionary revenues (e.g. grants, state/federal
program revenues) are designated for a specific purpose. Discretionary expenses are those costs not fixed in
amount by legal obligation prior to adoption of the annual budget by the Board of Supervisors. The current
revenue projections, as illustrated in Figure 5 below, show a $4.3 million decrease for FY 2013-14 due to
significant one-time revenues from the disposition of RDA assets in FY 2012-13 (see Figure 5). Revenues after
FY 2013-14 are projected to make steady increases through FY 2017-18 with ongoing revenues reaching $227.1
million, a $22.5 million or 11.0% increase from FY 2013-14.
The graph below displays that a balanced budget is achieved in FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14; however, it then goes
negative in FY 2014-15, primarily as a result of increasing retirement costs described later in this section.
Thereafter, the “gap” narrows towards a structurally balanced budget, which is again attained in FY 2016-17. In
the last few years, this chart was termed a “jaws” chart as it previously reflected a widening gap with
expenditures projected to significantly outpace revenues. As we move towards structural balance, it will
provide the opportunity to solve upcoming fiscal issues such as: deferred maintenance, deteriorating road
infrastructure, incremental increasing allocations towards the new jail operating costs, and other Countywide
issues identified in this document.
There have been 14 straight quarters of positive growth in the gross domestic product (GDP) and
unemployment is now at 7.6% at the national level. In the County, the unemployment rate in March 2013 was
7.2% and economic growth appears to be improving. After several years of decline, the housing market has
stabilized and now appears to be in recovery. The recent 2012 Santa Barbara County Agriculture Production
Report identified $1.3 billion in products grown in Santa Barbara, a $96.6 million (8.1%) increase over the past
year and tourism is projected to continue to improve.
The County’s discretionary revenues reflect a decrease in FY 2012-13 of $5.3 million, composed of property
taxes, sales taxes, and transient occupancy taxes. The decrease is primarily attributable to the Fire District tax
transfer ($5.9 million), the expiration of the Goleta Neutrality Agreement ($2.7 million), and reduced Cost
Allocation revenue ($2.3 million). These reductions were partially offset by one-time RDA Dissolution proceeds
of $5.1 million in FY 2012-13.
Total property tax accounts, the County’s largest discretionary revenue source, had an increase of 1.0% in FY
2012-13. Property taxes are estimated to grow by approximately 2.0% in FY 2013-14, well below the average
growth rate of approximately 8.0% over the past 30 years; however, they are expected to gradually increase in
the coming years. The expiration of the Goleta Neutrality Agreement impacted Local Sales Tax and Transient
Occupancy Taxes (TOT), both of which show decreases from FY 2011-12 revenue levels. The decrease in Cost Allocation Service revenues reflects the budget cuts to County support departments over the past several
years which result in lower reimbursement from other entities for such support services. Sales taxes, TOT, and
Cost Allocation reimbursements are expected to stabilize and modestly grow in the coming years.
The main drivers of the revenue changes depicted above are as follows:
Significant Property Tax Growth
A positive sign for the economy and the County is the projected growth of property taxes. The projected
increase signifies a strengthening housing market and home values. Property Taxes are the largest component
of discretionary revenue and therefore the major foundation for the County’s recovery and budget. Current
projections indicate that this revenue source will incrementally increase from a growth rate of 1.0% ($1.7 million)
in FY 2012-13 to 3.4% ($6.6 million) in FY 2017-18. Additional detail of Significant Property tax components are
shown in Figure 7, below.
Dissolved Redevelopment Agencies (RDA)
The County General Fund will receive $4.2 million in FY 2012-13 and $4.3 million in FY 2013-14 from ongoing
Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Funds that distribute RDA dissolution proceeds from the seven dissolved
redevelopment agencies in the County. These ongoing revenues are currently estimated to ultimately grow to
approximately $9.0 million dollars in annual taxes for the County General Fund, once all outstanding RDA debt
obligations of the dissolved agencies are paid. The Fire District anticipates receiving $0.6 million in ongoing
Redevelopment Agency dissolution tax increment for FY 2013-14.
In addition, the legislation required a one-time dissolution proceed of RDA Low and Moderate Housing Fund
cash balances on-hand as of February 1, 2011, and RDA Other Funds and Account cash balances on-hand as of
February 1, 2011, be distributed to taxing agencies. The most current information indicates that the County
General Fund is expected to receive one-time proceeds of $6.1 million with an additional $1.4 million being
withheld and disputed by two agencies (in the FY 2012-13 Current Estimate, these one-time funds are shown as
$5.1 million and potentially could increase by year end). The Fire District anticipates receiving $0.6 million in one-time proceeds for FY 2012-13. There are numerous lawsuits being filed by dissolved agencies throughout
the State that could affect future distributions.
Goleta Revenue Neutrality
When the City of Goleta incorporated in February 2002, a revenue neutrality agreement went into effect to
protect the County from arbitrary funding reductions to Countywide services. Beginning in FY 2012-13, when
the mitigation period of the agreement expired, the County’s annual sales tax revenue sharing with the City of
Goleta was reduced by $1.3 million and the County’s annual transient occupancy tax revenue sharing with the
City was reduced by $1.4 million, a total revenue decrease of $2.7 million. The County’s FY 2012-13 final and
balanced budget included this reduction in revenues. This is an on-going reduction in revenues for FY 2013-14
and subsequent years.
Local Sales Tax
Local or Retail sales tax represents the local portion of the retail sales tax collected by the State from sales
generated within the unincorporated areas of the County. Retail sales tax is an economically sensitive revenue
source that is used to support the general operations of the County.
Sales taxes are currently estimated to show a -$1.2 million decrease (-15.2%) in FY 2012-13 over FY 2011-12 as a
result of the Goleta Neutrality Agreement described above, but expected to increase by 3.0% for FY 2013-14
over current estimates for FY 2012-13. Beginning in FY 2014-15, sales taxes should experience an approximate
4.0% growth annually through FY 2017-18.
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
This source of revenue is highly dependent on tourism and the quantity of lodging in the unincorporated
County. The County is estimating decreases in the transient occupancy tax revenue in FY 2012-13 of $0.9 million
(-11.4%), primarily due to the loss of revenue from the shift in the City of Goleta Revenue Neutrality Agreement
as mentioned above. The County expects more tourism as the economy continues to improve and consumer
discretionary spending increases. The County anticipates 1.5% growth in FY 2013-14 and approximately 5.0%
growth annually thereafter through FY 2017-18.
All Other Revenues
This category is made up of Franchise Fees, Interest Income, State, and Federal Payments, as well as property
tax delinquency penalties. These revenues will remain relatively flat for the next five fiscal years.

Secured Property Taxes
Secured property taxes are generated from local and State assessed property values. The tax is generated
annually by multiplying the assessed values of these properties by a tax rate of 1.0%. Factors that influence the
assessed values include the inflation rate of real properties, changes in ownership, improvements/additions to
property, and temporary declines in market value.
Secured property taxes are the largest element of Discretionary Revenues and generally represent 53% - 58% of
total Discretionary Revenues. The Recommended FY 2013-14 Budget for secured property tax revenue is based
on a 2.2% increase in secured property tax from the FY 2012-13 estimate. The growth rate shows continued
increases of 2.7% in FY 2014-15, strengthening to 2.9% in FY 2015-16, and approximately 3.0% growth in both FY
2016-17 and FY 2017-18.
Property Tax In-Lieu of Motor Vehicle License Fees
Prior to FY 2004-05, the County received a share of vehicle license fee revenues collected Statewide based on a
population formula. Beginning with FY 2004-05, the State, as part of a complicated revenue reduction and
refunding plan, has replaced (swapped) this source with property taxes. A portion of the property tax
revenues that are taken from local governments to fund schools are returned to cities and counties in lieu of
vehicle license fees. From the FY 2004-05 base, now adjusted, revenue growth is based on property tax
growth. Thus, increases in these revenues mirror secured property tax revenue projections.
Unsecured and Unitary Property Taxes
Unsecured property taxes are generated from locally assessed property values. Property that is considered
unsecured includes business fixtures, business personal property, boats, and aircrafts. A Unitary tax roll
contains properties such as railroads and utilities crossing the County and is valued by the State Board of
Equalization.
Both Unsecured and Unitary taxes have remained stable and are projected to have minimal growth over the
next five years.
Supplemental Property Taxes and Property Transfer Taxes
The supplemental assessment roll contains a listing of all property that has undergone a change in ownership
or experienced new construction. The amount of each supplemental assessment is the difference between the
property’s new base year value, determined as of the date of change in ownership or completion of new
construction, and the existing taxable value. This tax source generally rises as property sales accelerate and
sales prices increase. In periods of decreasing sales activity and/or decreasing sales prices supplemental taxes
tend to fall. Supplemental taxes are expected to increase to $2.2 million for a growth of 10.0% ($0.2 million) in
FY 2013-14 over FY 2012-13 estimates. Growth is projected to continue annually thereafter from FY 2014-15
through FY 2017-18 by 72.7% or $1.6 million over FY 2013-14 levels.
Property Transfer Tax is a tax charged to buyers when a property is transferred or sold. Property Transfer Tax
revenues accruing to the County are based upon the assessed value of properties sold and a tax rate of $0.55
per $500 of that assessed value. This tax has historically been a leading indicator of future increases or
decreases in Supplemental and Secured Property Taxes. Projections indicate that transfer taxes will increase
by 8.0% annually, beginning in FY 2014-15.
Expenditure Projections
Discretionary expenses are those costs not fixed in amount by legal obligation prior to adoption of the annual
budget by the Board of Supervisors. The forecast in Figure 8 is comprised of three categories:
1. General Fund Allocations to all departments,
2. Incremental Changes to Salaries and Benefits (i.e. requiring additional General Fund allocations), and
3. Incremental Changes to Other Items, such as committing funds for the new jail operations or
increased funding for deferred maintenance costs.
The Five-year Expenditure Projections in the following table (Figure 8) include actual and projected numbers.
Actual amounts are included for FY 2011-12; FY 2012-13 figures reflect current departmental year end estimates;
FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15 amounts are the CEO Recommended and Proposed Budgets and the FY 2015-16 – FY
2017-18 amounts (to the right of the vertical line) are CEO projected figures.
Category Descriptions and Key Assumptions -
General Fund Allocations
General Fund allocations are the most significant revenue source for General Fund departments in the
delivery of services to the community. Other Funds are allocated based on Federal and State
maintenance of effort requirements or payments for specific purposes, such as local match for
transportation funding in the Roads Fund. Projected General Fund allocations in Fiscal Years 2015-16
forward, assume the prior year’s allocation plus incremental ongoing changes as described in the
middle and lower section of the above table.
Committed Fund Balance
Committed fund balance is used to set aside General Funds for deferred maintenance, Northern
Branch Jail operations funding, and building of the strategic reserve or other requirements that arise
over time.
Use of One-time Funds
Use of one-time funds is an estimate of the remaining portion of structural imbalances within General
Fund departments, where non-reoccurring sources are budgeted to fund ongoing expenditures. The
elimination of such one-time funding is included in the County’s Budget Policies and Fiscal Strategies wherein it states that “the use of one-time funds may be permitted to ease the transition to
downsized or reorganized operations, but is strongly discouraged.” The amount of structural
imbalance has been declining in recent years, from $23.6 million in the FY 2011-12 Recommended
Operating Budget, to $1.6 million for the FY 2013-14 Recommended Operating Plan. This has been
accomplished through a combination of cost control and increased General Fund allocations. These
amounts are included in the General Fund Allocations.
Salary and Benefit Changes –
The middle section of Figure 8 above details the major categories of Salary and Benefit changes which include
anticipated personnel related expenditures. They are determined based on negotiated Memoranda of
Understanding (MOU), health insurance and retirement benefit cost projections, and mandated costs such as
Social Security contributions. Additionally, the County is currently funding certain Other Post-Employment
Benefits (OPEB) related to providing medical coverage to retirees.
Generally, salaries for FY 2013-14 and 2014-15 are based on detailed positions by department (salary model),
existing wages, concessions (temporary and permanent), and any scheduled wage increases per MOU with the
various bargaining units. These wage increases will begin to come into effect in FY 2013-14 as concessions
expire. Salary cost estimates for FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15 of this forecast incorporate current terms of
negotiated MOU. The chart below lists the expiration dates of the MOU by Employee Organization. Executive
and management salaries have been subject to a wage freeze since January 2008.
Two of the groups, in Figure 9 above, have long term contracts that provide for general wage increases that
have delayed previously negotiated increases. The first group, Sheriff’s Managers’ Association, is scheduled to
receive a 3.0% wage increase at the beginning of Fiscal Year 2013-14. The second group, the Fire Fighters Local
2046, is scheduled to receive a 4.0% increase at the beginning of Fiscal Year 2013-14, a 4.0% increase at the
beginning of Fiscal Year 20014-15, and a 4.5% increase at the beginning of Fiscal Year 2015-16.
No enhancements of health or retirement benefits are projected; however, retirement costs, especially those
for public safety members, are projected to increase based on the most recent actuarial report.
In January 2013, the County implemented a new retirement plan as part of the State mandated Public
Employees Retirement Reform Act (PEPRA) for new employees hired on or after January 1, 2013. Savings from implementing this plan will be relatively modest at first and will increase gradually over time as new County
employees are enrolled in the PEPRA plan.
Salaries and Miscellaneous Benefits
Salaries and miscellaneous benefits included in Figure 8 above reflect a net incremental reduction of
$3.0 million in FY 2013-14, primarily due to the Fire District moving from the General Fund to its own
fund. There is a corresponding reduction to General Revenues (see Tax Transfer to the Fire District as
previously described in the CEO Recommended Plan). A 2.0% increase to all employee salaries and
miscellaneous benefits was assumed for the projected years, FY 2015-16 to FY 2017-18.
Healthcare Costs
Healthcare costs are expected to increase significantly with calendar years 2014 and 2015 (15% and 12%)
as a result of the Affordable Care Act. Projected costs beyond FY 2014-15 are assumed to increase 5%
per year.
Retirement Costs
The employer’s share of retirement costs are set by the independent Santa Barbara County
Employees’ Retirement System (SBCERS) Board and paid by the County. The annual County
Contribution is projected to peak in FY 2014-15 to $130.9 million, an increase of $60.4 million or 85.7%
since FY 2009-10 (see Figure 10). The investment losses during FY 2008-09 had a major impact on FY’s
2010-11 through 2014-15 retirement rates as these losses needed to be absorbed into the ongoing rates.
Smoothing formulas have enabled the rates to increase incrementally during these periods. At the
same time, the projected rate of return included in the actuarial assumptions was reduced from 8.16%
to 7.75% for FY 2011-12 and the projected figures assume another rate of return reduction from 7.75% to
7.50% in FY 2014-15.
The discretionary General Fund portion of retirement costs in FY 2014-15 are expected to increase $5.9
million over FY 2013-14 as a result of:
o Investment losses from 2008 and 2009 (these are absorbed into the rates over 5 years and
after FY 2014-15, they will be fully absorbed)
o The projected 25 basis point reduction in the assumed rate of return to 7.5%
The above increases have been anticipated and unspent concession savings from FY 2011-12 remain in
the General Fund Committed Fund Balance and could be used to fund a majority of such an increase in
FY 2014-15. The ongoing employer contribution, as a percentage of payroll is anticipated to begin to
decrease in FY 2015-16 (excluding potential further reductions to the rate of return or other
demographic factors).
A graph of actual and projected countywide pension contributions is included below. The retirement
contribution amounts reflected in the projections are based on SBCERS actuarial projections
developed during FY 2012-13 and include the impact of the Public Employee’s Pension Reform Act
(PEPRA) beginning in FY 2015-16. The bars reflect the changes associated with a) decrease in the rate
of return, b) changes to existing payroll assumptions, and c) the estimated impact of PEPRA.
Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB)
In September 2008, the County and the Retirement System adopted an Internal Revenue Code Section
401(h) account that provides for Other Post-Employment Benefits with the County currently assuming
a portion of the costs of retiree medical coverage, dependent upon years of service. The contribution
represents a level of funding that, if paid on an ongoing basis, is projected to cover normal cost each
year and amortize any unfunded actuarial liabilities over a period of fifteen years.
OPEB costs have been recorded and funded on a pay as you go method. In the FY 2013-14
Recommended Budget, the funding level was increased by approximately 8.3% (0.25% of covered
payroll) to increase the accumulation of a fund balance for these unfunded costs. The projections in
Figure 8 above reflect annual increases to OPEB funding of approximately 8.0% per year that are
expected to continue to build the fund balance.
Other Items -
? Northern Branch Jail – Operations Funding
The Northern Branch Jail Project is located near the City of Santa Maria and will provide capacity to
hold 376 individuals, in a facility estimated to be approximately 139,000 square feet, built on a 16-acre
portion of a 50-acre County-owned property located at Black and Betteravia Roads.
On January 15, 2013, the Board of Supervisors approved a Project Construction and Delivery
Agreement with the State of California that stipulated the terms of an $80 million conditional award of
funds towards the construction of a new Northern Branch jail. The total cost of the jail is currently
anticipated to be $96.1 million.
In addition to the construction costs mentioned above, the annual costs to operate the new jail are
projected to be approximately $17.3 million when it opens, currently scheduled for May 2018. In order
to establish such a significant annual General Fund allocation, the Board of Supervisors adopted a
Budget Policy in FY 2011-12 to establish an incrementally increasing annual General Fund Contribution
to this jail operating fund. A schedule of the planned operating debt service payments is included in
Figure 11 below.
Deferred Maintenance
During FY 2012-13, the County increased its focus on deferred maintenance of public buildings,
facilities, and road infrastructure needs. This was accomplished by modifying the Budget Policies that
call for the identification of such cost and development of a proposed funding plan. The current
allocation of General Funds totaling $2.8 million per year is distributed as follows:
o $1.3 million: General Services
o $0.5 million: Parks
o $0.5 million: Roads
o $0.5 million: Capital Designation used for small unbudgeted projects
In prior years, only Public Works had included a comprehensive list of deferred maintenance projects.
This year, General Services and Community Services Departments have also included their complete
list of projects in the County’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP). Identified deferred maintenance
projects are only those known at this time and there may be other projects that have not yet been
identified. It is expected that these initial lists will be refined over time and may require assistance
from consultants to thoroughly evaluate. The main purpose is to quantify the magnitude of deferred
maintenance and to begin to develop a funding strategy.
The table below displays the unfunded deferred maintenance needs identified by departments and
included in the County’s CIP. Identified amounts were spread over a five year period.
As the gap between revenues and expenditures closes and we move into structural balance it will be essential
that we strategically evaluate all County needs as funding becomes available. Prior Fiscal Outlook Reports and
this document have highlighted several issues that will require additional funding including:
Items addressed in the Recommended, Proposed and Projected FY 2014-18 Budgets:
Increased pension funding per SBCERS
Expiration of employee concessions
Increasing healthcare and Workers’ Compensation costs
Use of one-time sources to fund ongoing operations
Funding the increased operating costs of the Northern Branch Jail
Increased funding for other post-employee benefits (OPEB)
Continued tax transfer to the Fire District to maintain levels of service
The following items are anticipated to require additional funding needs over those presented in these budgets:
Increase funding for unmet maintenance and infrastructure needs
Potential negative impacts of the Affordable Care Act (unknown at this time)
Employee compaction and compensation issues
The County Executive Officer recommends that any unanticipated growth in ongoing revenue streams, such as
property and sales taxes, which become available in FY 2013-14 or 2014-15 be used to:
Reduce the remaining use of one-time sources to fund ongoing operations
Fund deferred maintenance projects
Service levels proposed in this budget do not adequately meet the needs of County residents. Core services will
focus on maintaining public safety, protecting our children and families and supporting sustainable
communities. Staff will continue to prioritize efforts to reduce the cost of providing these services by seeking
efficiencies wherever possible. However, it is critical to note that the ongoing cycle of service reductions is not
sustainable and therefore the County must consider revenue enhancement strategies resulting from increased
economic activity and resident supported tax increases.
