Dear Members of the Board:

This letter transmits the County Administrative Officer’s Fiscal Year 2015-16 Proposed Budget for your consideration during Budget Hearings which are scheduled for June 15 through June 23, 2015. A breakdown of all funds within the County budget is as follows:

The Proposed Budget does reflect some economic improvements; however, the County has yet to recover from the ongoing structural deficit caused by the Great Recession. We continue to rely on fund balances to address the deficit. This year’s Proposed Budget focuses on the following objectives:

•	Maintaining operations and addressing the increases in the cost of doing business including salaries, health and retirement benefits and other fixed costs;

•	Responding to numerous statutory changes including. the Affordable Care Act, Public Safety Realignment, Proposition 47, etc.;

•	Improving reserves;

•	Restoring County services in Public Safety;

•	Expanding Economic Development opportunities in the County;
Continuing the restoration of the Parks Department in part due to the passage of Measure F by the voters;

•	Reducing the ongoing structural budget deficit; and

•	Beg inning to make progress on the long list of deferred maintenance caused by the successive years of budget deficits.

The recommended 2015-16 Proposed Budget meets the requirements of the County General Fund Budgeting Principles adopted by your Board.
While we are pleased to note the' progress that has been made, we are still struggling to meet the needs of the County given currently available revenue streams. Expenditure growth is outpacing revenue growth and efforts to constrain cost increases are challenging as the needs and the requirements of the community continue to expand. General government activities have been held to basic levels for many years and fortunately the use of technology has allowed us to meet rapidly expanding requirements without significant new resources. Health and Human Services have relied on considerable growth in federal and state contributions but with few exceptions, the County has been essentially unable to allocate additional local resources to meet the critical social, economic and health needs of the community. Land Use activities continue to rely on the use of fees for services. New initiatives are underway to explore the possibility of increased financing for Parks, Open Space and Cultural Services as well as for Public Works roads, bridges, fire services and libraries.
A total of 2,415 positions are recommended which represents a net increase of 16 positions or about a .7% increase. The increase results from 36 mid-year additions mainly in the Human Services Department to implement the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and related health care programs. In addition, the 2015-16 Proposed Budget includes 40 new positions primarily for increased needs in Health and Human Services and Public Safety offset by 60 positions no longer able to be financed as detailed in the Personnel Summary. Vacant positions are proposed to be eliminated July 1,2015, and filled positions will be deleted effective August 15, 2015. Impacted employees will have access to the County's placement services in hopes that alternative placements can occur.

In June 2010, your Board adopted a policy governing the establishment and maintenance of reserves. The policy was intended to reflect your Board’s commitment to responsible fiscal management and address the Government Accounting Standards Bureau requirements for the classification and reporting of reserves by public agencies. As you will recall, during the multiyear recession, it was necessary for the County to utilize reserves to minimize the economic dislocation necessitated by declining revenues, increasing costs and State shifts of local resources to meet the challenges in Sacramento. Although we were able to thereby reduce the effects of the recession, the County still experienced layoffs, furloughs, program cuts and a depletion of our critical reserves. Pressure from rating agencies underscored the importance of restoring these reserves at the earliest opportunity. In order to continue our economic recovery, in November 2014, the Board established a new goal of increasing the reserve from 7% to 10% of General Fund revenue by 2021-22.

In order to make progress on this objective, the proposed budget directs one-time funds in the amount of $3.5 million from the State’s reimbursement of prior year mandated costs under SB90 to increase the reserve balance to approximately 7.9% of projected total general fund revenues. This is an appropriate use of these one-time resources. Funding ongoing costs with these funds would add to the County’s structural deficit, which is unacceptable and not in keeping with the Board’s budget principals.

As a part of your Board’s consideration of your policies on reserves, you did request staff to include information in the budget concerning the overall amounts and uses of one time funds. It should be noted, that other than the SB 90 funds discussed above, the budget does not include significant one-time funds, other than grants which support programs funded by outside sources and about $8 million in fund balance which was carried forward into the new year as available financing.

STRUCTURAL DEFICIT

You will recall, the County’s structural deficit which was projected last year was $8.3 million. In this budget year, we were able to reduce that number to $5.2 million. However, it should be noted, that this improvement reflects the increased one time SB 90 revenues which will not be an ongoing source of financing for County operations. For this reason, it is imperative that I again underscore the critical need for fiscal restraint. While we all would have welcomed the opportunity to release the economic constraints placed on the departments, it is simply too early to do so. The budget focuses our limited capacity on public safety and there is no ability to extend beyond that area at this time. This year, County departments were required to essentially absorb increased costs, increase fees and charges to reflect the actual cost of doing business, and reduce services, where necessary. Yet, thanks to the considerable talents of the County departments, our abilities to meet the challenges are strong. I would be remiss if I did not commend them to you and offer my appreciation.

2015-16 GENERAL FUND BY FUNCTION GENERAL GOVERNMENT

The recommended 2015-16 Proposed Budget for General Government provides for a Net County Cost decrease of $9,392,639. This change reflects the increase in revenues totaling $6,136,953 and the one-time revenues of $3,528,753 from the anticipated state mandated reimbursements. The one-time reimbursements were allocated to reserves, as discussed above. There is also an increase in the General Government departments totaling $273,067 to maintain status quo operations for the Board of Supervisors, County Administrative Office, Assessor, Auditor-Controller-Treasurer-Tax Collector, County Counsel, Personnel, County Clerk- Elections, and General Services.

Economic Vitality

Pursuant to your Board's direction, the Proposed Budget recommends that an Office of Economic Development be established as a division of the County Administrative Office. This division will allow the County to undertake important economic generating projects at the two remaining former Redevelopment Agency sites and carryout the array of programs and services envisioned in the Economic Vitality Strategy. Required actions to establish and transfer appropriations and positions will be included in the Supplemental Budget.

Plant Acquisition

After numerous years of significant financial challenge, the County's deferred facility and plant maintenance list now exceeds $70 million. This does not include the roads and bridges, which as a result of the last Pavement Management Report totals $110 million. Given the favorable market conditions, the Plant Budget proposes to finance $10.76 million in health, safety, energy efficiency improvements and grant matching funds. This amount includes $5.5 million in the General Fund, $2.5 million in other funds and $2.76 million in energy efficiency projects.

PUBLIC PROTECTION

The recommended 2015-16 Proposed Budget for Public Protection provides for a Net County Cost increase of $5,571,763 primarily from an increase for the Sheriff-Coroner of $3,699,016, and an increase for the District Attorney of $1, 138,713 to provide for current programs, new cannabis enforcement efforts, expanded prosecution capacity and considerable new consumer protection resources.

Sheriff-Coroner

The Sheriff's Budget includes funding for three newly-financed Deputy Sheriffs in the Patrol Division, one Sergeant for the Cannabis Cultivation Unit in the Investigations Division, and one Deputy Sheriff for the Civil Program. In addition, four Correctional Officer positions have been included to be used as flexible “over hires" to maintain staffing at the Jail. The budget also provides funding to replace necessary fixed assets, vehicles and food service equipment.

Public Defender

The County launched a new Criminal Defense Conflicts Program (CDCP), administered by the Office of the County Counsel. The CDCP panel has been established and independent service contracts have been executed. The program has recently achieved an operational status. Given the wide participation in the program by the local defense bar and signals of initial satisfaction from the Superior Court, the County Administrative Office is recommending that the CDCP be extended through June 30, 2016, with a report of successes after the first twelve months of operation.
 To enhance the District Attorney's efforts in the area of consumer protection, the budget provides for the addition of positions to provide more investigation capability in the field, and increases in support staff. Costs for Consumer Protection unit are fully offset by revenues generated by consumer fraud settlements and worker's compensation and real estate fraud fees. In addition, the budget recommends an increase in criminal prosecution by adding two attorneys and one Legal Secretary. Various vacant positions are recommended for deletion.

Probation Department

The budget for the Probation Department reflects a highly cost effective service delivery system. Through the use of risk assessment tools, cost/benefit analysis and evidence-based strategies, the Probation Department is maximizing existing resources, enhancing staffing levels to provide appropriate caseload management, and providing services and interventions proven to reduce recidivism for both adult and juvenile probation. On April 9, 2015, the Board of State and Community Corrections approved a conditional award in the amount of $9.5 million to the County of Santa Cruz for the implementation of new “Seed to Table” juvenile rehabilitative program and needed renovations and upgrades to the Santa Cruz County Juvenile Hall. This grant includes a required match which is included in the Plant Budget.

Planning Department

The Planning Department will make substantial progress and complete a number of policy efforts. It is proposed that the work plan include the CEQA review of proposed amendments to Zoning Regulations and continuing work on the streamlining of the Permit processes. Required updates to the Housing Element are also anticipated. Efforts to create the tools indentified in the Sustainable Santa Cruz County Plan for more flexibility in long range planning are also expected to be part of this year's work plan. In addition, the feasibility study for a regional approach to Community Choice Aggregation (CCA), new strategies for code enforcement, including the new administrative citation program and partnerships with other agencies to ensure compliance with cannabis products ordinances, and assistance with the implementation of A/1-/n, the Homeless Strategic Plan, are also proposed.

HEALTH AND SANITATION

This area provides for an increase in expenditures of $8,709,833 offset by an increase in revenues of $8,674,983 for a Net County Cost increase of $34,850.

Health Services Agency (HSA)

HSA will continue to operate its service delivery system while navigating significant changes at the national, State, and local level. The highlights include a substantial reduction in State Health Realignment funds, several federal and State grants ending their grant cycles, and additional demand for primary care and behavioral health services. In California, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is in its second year of implementation. It is projected that an additional 9,412 Santa Cruz residents will become eligible for Medi-Cal in 2015.

• HSA clinics have experienced a higher demand for primary health care and associated services for Medi-Cal patients and a corresponding reduction in MediCruz patients. This is as a result of the new areas of eligibility under the ACA. With this change in demographics, the Medi-Cal clients are choosing to fill their prescriptions through local pharmacies rather than utilizing the County clinic pharmacy, which has experienced a drastic reduction in the volume of clients it serves. As this service model is no longer viable, HSA proposes to discontinue in-house pharmacy services.

•	Public Health will continue to work with the community to educate, plan and implement measures to control communicable diseases and has begun its first stage of planning for national public health accreditation recognition.

•	The implementation' of legislative changes in Sacramento in FY 2014-15 have resulted in an approximately $3.6 million reduction to HSA’s Health Realignment funds. This has required the redirection of resources in critical areas and reliance on the ACA as a primary resource for funding medical care in the community.

PUBLIC ASSISTANCE

The 2015-16 Proposed Budget for Public Assistance provides for an increase in expenditures of $12,535,609 offset by an increase in revenues of $12,630,358 for a Net County Cost decrease of $94,749 primarily from a decrease in costs associated with the Probation-Court Wards program.

Human Services Department (HSD)

The HSD budget reflects no change in net costs but does anticipate a $12.6 million increase in revenues due to the substantial increases in Medi-Cal, 2011 Realignment, and various State and federal allocations including CalWORKS, CalFresh, and IHSS. Community Programs are recommended at status quo. Expenditures include a significant increase for Child Protection, as well as investments in technology improvements and maintenance and improvements of buildings and infrastructure.

RECREATION AND CULTURAL SERVICES

The 2015-16 Proposed Budget for Education and Recreation and Cultural Serices provides for an increase in expenditures of $819,962 offset by an increase in revenues of $395,440 for a Net County Cost increase of $424,522.

Parks, Open Space and Cultural Services

Parks, Open Space and Cultural Services was restored as a separate department on July 1, 2014. Fiscal Year 2014-15 was a year of transition, as duties gradually transferred from the Department of Public Works back to the Parks Department. On June 3, 2014, voters approved Measure F, creating a parcel tax of $8.50 on all improved parcels. The parcel tax on all improved parcels will provide approximately $339,000 per year for our County parks, maintenance, operations and programs.

The 2015-16 recommended budget continues the restoration of Parks as an independent department and includes additional positions, which are offset by increasing revenues. The 2015-16 Budget continues to place priority on restoring core park services, facilities, and programs on a year-round basis.

Department of Information Services (ISP)

The Information Services Department (ISD) will complete the deployment of the new Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) phone system in more than 40 locations throughout the County. lSD will also finish replacing the County General Ledger and Purchasing mainframe systems with a server-based vendor application, saving $500,000 in annual software and support costs. Other major projects include configuring an automated agenda management system for Board meetings, building the Government Continuity Data Center at the Center for Public Safety for real-time cutover of mission-critical business applications, and releasing a mobile application for citizens to report issues and obtain information.

Department of Public Works (DPW)

Over the next two years, the County will see sizeable reductions in gas tax revenues, which will reduce the overall ability to properly maintain the road system. In order to provide a clear view of the work that will be performed, the budget has been reformatted to reflect only the work that will actually be undertaken during the fiscal year rather than reflecting the multi-year costs for projects. Given anticipated gas tax reductions, $1 million is proposed to be placed in a reserve to fund road maintenance activities in the 2016-17 Budget.

Redevelopment Successor Agency (RSA)

The Redevelopment Successor Agency successfully refunded three bond issuances in 2014-15, for a total savings of approximately $17.7 million over 20 years. The Agency continues winding down activities, including the transfer of the Commercial Way excess right of way to the County in 2014-15, in accordance with the approved Long Range Property Management Plan. Work is beginning on the disposition of the Capitola Road at 1 7th Avenue and the Brommer Street at 7th Avenue sites. Staff is awaiting the Asset Transfer Audit conducted by the State Controller's Office.

2015-16 STATE BUDGET

On January 27,' 2015, our office provided your Board with a brief summary of the State Budget, which was released in early January. At that time, the Governor's primary message focused on investment initiatives that would repay the State's existing liabilities, invest in the State's infrastructure, including an investment in K-14 education, while continuing to hold the line on investments in any new programs. The importance of fiscal restraint was a clear message throughout the Governor's Budget, as it is on the local level.

According to the State Controller's Office, February proved to be another good month for the State's General Fund, as all three of the major taxes - personal income, sales and use, and corporation taxes - came in above the recent estimates, and March receipts for the State's General Fund continued to show strength, coming in 8.6% higher than projected. For the fiscal year to date, State General Fund receipts are about 2.1% greater than estimates. According to the State Controller's April 2015 report of California Personal Income Tax Revenues, the year-to-date revenues as of April 22, 2015 are about $7.7 billion ahead of that same date in 2014.

The May Revise will be released in mid-May, and the County Administrative Office will be providing your Board with a further update during budget hearings.

The annual federal appropriations process is in progress, and appropriations committees in the House and Senate have been holding preliminary hearings on spending bills. A number of initiatives of importance to counties will be addressed during this process including the need to enhance revenues for investment in our transportation infrastructure, nearly half of which is the responsibility of state and county governments and the need to restore the Highway Bridge Program, which previously provided a dedicated source of federal funding.

Also of importance to counties is some federal leadership pertaining to online sales tax. According to recent analysis the Marketplace Fairness Act, which passed the Senate two years ago, but has not be taken up by the House, is effectively dead. According to tax analysts, legislators are working on the Remote Transaction Parity Act, which would grant states the right to impose a sales tax obligation on remote sellers, which benefits counties' bottom lines through additional revenues accrued through county pool distributions.

California will also need. to advocate effectively for the renewal of the Bridge to Reform 1115 Waiver, which is due to expire on October 31, 2015. The waiver allowed California to make several major changes to Medi-Cal and to expand county-based overage programs for low-income, uninsured residents. The California State Association of Counties will also continue to promote Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) reauthorization that would restore state and county flexibility to tailor work and family stabilization activities to- individual needs, and increased financial support for programs that assist foster youth in the transition to selfsufficiency, including post-emancipation assistance such as education, job training, and access to health care.

CONCLUSION

The recommendations set forth below do not represent adoption of the 2015-16 Proposed Budget, but the approval of the budget estimates as a basis for full consideration at the time of final budget hearings scheduled to begin on June 15, 2015. In order to streamline budget hearings, the number of days has been reduced as approved by your Board. In order to accommodate the reduced number of days, the schedule has been modified to reflect a consent agenda for those budgets that are status quo and a regular agenda for those budgets that reflect a change in operations and require a full budget presentation. Of course, departments will be available to answer questions.

IT IS THEREFORE RECOMMENDED that your Board approve the figures in this document as those that constitute the Proposed County Budget for 2015-16, order publication of the required notices, set June 15, 2015 as the date the Public Hearings on the 2015-16 Proposed Budget will begin.