With major policy initiatives and changes at the
State and Federal level, FY 2015 will be a very
uncertain and complex year for the County. This is
a familiar theme but, unlike recent years, the uncertainty
and complexity of actions at the State and
Federal level hold the potential to produce positive
outcomes for the County, not just negative ones.
Ultimately all budgets are built on projections, but
uncertainty and unpredictability make it difficult to
project our future fiscal condition.
An improving economy appears to offer hope for
many, but also threatens an increasingly wide
divide between the “haves” and the “have nots” in
Silicon Valley. Rising real estate prices promise
increased property tax revenue, but a lack of inventory
coupled with escalating rental prices leaves
many in our community struggling to find affordable
housing. The unemployment rate is
decreasing, but the focus of improvement appears
to be in the technology sector, leaving many still
looking for meaningful employment and raising
the specter of another dot-com bubble in our
future.
Significant policy changes offer the same mix of
promise and peril.
Affordable Care Act (ACA): The impact of healthcare
reform for Santa Clara County is still unclear.
Although the new program will clearly provide
important service to beneficiaries, the costs and
responsibilities for public health systems are difficult
to predict. Fundamentally, the ACA is designed
to push the financial risk of health care down from
the Federal level to the local level. The concept of
the new program is for the Federal government to
trade “local control” of services for national financial
savings. Analogous to California realignment
initiatives, local agencies and health care providers
will be paid for outcomes, not procedures.
Although there continues to be great hope that the
ACA will be a positive development for the safety
net, the State of California has taken the position
that new Federal resources should replace, not
augment, efforts to provide care to the medically
indigent of the state. This policy position led to
AB 85, requiring that a portion of the realignment
funding provided to counties in 1991 for indigent
care be returned to the State instead of remaining
with counties. In Santa Clara County this loss of
revenue is over $38million annually. While we
assume increased Medi-Cal collections under the
new reimbursement formula, until we learn
through experience how much additional Medi-Cal
revenue Santa Clara Valley Medical Center
(SCVMC) will collect, we cannot really be sure
what the net impact of the ACA will be in Santa
Clara County.
AB 109 Public Safety Realignment: Santa Clara County
has embraced this iteration of State realignment
and has developed a model program for addressing
the needs of individuals being released from correctional institutions. In FY 2014, the State provided
adequate funds to allow us to “ramp up” our
programs to create the necessary capacity to
provide a service delivery plan that balances public
safety and client services. For FY 2015, the
Governor’s budget reduces funding for criminal
justice realignment by 7%, forcing us to re-evaluate
the programs we are providing, and creating uncertainty
regarding our ability to fund a program that
can be successful in reducing recidivism.
Redevelopment Dissolution: When the State decided
to dissolve redevelopment agencies, Santa Clara
County took the position that we would follow the
new legal requirements assiduously. When the
original redevelopment law was written in 1945 it
was based on the belief that brick and mortar projects
would create economic growth. Because the
law was written well before Proposition 13, the tax
increment that was taken from schools and local
governments by the new agencies could be
replaced with new tax revenue. After Proposition
13 the redevelopment law simply diverted tax
revenue away from safety net services and education
and into building projects that did not
necessarily stimulate the economy.
Santa Clara County has long believed that safety
net services should not be sacrificed for building
projects. Thus we believe that the dissolution of
redevelopment agencies is correct and prudent
public policy. However, most cities within Santa
Clara County which previously had redevelopment
agencies, predictably, did not share that belief. The
resulting conflict between some cities and the
County is surpassed only by the uncertainty
regarding how and when these resources will be
available to support critical County services. The
value of former redevelopment funds could be
significant, but we do not yet know whether they
will come in one-time windfalls or incremental
ongoing amounts. When the funds are received
they will impact our budget and present challenging
policy choices.
These policy changes potentially represent large
swings in the resources available to the County
now and in the future. Unlike recent years when
almost all uncertainty was linked to dwindling
resources, the difficulty that we face now is the
increasing complexity of these new program areas.
That complexity could result in either positive or
negative outcomes. Small changes in budgetary
projections may result in an expenditure plan that
varies significantly from future reality.
With this state of affairs as a backdrop, I am
pleased to present to the Board a budget that will
build back very important parts of our organization
after a decade of debilitating reductions. With a
positive balance of $34.3 million in ongoing
resources we have concentrated our recommendations
in two areas:
¦ The initial restoration and enhancement of our
administrative infrastructure to better support
the needs of operating departments in the
areas of budget, finance, human resources,
training, procurement, technology and
facilities.
¦ Continued investment in Santa Clara Valley
Medical Center to improve access and capacity,
and further prepare the hospital to compete in
the post-ACA health care marketplace.
Investment in Administrative Infrastructure
As we manage the transformation of our
organization, it is clear that the past decade of
reductions has had a significantly deleterious effect
on our administrative infrastructure. In the face of
deficit after deficit administrative capabilities, both
at the central service level and within operating
departments, were sacrificed to preserve direct
client services. The entire organization is now
suffering from the lack of these fundamental
resources. As we move toward a position of greater
financial flexibility, we must be careful to restore
our administrative foundation to a level capable of
supporting the needs of operating departments
that more directly serve our clients.
We are now challenged in our attempts to recruit
and fill vacant positions in a timely manner, in large
part because we do not have sufficient human
resources staff to meet demands. It is difficult to
meet the needs of departments attempting to
procure essential goods and services, as we have
not been able to provide adequate staff resources
for the procurement function. We ask departments
to abide by more restrictive and time-consuming
administrative policies, meant to assure that the
tax payer’s dollar is neither squandered nor
misspent, but insufficient staffing leaves us unable
to fully satisfy these requirements. Our ability to
improve work processes and outcomes across a
variety of important functions — budget, finance,
training — is limited as a result.
With this in mind, this budget recommends
resources to support administrative functions in
several key departments including:
¦ In the Employee Services Agency (ESA), the
addition of 6 staff to support the recruitment
and classification function will reduce the time
it takes to fill vacant positions throughout the
County. In addition, a new position for executive
management recruitment will help reduce
the time it takes to recruit and hire our executive
leadership. Another new position will
bolster the fiscal unit of ESA that is responsible
for workers’ compensation and retiree health
analysis and calculations. Finally, a new position
in the Learning & Employee Development
area will increase the utility of sccLearn to
reach a greater number of departments and
more accurately track their training needs.
¦ In the Procurement Department, the addition
of four staff; two Buyers, one Procurement
Contracts Specialist and one Buyer Assistant
will increase the department’s capacity to
support departments in acquiring the goods
and services they need. We firmly believe that
the current allocation of 32 staff is inadequate
to support the procurement needs of a
$4.4 billion operation. These additional staff
will make it possible for the department to be
more responsive and to reduce the time
between the department request and the
receipt of goods.
¦ In the Finance Agency, positions are recommended
to address a variety of needs in the
Controller’s Office, the Tax Collector’s Office,
and the Office of the Clerk-Recorder, that are
the result of budget reductions absorbed by the
Agency over the past decade. New leadership in
this department has identified gaps in oversight
of both accounting and financial system
support that will be addressed with these additional
positions.
¦ In the Information Services Department (ISD)
we must continue to address staffing needs in
what is clearly one of the most critical central
services departments in the County. As the
County implements more complex and interdependent
systems, we must develop better
technological solutions for the collection and
analysis of data, ratcheting up the need to
invest in this area. The human resource needs
of ISD are set against a backdrop of a very
competitive labor market for sophisticated
technology resources that puts a great deal of
pressure on the existing staff to manage an
never-ending flow of high priority requests
from departments.
¦ In the County Executive’s Office three new
positions are recommended for the Office of
Budget & Analysis to build critically necessary
analytical expertise in several key areas, chief of
which is hospital finance and operations. As we
face the uncertainties discussed earlier in this
message it is imperative that we invest in the
analytical resources that can provide the
County Executive, the Board of Supervisors,
and operating departments with more indepth
fiscal and policy analysis, to support the
decision-making process at all levels.
Additional administrative resources are also
recommended in the Social Services Agency,
SCVMC, the Facilities and Fleet Department, the
Clerk of the Board, County Counsel and other
departments to restore resources eliminated
during the deficit years. As we look to a future that
is less bleak than the past decade, we need to
assure that we invest in the proper foundation forinvestments in client services that cannot be delivered
because we cannot handle the central
business process of the County in a timely manner.
Investment in Santa Clara Valley Medical Center
The other critical area of focus for FY 2015 is Santa
Clara Valley Medical Center (SCVMC). The
implementation of the ACA is a fundamental
change in the way health care will be delivered in
the market place. Since the passage of the ACA,
Santa Clara County has been preparing for the
expected intense competition in that market place.
All patients will have more of a choice regarding
their health care and the resources to pay for a
provider who can cater to their specific needs. For
this reason the County Health and Hospital system
must be able to compete and deliver an
outstanding patient care experience. We must
eliminate long waiting times for clients to make an
appointment and actually access our health care
professionals.
We are recommending a net increase of nearly
$14million for enhancements to SCVMC. These
enhancements will help us match our resources
with our client needs.
Many of these recommendations are an effort to
right size the current level of resources that are
dedicated to patient care. Permanent positions are
added, while overtime and extra help are reduced,
to recognize the actual ongoing level of effort
required to serve patients. Funding for part time
positions is increased to a full time level to
acknowledge the actual current level of effort.
Additional resources are recommended to support
ancillary services such as environmental services,
quality and safety, dietary and the lab. These investments
are necessary to position SCVMC to be
successful in this new era of health care.
The Evolution of the Budget Balancing Strategy
for FY 2015
In December, the Office of Budget & Analysis
projected a potential $25million General Fund
deficit for FY 2015. Recognizing that projections
were likely to change, we did not require reduction
plans from departments. Our plan at that juncture
was to pursue county-wide solutions to address the
shortfall. This initial deficit projection included the
realization that property tax revenues, although
continuing to grow, are being diminished by the
fact that statewide inflation over the past year was
below 2%, thereby impacting the growth we can
expect in FY 2015.
In order to gauge the potential impact of the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) some significant
assumptions had to be made. Although common
sense would suggest that a reduction in the
number of uninsured patients would result in an
increase in revenue, AB 85 would require us to
surrender some of that revenue in the form of
reduced 1991 Health Realignment. Calculating an
accurate financial impact, considering we had no
experience to rely on, was the difficult part of this
process. We brought together our financial and
health system experts to develop a methodology
that would generate a reasonable projection.
After several iterations we reached consensus on a
projection that resulted in a net increase in hospital
revenues of approximately $54million. This shifted
our projected deficit from $25million to a surplus
of $29million. Additional updated projections for
various other revenues and expenditures further
improved the projection to a surplus of
$34.3 million.
This process took time and prevented us, until just
recently, from being able to assure the Board and
other stakeholders that the projected deficit could
be solved without reductions in programs and
services.
Also worth mentioning is a change in methodology
regarding the way we treat SCVMC revenues. In the
past, hospital revenues were netted against their
expenditure needs and this net, positive or negative,
was the amount added to the General Fund
“bottomline” through an increased subsidy. The
problem with this approach has been that when
SCVMC revenues increase, the full value of those
County services or we run the risk of wasting our 
increased revenues are allocated to SCVMC expenditure
needs without consideration of other needs
throughout the County.
In the current budget process we have changed
that approach to first adjust SCVMC revenues (we
have referred to this as a “re-base” of SCVMC revenues
in other discussions), then adjust the General
Fund subsidy to SCVMC in the based accordingly.
Finally, we evaluated the SCVMC request for
resources along with all other requests made by
General Fund departments. This is an approach we
plan to use in the future, as we believe it creates
balance among all the interests competing for
scarce General Fund resources.
Allocation of One-time Funds
In addition to our recommendations for allocation
of $34.3million in ongoing funds, this budget
includes the allocation of $187.5 million in onetime
resources for capital and technology needs, as
well as prudent reserves.
Major recommended allocations are discussed
below. A full summary of all one-time resources
and uses is provided in the pages following this
message (see One-time General Fund Resources
and Recommended Allocations).
A Continuing Commitment to our Physical
Infrastructure
The importance of maintaining the over 5million
square feet of various types of space owned by the
County goes without saying. From 2003 through
2012, the resources allocated to preventive
maintenance have declined significantly, and the
risk associated with system failures is a major
concern. In 2000 the Board adopted a goal of 2.0%
of current replacement value (CRV) for the facility
reinvestment rate (see Board of Supervisors Policy
4.11.3), an industry recognized measure of the
minimum amount of funding necessary for an
organization to maintain its facilities. In 2002 we
reached a rate of 1.70%, our highest level for this
measure. Today we are at 1.12%, a level that
demonstrates how far we have fallen behind in
funding the maintenance of our facilities.
For that reason, over the past two years we have
focused on increasing our investment in capital
projects that will solidify our building infrastructure.
Table 1 identifies the allocations we have
recommended for major maintenance and capital
projects during the last three years and in FY 2015:
As the table indicates, our level of support for these
critical expenditures has increased dramatically in
FY 2014 and FY 2015. We continue to allocate
$5 million for major maintenance projects, and
have now combined this project allocation with an
additional $885,000 in ongoing resources in the
Facilities and Fleet Department to increase the
frequency of our preventative maintenance efforts.
Table 2 specifies major capital projects that are
recommended for funding in FY 2015. There are
three main areas of focus in this years’ capital
budget:
Communications: $1.6million to continue the
replacement of outdated 9-1-1 dispatcher work
stations and $1.6 million to update the waterless
fire suppression system in the Communication
facility. Both of these projects are considered very
high priority needs.
Downtown Medical Clinic: $6.7 million is recommended
to acquire the furniture, fixtures and
equipment (FF&E) for the Clinic being built with
voter-approved bond proceeds. Since this is a
bond-funded project, none of the bond proceeds
can be used for these items, they must be funded
through the General Fund. At this point, the clinic
is expected to be completed in the fall of 2015, but
the FF&E will need to be ordered roughly six
months in advance of the completion of the
project.
Valley Medical Center Emergency Room Redesign: We
are recommending that $4.4million in one-time
Measure A funding be allocated for this important
project. The SCVMC emergency room has been a
source of inefficiency for many years, as it was not
designed to accommodate the number of people
that utilize that facility on a daily basis. We recommend
using unspent Measure A funds from the
FY 2014 receipts and dedicating them to this
project. At this time we are projecting an
$16.8million Measure A fund balance from
unspent FY 2014 allocations and reserves. We
recommend using $4.4 million for the design and
programming of this project, and reserving the
remaining $12.4million for the construction that
will begin in FY 2016.
Another relatively large allocation is $1.8million for
various department remodels and moves. This
allocation will address needs in the Planning
Department, Finance Agency, Office of the District
Attorney, and other areas where the current space,
or configuration of space, does not meet the needs
of staff or the public. Instead of defining individual
project budgets, we recommend addressing these
needs through a coordinated effort between the
affected departments and Facilities’ staff to maximize
potential economies of scale related to
purchase of materials or use of labor.
Technology Investments
Another critical area of infrastructure is technology.
As with capital projects, the County fell behind in
funding this increasingly important area during the
recession. In FY 2014, we began to reinvest in
technology in a more substantial manner, funding
over $26million in projects. We continue our
commitment in this area with recommendations
for $19.2 million of one-time funding and
$4.3 million of ongoing funding for technology
needs in FY 2015.
HealthLink: The major achievement over the past
two years has been the successful implementation
of the HealthLink system (electronic medical
record) at the hospital. This project will cost over
$200 million during the first ten-year period but
will provide the technological backbone for
hospital operations over the next half-century. The
initial phases of HealthLink installed more than 20
modules of HealthLink’s electronic health record
product suite. As a result of the implementation,
health information is now immediately available
for care providers across nearly the entire spectrum
of care, and patients are able to access their own
information online. FY 2015 funding will extend
HealthLink into the clinical lab, outpatient pharmacies,
diagnostic imaging and the surgical suite.
eProcurement: Another area of County operations
that is in dire need of technological support is the
procurement process. This budget recommends
the implementation of an eProcurement solution
called Ariba that is a module of our existing SAP
Enterprise system. This solution will move the
procurement process into the 21st century by
moving away from a manual process to one that is
fully automated. This solution is cloud-based so, as
with Office 365, the focus of our local staff will be
on implementing and using the software capabilities,
rather than the servers and other hardware,
which will be managed by SAP. There is an ongoing
cost to subscribe to the service, but the benefits of
automation, transparency, modern catalog
ordering, and order reconciliation, among others will streamline procurement functions while
making it easier to oversee critical processes along
the way. This project will require $5.6million in
one-time costs for implementation in FY 2015 and
$4.3 million in ongoing resources, including
subscription fees and additional staff to support
users throughout the County.
Table 3 provides a summary of the County-wide
and departmental technology projects recommended
in this budget. Once again, we cannot
emphasize enough the importance of identifying
and addressing the technology needs within our
departments. The public has an expectation that
the County, particularly as we sit in the heart of
Silicon Valley, utilize available technology solutions
to increase efficiency, accuracy, and accountability.
Providing employees with state-of-art tools greatly
enhances their ability to meet the expectations of
our residents.
Public Safety Realignment – AB 109
Santa Clara County has embraced the idea of
Public Safety realignment since the inception of the
program in 2011. This County has been recognized
as a model in terms of the way it has allocated
funding to support public safety as well as services
for those that are under our jurisdiction as they are
released from correctional institutions. Our
support for this change has been contingent on the
State providing adequate resources to support the
effort, which has not been an issue up until this
year. The graph below reflects the funding provided
by the State to support our AB 109 efforts.
Resources allocated to support the AB 109
program have grown over time to address the
ramp-up required for counties to develop the
programs and services required by these individuals.
In addition to the staff required in the
Department of Correction and Probation to
manage the additional populations we are now
responsible for, the County had to rebuild and
expand the systems of care to accommodate the
needs these individuals have identified as critical to
their success in the community. This includes
substance abuse and mental health programs as
well as job training, education programs, and
housing assistance.
In January of 2014, the Governor released his
budget for FY 2015, including a 7% decrease in
AB 109 funding. This proposed reduction is likely to
have an impact due to increasing activity at the
Resource Reentry Center. As we compare our
current level of service projected at next year’s cost,
with the current State allocation, we are projecting
a $3.6million deficit. In order to maintain current
service levels and not lose the momentum and
progress we have made to date, we are utilizing
one-time funds to avoid significant reductions,
with the hope that funding levels will increase in
the future. However, two things are clear at this
point:
If the state does not increase support for
AB 109, we will be unable to sustain the current
level of service through FY 2016.
¦ We have no flexibility moving forward to
absorb any additional program expansion or
address increases in demand for services in the
near future.
Measure A Allocations and Assumptions
Last year at this time there was a great deal of
uncertainty regarding Measure A, the voterapproved
1/8 cent sales tax increase. Fortunately,
litigation that attempted to invalidate the voters’
will on this sales tax measure was settled in the
County’s favor. Revenue is projected to total
$46 million in FY 2014 and as much as $49 million
in FY 2015, providing a source of funds to preserve
and enhance County programs and services.
An accounting of Measure A revenues, allocations,
expenditures, and fund balance is provided in the
Measure A Sales Tax Summary following this
message.
The Board-approved FY 2014 budget allocated
$20million of Measure A proceeds to preserve the
current level of service. Without this base allocation,
$20million of budget reductions would have
been necessary to balance the budget, jeopardizing
critical programs and safety-net services. The
FY 2015 budget continues to assume the allocation
of $20 million of Measure A proceeds to preserve
the current level of service for safety-net programs.
In FY 2014 the Board also approved the allocation
of $15.33 million of Measure A revenue to support
specific projects and services consistent with the
array of priorities outlined in the ballot measure.
The FY 2015 budget assumes continued allocation
of Measure A revenue to support the ongoing cost
of these original allocations at FY 2015 levels.
A third allocation of $9.67 million was set aside in a
reserve as we developed a process to engage the
community in identifying proposals they believed
were worthy of consideration. As this budget goes
into production we are in the midst of that process
and the Board will decide which proposals are
funded effective July 1, 2015.
The complexities of designing and executing the
current Measure A process and implementing the
projects funded through Measure A in the current
fiscal year have resulted in significant savings
because allocations were not made until well after
July 1. We expect to see as much as $6.1million of
the original Measure A allocations unspent at the
end of FY 2014 due to these “start-up” issues. Additionally,
the $9.67 million reserved in FY 2014 will
be available as fund balance at the end of the year.
Finally, anticipated FY 2014 Measure A revenue is
currently projected at $46million, $1million more
than budgeted.
In total we project that $16.8 million of our
projected FY 2014 fund balance for the General
Fund will be a result of unspent Measure A
proceeds. As noted earlier our recommendation is
to utilize those resources to fund the renovation
and expansion of the Emergency Room at Valley
Medical Center. We believe this project is critical to
putting SCVMC in position to be the competitive
institution it needs to be in order to be successful in
the post-ACA healthcare world. In addition, we
believe this project is very well aligned with the
intent of Measure A.
The capital budget outlines this project in more
detail, but the intent is to allocate $4.4 million of
the unspent Measure A for the design and
programming of the Emergency room and reserve
the remaining $12.4 million for construction that is
expected to cost $24 million in total. Our intent will
be to recommend that any additional unspent
Measure A funds be dedicated to this project in the
future to the extent necessary to make the project
successful.
We are very fortunate to have the support of the
public in delivering critical services to our community.
The Administration is committed to
accounting for and evaluating the use of these
funds as they are allocated by the Board.
Reserves
Consistent with our core value of maintaining a
strong financial foundation, this budget retains the
Contingency Reserve at 5 percent of General Fund
revenues, net of pass-throughs, or $112.8 million.
Our recommendations for other reserves are in the
Special Programs budget in Section 1 of this document.
The budget will not include a reserve for
economic uncertainty or State and Federal reductions.
However we have included a $1.5million
reserve for the cost of various reclassification and
reorganizations, some of which will be presented to
the Board in the same time frame as the publication
of this document. Our intent will be to adjust
the budget to fund Board-approved reclassifications
and reduce this reserve concomitantly.
We have also created a $4.7 million reserve in
Measure A for growth that has not been allocated
and is available at the Board’s discretion. We do
recommend giving serious consideration to leaving
these funds in reserve until the Daughters of
Charity issue is resolved.
Finally, we have established reserves for revenues
received from the redevelopment dissolution
process pending allocation of these monies in
accordance with the policy approved by the Board
at last year’s budget hearing. A total of $2.2 million
is reserved for allocation to our retiree health
unfunded liability and $10.4 million is reserved for
affordable housing. More discussion of these
reserves is available in the Special Programs
budget.
Unlike prior years we have not established an
AB 109 reserve as the flexibility in that program has
been exhausted and all resources are being utilized
maintain the current level of service.
Risks and Threats to the County Budget
Santa Clara County relies on State and Federal
revenues to support over 50% of our programs and
services. During the last five years we have been
extremely vulnerable to decisions made in
Sacramento that have negatively impacted County
services and the clients we serve. With a recovering
economy and the passage of Proposition 30, the
risks associated with the State budget have
declined dramatically.
The same is true of federal sequestration. After
years of relative stability, the impact of a growing
federal deficit and the inability of Congress to reach
any meaningful agreement led to structured reductions
that have been harmful to local government.
The recent budget agreement at the federal level
has also reduced this risk to a much lower level. For
these reasons the threats to our local budget from
other levels of government are less than they have
been in over a decade.
Unfortunately, there are still risks and realities that
must be taken into account as we move forward.
The realities that we are most concerned about
relate to the escalating cost of providing services, in
particular the unfunded liabilities in retiree health
and PERS that will impact our future financial
stability.
Retiree Health: In the case of retiree health, the
Board has taken bold action to approve an ordinance
(County of Santa Clara Ordinance Code Sec.
A7-11) that requires the Administration to fully
fund the Annual Required Contribution (ARC) of
retiree health by FY 2018. During the recession, the
County made decisions to underfund this benefit
in favor of maintaining safety net services, resulting
in an increase in unfunded liability to $1.8 billion.
The current plan obligates the County to fund 70%
of the ARC in FY 2015, 80% in FY 2016, 90% in
FY 2017 and 100% in FY 2018 (July 1, 2017) and
thereafter.
For FY 2015, we are budgeting at the specified 70%
of ARC at $105.7 million. For FY 2016, the funding
level is projected to increase to $137 million, a
$25 million increase, with another $25 million
increase to $161 million due in FY 2017. These
actions will put us on the path to fully fund this
benefit and eliminate the unfunded liability by
2046. However, we will face increasingly difficult
resource allocation decisions each year as more and more of our discretionary resources at
committed to the proper funding of this employee
benefit program.
Public Employee Retirement System: The second area
of concern is our pension contribution for the
Public Employee Retirement Systems (PERS).
Action taken by the PERS Board with relation to
investment return assumptions and mortality
tables is likely to result in a substantial increase in
our rates over the next five years. Currently, our
miscellaneous and safety plans are funded in the
82% range, which creates a moderate unfunded
liability. With the recent spotlight on public sector
pensions, it is not surprising that there is an inclination
by PERS to be more conservative thereby
requiring increasing payments by PERS agencies.
The table below highlights the changes in the
contribution rates over the past 5 years for both the
miscellaneous and safety plans:
In FY 2015, the budget for our PERS contribution is
$314million. There have been several estimates
regarding how much rates will increase, including
some estimates in the 50% range. We are
concerned about the growth in the cost of this
benefit due to the large base it is calculated on and
the fact that we do not control the change in our
rates from year to year. This is an area that we will
pay careful attention to and discuss with the Board
as changes occur.
Transforming County Government
Currently, the County is in the fifth year of our Ten-
Year Plan. This year, I launched a series of town hall
forums to spread the concepts of the Learning
Organization more widely throughout the County.
In these forums, I have been sharing my vision for
the future of the County and how it has evolved
since I became the County Executive in September
2009.
The primary concepts of the Learning
Organization are providing employees the tools,
the map, and an understanding of the environment
in which we work and how we treat one another. In
FY 2015, the work of the Center for Leadership and
Transformation is the cornerstone of the Learning
Organization, providing the opportunity for teams
of employees to contribute to work process
improvements both big and small for the benefit of
the County’s customers and employees.
While the seven Vision Elements provide the map
for executive leaders to direct their organizational
priorities, the Just Culture model is an approach to
looking at both systems and individual behaviors
that contribute to poor outcomes in County
government. The Administration will be creating a
series of courses to assist employees in implementing
Just Culture in their departments.
The journey of leadership and transformation is
not a quick trip, and we must be persistent in
creating conditions that will result in both incremental
and transformational change to benefit our
customers, and in so doing, will produce beneficial
experiences for our employees in the process. To
quote Alvin Toffler, Futurist, “the illiterate of the
21st Century are not those who cannot read and
write but those who cannot learn, unlearn, and
relearn.”
Conclusion
This budget makes important progress in
strengthening our central service functions and
physical infrastructure. As the County’s fiscal
situation continues to stabilize we will need to
make more progress in the future. This area of our
County budget and workforce is like the
foundation of a building. If we try to increase
services and programs for the community without
assuring a strong foundation our efforts will be
hampered by inefficiencies, lack of information, and poor oversight and enforcement of controls
meant to assure that the taxpayer’s dollar is not
squandered or unwisely appropriated.
The true impacts of decimating our administrative
infrastructure may not be known for some time. In
recent years as we have worked at pulling our organization
out of the doldrums of recession, we have
heard many complaints about weakness in our
central service functions. This reality should not
surprise anyone as ten consecutive years of significant
reductions could not have resulted in
anything other than a degradation of service.
Additional resources are recommended for the
Employee Services Agency, the Information
Services Department, the Finance Agency,
Procurement, Facilities and Fleet, the County Executive’s
Office of Budget & Analysis, the Social
Services Agency, SCVMC, the Clerk of the Board,
County Counsel and others. These additions are
meant to improve support to direct service agencies
so they can be successful in the future. The
truth of the matter is that the foundation of our
organization needs to be addressed before we can
effectively increase our service levels. With this
investment, we are prepared to aggressively
address the social issues that currently plague the
residents of Santa Clara County.
We are also moving in the right direction by
investing in our physical infrastructure. By
investing $26 million in our capital plan and
$19million in technology projects, we are creating
a productive environment for our employees. With
only $34million in ongoing resources to work with,
we recognize this is a modest plan but one that is
focused on the right things. One has only to look
back at FY 2009 and FY 2010 and the huge deficits
this organization faced to appreciate that modest
progress and success is a good outcome.
This budget also reflects the County’s continued
commitment to providing an efficient and effective
health care system. The investments in SCVMC
recommended in this budget will help us move
from being a provider of last resort to a provider of
choice. This shift will enhance our ability to maximize
revenue streams that assure that we will
always be able to take care of those who truly have
no choice.
In FY 2015 we will continue to grapple with
complex policy and fiscal issues that hold the
promise of both risk and reward for the County. As
we look to the challenges ahead we appreciate the
support and collaboration of our community partners,
labor groups, and the Board of Supervisors.
Mostly we are profoundly grateful for the continued
commitment to public service demonstrated by
County employees throughout the organization,
both those who serve the public directly and those
who “serve the ones who serve”.
