This letter transmits the County Administrative Officer's Fiscal Year ( FY) 2016-17 Proposed
Budget for your consideration during Budget Hearings scheduled for June 20 through June 28,
2016. The recommended Proposed Budget totals $696 million, a reduction of $16 million from
the prior year, primarily from reductions in Housing Special Districts and in the Public Works
Internal Service Fund due to completed projects.
This year's Proposed Budget focuses on the following objectives:
• Maintaining operations and addressing the increases in the cost of doing business
including salaries, health and retirement benefits and other fixed costs;
• Continuing to improve reserves;
• Restoring County services;
• Improving economic opportunity;
• Meeting the requirements of the Board's budgeting principles;
• Reducing the budget deficit; and
• Providing additional financial information for use by the public.
As the County emerged from the Great Recession, the County worked diligently to limit the growth
of the overall budget and has aligned new spending with the priorities set by the Board. While the
County's revenues are improving, economic forecasts project that there will likely be another
recession in the near future.
In addition to restoring fiscal reserves, the budget also focuses on public safety and service
delivery. The budget includes the implementation of projects on which the Board has
demonstrated sound leadership, including the Recovery Center, Winter Shelter, Cannabis
Licensing, Mental Health and Substance Abuse services, Homeless Services, Economic
Development, and energy and technological improvements. Other areas needing attention, such
as deferred maintenance, funding for local roads and more, need to be addressed and are high
priorities for the coming year.
This year, progress has been made to reduce the ongoing structural deficit within the General
Fund. We are pleased to note that revenues are growing faster than expenditures, reducing the overall structural budget deficit. In addition, the Proposed Budget includes enough funding to
maintain progress toward increasing General Fund reserves to 10% of revenues. After weathering
the Great Recession, the County has increased reserves by $10.9 million to create stronger
financial stability for the County's General Fund and improve the County's credit quality. The
budget reflects an additional contribution of approximately $377,000 to meet this year's target
goal of 8%. A total of 2,440 positions are recommended in the Proposed Budget, a net decrease of 3.95
positions compared to last year. The net change results from:
• Deletion of 34.30 vacant positions as detailed in the Personnel Summary;
• Two filled positions are eliminated due to reduced State and federal funding;
• 9.25 mid-year additions, mainly in the Health Services Department to implement the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) and related health care programs, and a Probation Department
grant-funded positions; and
• 23.1 0 new positions primarily for increased needs in Health Services and Public Safety
and Protection.
Vacant positions are proposed to be eliminated July 1, 2016, and filled positions are proposed to
be deleted effective close of business August 13, 2016. Impacted employees will have access to
the County's placement services with the exception that alternative placements may occur.
Personnel details can be found in each Departments Budget Summary and in the Appendix.
GENERAL FUND SUMMARY
Budget Structural Deficit
Last year, the County's final budgeted structural deficit was estimated at $12.6 million. This was
addressed through the use of fund balance and other one-time adjustments to assure a balanced
budget. The County ends the year with funds referred to as fund balance. These funds are used to meet obligations in the subsequent years. For the last several years, the available fund balance
has been as follows: Since expenditures exceeded ongoing revenue, the County continued to focus on reducing overall
expenditures and undertaking strategies to enhance economic opportunities including projects
such as the creation of an economic development unit and planning code modernization. Each
fiscal year presents a different set of circumstances that make up the fund balance. The FY 2015-
16 estimate of fund balance is $8.5 million, which is programmed to cover anticipated shortages
in FY 2016-17.
Anticipating that the County will continue to limit budget growth and as departments continue to
absorb cost of doing business increases wherever possible, the likelihood of future carry-over
savings are likely to be reduced in the future. For this reason, and in anticipation of a downturn
in the economy, it is imperative to underscore the critical need for fiscal restraint.
While the County looks forward to the opportunity to ease the fiscal burdens placed on
departments, we must be prudent. In addition to focusing the County's limited fiscal capacity, the
budget provides no opportunity to commence new initiatives absent outside funding or reductions
in other areas.
This year, County departments were required to essentially absorb increased costs, increase fees
and charges to reflect the actual cost of doing business, and reduce services, where necessary.
Acknowledging the considerable talents of the County departments, the challenges presented by
our budget limitations have been exceptionally difficult to manage. Yet the departments' ability to
meet the challenges is strong.

The FY 2016-17 recommended General Fund requirements reflects total net costs of $4,277,250,
offset by an increase in General Purpose Revenues of $8,696,941, for a decrease in Net County
Cost of $4,419,691. The proposed budget reduces the overall structural budget deficit by 35%.
In addition, the Proposed Budget provides for an increase to reserves to achieve the reserve
target of 8% of revenues to make the required progress toward 10% by FY 2021-22. With the
exception of the use of Fund Balance, the Proposed Budget does not contain any major one-time
expenditures or revenues that fund ongoing operations. The following chart summarizes the
proposed requirements.

The FY 2016-17 General Fund allocation, known as the Net County Cost, of $116,221,906
included in the FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is illustrated in the following chart. Public
Protection continues to be the primary use of County funds, comprising 61% of Net County
Cost.

The recommended FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget for General Government provides for a Net
County Cost decrease of $10,756,569. This change reflects the increase in General Purpose
Revenues totaling $8,696,941. There is also a decrease in the General Government departments
totaling $2,059,628 primarily from the completion of one-time improvements in the Plant
Acquisition Budget for Parks, Open Space and Cultural Services.
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Elections
In FY 2016-17, the Elections Department will conduct the November 8, 2016 Presidential General
Election. Run-off elections will also be held, along with elections for the four cities, school, water,
fire and special districts. Increased expenditures for staffing and services and supplies for the
elections is offset by increased revenue to reflect the assumption that local jurisdictions will
consolidate newly called contests or local measures with the November 2016 election, which is
typical for Presidential elections, and a corresponding increase of candidate filing fees.
General Services
High priority projects in the upcoming fiscal year include construction of the Juvenile Hall
multipurpose facility, additional energy efficiency improvement projects, completion of the 701
Ocean St. departmental relocations and technical support for renovation of the Rountree Men's
Medium Security Facility in Watsonville. Additionally, the department continues work related to 

Monterey Bay Community Power, a regional city and county collaborative partnership, to
investigate the possibility of establishing a local community choice energy joint powers agency
within the region. Efforts to make progress on deferred maintenance continue with modest
investment and the use of financing where appropriate.
Cannabis Licensing
Pursuant to your Board's direction, the Proposed Budget recommends that an Office of Cannabis
Licensing be established as a division of the County Administrative Office. This division will allow
the County to license cannabis as required by the ordinances approved by the Board.
Economic Development
An Office of Economic Development was established as a division of the County Administrative
Office during FY 2015-16. The division has been stc;~ffed with an Economic Development
Manager and two Economic Development Coordinators, which have been actively engaged in
carrying out the programs and services defined within Economic Vitality Strategy, including the
disposition of the former Redevelopment Agency properties, and a restoration/reuse plan for the
former CEMEX cement plant in Davenport. This year, the division will also take over responsibility
for the County-wide Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy (CEDS) planning process.
PUBLIC PROTECTION
The recommended 2016-17 Proposed Budget for Public Protection provides for a Net County
Cost increase of $2,803,807 primarily from an increase for the Sheriff-Coroner of $1,799,491, and
an increase for the District Attorney of $326,651 to provide for current programs. A supplemental
budget report is anticipated for this department to address unmet workload issues.
Sheriff-Coroner
In 2016-17, the budget for the Sheriff-Coroner's Office includes mid-year funding for two Deputy
Sheriffs in the Patrol Division and body cameras for sworn personnel. The budget also makes
various staffing changes. The Corrections budget continues the work of the Recovery Center,
which was established by Justice Assistance Grant funding and provides 1 0 beds, 24 hours a
day, to qualified public inebriates who would otherwise be temporarily incarcerated in the Main
Jail. With $24.6 million in State funding, the Sheriff's Office and Public Works Department also
continue efforts to renovate the existing minimum security building and construct a 64-bed Men's
Rehabilitation and Re-Entry Facility, which is estimated to be complete in early 2018.
District Attorney
The budget for the District Attorney's Office maintains funding for current staff and programs.
Staff are exploring options for re-implementing a Multi-Disciplinary Interview Center (MDIC) in the
County and expect to present supplemental recommendations on this effort.
Probation Department
The Probation Department budget reflects a highly cost-effective service delivery system.
Through the use of risk assessment tools, cost/benefit analysis and evidence-based strategies,
the Probation Department is maximizing existing resources, enhancing staffing levels to provide
appropriate caseload management, and providing services and interventions proven to reduce
recidivism for both adult and juvenile probation. In 2016-17, the Department begins a new cycle 

of AB 109 treatment and intervention services based on risk, needs and responsivity, building
upon the work of the Pew/MacArthur Foundation Results First Initiative.
Public Defender
The County completed the first year of the Criminal Defense Conflicts Program (CDCP),
administered by the Office of the County Counsel. The CDCP panel has been established and
independent service contracts have been executed. Given the wide participation in the program
by the local defense bar and signals of initial satisfaction from the Superior Court, the County
Administrative Office is recommending that the CDCP be extended through June 30, 2017.
LAND USE PROTECTION
Planning Department
In 2016-17, the Planning Department will be implementing several changes to the permit process,
including electronic application submission and plan check, and ability for applicants to use credit
cards to pay permit costs. With increased development activity, funding to fill vacant positions is
available, and recruitment efforts will result in improved customer service and responsiveness
within the permitting functions of the Department. Work continues on policy and regulatory
amendments, and a key focus during the year will be preparation of an Environmental Impact
Report for the Sustainability Policy and Regulatory Amendments. A consultant study of
regulatory, financing and utility constraints to the creation of Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) will
be prepared. The Department will provide support to the Cannabis Licensing Program and to the
CEMEX Reuse Study efforts carried out by the Office of Economic Development. The update
Local Hazard Mitigation Program as well as other Safety/Hazards regulatory efforts will be
presented for adoption.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
This area provides for an increase in expenditures of $739,326 offset by an increase in revenues
of $739,326 for no change in Net County Cost.
Health Services Agency (HSA)
The Health Services Agency (HSA) anticipates a continued changing and fiscally challenging
health industry landscape at the federal, State, and local levels with statewide policy changes,
legislative initiatives, and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) being
implemented in full force. Nearly one in four County residents are now Medi-Cal eligible and HSA
has experienced high demand for health services at our primary care clinics and for community
mental health and substance use disorder services. Additional highlights include:
• Continued negotiations toward a contract with the State Department of Healthcare
Services to fund the expansion of Drug Medi-Cal Services in Santa Cruz County under
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) approved 1115 Waiver.
• The opening of the new Watsonville Health and Dental Center is a landmark partnership
providing primary care, behavioral health and dental services in one building serving lowincome
patients.
• Behavioral Health continues the development of a Mental Health and Substance Use
Disorder Strategic Planning Process, a new Mobile Crisis Team has begun operations 

and is also providing coverage to Dominican Hospital for the first time in several years,
and a new walk-in crisis service for children will be established in the coming year.
• Public Health continues work toward a National Public Health Accreditation by anticipating
completion of a Community Health Assessment, Community Health Improvement Plan,
and a Strategic Plan. Additionally, Public Health will work with the Central California
Alliance for Health (CCAH) toward implementing the Whole Child Model, which is a
California Children's Services (CCS) redesign that would move CCS case management
activities from the County to CCAH, the Managed Care Medi-Cal organization.
PUBLIC ASSISTANCE
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget for Public Assistance provides for a decrease in expenditures
of $3,838,395 offset by a decrease in revenues of $4,385,067 for a Net County Cost increase of
$546,672, primarily from an increase in costs associated with the Entitlement Assistance
programs including mandated increases in In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS).
Human Services Department (HSD)
The Proposed Budget reflects a total decrease of $4,112,132 in revenue, primarily attributable to
the unavailability of supplemental Medi-Cal funding. Additional highlights include:
• The recommended Categorical Aid budget includes mandated increases of 3.5% to the
IHSS maintenance of effort (MOE) and 2.9% for California Necessities Index (CNI) to
Adoptions and Foster Care grants. In addition, the Adoptions caseload is projected to
increase by 2.4% and the Foster Care caseload continues to shift from federally eligible
to non-federally eligible clients.
• Under a new law that will be implemented no sooner than May 1, 2016, children under 19
years of age will be eligible for full-scope Medi-Cal benefits regardless of immigration
status, as long as they meet all other eligibility requirements. Over 700 children who will
become eligible for full-scope Medi-Cal have already been identified.
• Effective January 1, 2017, all child welfare agencies in California will begin to implement
a set of changes known as Continuum of Care Reform. This major effort includes
eliminating foster youth long-term group home placements, replacing group homes with
Short Term Residential Treatment Centers (STRTCs), accomplishing the accreditation of
STRTCs and foster family agencies, developing therapeutic foster homes that are able to
care for youth with difficult behavioral and mental health issues, and revamping the way
that foster homes and adoptive homes are approved.
PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL SERVICES
The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget for Parks, Recreation and Cultural Services provides for an
increase in expenditures of $508,575 offset by an increase in revenues of $563,970 for a Net
County Cost decrease of $57,366 from the completion of one-time expenditures.
Parks, Open Space and Cultural Services continues its restoration as a stand-alone department
with some position changes to better meet the needs of the department. The FY 2016-17
Proposed Budget continues to place priority on maintaining core park services, facilities, and
programs, including eliminating Sunday closures and operating the Swim Center seven days a
week, implementing newly developed youth outdoor education programs and leveraging
partnerships for a larger network approach to protecting the County's natural resources and 

providing recreation opportunities. Parks, Open Space and Cultural Services will be also
installing electronic payment kiosks in in several regional parks. These modern, more efficient
collection methods are anticipated to generate additional revenue for the department.
INTERNAL SERVICE FUNDS AND SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Information Services Department (lSD)
The Information Services Department (lSD) will implement real time results tracking for the 2016
Presidential Election via the County's award winning Citizen Connect mobile application. lSD will
embark on a number of projects that will support the Board with implicit and explicit direction for
green, paperless and online business processes. These include developing a portal for Electronic
Plan Check to do away with paper submittals, configuring E-signature for use with the Agenda
Management System, and implementing an electronic email archive solution to streamline and
simplify the County's ability to respond more quickly and cost-effectively to public record requests.
Department of Public Works (DPW)
The County continues to see reductions in gas tax revenue, impacting the ability of the
Department to properly maintain our road infrastructure. Repair of storm-damaged roads
continues to be a priority for the Department. The Sanitation Division expects to begin projects
for recycled water in Davenport and improvements to the Soquel pump station, while the
Recycling and Solid Waste Division will be working towards the final contract for the franchise
agreement and beginning to implement organics processing.
Redevelopment Successor Agency (RSA)
The Redevelopment Successor Agency (RSA) is preparing to refund additional tax allocation
bonds in June-July 2016, and to reduce debt service for an estimated savings of $16.4 million
over 20 years. The Agency received the Asset Transfer Review Report conducted by the State
Controller's Office in June 2015. Staff continues with wind-down activities, including preparing for
the disposition of the RSA real property assets located on Capitola Road west of 17th Avenue and
the Brommer Street at 7th Avenue site, in accordance with the approved Long Range Property
Management Plan.
2016-17 STATE BUDGET
Governor Brown released his proposal for the 2016-17 State Budget on January 7, 2016. The
Governor's overall message was positive despite a sharp focus on an inevitable economic
recession. The economy is in its seventh year of expansion, two full years beyond the historical
average of five years. The proposal focused on increasing reserves and noted fiscal restraint on
new on-going commitments and focusing on one-time expenditures. The budget includes
increased funding for education, healthcare, and state infrastructure, with additional funding
dedicated to the State's Rainy Day Fund and paying down State debt and liabilities.
The State Controller reports March revenues were $218 million above Brown's budget estimates,
with revenues for the first three months of the year exceeding $512 million, or 0. 7 percent more,
than what the governor anticipated.
In other significant developments, the governor signed a bill to increase the minimum wage to
$15 per hour by 2022, with indexed increases thereafter. The State Department of Finance 

estimates the bill will cost California $4 billion. However, the bill includes "off ramps," allowing the
Governor to pause increases if certain fiscal and economic conditions are met.
The Governor also recently appointed a chief for the newly formed Bureau of Medical Marijuana
Regulation, who anticipates the number of marijuana licenses across the state to rival the number
of alcohol licenses, which is more than 88,000.
Furthermore, experts predict there is a 50% likelihood of recession within the next three years.
While the U.S. economy is in good shape and any recession is not expected to be deep,
headwinds are likely due to instability abroad. How any recession would impact Santa Cruz
County is unknown.
Through our representatives in Sacramento, the County has weighed in on several bills, and is
tracking several more. The County supports bills for new transportation funding, eliminating
sunset provisions under Proposition 47, granting County Counsels added powers to enforce the
False Claims Act, increasing the Medi-Cal personal needs allowance, cap-and-trade funding for
a wood stove change-out program, increased broadband funding and more.
We have also opposed bills that would hamper Property Assessed Clean Energy programs,
proscribe the locations of agendas on County websites and, allow legacy phone service providers
to stop maintaining wired phone lines in 2020. In addition, we are eyeing developments in the
areas of cannabis taxation, community choice energy regulations, and housing regulations
(density bonuses, changes to accessory dwelling unit rules, etc.), along with other proposals. We
also continue to advocate for state emergency funding to repair local road damage due to March
El Nino storms.
The May Revise will be released in mid-May, and the County Administrative Office will be
providing your Board with a further update during budget hearings.
BUDGET PROCESS - NEXT STEPS
This FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is being provided on May 10, 2016 in order for the public to
review the document in advance of the Budget Hearings. The hearings are scheduled to begin
on June 20, 2016 and will continue until June 28, 2016. Per State law, the Board is required to
adopt the FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget, containing such revisions as the Board of Supervisors
determines at the conclusion of the Hearings.
Prior to the beginning of the budget hearings, the Board will be presented with a supplemental
package containing additional information and recommendations as necessary to provide up to
date 2015-16 and 2016-17 Budget reports, as applicable, which were not included in the
recommended budget.
At the conclusion of the public hearings, the Board of Supervisors will be asked to adopt only the
2016-17 Proposed Budget as modified per the approved Supplemental Proposed Budget
Adjustments and additional Board direction during the hearings.
After the State adopts its budget and/or as needs arise after the close of the property tax roll and
the County's Fiscal 2015-16 books, staff will return with a collection of budgetary adjustments for
the Board's consideration as the final 2016-17 Adopted Budget. 

The FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget is the product of collaboration and partnership. Department
Heads and fiscal staff have been flexible, tolerant, and willing to develop the County's budget plan
while adapting to a new financial system. Through this effort of checks and balances, the County
Administrator staff has produced a balanced budget and operating plan that implements the
Board's policy guidance. I wish to thank the Department and Agency Heads for their strong
support.
The dedicated professionals working in the County Administrator's Office are to be specially
recognized for the development of the FY 2016-17 budget. To each of them, I extend my gratitude
for their tenacity, attention to detail, positive attitudes, and strong teamwork as they completed
this important process.
Once the budget is developed and approved, it is the Santa Cruz County employees' daily
performance of duties and continued engagement that achieve positive results for our community.
I want to thank each County employee for investing their time and performing their jobs in the
most innovative and collaborative way possible, making Santa Cruz County a great place to live,
learn, work and play.
Most importantly, Santa Cruz County is fortunate to have leadership from the Board of
Supervisors that reflects, at its core, the interests of the citizens. I am grateful for the Board's
clear mission to enrich the quality of life in Santa Cruz County through superior public services
and their commitment to the budget process. Without their solid and formidable support, this
document and our stable fiscal position would not be possible.
The recommendations set forth below do not represent adoption of the 2016-17 Proposed Budget,
but the approval of the budget estimates as a basis for full consideration at the time of final budget
hearings scheduled to begin on June 20, 2016. Budget hearings will allow for a consent agenda
for those budgets that are status quo and a regular agenda for those budgets that reflect a change
in operations and ·require a full presentation. Of course, Departments will be available to answer
any questions.
It is, therefore, RECOMMENDED that your Board approve the figures in the Proposed Budget
and Volume II Line Item Detail documents as those that constitute the FY 2016-17 County
Proposed Budget, order publication of the required notices, and set June 20, 2016 as the date
the public hearings on the FY 2016-17 Proposed Budget will begin.