The Recommended Fiscal Year (FY) 2016-17 County of Santa Barbara Operating Plan is submitted for your
consideration, possible amendment and eventual adoption. This Operating Plan, which includes a balanced
Recommended Budget, is the result of a thorough development process involving participation from all
departments and adherence to budget policies, development schedule and the General Fund allocation
methodology approved by the Board of Supervisors over the past several months.
In compliance with California Government Code (Section 29062) and Santa Barbara County Code (Chapter 2,
Article X, Section 2-71 k), I am submitting to you the recommended operating and capital budgets for FY 2016-17
and have determined that the budget development process is compatible with approved County policies and
long-range plans through the thorough evaluation of departmental requests for expenditures, revenues and
fund balance.
I welcome and encourage our community members to participate in the discussions and decisions that affect the
County’s spending priorities. In addition to Budget Workshops held in April, public hearings on the
Recommended Fiscal Year 2016-17 Operating Plan are scheduled for June 13, 2016 and will continue if necessary,
through Friday June 17, 2016, with specific hearings scheduled for Monday, June 13, 2016 and Wednesday, June
15, 2016 and only if needed Friday, June 17, 2016. The public budget hearings will be conducted at the County
Administration Building’s Fourth Floor Hearing Room located at 105 E. Anapamu Street in Santa Barbara and will
be able to receive remote testimony from the Board Hearing Room, Joseph Centeno Betteravia Government
Center, 511 East Lakeside Parkway in Santa Maria.
I want to thank the Board of Supervisors for successfully guiding the organization over the past year. I also want
to thank our department directors and their staff for assisting in the budget process. In particular, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Auditor-Controller’s Office and the County Executive Office staff for their
efforts in preparing this document and making improvements. Lastly, I want to express my gratitude to our
employees for their dedication in serving our community and commitment to a financially sound and vibrant
organization.
As we look to the upcoming 2016-17 Fiscal Year, the County’s fiscal situation is projected to be positive, and
continues to improve at a moderate pace. As federal, state and local revenues have strengthened, the past
two budgets have allowed for our ability to restore some previous budget cuts and enabled the expansion of
some services to address mandated or emerging needs. In this time period, the County fully funded its General
Fund strategic reserve (or 30-day operating reserve) and developed plans to address long-term liabilities, such
as paying down unfunded pension and retiree health liabilities over the next two decades, and annually
increasing funding toward deferred maintenance needs.
All of this is good news, but caution is still required. In the past, the Board has made difficult choices and
tradeoffs to ensure a balanced budget. After reducing 580 positions and cutting operations by approximately
$60 million during the Great Recession, financial and operational challenges continue. Maintaining fiscal
stability and ensuring a balanced budget in the coming years requires continued prudence, realistic
expectations and restraint.
This year’s budget theme, “Challenges, Choices and Changes Ahead,” reflects the need to maintain existing
levels of service amid growing demands and high expectations. Given limited available revenues and the need
to address existing liabilities and prior funding commitments, we face continued challenges. These prior
commitments, which obligate future ongoing revenue, reduce our capacity for significant expansions of
programs and services, or other expenditure increases, in the near term. These challenges will require a
continued commitment to responsible choices to deliver the level and quality of programs and services desired
by the residents of Santa Barbara County. Next year also signifies important changes in the County, with newly
elected and appointed leadership, in addition to expected employee retirements.
Yet even with these challenges, your County government continues to strive to provide high quality work,
advancing major initiatives and fulfilling priorities to serve Santa Barbara County residents. Significant services
are provided day in and day out by County departments, and all have made substantial progress to accomplish
goals set by the Board to better serve our communities. These achievements are listed in their budget
narratives.
General Priorities to guide the budget development process. Similar to last year, general priorities to guide the
budget development process are as follows:
? Continue the Board’s prior commitments
? Rebuild our financial reserves and incrementally address organizational needs, addressing the highest
needs that meet mandates and core missions
? Create a thriving and engaged workforce
? Create efficiencies through technology and process improvements
? Strategically plan for the future
? Minimize service reductions and impacts to the public, to the extent possible
? Address new and emerging needs
Key Issues in FY 2016-17 and Near Term. While this Recommended Operating Plan is largely a status quo
budget, several key factors have influenced our operations next year.
? State funding to the County for roads continues to decline. As was the case last year, the State provided
$2.7 million less to the County for roads. Funding shortfalls caused by reduction in State funding has put
pressure on the General Fund to contribute towards maintaining our roads. If no relief is provided by the
State, this is an unsustainable situation for local roads, faced by all local governments in California. In
addition, State funding is flat (not growing) or has a cap (spending limit) for some programs, such as Child
Support Services, and programs in Social Services. This means no additional funding is provided by the
State to cover normal increases in labor costs or supplies and expenses.
? We continue to experience a higher demand for inpatient mental health services than in the recent past,
although the addition of new services to assist those in crisis appear to be helping reduce this pressure.
? As County services have expanded in the last few years, largely due to state and federal programs such as
the Affordable Care Act, there has been a greater demand on internal service departments.
? A recent increase in violent crime in North County has affected our public safety and justice departments.
According to the District Attorney’s office, the caseload for serious and violent crimes in North County
(defined as murder, non-negligent manslaughter, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault) increased 42%
between calendar years 2012 and 2015.
? We also continue to face increased employee-related costs, such as a higher health care and general
liability costs. Pension costs have stabilized for now but could be increased in FY 17-18 pending the
performance of the pension portfolio and decisions by the retirement board in the fall. Contracts for our
largest labor groups terminate at the end of fiscal year 2016, and negotiations for these successor
agreements begin this spring. This is a significant factor that is unknown at this time.
? Departments are experiencing retirements of experienced employees, necessitating the need for
increased efforts in workforce (succession) planning, retention and recruitment.
? Recent events have also put a spotlight on employee security and safety; as a result, since January 2016, an
interdepartmental work group has been meeting to develop short, medium and longer-term
recommendations. Facility improvements in public areas have been requested and General Services has
been coordinating those evaluations.
? During the Recession, few new capital projects funded by the General Fund were possible. Prior to the
recession, the General Fund contributed $0.5 million annually for various capital projects, and several larger
projects employed debt financing. The County stopped allocating funding for capital and shifted these
funds for maintenance needs. With a growing list of capital needs, work has resumed to identify high
priority needs and adequate funding to begin addressing them.
To address some of these issues, the CEO is recommending enhancing services in select areas using available,
discretionary General Fund revenue. (See table – CEO Recommended Budget Expansions.). Departments are
also reallocating resources within their operations to address these and other emerging needs. Unfortunately,
the County’s capacity for significant expansions of programs, services, staff or other increases is limited in the
near term given our projected revenue growth and prior funding commitments.
Continued commitments to Board priorities. The FY2016-17 Recommended Budget continues prior funding
commitments.
? The County has significant deferred maintenance needs. In recognition of our aging infrastructure and
facilities, the Board approved a plan to allocate 18% of unallocated, discretionary General Fund revenue
each year, allowing it to incrementally grow over time so that in ten years an estimated $100 million will
have been accumulated. Maintenance funding will increase pursuant to the “18% funding policy” by $1.2
million (to $2.5 million). This is in addition to $2.8 million of discretionary General Fund revenue that is
already allocated to maintenance, pursuant to another Board policy. The County’s maintenance need for
roads, buildings, and park structures continue to be a significant challenge, and staff continues to
effectively prioritize the use of these funds.
? For several years, the County has proceeded in developing the Northern Branch Jail, a 376-bed new jail
outside of Santa Maria. While the State is providing most of the construction funding, the operations are
expected to cost $17 million annually beginning in FY 2018-19, funded by the General Fund. The County’s
funding plan guides setting aside increasing amounts of General Fund revenues each year to cover the
operating costs. The Recommended Budget includes $7.6 million for the eventual operations, per the
funding plan. In April 2016, construction bids for the project were received and exceeded staff’s estimates.
As of the release of this Recommended Budget, staff is continuing to work on options for the Board’s
review to address this issue.
? The Board had also committed an ongoing shift of property tax revenue to the Fire District to ensure
adequate staffing, equipment and facilities for this service. One quarter percent of property tax growth
that would have otherwise been allocated to the General Fund is shifted to the Fire District until the
District’s allocation reaches a 17% share of property taxes (from 14.3% in FY 2012-13). This shift continues,
resulting in an additional $6.5 million in revenue to the Fire District in FY 16-17.
? Employee agreements are being satisfied. The Recommended Budget for FY 2016-17 includes increases for
employee salary and benefits, pursuant to negotiated labor agreements approved to date and expected
costs.
Financial stability and Planning for the Future. The Recommended FY 2016-17 Budget continues to place the
County on the path of fiscal prudence and long-term financial sustainability.
? The Strategic Reserve in the General Fund is recommended to be fully funded ($31.0 million or 8% of
operating revenues).
? Plans are in place to eliminate the unfunded pension and retiree health liabilities, assuming investment
returns meet expectations. The Recommended Budget funds the required contributions per these plans.
? The County Executive Office began a countywide, internal-facing strategic planning initiative in FY2015-16
which will continue in FY 2016-17 to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the County’s operations.
Several departments are also revising or initiating strategic planning for their departments.
Budget Savings (Efficiencies) Departments continue to be efficient through process improvements,
technology, and innovation to better serve the public. Departments also propose efficiencies, or budget
reductions, that may reduce their resources but does not result in a reduction of service to the public or clients.
In FY 2016-17, the following efficiencies (budget reductions without service impacts) are proposed:
? Behavioral Wellness has a reduced need of certain Community Based Organization (CBO) services since
implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA).
? Probation has a reduced need for the word processing function. In addition, at the Alternative Report and
Resource Centers (ARRC), Probation will increase the level of staffing from Community Based
Organizations (CBO’s) to provide enhanced programming and treatment opportunities in a more cost
efficient manner. Probation will have a plan in place for programming before the beginning of the new
fiscal year
Service Level Reductions. Recommended Service Level Reductions necessary to balance select departments’
budgets are proposed each year. (See table - Service Level Reduction Summary). As in the prior year, with an
improving fiscal situation, there are fewer proposed budget reductions than in past years. No layoffs of staff
are currently anticipated. Service Level Reductions are proposed in the budgets for Behavioral Wellness, Child
Support, County Counsel, Public Works and Sheriff. To minimize impacts to the public, however, the CEO’s
Recommended Expansions mitigate all of these service level reductions except for the loss of State gas tax in
Public Works. The CEO is recommending offsetting some of the State revenue loss but not backfilling the
entire loss.
? Behavioral Wellness is proposing a $2.8 million reduction in current level of inpatient beds (existing funding
is insufficient for current demand) but the department is only requesting $1.6 million to help restore (given
that new crisis services and safe and stable housing beds will help abate the demand).
? Child Support is reducing their costs by $146 thousand (1.7 FTEs) through attrition as retirements occur to
meet increased expenses but fixed State funding.
? County Counsel was proposing a $257 thousand (1 vacant FTE) reduction related to a vacant Senior Deputy
County Counsel position. However, given discussion at the Budget Workshops and need for the immediate
hire, the CEO directed the early restoration of the positon. Therefore, the positon is now included in the
Recommended Budget as part of the department’s baseline budget.
? Public Works is reducing their costs by $3.3 million (3 vacant FTEs) through a $2.5 million reduction in
contracted road maintenance plan and $0.8 million reduction in staff, supplies, and equipment used for
Road Operations (due to loss of gas tax funding).
? The Sherriff is proposing to a $1.0 million reduction (6 vacant FTEs) by closing the Santa Maria Branch Jail.
CEO Recommended Expansions. For FY 2016-17, departments requested a total of $17.3M ongoing and $11.8
one-time General Fund increases to their budgets. CEO Recommended Expansions for FY 2016-17 are shown in
Figure 2. Expansion requests were evaluated and recommendations made based on the following: new or
existing mandates or requirements; Board established priorities and policies; significant financial, legal, health
or safety risk or liability; well documented need based on past studies or data; or self-funded or cost-covering
initiatives. As stated earlier, to minimize impacts to the public, expansions are also recommended to mitigate
service level reductions.
The FY 2016-17 and FY 2017-18 Operational Plan continues to represent financially prudent choices while
addressing critical needs, mitigating risks, and delivering on the Board’s highest priorities. The County is in a
positive financial position but faces “Challenges, Choices and Changes Ahead.” We are in better financial
shape than in the most recent years and continue to face funding challenges and greater expectations,
requiring diligence in managing expectation and prioritizing the most critical needs. As we look to FY 2016-17
and FY 2017-18, the County remains optimistic but realistic about what we can achieve and dedicated to
providing high-quality services through an engaged and accountable workforce.
The Plan was prepared in accordance with the Board’s adopted Budget and General Fund Allocation Policies
with consideration of the Board’s six goals adopted on April 21, 1998, and revised on November 21, 2006. These
adopted organizational goals help to unify, focus, and align the wide variety of services provided by the County
of Santa Barbara and identifies how the organization should operate. The goals are:
? Goal 1: EFFICIENT AND RESPONSIVE GOVERNMENT: An efficient professionally managed government
able to anticipate and to effectively respond to the needs of the community;
? Goal 2: HEALTH AND SAFETY: Safe and healthy communities in which to live, work, and visit;
? Goal 3: ECONOMIC VITALITY: A community that is economically vital & sustainable;
? Goal 4: QUALITY OF LIFE: A high quality of life for all residents;
? Goal 5: CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT: A County government that is accessible, open, and citizen-friendly; and
? Goal 6: FAMILIES AND CHILDREN: A community that fosters the safety and well-being of families and
children.
The CEO Recommended Operational Plan for Fiscal Years 2016-17 and 2017-18 presents a balanced budget, with
FY 2016-17 Operating Revenues of $1,018.5 million and Operating Expenditures of $1,008.1 million resulting in an
operating surplus of $10.4 million. Improving revenues, up $46.9 million (4.8%), and measured expenditure
growth, $28.9 million (3.0%), have helped to develop a balanced Recommended Budget.
In FY 2017-18, Operating Revenues are projected to grow by $30.7 million (3.0%) to $1,049.3 million and
Operating Expenditures are project to increase by $27.1 million (2.7%) to $1,035.2 million, resulting an operating
surplus of $14.1 million in the FY 2017-18 Proposed Budget .
The FY 2016-17 Recommended Staffing levels will modestly increase by 9.1 Full Time Equivalents (FTEs) from
4,340.9 in the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget, to 4,350.0 FTEs in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Plan. A 10 year
history of Countywide FTE’s can be found in Section C.
Revenues from all taxes are projected to increase by $13.2 million or 4.7% from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget
for total Recommended Tax revenue of $292.3 million; and as a percent of operating revenues is 28.7%. The
primary drivers of the increase are Property Taxes from Secured, In-Lieu of Vehicle License Fee (VLF), and Local
Sales Taxes. Secured Property Taxes are projected to increase by $9.0 million or 5.1% and is the largest source
of the tax category. The growth reflects continued increases in the assessed value of local real estate that has
been occurring for the last few years. Property Taxes In-Lieu of VLF are projected to increase by 4.8% or $2.4
million and Local Sales Tax is expected to increase by $1.4 million or 15.6% from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget.
Intergovernmental revenues are comprised of State, Federal and other governmental sources and are
projected to increase by $14.4 million or 3.9% to $387.5 million. The increase reflects anticipated State Revenue
from the Board of State and Community Corrections (BSCC) Conditional Award for the construction of a
Northern Branch Jail. The project’s one-time funding is anticipated to be $30.0 million in FY 2016-17, see
discussion on the Jail later in this Executive Summary.
Charges for Services are expected to grow $16.6 million or 6.8% over FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget figures. The
growth is spread across many different sources. Charges for Services include revenue such as, but not limited
to, Medi-Cal and Medicare services performed, allocated costs for administrative and other services, State
Federally Qualified Health Centers (FGHC), and Development Fees.
Fines, Forfeitures, and Penalties are projected to remain relatively flat, with a decrease of $30.0 thousand or -
0.4% from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget. The main reason for the decrease is a reduction in Penalties related
to Property Taxes. This trend is usual when the real estate market improves and property values increase.
Miscellaneous Revenue is comprised of numerous sources that do not fall into a specific category. It is
estimated that Miscellaneous Revenues will increase by $2.1 million or 4.9% in FY 2016-17. The main drivers are
increased insurance premium contributions.
Revenues by Fund
Countywide revenues can also be viewed by fund. The majority of revenues are derived in the General Fund
and Special Revenue Funds. The General Fund is the chief operating fund of the County and Special Revenue
Funds are typically used when revenues are provided for a specific purpose, such as gasoline tax for road
maintenance or specific funding for food stamp programs. A description of Government Funds can be found
in Section F, Annual Budgetary Processes, Policies and Fund Structure.
The table below displays the Recommended Revenues for FY 2016-17 by major funds, the largest of which is the
General Fund representing 38% of countywide revenues. The General Fund can be further broken down into
Discretionary General Revenues and Other Revenues.
The Fiscal Year 2016-17 Recommended All Funds Operating Revenues are $1,018.5 million. Of these total
revenues, the locally elected Board of Supervisors has some discretion over the allocation of about 23.5% or
$239.8 million. This latter revenue figure, predominately from local taxes, is called local discretionary revenue.
The table below summarizes the General Fund discretionary revenues available in FY 2016-17 and compares
them with prior fiscal periods. Property taxes, sales taxes, and Transient Occupancy Taxes (TOT) are the three
major local sources of revenue generated from the performance of the local economy. Significant property
taxes (including secured, unsecured, In-Lieu of Vehicle License Fees, and property transfer taxes) make up
82.6% of total discretionary revenues and 85.0% if RDA proceeds are included.
In the Recommended Fiscal Year 2016-17 budget, local discretionary revenues increased $9.3 million from the
Fiscal Year 2015-16 adopted revenues, for a total of $239.8 million. This increase is most notably from property
taxes, sales tax, and Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT). Cost Allocation Services reflect charges for support
services provided by General Fund departments and are projected to decrease $0.7 million in FY 2016-17 to $11.2
million.
The main drivers of the revenue changes depicted above are as follows:
Property Tax Growth
Property values are a key component of the local economy, and modest growth is expected to continue,
thereby providing increased property tax revenue. Property taxes are the largest source of funds for the
County’s budget. The FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget of $203.8 million projects that there will be 5.3%
growth ($10.3 million) over FY 2015-16 Adopted amount of $193.5 million. The FY 2017-18 Proposed Budget is
expected to have a 3.8% growth ($7.8 million) over the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget.
Dissolved Redevelopment Agencies (RDA)
The County General Fund will receive $5.7 million in FY 2016-17 and $5.9 million in FY 2017-18 from ongoing
Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Funds that distribute RDA dissolution proceeds from the seven dissolved
redevelopment agencies in the County. These ongoing revenues are ultimately expected to grow to
approximately $9.0 million dollars in annual taxes for the County’s General Fund, once all outstanding RDA
debt obligations of the dissolved agencies are paid.
Local Sales Tax
Local retail sales tax represents the local portion of the retail sales tax collected by the State from sales
generated within the unincorporated areas of the County. Retail sales tax is an economically sensitive revenue
source that is used to support the general operations of the County.
Sales taxes are expected to have significant growth in FY 2016-17, up $1.4 million (15.9%) for the Recommended
Budget. Included in the growth in Sales Tax for FY 2016-17 is the mid-year restoration of the sales taxes rate
from 0.75% to 1.00% as the Triple Flip program comes to an end. The Triple Flip was a complex series of revenue
exchanges to repay $15 billion in state deficit financing bonds or economic recovery bonds (ERBs) from the
2004 Proposition 57. This method reimbursed cities and counties with property tax proceeds “In-Lieu of Local Sales Tax” to compensate for the sales tax revenue being redirected to the State to pay off the ERBs. This
increase will be offset in FY 2016-17 by a reduction of In-Lieu of Local Sales Tax revenue as this is where
the proceeds of the Triple Flip were recorded. Sales tax growth is expected to return to a more normal growth
rate of 2.9% ($0.3 million) in the FY 2017-18 Proposed Budget.
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
This source of revenue is highly dependent on tourism and the quantity of lodging in the unincorporated
County. TOT is taxed at a 10% rate in the unincorporated areas and is related to consumer spending and
tourism that should continue to increase if the economy continues to grow and remains stable. Thus, TOT is
estimated to increase by $1.4 million (17.5%) in FY 2016-17 over FY 2015-16, and another 4.3% or $400 thousand in
FY 2017-18. The County is placing a ballot measure before the voters on the November 8, 2016 ballot to
increase the TOT from 10% to 12% to more closely align with rates of most cities within the county.
Payments In-Lieu of Tax (PILT)
PILT are Federal payments to local governments that help offset losses in property taxes due to non-taxable
Federal lands within their boundaries. The Federal Budget during FY 2015-16 did not originally have any PILT
funding and was not included in the County’s Adopted Budget. Funding has now been appropriated and thus
included in the FY 2015-16 projected year end results; however, due to the uncertainty of PILT funding, it is
again not included as ongoing revenue in the FY 2016-17 Recommended or the FY 2017-18 Proposed budgets
but it is included in our FY 2015-16 projections. Nevertheless, the County is advocating for full PILT funding
through its Legislative Advocates.
All Other Revenues
This category is made up of Franchise Fees, Interest Income, State, and Federal Payments. These revenues will
decrease in FY 2016-17 Recommended, but will stay relatively flat in the Proposed Budget year. In-Lieu of Local
Sales Tax is expected to decrease by $2.5 million in FY 2016-17 with an offsetting increase in Local Sales Tax; In-
Lieu of Local Sales Tax represents the Property Taxes given to the County in-lieu of the 0.25% Sales Tax that was
given up as part of the “Triple Flip” as discussed above. The decrease is the result of the ending of the
program and the restoration of 1.00% County Sales Tax rate.
Significant Property Taxes depicted in Figure 7 above include but are not limited to secured and unsecured
property taxes, property taxes in-lieu of vehicle license fees, and fines and penalties.
The County’s Recommended FY 2016-17 operating expenditures are $1,008.1 million, a $28.9 million (3.0%)
increase over the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget of $979.2 million. The rate of expenditure increase is down from
the 4.8% that occurred in FY 2015-16, with the majority of the projected increase ($15.8 million) in Salaries and
Benefits. While Contractual Services, in FY 2016-17, are stable, there was a large increase in this object level in
FY 2015-16; of the $39.5 million increase in Contractual and Special Services, in FY 2015-16, $18.8 million is due to
budgeted capital expenditures for the North County Jail and $13.5 million is due to various Public Works
projects. The table below identifies significant categories of these expenditures.
Recommended salaries of $573.1 million represent a 2.8% increase over FY 2015-16, mostly comprised of a
projected increase in the cost per employee of 2.5% and the impact of adding 9 new employees (0.2% increase)
which will be added throughout FY 2016-17. The blended impact of these factors results in the majority of the
2.5% increase.
Figure 9A illustrates the trend in County staff and historic salary costs. Note that salaries were relatively flat
from FY 2008-09 ($279.9 million) to FY 2013-14 ($284.2 million) and that the 4,341 employees as of 2015-16 is
effectively the same number as in 2007-08.
The annual County pension contribution is budgeted to remain relatively flat, with an increase of $800
thousand (0.65%) to $123.0 million in the FY 2016-17 Recommended Budget. Like most other public entities,
pension costs have been one of the fastest growing cost elements in recent years but have stabilized in recent
years.
The total pension costs as shown above may increase or decreasing based on the change in the number of
employees. To normalize the data, it can be helpful to view these costs as pension cost per employee. As can
be seen in the graph below, the pension cost per employee increased significantly between 2010-11 through FY
2013-14, but has been relatively stable since then.
Employer contribution rates are set by the independent Santa Barbara County Employee’s Retirement System
(SBCERS) Board and paid by the County and shown in the graph below. The rate of growth in pension
contributions accelerated between FY 2009-10 and FY 2013-14 due to investment losses that needed to be
absorbed into the ongoing rates. Smoothing formulas have enabled the rates to increase incrementally during
these periods. At the same time, the projected rate of return included in the actuarial assumptions was
reduced from 8.16% to 7.75% for FY 2011-12 and from 7.75% to 7.50% for FY 2014-15. Additionally, the unfunded
liability as of 6/30/2013 was fixed and is being amortized over 15 years starting with the pension rates for FY
2014-15 and will be fully amortized by 2030, at which time the employer rate will significantly decrease (if other
assumptions are met). Future gains and losses will be amortized over a 19 year period. As of June 30, 2015, the
pension fund had a funded ratio of 78.4%.
Finally, should the pension board change its assumed rate of return (currently at 7.5%), this would require more
funding from the County. The pension board will make its decision this coming fall, after it conducts its threeyear
experience study. These changes could potentially result in a 1% to 2% increase in FY2017-18, equating to
$3.3 million to $6.6 million in additional County costs ($1 million to $2 million in Discretionary General
Revenues).
Other Post-Employment Benefits (Retiree Health Care Costs)
The Santa Barbara County Employees’ Retirement System (SBCERS) administers a cost sharing multipleemployer
defined benefit post-employment healthcare plan, which the County participates in. This Other Post-
Employment Benefit (OPEB) Plan provides medical benefits to eligible retired County employees and their
eligible dependents. In recent years, the Board approved a budget policy to address current requirements and
the unfunded liability. This year, the Board formalized that policy and approved a plan to pay down the
unfunded liability by contributing 4% of payroll annually. This plan would eliminate the unfunded OPEB liability
by 2034, if all investment return assumptions are met. In next year’s budget, the 4% funding is included to
reflect this policy.
Employee Healthcare Costs - Fastest Growing Cost in Salaries & Benefits Category:
The County’s Health insurance costs are budgeted to increase by $4.1 million to $40.1 million (11.4%) in the
Recommended Budget for Fiscal Year 2016-17, with continued increases projected for the FY 2017-18 period.
This represents the largest percentage increase in the Salaries and Benefits category of expenditures.
The County’s Recommended FY 2016-17 expenditures can also be viewed by Functional area. The increases
were primarily in the functions of Public Safety, Health & Human Services, and General Government & Support
Services. General Government & Support Services illustrates a large increase due to the anticipated first year
of construction of the North County Jail. The main drivers of the increase in these functions are summarized
below by department. Significant changes are explained more fully in Section D of this book.
Policy & Executive
County Executive Office: The FY 16-17 Budget increases by $2.6 million (7.4%) to $37.6 million from the FY 2015-
16 Adopted Budget of $35.0 million due primarily to increases to Risk Management insurance costs.
Public Safety
District Attorney: The FY 2016-17 Budget increases by $1.1 million (5.1%) to $23.3 million from the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget of $22.2 million due primarily to anticipated increases in salaries, retirement costs, health
insurance, and workers compensation costs.
Fire: The FY 2016-17 Budget increases by $4.1 million (6.6%) to $66.4 million from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget
of $62.3 million due primarily to anticipated increases in labor agreements, retirement costs, health insurance,
vehicle expenditures and workers compensation costs. The increases are more than offset by increases in
revenue from property taxes, including the County Property Tax Shift to Fire.
Probation: The FY 2016-17 budget increases by $1.8 million to $54.7 million from the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget
of $52.9 million due primarily to anticipated increases in salaries, retirement costs, health insurance, and
workers compensation costs along with increased costs for Services & Supplies for health care for incarcerated
juveniles and contracts for services with Community Based Organizations for Adult and Juvenile
programs. These increased costs are partially offset by increases in Federal and State revenues for Public
Safety Realignment and Public Safety sales tax distributions.
Sheriff: The FY 2016-17 budget increases by $2.9 million (2.3%) to $127.5 million from the FY 2015-16 Adopted
budget of $124.7 million due primarily to anticipated increases in labor agreements and an increase in liability
insurance premiums.
Health & Human Services Function
Public Health: The FY 2016-17 budget increases by $7.0 million (8.5%) to $89.4 million from the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget of $82.4 million due primarily to increased staffing, insurance costs, and an increase in
pharmaceutical expenditures.
Behavioral Wellness: The FY 2016-17 budget increases by $4.2 million (4.0%) to $109.0 million from the FY 2015-
16 Adopted budget of $104.9 million due to implementation of the Crisis Stabilization unit and overall salary and
benefit rate increases.
Social Services: The FY 2016-17 Budget increases by $1.3 million (0.8%) to $174.2 million from the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget of $172.9 million due primarily to increases in cash assistance payments. These increases are
funded primarily through state and federal sources.
Community Resources & Public Assistance Function
Public Works: The FY 2016-17 budget decreases by $6.5 million (-6.0%) to $101.8 million from the FY 2015-16
Adopted Budget of $108.3 million mostly due to decrease for capital projects and maintenance in
Transportation.
The increases in this functional group are primarily derived from construction costs associated with the
Northern Branch Jail Project.
General County Programs
General County Programs is made up of programs and projects that are not directly associated with one
specific department. The FY 2016-17 budget decreases by $702 thousand to $2.3 million as a result of a prior
year one-time allocation of $431 thousand to outside agencies and a $225 thousand reduction in funding of the
Children’s Healthcare Initiative as children will soon qualify for full scope Medi-Cal under AB-75.
This five year forecast is intended to provide additional information that may be helpful in weighing the
financial consequences of current year decisions and understanding commitments that have already been
made. The Discretionary General Fund Forecast focuses on Discretionary Revenues, General Fund Allocations
or Contributions (GFC’s), and additions to Committed Fund Balances; all of which are described below.
Discretionary Revenues
Discretionary Revenues are those revenues which the locally elected Board of Supervisors has some discretion
over their ultimate allocation and represent about 24.0% of Countywide revenues or $239.8 million in the FY
2016-17 Recommended Budget. These revenues, predominantly from local taxes, are called local discretionary
revenue.
The major source of discretionary revenue is taxes on property and property transactions. The growth rate
assumed for property and other taxes is 4.5% (before the Fire Tax Shift) and is comparable to current property
tax estimates reflecting changes to assessed property values, recent inflationary trends and other market
factors. Other revenues include Sales Tax, Transient Occupancy Tax, and cost allocation recovery from non-
General Fund entities. Projected local discretionary revenues are displayed as the top line in the graph below.
This discretionary revenue is $231.6 million in FY 2014-15, $235.5 million in FY 2015-16, $239.8 million in FY 2016-17
and so on. The line below that displays discretionary expenditures, which are discussed in more detail in the
following section.
Discretionary expenditures are those costs not fixed in amount by legal obligation prior to adoption of the
annual budget by the Board of Supervisors. The forecast in Figure 16 is comprised of four main categories and
are displayed as stacked bars on the graph:
1. General Fund Allocations or Contributions to all departments (shown as base GFC in graph).
2. Incremental Changes to Salaries and Benefits funded with discretionary revenues (i.e. requiring
additional General Fund allocations, shown as S&B on the graph), and
3. Board identified funding priorities. These priorities are funded by increases to the Committed Fund
balance accounts, shown with separate stacked bars on the graph below and will be discussed in more
detail. These include:
? Fire Tax Shift
? North Branch Jail Operations Funding
? Maintenance Funding (Base of $2.8 million, plus 18 % of unallocated discretionary revenues)
4. Unallocated discretionary revenues are those remaining funds available for funding Board priorities or
other necessary matters.
General Fund Allocations or Contributions (GFCs)
General Fund Contributions (shown as “Base GFC” on the graph) are the most significant revenue source for
General Fund departments in the delivery of services to the community. Other funds are allocated GFC based
on Federal and State maintenance of effort requirements or payments for specific purposes, such as local
match for transportation funding in the Roads Fund. Projected General Fund Contributions assume the prior
year’s allocation plus incremental changes to salaries and benefits (S&B) and any other necessary changes.
Salary and Benefit Changes
Salary and Employee Benefit changes include anticipated personnel related expenditures. They are primarily
determined based on negotiated Memoranda of Understanding (MOU), health insurance, and retirement
benefit cost projections, and mandated costs such as Social Security contributions. Additionally, the County is
currently funding certain Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) related to providing medical coverage to
retirees.
Generally, salaries for FY 2016-17 and 2017-18 are based on detailed positions by department (salary model),
existing wages, and any scheduled wage increases per MOU with the various bargaining units or anticipated
increases for unrepresented employees.
Total employee salary and benefit costs are expected to increase at 2.8% in FY 2016-17; however, contracts for
the County’s largest employee labor groups terminate at the end of fiscal year 2015-16. Labor negotiations for
many of these successor contracts are currently underway or will soon begin. This is a significant financial
factor that is unknown at this time. The chart below lists the expiration dates of MOUs by Employee
Organization.
Committed fund balances are used to set aside General Funds for Board priorities, such as deferred
maintenance, Northern Branch Jail operations funding, building of the strategic reserve, or other funding
requirements that arise over time.
The graph below displays the Five Year Forecast of discretionary revenues, property tax revenue shifted to the
Fire District, General Fund Contributions, and the various increases to committed fund balances.
Fire Tax Shift Allocates 25% of Property Tax Growth to the Fire District
Fire services are vital to Santa Barbara County, and its history of fires are reminders of the constant danger
given our geography and climate. To ensure adequate staffing, equipment and fire station facilities, the
County shifted future property tax revenue from the General Fund to the Fire District. The target is 17% of
property taxes to the Fire District (from about 14.3% in FY 2012-13). To do this, a formula was developed that
shifts a quarter growth in property taxes until the 17% target is reached (projected in FY 2019-20). The new
revenue gained by the Fire District through this shift of taxes would otherwise have been General Fund
revenue. As part of this tax shift agreement, the Fire District also forgoes a share of other revenue it had
previously received.
The current allocation of property taxes in FY 2015-16 is 15.7%. In FY 2016-17 the shift will result in $6.5 million
more to the Fire District than would have occurred without the tax shift. The shift is expected to result in an
additional $11.5 million annually to the Fire District by the time the 17% target is reached in FY 2019-20. To date,
this new revenue has been used to improve fire safety throughout the County. Future expenditures are
anticipated to largely address significant capital needs of the department. The Fire Department will provide a
progress report on use of these funds as a “Special Issues” presentation at the Budget Workshops.
The Northern Branch Jail (NBJ) Project is located near the City of Santa Maria, California; when completed, the
facility will provide capacity to hold 376 individuals, of which 32 beds are reserved in a separate housing unit for
individuals with medical and mental health challenges. The entire jail complex is composed of several buildings
estimated to be approximately 139,000 square feet for inmate housing and ancillary support functions. The
facility will be built on a ten-acre portion of a 50-acre County-owned property located at Black and Betteravia
Roads.
On January 15, 2013, the Board of Supervisors approved a Project Construction and Delivery Agreement with
the State of California that stipulated the terms of an $80 million award of funds towards the construction of a
new Northern Branch jail near the City of Santa Maria. The cost to build the jail was originally anticipated to be
$96 million. In April 2016, construction bids received were significantly greater than the original budget and
additional funds have not yet been approved. The Board will hear options and consider alternatives in May
2016 and may continue any decisions into the June 2016 budget hearings. Prior to the receipt of bids, the
planned opening was November 2018.
In November 2015, the consulting firm of Carter, Goble, and Lee estimated the additional operating costs of the
new jail, including shift relief at $16.8 million in the first full year of operation. If we include additional
maintenance staff and costs, the total annual operating cost of the new facility would be $17.6 million. The
County adopted a funding plan in FY 2011-12 to annually allocate an increasing amount of General Funds
towards the ultimate operating costs. Funding for the NBJ operating costs has been occurring per the original
funding plan (shown below) and is accumulating in a NBJ Operations fund balance.
In recognition of our aging infrastructure and facilities, the Board developed a policy of annually setting aside
18 percent of available revenue to fund deferred maintenance needs. This has resulted in $2.5 million of
ongoing, dedicated maintenance funding in FY 2016-17, which is in addition to a minimum of $3 million annual
funding previously authorized by Board policy for these needs. It is envisioned that the ongoing funding will
build over time as additional General Fund is added annually, so that $100 million will have been accumulated
over 10 years (see Figure 19 below).
Unbudgeted emergency repairs for County buildings, however, have increased $1.3 million this past year for
items such as transformer replacements, generators and sewer lines. These unplanned emergency repairs will
likely continue in the near future until ongoing funding builds and deferred maintenance levels stabilize. More
one-time funding will likely be needed in the near term for these needs.
Road maintenance also has seen a need for increased funding. In the past, the County's roads were funded
from federal, state and regional funding sources. Measure A, passed in 2008, provides regional funds to the
County, but it is less than local road funding provided by its predecessor, Measure D. The state provides Gas
Tax (Highway User Tax Account or HUTA) funds, which have diminished in the last two years. As a result, many
counties are in the same predicament as Santa Barbara. Over 77% of California Counties have Pavement
Condition Index ratings in the 50-70 range (“at risk”). (In Santa Barbara County, the overall PCI is 59, with a
higher PCI rating in more urban areas (66) to compared rural areas (55)).
To help ensure roads are maintained at a safe level, in FY 2015-16 the County provided one-time General Funds
to road maintenance of $1.4 million in addition to the dedicated 18% maintenance funding. While the issue is
being debated in the State Legislature, there is no certainty of improved funding. Without improved state
assistance in FY 2016-17, contribution from the General Fund again is being requested and $1.25 million in onetime
funds is being recommended for the FY 2016-17 budget.
The County has a large list of unfunded capital items; some are new capital improvements, such as new
facilities, while others are capital replacement of systems to address significant deferred maintenance. Prior to
the recession, the General Fund contributed $0.5 million annually for various capital projects, and several larger
projects employed debt financing. Many of the capital projects were improvements to replace aging or
obsolete buildings and fix major systems. In FY 2013-14, the County stopped allocating $0.5 million for capital
and shifted these funds for maintenance needs.
The County now has a long list of capital projects requiring significant funding. A Capital Executive Committee
was re-established this year to establish criteria for ranking non-Public Works capital projects (buildings, parks
etc.) in an effort to prioritize needs. The results of a preliminary evaluation identified 12 high priority projects
totaling $22.3 million. (There are significantly more unfunded projects but these are considered the highest
need). Available one-time funding and/or potential use of debt is being considered to start rebuilding a capital
improvement program for the County.
A complete summary of projects and recommended appropriations for Capital Expenditures can be found in
Section E of this document. The following is a summary of the County’s Five Year Capital Improvement
Program (CIP).
The Fiscal Year 2016-2021 CIP contains 181 capital projects and 12 maintenance projects. This includes 38
projects that are new this year. Of this total, 73 projects are fully funded, 33 are partially funded, and 75 are
currently unfunded. A funded project is one that has identified specific funding, including ongoing/existing
sources to fully implement the project. A partially funded project has funding to accomplish various portions
of the project but lacks sufficient funding to fully complete the project. An unfunded project is one that has
been identified in the CIP as a need but has no funding secured to implement the program.
Significant projects are detailed in Section E of this book and are summarized below:
? Cathedral Oaks Road Bridge
Total cost of the project: $5.1 million
? Countywide Telephone System Modernization
Total cost of the project: $6.8 million
? Livescan Fingerprint Equipment
Total cost of the project: $0.8 million.
? Jalama Road Bridge Replacement
Total cost of the project: $6.8 million
? Arroyo Burro Park Improvements
Total cost of the project: $1.3 million
Fiscal Year 2016-2018 Significant Funded Projects
The proposed CIP continues to address the significant public infrastructure needs identified in various
strategies and long-range plans adopted by the County, including funding for the proposed new North County
Jail, the maintenance and repair of public buildings, and the transportation infrastructure system maintenance.
Significant projects planned for FY 2016-17 are:
? Northern Branch County Jail AB-900
? Goleta Beach Access Bridge
? Fire Station 21 Rebuild – Cuyama
? Landfill Heavy Equipment Replacement
? Jalama Beach Affordable Overnight Accommodations
? Lower Mission Creek Flood Control Project
