The proposed Fiscal Year (FY) 2012-13 County of Santa Barbara Operating Plan is submitted
for your consideration, possible amendment, and adoption. Your Board will notice a change in
the look and composition of the Plan. This is a result of a project to overhaul the Plan to enhance
the clarity of information for the public, focus on performance outcomes, and provide a future
perspective by inclusion of a FY 2013-14 proposed budget. The Plan was prepared in
accordance with the Board’s adopted budget policies and with consideration of the Board’s focus
on maintaining public safety, protecting our children and families, and supporting sustainable
communities. The FY 2012-13 proposed Plan recommends expenditures totaling $800.1 million.
Funding sources include $745.7 million from revenues and approximately $54.4 million, net
($82.4 million less $28.0 million) from fund balances. Staffing levels are proposed to increase
by 87.7 FTEs from the FY 2011-12 Adopted Budget to 3,801.4 FTEs, down 533.9 FTEs since
FY 2002-03. The increase in recommended FTEs is primarily in Public Safety department
personnel related to AB109-State Criminal Justice Realignment and in the Health and Public
Assistance departments based on available Federal and State funding.
Santa Barbara County continues to face significant internal challenges such as increases in
employee retirement and health care costs, reliance on one-time funding solutions, deferred
maintenance of critical infrastructure, funding of a new North County Jail, increasing cost of Fire
Department operations, and lack of new revenues. Additionally, external factors such as the
Great Recession, the nationwide anemic economic recovery, and inability of the State to balance
its budget often result in the realignment of State programs to counties without guaranteed
funding. All these factors increase the uncertainty of achieving a structurally balanced County
budget.
The magnitude of projected deficits in FY 2012-13 and beyond requires substantial changes in
both spending and revenue. The Board of Supervisors will need to make significant policy
decisions and difficult budget choices. To support these efforts the County Executive Officer
(CEO) will initiate an update of the County’s Strategic Plan beginning with a workshop to
identify the Board’s priorities. The goal of the planning process will be for the County to
develop a strategic vision for the future which provides a roadmap to fiscal sustainability and a
clear focus on the services most needed and valued by our residents.
The Strategic Plan will identify opportunities and threats facing the County and those critical
actions needed to position the County for future success. Objectives in the Plan will focus on
finding ongoing solutions instead of one-time fixes, managing and reducing workforce costs
(salary, healthcare, retirement and workers compensation), defining core services, reducing
deferred infrastructure maintenance, raising new revenues with efforts that stimulate economic
vitality, and building a financial reserve to enable the County to weather future economic
downturns.
Employee salary and benefit costs (including retirement and healthcare) continue to rise,
especially with public safety members. The end result is less services at a higher cost. It is
anticipated the required County retirement contribution will increase by $6 million in FY 2012-
13 with an additional increase of $18 million in FY 2013-14. , Beginning in FY 2012-13 all
future non-safety employees will be in a new retirement tier that increases the retirement age and
reduces the amount of the pension.
Last fiscal year many employee groups came to the negotiating table to assist with helping the
County close a $72 million budget gap. In total they offered salary and benefit concessions
which resulted in approximately $15 million of savings in FY 2012-13, however some of these
savings are one-time in nature such as furloughs. It is imperative the County continue
concession discussions with public safety unions to reduce or eliminate previously negotiated
salary increases and implement a less costly retirement tier for new employees.
The immediate financial impacts of dissolution of the seven Redevelopment Agencies (RDA)
within Santa Barbara County are still unknown. Oversight Boards, representing the major taxing
entities in each former RDA, have been appointed to wind down the operations, determine each
former RDA’s enforceable obligations, and return the remaining tax increment to the taxing entities. It is anticipated this process will continue over the next several months. Upon
satisfaction of all former RDA enforceable obligations, which could take as long as thirty years,
it is estimated the County and its dependent districts will receive approximately $9.4 million (in
2012 dollars) of tax monies that had previously been directed to the seven RDAs.
Funding of your Board’s priority to ensure a safe community continues, as reflected by the
increasing percentage of expenditures made in the areas of Public Safety (Sheriff, Probation and
Fire) and Law and Justice (District Attorney, Public Defender and Courts). This shift of funding
to address priority needs has resulted in a critical underfunding of community resources
departments (Community Services including parks, housing, and libraries, Planning and
Development, and Agriculture) and internal support services (Auditor-Controller, Clerk-
Recorder-Assessor, General Services, and Treasurer-Tax Collector). Further reductions in
funding and staffing for these programs will result in the deterioration of the quality of life so
valued by Santa Barbara County residents and a significant increase in the risk of financial losses
from lack of staff to manage and maintain public infrastructure, appraise property, collect taxes,
and ensure the fiscal integrity of County activities. The charts below show the percent of total
County expenditures for these departments in FY 2002-03 in comparison with those proposed in
the FY 2012-13 Operational Plan.
FY 2012-13 will be a challenging year for your Board to achieve fiscal sustainability and provide
for the increasing demand for public services. The proposed FY 2012-13 County of Santa
Barbara Operating Plan will meet this goal. Equally important is the ability of your Board to see
into the future and prepare for the even greater challenges to be faced in FY 2013-14 and
beyond. Over the course of the next several budget cycles your Board will need to demonstrate
its commitment to address the structural deficit in revenues to fund expenditures. The Board
must avoid the cliffs caused by dependence on one-time funding solutions and steer a course that
leads the County toward ongoing revenues that adequately fund needed services while setting
aside reserves for addressing deferred infrastructure maintenance, future economic downturns
and other unexpected costs.
FY 2012-13 is a year to position the County to take on the challenges of the future. As an
organization we are already looking to FY 2013-14 and developing plans to address looming
threats. Through the strategic planning process, the County of Santa Barbara will take steps to
look into the future to determine the action steps required to align the available resources with
the public’s service expectations. This is a time for vision, imagination and creativity and the
organization stands ready to address the challenges ahead; we will succeed.
Sustaining Public Results
The current fiscal year began with anticipation of the most significant financial and employee
reductions in recent memory. The budget for FY 2011-12 closed what would have been a $72
million budget gap and employees, service departments, support departments and the public were
prepared to feel the impacts. Through planning, dedication and leadership, the staffing and
service changes were implemented. Difficult circumstances often lead to surprising results.
Current Year Service Preservation and Cost Reduction Accomplishments
Some examples during the current fiscal year of organization-wide efforts to manage expenses to
preserve valuable public services include:
? Completed negotiations with all general (non-public safety) labor groups that reduce
current and future year salary and benefit obligations and create a lower cost retirement
plan for new employees
? Implemented department consolidations designed to deliver more effective services to
the public while reducing overhead expenses
? Improved the budget development process by focusing on strategic accomplishments,
anticipating the financial needs for FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14, identifying specific
operational objectives and reporting on service outcomes rather than process outputs
? Participated in business forums to explore opportunities for public-private partnerships
and promote increased economic vitality
? Explored strategies for revenue enhancement including an oil production tax,
economic development, fee adjustments and increasing the Transient Occupancy Tax
in line with other jurisdictions
? Developed and implemented a special event coordination process which provides event
organizers and the public a consistent and comprehensive review of large public events
taking place in or on County facilities
? Continued the examination of all requests to fill positions for funding stability,
customer service impacts and other considerations before approving, delaying or
denying the filling of a vacant position
? Provided extensive staff support, received the recommendations and directed the use of
proposals of the "Retirement Reform Working Group" in negotiations with labor
groups
In addition to countywide strategies, department-specific service preservation and cost reduction
measures have also been implemented. Some examples:
? Fire protection and prevention are vitally important to the public. This past year a
comprehensive analysis was conducted on the effectiveness of the Fire Department in
responding to calls including any gaps or excessive service areas. Additional analysis
was conducted on the support services and financial resources required to maintain a
modern firefighting program. The final report indicated that service levels and the
location of fire stations are appropriate for the current population. According to the
report, additional financial resources will be required to meet operational and capital
needs in the years ahead. The Fire Department has created a multi-year plan to
implement the report recommendations as funding becomes available.
? Helicopters and fixed wing aircraft provide fire fighters and law enforcement a key
tool in protecting the public. The Board Sub-committee on Public Safety Aviation
conducted a thorough fact finding process and made recommendations to the full
Board of Supervisors. The Board adopted unanimously the recommendation to
combine the separate Fire Department and Sheriff Department aviation programs to
create a multi-mission (law enforcement, fire, and rescue) joint unit within the
Sheriff’s Department. The combined unit will save tax payers just over $250,000 a
year while providing an enhanced level of aviation service.
? The Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) Prevention and Early Intervention (PEI)
Funding Stream has as one of its priorities - support to culturally underserved
communities. In Santa Barbara County, underserved communities who fall within the
priorities of the MHSA PEI funding include Latino, Oaxacan, Native American and
LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning). The Promotora program
specifically provides for community health educators to culturally underserved
communities to offer educational workshops, discussion groups and support groups to
address individual and family member mental and wellness topics. Additionally
culturally appropriate training sessions are provided for community leaders and service
providers and culturally and linguistically appropriate case management is provided to
ensure linkages to services.
The County’s former Redevelopment Agency (RDA) was dissolved on February 1,
2012 as required by recently enacted legislation known as ABX1 26. As part of the
dissolution process, the County of Santa Barbara chose to become the “Successor
Agency” to the former RDA. In its role as Successor Agency, the County is
responsible for winding down the affairs of the former RDA and disposing of its assets
– a process that has required, and will continue to require a significant amount of staff
time and County resources. The dissolution of the former RDA is significant because
the County, along with several special districts under the County’s control, are the
direct beneficiaries of the proceeds gained from liquidation of the former RDA’s
assets. It will be important that the County direct an expeditious and orderly
dissolution of the former RDA to ensure that maximum value is gained from its assets.
? The State of California adopted Public Safety Realignment (AB 109) to reduce costs
by shifting prisoners and parolees from the state prison system back to counties.
Counties would be provided financial resources to provide the appropriate
incarceration, supervision, case management, treatment services and other services to
reduce future criminal behaviors. AB 109 services were implemented in October 2011
by the County’s Probation, Sheriff, District Attorney, Public Defender and Alcohol,
Drug and Mental Health Services Departments. Increased cooperation and planning
between the many departments have thus far resulted in being able to deliver the
required services on budget although 50% more individuals are being served than had
been expected.
? Caseload growth in public assistance programs, specifically CalWORKS/Welfare-to-
Work and CalFresh (Food Stamps) are a real-time indicator of the local economic
climate. Over the last several years, caseload has continued to rise while overall state
allocation for the cost-of-doing-business has been capped. In order to maintain core
service delivery requirements, Social Services staff has worked to implement
innovative systems such as a Call Center, on-line applications, application assistance
by non-profits, and business process efficiencies to manage the over 60% growth in
workload.
More Reductions Needed for FY 2012-13
Despite these efforts undertaken by departments to maintain and even enhance services in a time
of scarce resources, the County’s budget must be balanced. The County Executive Office is
reducing two more positions, one each in the Office of Emergency Management and the Clerk of
the Board. To the extent possible, the proposed budget seeks to minimize the impact of
reductions on the community.
Below are some of the most significant areas of reduction proposed for FY 2012-13 that will
directly impact the public:
? Sheriff: Eliminate gang team, reduce two detective positions, reduce narcotics team
by four positions, reduce the hours at the Santa Maria Branch Jail to nights only and
reduce four Court bailiffs.
? Clerk, Recorder, Assessor: Eliminate 2.6 positions in the Assessor’s division, and 2.0
positions in the Elections division office and 1.0 position in the Clerk-Recorder
division which may result in closure of a branch office.
? Community Services: Eliminate 6.5 park ranger and park maintenance positions,
continue closure of Guadalupe Dunes Park two days a week, eliminate funding the
Human Services Commission, reduce shelter support, reduce housing program staff,
eliminate conference and visitor bureaus and Film Commission funding and reduce
landscape maintenance at County facilities.
? Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services: Reduce homeless-related contracts,
reduce contracted psychiatric inpatient beds and reduce Psychiatric Health Facility
(PHF) costs at mid-year.
? Agricultural Commissioner: Reduce pest/pesticide inspector and reduce Cooperative
Extension contract.
? Planning and Development: Reduce staff in Long Range Planning, technology
support, permitting, grading inspectors and staff that worked on Redevelopment
Agency (RDA) projects.
? Fire: Eliminate Engine 11 in Goleta; reduce a fire fighter at Station 22 (Orcutt) and a
fire engineer/paramedic at Station 51 (Lompoc).
? Treasurer-Tax Collector: Reduction of one staff position for Veterans Services and
the elimination of the Representative Trust Fund program that provides benefit
management services to the mentally ill.
Setting Future Goals to Achieve Results
Now more than ever, the County is focusing on defining specific goals and objectives. Planning
to effectively meet the public’s needs for services takes commitment and focus. In FY 2012-13
staff efforts will include:
? Initiating a broad strategic planning that engages the Board of Supervisors, County
departments and the public in a sustained effort to identify resources, needs, goals and
actions necessary to transform the organization to the new normal.
? Delivering a proposed and adopted budget document that is transparent, easy to
understand, provides policymakers and the public with valuable information and
provides a longer view of the fiscal opportunities and challenges.
? Integrating three social service programs--Adult Protective Services, Child Welfare
Services and Foster Care that were "realigned" to the counties through additional nonguaranteed
revenue. Local redesign of these programs to meet the County’s needs will
be a challenge due to the state and federal service mandates associated with the
programs.
? Conducting the Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services (ADMHS) operational
review will build on the success of internal efforts, provide for a comprehensive
analysis of inpatient and outpatient client service delivery options and identify
additional efficiencies and cost saving measures to enhance the overall delivery of a
spectrum of services provided by the department.
? Developing a marketing and promotional plan to increase park visitorship and enhance
appreciation of the County park system through advertising, online reservations
system, and greater concessions to attract new visitors to county parks and increase
lengths of stay. Increasing park visitation will have a positive local economic impact.
? Establishing a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) requirement
for new County buildings and remodels of County space will increase building
operating efficiency and decrease energy use resulting in long term cost savings.
? Updating the Winery Ordinance to address community and business interests which
includes a review of potential amendments to permit requirements and development
standards for wineries and associated activities including wine-tasting, food service,
events, and sale of non-agricultural products.
Budgeting for a Structurally Balanced Future
During the past four years significant staffing and service level reductions have been required to
balance the budget while maintaining a prudent level of strategic reserves. The reasons for these
reductions were primarily:
? The decline in growth of property tax related revenues
? Increasing salary and benefit costs
Reductions were moderated by the use of one-time funding for ongoing services. The continued
use of one-time sources to fund ongoing operations is unsustainable. Fortunately the County had
built up some fiscal reserves over the years that allowed service levels to be maintained to a
degree and avoided dramatic budget cuts during this economic downturn. The Board of
Supervisors has chosen to use one-time funding to mitigate some service level reductions for
high priority programs, but this practice cannot be sustained as the availability of the County’s
reserve funds has significantly decreased. Structural deficits develop when ongoing expenditures
are not reduced to meet available ongoing revenue. In a time of large expenditure growth,
primarily in the area of employee salaries and benefits, and nearly flat revenues, the use of onetime
funding to fill the gap exacerbates the problem in future years.
To better understand the challenges on the horizon, the County’s five-year forecast provides a
snapshot of the anticipated revenue and cost growth in the near future. The five-year forecast of
discretionary General Fund revenues are intended to provide a context that may be helpful in
weighing the financial consequences of current year decisions. In keeping with prior forecasts,
the revenue projections focus on discretionary General Fund revenues. Discretionary revenue is
derived primarily from local taxes, especially taxes on property and property transactions. On
the expenditure side, the forecast projects the use of discretionary revenue for salaries and
benefits, maintenance of effort requirements, and other specific uses directed by the Board of
Supervisors.
In FY 2011-12, Cost Allocation Plan (CAP) revenues were added to discretionary revenues. The
graph above excludes these CAP revenues ($9.0 million in FY 2011-12) to avoid distortion of
the revenue trend. CAP revenues are included in revenues in Figure 4 on the next page to
evaluate the gap between revenues and required General Fund Contribution.
Figure 3 above demonstrates discretionary revenue growth of $2.4 million or 1.2% for the five
year period 2008-09 to 2012-13 or 0.24% per year. By contrast, the discretionary revenue for the
five year period ending in FY 2007-08 averaged approximately 13% growth. This reduction in
revenue growth is a key factor impacting the County’s recent budgets as these revenues
previously funded the expenditure growth in prior years.
Figure 4 on the next page shows the projected “gap” in discretionary revenue versus the required
General Fund Contribution to maintain FY 2011-12 services levels. (Note that the discretionary
revenue figures in Figure 4 include the CAP revenue of $9.0 million in FY 2011-12, as
previously discussed.)
This chart demonstrates a continuing structural deficit for the County. The forecasted gap
between revenue and General Fund Contribution to meet expenditures is driven by:
? The use of $6.9 million of one-time sources to maintain levels of service for FY 2012-
13 which, with relatively flat revenue projections, continue the structural imbalance in
future years;
? A General Fund base budget that is higher than is sustainable by annual revenues
requiring reductions in the cost of providing services or reductions in services;
? A structural imbalance within the Fire Department as the growth of its primary
revenue, a dedicated portion of the property tax, fails to match the growth of its
expenditure demands;
? Continuing strong demands for mandated social services as a result of the recessionary
economy;

? Diversion of General Fund Contribution (GFC) for the future operation of a new
County jail, a strategy that incrementally increases GFC each year and significantly
closes the budget gap that would otherwise be created in future years;
? Increased use of local discretionary revenue to meet the Public Health Department’s
Maintenance of Effort (MOE) as prior fund balances are depleted and GFC is needed
to maintain service levels;
? Assumed annual overall cost increases for wages and benefits of 3.0% for FY’s 2014-
15 through 2016-17;
? Increases in the actuarial cost of funding existing retirement obligations of 21.8% and
21.2% in FYs 2010-11 and 2011-12, respectively, and a cumulative $95.7 million
(353.1%) increase since FY 2000-01;.
? Flat revenues slowly rebounding as the economy improves with a negative adjustment
related to the Goleta Revenue Neutrality Agreement, whereby the County’s share of
certain sales and transient occupancy taxes expire in FY 2012-13. There will be a
positive revenue effect from the dissolution of the former Redevelopment Agencies
(RDA’s) however, the impact is not yet determinable and is therefore not reflected in
these projections.
This gap is ongoing and demonstrates that future costs exceed the available ongoing
discretionary revenue by $12.1 million in FY 2013-14 and by $18.3 million in FY 2016-17 as the
expenditures increase and as one-time sources cease to be available to support expenditure
levels. Closing the gap will require services to shrink, employees to be compensated less, and/or
new revenue sources to be created, from economic development, natural growth of the economy,
fee increases, and/or voter approved tax increases.
Forecast Revenue Detail
The revenue forecast projects that FY 2009-2010 marked the low point for local discretionary
revenues at $197.3 million. Modest increases in discretionary revenue have occurred since that
time and are expected to continue during the forecast period.
The nation fell into a recession in the second half of 2008 following the real estate market crash
and precipitated by the turmoil in the financial markets. California’s economy showed an even
more troubled trend. It is estimated that the economic recovery will continue; however, as a
result of the adjustment from the Goleta Revenue Neutrality Agreement, the net increase is
projected at 0.30% in FY 2012-13, increasing by 1.94% in FY 2013-14, 2.46% in FY 2014-15,
2.89% in FY 2015-16 and 3.29% in FY 2016-17.
Secured Property Taxes are the largest element of Discretionary Revenues and generally
represent 55% - 60% of total Discretionary Revenues. Over the past five years, annual increases
in the assessed value of properties have ranged from 0.5% to 4.6% percent and were 1.4% in FY
2011-12. Unlike other California jurisdictions, the County’s secured property tax did not
experience negative growth during the recent recession; however, this modest growth is not
keeping pace with increasing costs. The Recommended FY 2012-13 budget for Secured
Property Tax revenue is based on a 2.14% increase in Secured Property Tax from the FY 2011-12 estimate. The growth rate shows continued growth of 2% in FY 2013-14, strengthening to
2.5% in FY 2014-15, 3.0% growth in FY 2015-16 and 3.5% in FY 2016-17.
Unsecured and Unitary Property Taxes
Unsecured tax revenues have remained stable in recent years and are projected to rise modestly
over the coming years. The most significant variable is the level of activity of contractors for
various satellite ventures at Vandenberg Air Force Base. Changes here could cause fluctuations
in future unsecured property tax values, and thus future unsecured tax revenues. Unitary taxes –
which are based on State assessments of railroads, inter-county pipelines and communication
cables (including fiber optic) running through the County – have shown declines in the past four
years.
Supplemental Property Taxes and Property Transfer Taxes
Both revenues are directly dependent on property sales prices and the number of transactions.
Supplemental property taxes are based on existing assessed value compared to the sales price and
any new construction. Property transfer taxes are levied at $1.10 per $1,000 of the sales price of
the property transferred. Thus, they are a leading indicator of future secured property tax growth.
Supplemental property taxes are expected to begin recovery in FY 2012-13. The Property
Transfer Taxes are budgeted to grow based on the expectation of an increasing number of sales
and stabilizing sale prices. These taxes peaked in FY 2005-06 at approximately $14 million and
are projected to be about $4.5 million in FY 2012-13.
Retail Sales Tax
The sales tax began to rebound in late 2010 and early 2011, resulting in actual growth of 8.4% in
FY 2010-11. Solid growth continued in FY 2011-12 and is projected to be 8.0%. The FY 2012-
13 forecast shows a decrease of 10.8% reflecting the anticipated change in sales tax associated
with the City of Goleta Revenue Neutrality Agreement. Prior to FY 2012-13, the County
received 50% of the Retail Sales tax generated in the City of Goleta. Beginning in FY 2012-13
the County will receive 30% of retail sales. Sales tax growth projections will be on a smaller tax
base and therefore there will be a decrease in sales tax revenues. This Goleta Neutrality shift
results in an estimated net ongoing annual revenue loss beginning in FY 2012-13 of
approximately $1.1 million.
Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
This source of revenue is highly dependent on tourism and the availability of lodging in the
unincorporated County. The County experienced significant growth in the transient occupancy
tax revenue in FY 2010-11 of 17.3% and projects continued growth of 11.3% in FY 2011-12
Growth in TOT is anticipated to continue in FY 2012-13; however, this is more than offset by a
loss of revenue from the shift in the City of Goleta Revenue Neutrality Agreement. Therefore,
there will be a decrease in revenues as the growth rate will be applied to a smaller base. The
Goleta Neutrality shift results in a net ongoing annual revenue loss beginning in FY 2012-13 of
$1.38 million.
Property Tax In-lieu of Motor Vehicle License Fees
Prior to FY 2004-05, the County received a share of vehicle license fee revenues collected
statewide based on a population formula. Beginning with FY 2004-05, the State, as part of a
complicated revenue reduction and refunding plan, has replaced (swapped) this source with
property taxes. A portion of the property tax revenues that are taken from local governments to
fund schools are returned to cities and counties in lieu of vehicle license fees. From the FY 2004-
05 base, now adjusted, revenue growth is based on property tax growth. Thus, increases in these
revenues mirror secured property tax revenue projections.
Franchise Fees
About 45% of these revenues come from cable television franchises, the other 55% are from gas
and electric utilities. Franchise fee revenues are expected to remain flat in FY 2012-13 and
modestly increase beginning in FY 2013-14.
Interest Income
Interest income earnings are volatile and are based on the amount of cash in the treasury and the
interest rate earned. Interest earnings have decreased in recent years due to declining interest
rates; however, the actual cash balances have been modestly increasing. This projection assumes
a stable State budget, no further reduction to the interest rate and continued modest improvement
of cash balances.
Other Revenues
This category has four main components: 1) State payments, other than payments in lieu of
vehicle fees, 2) cost allocation use allowance revenue (internal charges) for structure and
equipment use, 3) federal payments in lieu of property taxes, and 4) property tax delinquency
penalties. State payments averaged $1.6 million a year until Williamson Act subventions were
reduced. The forecast assumes these revenues, annually approximating $600 thousand, will not
return. Federal payments have been flat and are about $1.6 million annually. Cost allocation use
allowance revenue fluctuates between $1.1 and $2.3 million. For planning purposes, cost
allocation revenue estimates are at the low end of this range. Property tax delinquency penalties
are anticipated to drop in FY 2012-13 and continue to decrease in the forecast period. Together,
these and the remaining revenues that comprise the category of Other Revenues generate
approximately $8.9 million per year and are projected to remain relatively flat over the forecast
period.
Forecast Expenditure Detail
The expenditure forecast depicts how the local discretionary revenue is anticipated to be
required. Local discretionary revenue is primarily spent as base budgets, for General Fund
departments, to fund operations. The remaining local discretionary revenue is either designated
for one-time needs or used to fund maintenance of effort requirements for non-General Fund departments. The forecast is comprised of three categories: 1) non-salary cost increases, 2)
maintenance of effort increases, and 3) salary and benefit increases.
Total local discretionary revenue is appropriated in three broad ways. First, in FY 2012-13 the
base budget for General Fund departments (the General Fund target) totals $165.3 million.
Second, the budget earmarks $3.9 million for certain future uses including deferred maintenance,
Board contingency, a designation for future capital projects, and a designation for future jail
operations. Third, the remaining $29.3 million available in local discretionary revenue is
recommended to be appropriated for maintenance of effort requirements or payments to a non-
General Fund department for specific services, such as local match for transportation funding in
the Road Fund.
The Five-year Expenditure Projections table (Figure 6) includes actual and projected numbers.
Actual amounts are included for FY 2009-10 through FY2010-11 and budgeted figures are
presented for FY 2011-12 and FY 2012-13 (FY 2012-13 is the Recommended Budget). These
figures are shown to the left of the vertical double line while forecast projections are to the right
of the double line. The top portion of the table includes aggregate numbers of the three uses of
discretionary revenue. The bottom portion of this table details the major components of Non-
Salary and Salary related costs.
? Cost of maintaining the Fire department’s level of service,
? Anticipated certificate of participation (COP) payments for the north County jail
construction costs
? Operating costs of the new north County jail, and
? Funding for ADMHS not related to current year maintenance of effort requirements.
The Fire Department’s current level of service is not sustainable with existing funding sources,
contracted salary increases and anticipated additional cost of benefits. This is confirmed by the
Fire Department’s analysis and a report prepared by an independent consultant, Citygate.
Beyond existing service levels, the Citygate report detailed areas of additional staffing, facilities
and equipment that they recommend should be expanded. The Board has directed that the
County Executive Officer (CEO) evaluate an increase in funding for the Fire Department from or
tied to property taxes such that funding would increase as property values recover. This “tax
exchange” is currently being investigated and is not complete at the time of this writing;
therefore, an estimated increase in funding of $600 thousand per year is projected in FY 2013-14
forward to reflect the Board’s request. This adjustment assumes that $5.9 million of General
Fund would be replaced by property tax revenues. In the meantime, the Fire Department has
made certain service reductions to balance FY 2012-13; including the removal of Engine 11 in
Goleta; reduced a fire fighter at Station 22 (Orcutt) and a fire engineer/paramedic at Station 51
(Lompoc). The above reductions, totaling approximately $2.3 million are included in the FY
2012-13 recommended budget figures.
The construction of the north County jail is expected to be funded by a combination of State and
local funding. State funding is projected to be $80 million and local funding is planned to be $15
million (local funding includes $5.7 million already spent, primarily on the land). The State
grant has been approved in the amount of $60 million and it is anticipated that an additional
award of $20 million will be forthcoming. Based on these assumptions, debt service for the
County’s local match is projected to begin in FY 2015-16 in the amount of $860,000.
In addition to the construction costs mentioned above, the annual costs to operate the new jail are
projected to be $17 million. In order to establish such a significant annual General Fund
allocation, the Board of Supervisors adopted a Budget Policy in FY 2011-12 to establish an
incrementally increasing annual General Fund Contribution to this jail operating fund. A
schedule of the planned operating debt service payments is included later in this section.
There is no allocation of additional General Fund for Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services
(ADMHS); however, it is an area of potential exposure and is discussed further in this section.
Salary and Benefit Changes
The bottom section of Figure 6 details the major categories of Salary and Benefit changes which
include anticipated personnel related expenditures. They are determined based on negotiated
Memoranda of Understanding (MOU), health insurance and retirement benefit cost projections,
and mandated costs such as Social Security contributions. Additionally, the County is currently
funding certain Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) related to providing medical coverage
to retirees. The assumptions behind these increases include:
? Salaries for FY 2012-13 and 2013-14 are based on detailed positions by department (salary
model), existing wages, concessions (temporary and permanent) and any scheduled wage
increases per MOU with the various bargaining units. These wage increases will primarily
come into effect in FY 2013-14 as concessions expire. Salary cost estimates for FY 2012-
13 and FY 2013-14 of this forecast incorporate current terms of negotiated MOU. The chart
below lists the expiration dates of the MOU by Employee Organization. The County is
currently engaged in concession bargaining with the four safety groups below and the one
non-safety group with an expired contract. Executive and management salaries have been
subject to a wage freeze since January 2008.
No enhancements of health or retirement benefits are projected; however, retirement costs,
especially those for public safety members, are projected to increase based on the most
recent actuarial report. See description of retirement costs on the next page.
? All costs associated with salaries and benefits beyond FY 2013-14 are projected to be
relatively flat and are projected at an annual increase of 3%.
The employer’s share of retirement costs are set by the independent Board of Retirement
(SBCERS) and paid by the County. The annual County Contribution has increased by $85.4
million or 228% over the past ten years (see Figure 8). The investment losses during FY 2008-
09 had a huge impact on FY’s 2010-11 through 2013-14 retirement rates as these losses needed
to be absorbed into the ongoing rates. Smoothing formulas have enabled the rates to increase
incrementally during these periods. At the same time, the projected rate of return included in the
actuarial assumptions was reduced from 8.16% in FY 2010-11 to 7.75% for FYs 2011-13.
While some ameliorative measures were recently approved: such as keeping the assumed rate of
return at 7.75% for FY 2013-14, the Retirement Board has the sole authority to set rates and the
actual impact on the FY 2013-14 rates will not be known until after FY 2011-12 is closed and
the actuarial valuation study is complete. Moreover, these measures add to the total cost of the
system’s debt and ultimately must be paid. The Board of Retirement’s annual actuarial valuation study may include unforeseen costs due to market returns and the effects of demographic
changes that are not reflected in these projections. The Board of Supervisors approved a new
retirement plan for General Members with a hire date on or after June 25, 2012 which will
ultimately reduce future retirement costs.
In September 2008, the County and the Retirement System adopted an Internal Revenue
Code Section 401(h) account that provides for Other Post Employment Benefits with the
County currently assuming a portion of the costs of retiree medical coverage, dependent
upon years of service. The County’s defined benefit postemployment healthcare plan
(OPEB Plan) provides medical benefits to eligible retired County employees and their
beneficiaries pursuant to California Government Code Section 31694 et. seq. Pursuant to
the OPEB Plan, the Board of Supervisors has determined to provide a monthly insurance
premium subsidy from the 401(h) Account for Eligible Retired Participants participating in
a County sponsored health insurance plan in the amount of $15 per year of credited service
or $4 per year of credited service for those not enrolled in a County health plan. The
County is required to calculate and record the annual required contribution of the employer,
an amount actuarially determined. The contribution represents a level of funding that, if
paid on an ongoing basis, is projected to cover normal cost each year and amortize any
unfunded actuarial liabilities over a period of fifteen years. The County contribution
consists of two components: 1) the normal cost for the year for current active employees,
and 2) a component for amortization of the total unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities
(UAAL) of the OPEB Plan consisting of current retirees, current vested terminated, and
current active employees. This forecast assumes increasing General Fund Contributions to
meet these contribution requirements. The cost of OPEB is expected to increase 7%
annually for current plans. The retiree medical program is eliminated for General Plan
members hired on or after June 25, 2012, which will incrementally reduce the County’s
costs over time.
Appropriation of Prior Year Revenue: The cost to maintain services at a level
approximating FY 2011-12, required the use of one-time local discretionary department
reserves or fund balances. This strategy has enabled the County to retain a higher service
level during years where the growth in expenditures exceeded the revenue growth.
Departments employing this strategy include the departments of Public Health, Social
Services, Housing and Community Development, County Counsel, Clerk Recorder-
Assessor, Parks, the Public Defender, District Attorney, Probation, and Sheriff. Through
concessions and departmental savings, it is recommended that the General Fund backfill
50% of previously identified one-time funding for ongoing services to prevent further
service level reductions. This change is the reason for the reduction in use of prior year
revenue in FY 2012-13 but results in a higher level of General Fund Contribution.
The maintenance of effort increases are projections of required local match for Public Health,
Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services, Social Services, Public Works-Road Fund plus
projections for the courts facilities mandate.
Investing in the Future
In recognition of continued expenditure growth outpacing revenue growth, strong fiscal planning
is crucial to ensure core services can be maintained over the next several years. There are three
areas that may require significant funding in the coming budgets.
Fire – Maintaining and Improving Current Service
The Citygate Report on Fire Department Operations found that current revenue sources are not
projected to rise fast enough to keep up with the rising cost of providing the current level of fire
services. Further, the Report indicates that unless new sources of revenue are developed for the
Department expenditures will exceed revenue by an aggregate of $14.8 million by FY 2015-16.
Funding for a large number of capital projects has not been identified.
The Citygate Report identified the immediate, near term and long-term needs of the Fire
Department as:
? Immediate: $1.8 million in FY2012-13, increasing to an average of $4.0 million per
year over the three following years just to maintain the current operation;
? Near-term: $12.1 million per year to implement the enhanced operational and support
staffing identified in the Citygate Report as Phases 1-3 (excluding capital); and
? Long-term: Capital needs of $89 million, identified as Phases 1-3 which were
estimated to require $6 million per year in annual debt service payments to implement.
The Citygate Report states that there is not enough revenue flow in the near-term economy to
address the fiscal needs without serious adjustments in the County’s budget priorities. The
report also emphasizes that no single revenue enhancement strategy will be able to meet all of
the operating needs. The same multi-prong approach is going to be required to address the
current Capital Improvement Plan needs listed at approximately $89 million.
The Board requested additional revenue options including a tax transfer from the County General
Fund to the Fire District to provide sufficient resources for current and enhanced levels of
service proposed in the Citygate report as revised by the Fire Chief before the Board on April 10,
2012. The transfer would replace the Fire District’s General Fund contribution with a tax base
and a portion of the tax increment (20% or 25%) until the Fire District share reaches 16-17%.
This additional revenue level will not be a permanent solution to meeting the continued cost
increases in the Fire Department.
An illustration of the possible increased funding for the Fire District, assuming the transfer of an
amount equivalent to 20% of the incremental property tax growth is shown in figure 9 below.
Sheriff – New North County Jail
Public safety is one of the Board of Supervisors’ core values and the need for a new jail has been
well documented over the past two decades. This budget proposes a solution that will set aside
General Fund discretionary revenue over a period of ten years to fund future jail operations with
a goal of the jail becoming operational in FY 2017-18 (see Figure 10). The FY 2012-13
recommended budget includes a $2 million set-aside for future jail operations.
Alcohol, Drug and Mental Health Services (ADMHS)
The majority of revenues in ADMHS have historically been related to Medi-Cal services. The
State reporting, claiming and reimbursement system for Medi-Cal is very complex and subject to
significant adjustment long after the end of the budgeted fiscal year. As a result, ADMHS has
incurred significant unbudgeted costs over the past decade. During FY 2007-08, the Department
estimated existing and potential liabilities spanning multiple years at approximately $30 million.
These included self-disclosed billing practices, outstanding Medi-Cal settlements and a State
disallowance of certain children’s mental health programs, the Counseling and Education
Centers (CEC) and the Multi-agency Integrated System of Care (MISC).
Starting in FY 2008-09, ADMHS worked to improve systems, business practices and to develop
a greater depth of staff to more accurately report and budget for Medi-Cal costs and the related
revenues. In April 2012, a negotiated settlement between the County and State was reached on
audit disallowances assessed for FY 2002-03 through FY 2005-06 and the County is now due a
refund of approximately $5 million. While progress has been made, the improvements were
hampered by a new and untested claiming system installed by ADMHS in July 2007 and the
State’s installation of a new and not fully tested claiming system in December 2009.
The Department had modest operating losses in FY 2008-09 through 2010-11 but is projecting a
significant unfavorable variance in FY 2011-12. The 2011-12 loss reflects a combination of
what are considered one-time issues and ongoing issues (primarily uninsured inpatient services).
Acknowledging the complexity of these issues, the County is in the process of utilizing
specialized consultants to review current systems, practices and staffing to identify weaknesses
and opportunities for improvement. Additionally, there remains the risk of ongoing State audit
adjustments long after the end of a given fiscal year and therefore the establishment of reserves
for such potential liabilities will be considered in the coming year.
Closing Comments
The County Executive Officer recommends that any new funding that becomes available in FY
2011-12 or 2012-13, such as unanticipated growth in ongoing revenue streams like property and
sales taxes, be used to reduce the one-time fund use and fund deferred maintenance projects.
The cycle of service reductions is not sustainable for the long-term and therefore the priority
must be to reduce the structural deficit as opportunities present themselves during the year,
including revenue enhancements resulting from economic vitality and resident supported tax
increases. Additionally the County must continue to provide core services and seek efficiencies
wherever possible. Core services will focus on maintaining public safety, protecting our children
and families and supporting sustainable communities.
Guiding Principles
Santa Barbara County’s Strategic Plan is the overarching guide that defines and measures the
expected results of County government services as illustrated in Figure 7. It includes six General
Goals, three Organizational Values and six broad Policy Plan Areas that enable the County to
focus on its priorities. The departmental budget pages (Section D) describe current year
accomplishments and alignment of services to the six General Goals. The Goals were initially
adopted by the Board of Supervisors on April 21, 1998 and revised on November 21, 2006 and
include:
Goal 1: EFFICIENT AND RESPONSIVE GOVERNMENT: An efficient
professionally managed government able to anticipate and to effectively respond to the
needs of the community;
Goal 2: HEALTH AND SAFETY: Safe and healthy communities in which to live,
work, and visit;
Goal 3: ECONOMIC VITALITY: A community that is economically vital &
sustainable;
Goal 4: QUALITY OF LIFE: A high quality of life for all residents;
Goal 5: CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT: A County government that is accessible, open,
and citizen-friendly; and
Goal 6: FAMILIES AND CHILDREN: A community that fosters the safety and
well-being of families and children.
Organizational Values of accountability, customer service, and efficiency (“ACE”) are a critical
component of the Strategic Plan and represent important principles that embody a work ethic that
is embedded within all County efforts. While the context for public policy is constantly
evolving, the organization’s values reflect the fixed ideals of ethical public service.
