Dear Members of the Board:
This letter transmits the County Administrative Officer's Fiscal Year 2012-13 Proposed Budget
for your consideration during Budget Hearings which are scheduled for June 18 through June
28, 2012. The Proposed 2012-13 Budget totals $595 million, an overall reduction of $23.8
million, due mainly to the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency. The total General Fund
budget is $387 million, which reflects overall reductions in costs offset by the reduction of
furloughs and the addition of new programming such as Public Safety Realignment (AB 109)
and the Low Income Health Care Program.
A total of 2,295.8 positions are recommended which reflects a net increase of 2.85 positions.
This increase consists of various deletions offset by a total of 18.25 positions added and funded
to implement Public Safety Realignment.
201??13COUNTY BUDGET
The Proposed County Budget for 2012-13 reflects a fifth difficult year due to the sluggish
economy. The General Fund is particularly constrained and relies on the use of available onetime
resources. Despite these difficulties, this recommended budget is balanced, conforms to all
applicable requirements, is based on realistic revenue and expenditure projections, and
complies with the County General Fund Budgeting Principles. These recommendations prioritize
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the County and the preservation of the quality
of life in the County and its environments.In January 2012, the County deficit projection for 2012-13 was $17.3 million if furloughs were
eliminated. Reductions in the Proposed Budget are largely accomplished through the following
actions:
• A continued reduction in payroll costs of approximately $5.7 million through negotiated
furloughs which range from 4.62% to 5.2% in 2012-13. The continuation of the
temporary layoff or furlough minimizes position and program reductions and helps
address the County's overall deficit,
• Budget reductions of approximately 15% to Net County Cost in most County
departments and programs, with the additional requirement that departments absorb any
cost increases,
• Changes in fees and charges to reflect the actual cost of doing business, and
• Reliance on fund balance to alleviate the need for additional reductions.
For the 2012-13 Budget, all County departments rigorously prioritized their staffing and
o perational needs to address the County's shortfalls and reduced their Net County Cost figures
wherever possible.
2012-13 STATE BUDGET
Economic data currently is providing mixed signals to California's policymakers, as they
continue to craft a State Budget in a constrained fiscal environment. California's economy on
some levels now appears to be somewhat better. Nevertheless, significant impediments block
the State's path to a more robust recovery from the recent, staggering economic downturn.
The Governor's administration estimated in January 2012 that the Legislature and the Governor
would need to address a budget problem of $9.2 billion by the start of the 2012-13 fiscal year.
The cornerstone of the Governor's 2012-13 Budget plan is its assumption that voters will
approve a temporary increase in income and sales taxes through an initiative that the Governor
has proposed for the November 2012 ballot. The administration estimates the initiative would
increase State revenues by $6.9 billion by the end of 2012-13, and generate billions of dollars
per year until its taxes expire at the end of 2016. The taxes would be deposited to the General
Fund to pay for the State's Proposition 98 school funding obligations, as increased by the
initiative, and to help balance the budget by paying for other State programs. The Governor also
proposes significant reductions to social services and child care programs and additional State
borrowing.
The administration estimated the Governor's plan would leave the State with a $1.1 billion
reserve at the end of 2012-13 and balanced annual budgets for the next few years. However,
according to the mid-April update from the Legislative Analyst's Office, State income and
corporation taxes will return over $2 billion less than recent estimates. If accurate, this would
increase the State's current and next budget year combined deficit to over $11 billion.
The Governor's proposal requests that the Legislature approve $5.4 billion of "trigger cuts" to
take effect on January 1, 2013, if voters do not approve the Governor's tax initiative. Proposition
98 funding for schools and community colleges would bear the brunt of these trigger cuts: $4.8
billion (90 percent) of the total.
In a May 1, 2012, report, Standard and Poor's noted that personal income tax collections in
California fell well below State Budget assumptions and that the Superior Court has determined

that the State Controller cannot withhold legislative pay based on budget quality. Standard and
Poor's cautioned that these two developments could "allow the State Legislature to rely on
questionable fiscal assumptions while still complying with the constitutional mandate for a timely
and balanced budget." Although the ratings agency continues to believe that State lawmakers
could pursue a budget structure that extends the progress made on this front, they believe that
the larger deficit and the practical implications of the court's decision will test the legislature's
commitment to a stronger fiscal position as a public policy priority. The State's current rating of
A- is the lowest of any state.
The Governor's Revised Budget will be released in mid-May. Reduced personal income tax
revenues foreshadow another year of very difficult budget negotiations. Although the currently
identified "trigger cuts" primarily target education, it is entirely possible that the Legislature will
cut funding to programs carried out by Counties. We will return to your Board with information
when the details of the State Budget are known.
Redevelopment Agency
As your Board is aware, on February 1, 2012, all Redevelopment Agencies in California were
dissolved and the process for unwinding their financial affairs began. Given the scope of these
agencies' funds, assets, and financial obligations, the unwinding process will take time. County
Auditor-Controllers are required to allocate and distribute residual property tax revenues to
taxing entities as a result of the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency. Unfortunately, the
law is confusing and conflicting in regards to how the residual is to be distributed. There are two
predominant positions on how to distribute the residual, one described by the Department of
Finance and the other by the Legislative Analyst Office (LAO). The Department of Finance
method leaves passthroughs in place and distributes just the residual. The LAO method
distributes the residual plus the passthroughs in proportion to each taxing entity's pro-rata share
in the redevelopment tax rate areas and results in taxing entities throughout the State receiving
a "haircut" on their passthroughs.
Should the LAO method of residual property tax distribution be determined correct, the County's
share of property taxes for 2011-12 and 2012-13 combined could be reduced by as much as
$5.7 million. Simply put, the loss of these general purpose revenues would be catastrophic. To
develop a balanced budget under those circumstances could bring budgeted reserves below the
level adopted by your Board and could require inconceivable reductions to County staff,
programs, and operations. For 2012-13, reserves are budgeted at 7% in accordance with your
Board's adopted policy regarding reserves.
The Auditor-Controller has prepared estimates under both Department of Finance and
Legislative Analyst Office interpretations of the language regarding the distribution of the
Redevelopment Agency residual property tax revenues. The first residual property tax
distribution is required by June 151• Until that time, this office will work with the Auditor-Controller
and County Counsel to determine the impact on the General Fund 2011-12 and 2012-13
budgets.

Information on significant changes to departments and programs recommended for 2012-13 are
presented below.
Redevelopment Agency: In February 201, the Redevelopment Agency was dissolved and the
Redevelopment Successor Agency (RSA) is now responsible for the winding down of the affairs
of the former Redevelopment Agency, including payment of all enforceable obligations and
disposition of assets. Activities are managed by one staff person and financed by remaining tax
increment funds and bond proceeds, and by property taxes allocated by the Auditor-Controller
in an amount not exceeding the amount of the RSA's enforceable obligations for the fiscal year.
The Redevelopment Successor reports to a separate Oversight Board consisting of appointed
community stakeholders, including elected officials and representatives from a variety of
governmental organizations.
Public Safety Realignment: The County's criminal justice departments and their public safety
partners are working together to respond to the realignment of non-violent offenders and the
adult parole program to the counties for local supervision, imprisonment, and rehabilitation
under Public Safety Realignment (AB 109), implemented in October 2011. As of May 2012, the
Sheriff's Office had received and was housing 57 long-term inmates sentenced under Public
Safety Realignment. As of April 2012, the Probation Department had received 67 individuals
under post-release community supervision upon their release from prison. 

Low Income Health Program: Beginning in January 2012, HSA has expanded indigent health
care through the Low Income Health Program (LIHP), which is the "Bridge to Reform" of the
State's Medi-Cal 1115 Waiver demonstration project. The LIHP, known locally as the MediCruz
Advantage program, allows leveraging of federal matching funds for qualified health services to
eligible clients. Among the goals of the program are the provision of high quality, coordinated,
cost effective, and efficient physical and behavioral health care to those in need. To date, 1,407
applications have been approved.
Parks Department: In 2011-12, oversight of the Parks, Open Spaces and Cultural Services
Department was temporarily assigned to the Department of Public Works and will continue for
another year. Operational efficiencies achieved along with increased revenues through better
cost recovery will result in improved operations in 2012-13, including 320 additional public pool
hours and a 7-day-a-week operation in the summer season. Additional programs implemented
in fiscal year 2011-12 will continue in 2012-13, including a second Junior Guards program, a
new Little Guards program and spring pool camp, winter swim lessons, an additional summer
camp at Quail Hollow and increased availability of Quail Hollow Ranch for wedding and other
public gatherings. There are no reductions in staff recommended for the Parks Division.
Assessor, Auditor, Treasurer-Tax Collector and the Information Services Department: will
implement the new Property Tax System during fiscal year 2012-13. In addition, the Recorder
plans to expand E-Recording to non-governmental customers during fiscal year 2012-13 and
will continue to convert vital records to digital images and conserve the integrity of historical
documents through restoration and imaging. These systems are intended to achieve financial
efficiencies in the future.
Planning Department: After three years of constant budget cuts and the loss of nearly 37
employees, the Planning Department is beginning to see a slight increase in activity. The fiscal
year 2012-13 budget continues the reorganization activities begun two years ago. The Planning
Department budget also includes the new Housing Successor Agency resulting from your
Board's January 10, 2012 election to assume the assets, obligations and responsibilities of the
former RDA Housing Program, which allows for continued funding of affordable housing staff
and activities.
Personnel Department: As a cost savings measure, the department will be implementing
online sexual harassment prevention training. The department will also re-establish the County
Training Program.
The County Clerk's recommended budget for the Elections Department includes investments
to streamline operations, including an Intelligent Recognition Code (ICR) software system that
will permit most voter registration cards to be entered into the voter file electronically, an
application which allows voters to access election information by smart phone, and a Ballot On
Demand system designed to print ballots on an as-needed basis. All these investments will
recoup their costs in the short term through savings in staffing, printing, and supplies.
District Attorney: The recommended budget for the District Attorney's Office continues support
for the Santa Cruz County Anti-Crime Team (SCCACT) which was formed in collaboration with
allied agencies to address community concerns about gang violence, drugs and other violent
crimes, the North County Broad-based A pprehension, Suppression and Treatment Alternatives
Program (BASTA), the Criminal Justice Council, and, in coordination with the Sheriff's Office,
the county-wide Gang Task Force.

Based on the current economic realities, the 2012-13 Budget foreshadows the need for
continued constraint this year and into the future. The County's structural changes over the last
four years along with the use of one-time funding sources, have allowed us to achieve a
balanced budget while maintaining core services. To have continued providing these services
with the constricted resources of the past four years has required careful management by all
County employees, including department heads, managers, supervisors, and staff. I would like
to take this opportunity once again to thank them all for their efforts to continue providing these
vital services to our community under these difficult circumstances.
The recommendations set forth below do not represent adoption of the County Budget, but the
approval of the budget estimates as a basis for full consideration at the time of final budget
hearings scheduled to begin on June 18,2012.
IT IS THEREFORE RECOMMENDED that your Board approve the figures in this document as
those that constitute the Proposed County Budget for 2012-13, order publication of the required
notices, and set June 18, 2012 as the date the Public Hearings on the 2012-13 Proposed
County Budget will begin.