After eleven consecutive years of debilitating reductions, it is a great relief to be able to present a recommended budget that focuses on maintaining services and building capacity within the County. This financial plan is built upon the collaboration of labor and the Board of Supervisors in order to reduce the cost of a unit of service and maintain services across the County.
Entering FY 2013 having achieved $75 million in concessions from our union partners is critically important. This effort has allowed us to present this “maintenance” budget to the Board of Supervisors. Clearly, this is an important demonstration of the willingness of County employees and labor to work together with management to address the need to create a financially sustainable County in the new economic reality. It is important to recognize that there are still many threats on the horizon, including rising retirement costs, instability at the State and Federal levels, and a health care landscape that is creating significant challenges for Valley Medical Center. Any of these threats could impact us if they are not resolved in a way that avoids harsh outcomes for local government.
A Welcome Respite from Deficits
By solving our FY 2012 deficit with ongoing
solutions, we prevented an automatic deficit from
being created in FY 2013, a break in the pattern of
the last 10 years. This approach, coupled with a
stabilizing economy, has allowed the
Administration to develop this maintenance
budget. Reaching this likely short-lived period of
stability is a critical achievement when you
honestly look at the harm ten consecutive years
and $2 billion in gap-closing actions have inflicted
on the County organization. This respite will allow
the organization to heal and embrace many of the
initiatives that have been introduced by the Center
for Leadership and Transformation (CLT)
throughout the organization. These initiatives will
improve service to clients, work processes and
procedures, increase efficiency and effectiveness,
and enhance revenue collections. We are
committed to these efforts because business as
usual will not result in the outcomes that we or the
public are expecting. We are enormously proud of
the great work that has been done by the County in
the past. However, with the changing world around
us, we must also change in order to meet the needs
and imperatives of a new world. Although change
can be threatening to some, it is clearly necessary if
we are to survive in today's “new normal”
environment.
As we develop our roadmap for the future we must hold fast to the mission of the County. The mission statement the Board of Supervisors adopted in 2009 reaffirms the commitment to plan for the needs of a dynamic community, provide quality services, and promote a healthy, safe and

prosperous community for all. As we have developed our financial plan for FY 2013 and beyond we have made decisions that recognize this mission statement and the core values that are critical to the mission:
¦ Demonstrate ethical conduct reflecting
honesty and integrity
¦ Commit to efficient, effective, quality service
¦ Value the community
¦ Uphold our fiscal responsibility
¦ Exhibit mutual respect
¦ Encourage innovation and flexibility
These important statements need to be rewoven into the cloth of the County culture. Coupled with the fact that our workforce has changed considerably, ten years of deficits and the stresses and strains of doing more with less have created a set of circumstances that have obscured the County's mission and core value statements. An important aspect of this maintenance year is being able to focus on these important ideals and make sure they are understood by all members of the County organization, from the line level to the executive leadership. By embracing these values together, the ability of the organization to achieve goals and work through what will be difficult years in the future will be greatly improved.
Rebuilding the Infrastructure
An important benefit of this maintenance budget is
our ability to address critical needs in both the
physical and financial infrastructure of County
government. In order to be prepared for the “new
normal,” we must start with a strong foundation.
However, that foundation has been damaged in the
past.
Over the past ten years, faced with constant General Fund deficits, the Administration and Board have worked hard to limit the impact of expenditure reductions upon direct services. This strategy was very appropriate given the clearly documented needs of our clients in the community

and the importance of maintaining the safety net during difficult economic times. With this in mind, our investments in technology and our physical infrastructure have declined significantly. In addition, we have reduced our payments to benefit programs like retiree health in an attempt to limit impacts on direct services. Retiree Health Funding
Ten years ago Santa Clara County was unique in
that we were one of few jurisdictions that funded
our retiree health liabilities on an actuarial basis.
During the past ten years we have been unable to
maintain this commitment and as a result, our
unfunded actuarial accrued liability in this
program as of 6/30/2011 had risen to $1.78 billion.
In the past two years we have reduced our funding of the normal cost of retiree health to 50% of the requirement in order to preserve resources for direct services. For FY 2013, we recommend an increase of the ongoing commitment to 75% of normal cost, committing to fund 100% of the cost by allocating funds from the retiree health trust fund for the other 25%.
Our current best estimate of the funding required for FY 2013 is reflected in Table 1. We continue to work with our actuarial advisors and it may be necessary to revise this funding estimate at the June Budget Hearing.

In FY 2010, in order to provide us with the needed flexibility to maintain our cash balances, we stopped drawing from the retiree health trust fund

to cover these expenses. Although our cash position remains a concern, circumstances have improved, and we believe it is prudent to begin slowly drawing down these trust fund reserves to meet our commitments in this area. Table 2 is taken from the most recent actuarial review of our retiree health program, and presents the reality we are facing in funding this important benefit program.

Investment in Information Technology
The second priority that we are addressing in this
budget is our physical infrastructure, including
technology. In this budget we are recommending
that the County issue $100 million in technology
bonds to support the implementation of the EPIC
core health information system (HIS) at Santa
Clara Valley Medical Center, and other technology
needs. It is critical that this investment be made to
allow SCVMC to utilize electronic medical records
and other commonly used technology to increase
efficiency and enhance our ability to deliver high
quality medical services. The implementation of
the EPIC system will require an investment of
$200 million over ten years but will generate
savings and efficiencies that will exceed our
investment. The EPIC implementation is one of the
key components to keeping SCVMC competitive
and financially viable in the ever-changing health
care financing environment.
In addition to funding the up-front costs of EPIC, we will also use $20 million of the technology bond proceeds to address other essential technology needs throughout the County. I recommend that the $20 million be allocated to the enterprise operations reflected in Table 3, all of which are functioning on equipment at or near the end of life.

Our dependence on technology is increasing, and our investments in the Information Services Department (ISD) and equipment utilized throughout the County have not kept pace. During the last ten years of reductions, ISD contributed $16 million in solutions and lost 57 staff, a reduction of 23% over this ten year timeframe. As we become more dependent on technology, it is clear that ISD is a critical function within our infrastructure that must be built back in a way that enables the provision of adequate support to departments and generates solutions that can improve the efficiency and quality of our services.
In terms of ongoing resources we are beginning the process of rebuilding ISD with an allocation of $4.1 million for additional staff resources, maintenance and new software tools. This is a large commitment in a maintenance year, but one that we feel is essential to rebuild this crucial support structure for all of County government. In addition to the technology bonds that will support equipment costs, we are also recommending the allocation of $1.5 million to support the Assessor's PAAMS project, an upgrade of the KRONOS timekeeping system, and resources to assess three systems in County departments (Probation, Department of Correction, and Planning & Development). 

We are also recommending a significant allocation
to the capital budget to make some progress in
maintaining our facility infrastructure and meet
other important major maintenance needs. As in
prior years we are recommending to continue an
allocation of $5 million toward the maintenance
and repair backlog, and an additional $3.5 million
to replace the HVAC system in the Elmwood
Support buildings, among other projects. We are
also recommending $1 million to support the
Board's priority of investing in energy savings
projects. Although this allocation is substantially
less than the $42.5 million requested, the total
allocation of $13.75 million is a substantial
investment in this very important area. 

Reserves
Consistent with our core value of upholding our
fiscal responsibility, this budget retains the
Contingency Reserve at 5% of General Fund
revenues, net of pass-throughs, or $96.65 million. In
addition, we have also set aside a Reserve for
Economic Uncertainties of $10 million. This
reserve is funded with ongoing funds, and has been
established to address any impacts that result from
State or Federal budget actions, given the
significant uncertainty associated with the
November election. An additional $2.9 million
reserve, funded with one-time resources, is
recommended as a reserve for cash. 

Finally, this budget will fully repay the retiree health trust fund in the amount of $11.4 million for the loan used to acquire the San Jose Medical Center property.
Risks and Threats to the County Budget
Our ability to address these infrastructure needs is
critical in attaining a financially sustainable county.
At the same time, this budget will also allow for a
limited number of enhancements and restorations
to address reductions made in the past that are
straining the organization. These improvements
will be highlighted in a later section of this
message.
Concurrently, it is also important to recognize the risks and threats that continue to plague our financial outlook. Some of these threats are economic and local, while others are based on decisions that are being made at other levels of government.
Healthcare Reform and SCVMC
As mentioned previously, Valley Medical Center is
facing significant challenges relating to economic
conditions and the uncertainty regarding
healthcare reform. We are working hard to prepare
for the changes that have already started in
healthcare, and are due to change again
dramatically in 2014. Recognizing that a decision
by the U.S. Supreme Court could send Federal
health care financing into chaos, the risk to Valley
Medical Center and the County in the near future is
considerable. This level of uncertainty is unsettling
to say the least, considering the amount of
preparation that has gone into meeting the Federal
requirements associated with healthcare reform.
What we do know is that Valley Medical Center has had a very difficult year. As FY 2012 unfolded, monthly financial reports revealed that VMC would generate a $60 million deficit. The Administration developed a plan to address this shortfall through changes in the scheduling of clinics and significantly increasing access to our healthcare system. At the same time, the Board approved bridge financing of $30 million from the  General Fund with the assumption that changes made in the second half of FY 2012 would annualize in FY 2013 and result in a balanced budget. The operational changes that have been made are beginning to show some results.
At this point in time we are projecting that significant improvements will result in additional inpatient and outpatient revenue. Although these recommendations may appear to be a “business as usual” approach from prior years, significant operational changes are underway, and we have more confidence that related revenues can be realized. The SCVMC budget plan also includes non-revenue components, including the elimination of vacant positions and other operational changes.
I do not believe a wholesale restructuring of the institution is warranted at this time, as changes underway are beginning to show results. It is important to note that if the revenues do not materialize as projected, I have directed the development of a “Plan B” that is already under development and would result in substantial reorganization of the health system. I am quite confident that we will be able to avoid this eventuality. However, we must be prepared for all options. If necessary, “Plan B” will be fully discussed in the Health and Hospital Committee and before the full Board in the fall if the changes discussed above do not result in SCVMC being able to achieve a positive financial balance in FY 2013.
Local Risks and Concerns
Other local concerns revolve around the County
being successful in negotiating concessions with
the remaining bargaining units whose contracts
are open in FY 2013. The value of these necessary
concessions totals approximately $15 million and
requires agreements with units that include the
Registered Nurses Professional Association and the
Deputy Sheriff's Association. The recommended
budget assumes these savings and they must be
achieved to retain the integrity of $75 million in
total salary and benefit savings assumed in this
budget.
In addition to the retiree health funding concerns discussed earlier in this message, another benefit issue that will result in increased costs in the future is the change in the assumed discount rate utilized by CalPERS. The reduction in the rate from 7.75% to 7.5% will result in increased contributions that will eventually total $36 million annually. CalPERS has indicated that this additional cost will be spread over three years, but this will still result in a $12 million impact in FY 2014, $24 million in FY 2015 and $36 million in FY 2016. The magnitude of these increases must factor into our labor negotiations, set to reopen again in the spring of 2013. We must find ways to reduce the cost of providing a unit of service if we are going to maintain any stability in our budget in the future.
State and Federal Issues
The last area of risk is the result of our reliance on
State and Federal assistance. In FY 2013, Santa
Clara County will receive over 50% of its revenue
from Sacramento and Washington, D.C. This
reliance creates significant risk in this period of
economic uncertainty. At both the State and
Federal levels, lawmakers are contemplating
solutions to address their respective budget
deficits. While the specific impacts on the County
will not be known for some time, possibly not until
mid-FY 2013, it is reasonable to assume that future
State and Federal funding to the County will be
reduced.
At the State level, the Governor has proposed various changes to social services, which would affect the County's clients, and cuts to health programs, affecting both clients and the County. In the health area, a large cut to the Medi-Cal and Federal Qualified Health Center (FQHC) programs has been recommended, with unknown impacts to the County. If the Legislature rejects these cuts, they will be forced to identify alternative savings, with a limited range of options to choose from.
At the Federal level, the County is likely to be affected by two issues, passage of the Federal budget and the implementation of budget sequestration. Spending in the Federal FY 2013 budget is limited by the Budget Control Act, approved in 2011. In February, the President released his proposed budget, which contains budget reductions in many areas of importance to the County. While Congress is beginning its process to consider the budget bills, it is too early to determine which cuts will be enacted and the resulting impact to the County.
Budget sequestration, which will begin in January 2013 is also a result of the Budget Control Act. Sequestration requires automatic, across-the-board cuts to government programs, with half the reductions coming from defense spending. Cuts of $1.2 trillion over the next decade must be enacted, which represents lower Federal spending of approximately 9%. A number of County programs are exempt from sequestration, including Medicaid, the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), and the CalFresh food stamp program. Unless Congress passes, and the President signs, legislation to alter or delay the pending sequestration, it will occur, and Federal funds to the County are likely to be reduced. Restorations and Enhancements
In addition to our ability to address the financial
and physical infrastructure needs highlighted
above, this budget also has the flexibility to provide
some General Fund restorations and
enhancements totaling about $6.8 million. This
represents about 34% of the $20 million in
enhancements that were initially requested by
General Fund departments. These additions can be
best characterized as an attempt to address a
variety of areas where reductions over the years
have gone too far or where our stretched resources
are not able to address needs that could have
greater financial impacts in the future if not
addressed today. The majority of what was
requested was justified, but our financial situation
is still fragile and could only support a portion of
what was requested.
Facilities and Fleet
In the Facilities and Fleet Department we are
recommending the addition of four staff to reflect
the responsibility for maintaining increased
building square footage, and resources to address
rate increases for utilities. Much of this cost is offset
by savings related to the operation of our newly
installed solar panels and better pricing due to the
bulk purchase of natural gas. Although a net
increase of $845,000 is recommended for Facilities
and Fleet, the need is far greater and this
department is operating with fewer resources than
are needed to provide a comprehensive preventive
maintenance program. This is an area that requires
additional consideration when our financial
picture further stabilizes.
Employee Services Agency
In the Employee Services Agency, eight new
positions are recommended to address the
workload associated with our increasing
population of retired employees, providing
additional depth in the Labor Relations Office that
will be entering labor negotiations for the majority
of our contracts once again in the spring of 2013,
and the need to address Equal Opportunity (EO)
requirements. Over the years, EO positions have
been eliminated and there are no EO officers
currently located within the Health and Hospital
System. This situation creates substantial risk for
the County that we believe must be addressed in
this budget.
Social Services Agency
In the Social Services Agency, enhancements
totaling a net increase of $406,558 are included in
the Recommended Budget. $155,000 is allocated to
the IHSS program to add four staff that will support
timely processing of provider payroll, reduce
excessive telephone wait times, and address delays
in receiving responses to inquiries. $379,154 will be
restored to the Senior Nutrition Program to address
the rising cost of food, the increasing demand for
nutrition services, and to make up for use of
reserves to fund program costs. As the Board is aware, the County implemented
the realignment of adult criminal justice services in
2011. On October 1 the County became responsible
for a category of non-serious, non-violent, non-high
risk sex offenders being released from state prison.
At the same time, sentencing regulations changed
and individuals convicted of certain felonies with
sentences greater than one-year are now being
housed in County jail instead of State prison. These
changes created a new criminal justice system at
the local level, and counties had only three months
to plan and implement how to manage these
populations.
Santa Clara County has been recognized across the
State for developing an innovative plan that
focuses significant resources on the programs and
services these individuals need to exit the cycle of
criminal behavior. The County has brought
together Mental Health and the Department of
Alcohol and Drug Services to work with Probation
staff to design the programs and services that will
meet the needs of each parolee or inmate. This is a
work in progress, but initial results have been
extremely promising as the number of individuals
violating parole and re-offending is declining.
The original allocation for FY 2012 for AB 109 programs was $12.6 million. For FY 2013 the Governor's budget has allocated additional funding, and even though final allocations have not been made, we have been told to expect at least twice the FY 2012 amount in FY 2013. With this in mind, the Administration has developed a spending plan based on a careful review of requests and our experience to date. We are still developing information and plans to fully implement our evaluation process as data becomes available. With input from Departments and after reviewing the data collected up to this point, we are recommending substantial increases in resources for the majority of the components of AB 109. Increased resources are recommended as follows:
This recommended spending plan maintains the balanced approach that the Administration has consistently supported for this program. The pie chart below depicts how the funding is allocated by component.
We are still committed to a flexible approach to the AB 109 program as we gain more experience and fully evaluate the success of each program element and service, caseloads, and the population within the jail system. To the extent that adjustments need to be made in the allocations, they will be brought forward to the Board for discussion and approval.
A more comprehensive discussion of the AB 109 program is provided as part of the introductory material in this document and individual recommendations are described within the County Executive recommendations for each affected department. An important core value that must be emphasized
is our commitment to innovation in this
organization. The Center for Leadership and
Transformation (CLT) program has been
developed as a mechanism to drive the change that
needs to take place as we look ahead to the future.
As we have stated before, we must find new and
more efficient ways to deliver excellent services.
Without this change we will be unable to sustain
the current level of service moving forward. This
budget recommends an ongoing commitment to
CLT, recognizing the importance of this initiative.
We are recommending an increase of $556,145 to
fund this effort at an annual level of $736,145.
CLT is described more completely within this document in several locations. In summary, our goal is to empower our employees to look at their jobs differently and initiate changes that will improve performance in a material way. To date, the 39 CLT teams that are currently working have created over $400,000 in ongoing savings and over $1 million in one-time savings, as well as numerous client and customer service improvements. This is just the beginning, and as this effort spreads to more employees within the organization, horizontally and vertically, we are confident more savings and customer satisfaction results will be achieved and reported. Several efforts, including the implementation of the “software as a service” and common directory technology and the core system in the Health and Hospital system, are poised to deliver tangible results. I strongly support this initiative and believe it is a critical tool to move us forward as an organization to the level required in this very challenging environment.
Conclusion
After 10 years of unrelenting financial difficulties,
FY 2013 provides for a much needed pause for the
County organization, as well as the opportunity to
provide limited new resources to address critical
service areas. However, wary of the significant
threats on the horizon, it would be imprudent to
recommend the allocation of even more resources
for ongoing programs.
Our goal is to manage challenges while shoring up our service delivery networks where possible. While there are compelling arguments for increasing safety net and support services, we are committed to strengthening our foundation so we can withstand some of the problems evident on the horizon. We must be deliberate and restrain our desire to move quickly or we will return to the spiral that we have experienced for the past 10 years.
The reality is that our world is filled with uncertainty and ever-changing circumstances and conditions. We are fortunate to have an outstanding group of employees who believe in the mission statement and core values of the County. We must prepare ourselves to embrace the continuous challenges facing government, and provide the leadership necessary to maintain our essential service delivery systems and the safety net during these difficult times.