This document represents Shasta County's Recommended Fiscal Year 2013-14 Budget, pursuant to
Section 29062 of the Government Code. The budget is created from a process that includes
requests prepared by the operating and support departments of the County, review and
recommendations from my office, and compilation by the Auditor-Controller.
The Recommended Budget totals $398,905,999, including Total Governmental Funds,
$346,001,847; Internal Service Funds, $26,507,594; Enterprise Funds, $·18,872,837; and Special
Districts and Other Agencies governed by the Board of Supervisors, $7,523,721. The budget
represents the efforts of my staff and managers of the County's many departments who worked
diligently to prepare a budget that reflects departmental needs and program funding requests as well
as the CEO's recommended appropriations for the next fiscal year.
This document is an administrative tool that provides the framework under which the County will
operate for the fiscal period. Absent mandates, the budget is a vehicle by which the Board of
Supervisors provides philosophical direction for programs important to the local community.
The budget process, and the ultimate adoption of a balanced budget, requires the cooperation,
dedication, and labor of many individuals. I would like to extend my thanks to all department heads,
and their staff, for the common effort they commit to this annual process. All are to be commended
for their service and dedication to the County of Shasta and its citizens.The Recommended FY 2013-14 General Fund Budget is $69 million, which is approximately 5
percent ($3.9 million) less than the adjusted 2012-13 budget. The County refunded the long-term
debt on the Shasta County Administration Building which yielded lower annual debt service expense
($494,512). The prior fiscal year included a one-time appropriation ($2.8 million) for the contract with
Haven Humane for animal care and sheltering. These two account for the bulk of the reduction.
The Principles directed all departments to maintain a status quo General Fund subsidy, except for
those departments that have a minimum maintenance of effort (MOE) requirement. The two most
significant MOE’s are to public safety and health and human services programs.
Annually, the Auditor-Controller calculates the County’s Maintenance of Effort (MOE) for public
safety. In FY 2012-13 the County over-matched the public safety MOE by $11.5 million. The
County subsidy to the combined health and human services programs has been held static over the
last several years.
LONG-RANGE PLANNING
There has been no significant improvement to revenues, and the County continues to adhere to
conservative spending due to the continued economic downturn. Taking a proactive approach to
spending reductions in the past several fiscal years has helped keep the County solvent; but, absent
sustained annual revenue growth more reductions may be necessary each fiscal year.
Balancing service delivery with available resources will continue to be a challenge to the County for
many years.
DISCRETIONARY REVENUE
The national, state, and local economic downturn has resulted in a decline in property values,
lagging sales of consumer goods and services, and a steep decline in interest rates. Shasta County
continues to experience the unprecedented loss of discretionary revenue. In the year ending June
30, 2013, revenue is projected to decline by $2.1 million, or 4.3 percent, and is estimated to decline
another 2.7 percent at June 30, 2014. Problematic is not only the loss of current year base revenues
but the continued loss of revenue growth. Projections are for at least two additional years of
declining revenue, approximately 2 percent per year. The dissolution of redevelopment agencies
may have some yet unknown positive impact on the General Fund, as a minimal amount of tax
increment may accrue to the General Fund. In FY 2012-13 the County received some one-time
revenue ($2.5 million) from the dissolution of the City’s Redevelopment Agencies, in accordance
with State Department of Finance directives. However, the cities of Anderson, Redding and Shasta
Lake have claims pending for property tax administration fees. The settlement of these claims may
erode some or all of the one-time revenue.In addition to our discretionary sales tax revenues, sales taxes dedicated to public health, mental
health, social services, and public safety have declined dramatically.
1991 Realignment (Health and Human Services) sales tax and vehicle license fees (VLF) are
dedicated to public health, mental health, and social services and provided the majority of matching
funds for numerous state and federal funding sources. After decreasing for several years, VLF
receipts are expected to be flat in FY 2012-13 and a modest amount of growth is projected, primarily
for Public Health and Mental Health, in FY 2013-14. Sales tax revenue is anticipated to grow
slightly. Previous years’ unpaid caseload growth was substantially paid in FY 2012-13, with a small
amount remaining. Sales tax growth funds will be used to complete caseload growth and then be
distributed in FY 2013-14 as general growth to other realigned programs, including Public Health,
Mental Health, and Social Services. The total realignment base for all accounts for FY 2013-14 is
projected at $28,360,875, which is $1.2 million lower than FY 2006-07, the last year that the
realignment base in all accounts was fully funded.2011 Realignment (Health and Human Services) Similar to 1991 realignment, 2011 realignment is
projected to see a modest amount of growth in FY 2013-14. Within the funding mechanism,
restoration of child welfare funding in a statewide amount of $200 million takes precedence over
growth in funding for other programs. Provided the economic recovery is sustained, this restoration
is expected to be fully paid by FY 2014-15, leaving growth funds available for behavioral health and
other realigned programs. The 2011 realignment structure includes preferential treatment of
behavioral health, intended to compensate for financial treatment that favored health and social
services under the 1991 realignment mechanism.
2011 Realignment (Public Safety) included a major realignment of public safety programs from the
state to local governments. The intent of the Community Corrections Partnership Program
authorized by AB 109 is to end the revolving door of lower-level offenders and parole violators
through the state’s prisons.
The County’s Community Corrections Partnership Executive Committee (CCPEC), chaired by the
Chief Probation Officer, presented a coordinated plan for the second year of implementing AB 109 in
Shasta County to the Board of Supervisors on October 2, 2012. Funding for FY 2013-14 is expected
to be $7.4 million and appropriations are requested at $8.1 million, balanced with use of $752,232 in
carryover AB109 Restricted fund balance. Funding is expected to decline to and stabilize at $6.9
million in FY 2014-15. There are estimated annual growth funds starting in FY 2012-13; however,
the allocation methodologies have not yet been set so the amounts allocated to Shasta County
cannot be projected at this time. The CCPEC approved FY 2013-14 funding augmentations in the
District Attorney’s and Public Defender’s budgets as they will be responsible to staff nearly all
revocation hearings beginning July 1, 2013 as part of the continued transfer of state responsibilities
to counties; this will include all Mandatory Supervision, all Post Release Community Supervision,
and most of state Parole’s revocation hearings, as well as the Probation revocation hearings they
have always staffed. The CCPEC augmented this revenue because the 2011 Realignment
allocation to the District Attorney and Public Defender (which is separate from the AB 109/CCP
allocation) is only about half the amount necessary to fund one full-time attorney and does not
include any funding for support staff, training, equipment, supplies, etc.
The state and a nine-member CEO workgroup are currently working on new CCP and DA/PD
permanent funding allocation methodologies for FY 2014-15 and beyond, as well as 2011
Realignment growth allocations (however, the state Department of Finance has the authority to
make the final determination on the growth allocations). The Governor’s 2012 November ballot
initiative, called the Schools and Local Public Safety Protection Act of 2012, which included a
temporary increase in the state sales tax rate and income tax for people earning over $250,000
annually in order to fund education, and a Constitutional Amendment to protect realignment funding
for counties, was approved by the voters on November 6, 2012. The Constitutional Amendment
protects the state funding source for 2011 Realignment revenue which comes from Vehicle License
Fees (VLF) in the statewide amount of $453.4 million and 1.0625% of the state’s sales and use tax
(SUT) that would have ordinarily gone to the state general fund. Both of these funding sources,
though now constitutionally protected are not stable, as receipts are directly related to the health of
the economy; additionally, the temporary increase in the sales tax will sunset at the end of 2016.
Finally, the Governor is under pressure to release an additional 10,000 inmates from prison by
December 2013 to meet the Three-Judge Panel’s order to reduce prison capacity to 137.5 percent of
designed capacity. Therefore it is possible that we could see the AB 109 population grow to levels
higher than estimated with no additional funding, especially for Shasta County who is now second in
the state (per 1,000 arrests) for sending people to prison.Receipts from Public Safety Augmentation Proposition 172 sales tax are once again lagging behind
the prior year. The County’s pro-rata share of this sales tax was decreased from 0.005211 to
0.004889 in mid-year and the State recouped over $360,000 with the sixth distribution. We are
cautiously optimistic the receipts will at least meet the budget target. Absent, however, will be a
surplus which has been used to retire the debt owed to the General Reserve for funds advanced in
2008-09 when receipts were $2 million less than budgeted. Several years of positive receipts has
enabled the Public Safety fund to pay back all but approximately $370,000. Starting in FY 2012-13,
5 percent of each monthly receipt has been set aside for reserves to cushion the impact of any future
decline in this revenue, or for new detention facilities. The new Juvenile Detention Facility will use
$507,854 of this reserve to offset its first year’s increased operating expenses. The remaining
reserve is estimated to be $1.9 million. Due to declining receipts the monthly addition to the Reserve
has been suspended for 2013-14.Appropriations include a Contingency Reserve of $5 million that can be used for unanticipated
requirements that may occur during the fiscal year. When no need arises, these funds return to
fund balance and become the basis of the carry-over for the succeeding year. Financing is derived
from anticipated revenue, inter-fund transfers, and carry-over fund balances.
The General Reserve is approximately $10 million. This is 2.9 percent of total Government Funds
appropriations ($346 million). The Board established a policy for budgetary reserves in December
2007. The goal is to attain a Reserve of 5 percent of estimated financing uses, less designations
for reserves and capital projects, but no less than $10 million. The Public Safety Fund is making
payments on a loan from the General Reserve when Proposition 172 receipts declined; the
balance due is approximately $370,000.
YEAR-TO-YEAR COMPARISON
Departments were directed to submit a status quo budget request which could be achieved by
spending reductions in FY 2012-13. For the fiscal year ending June 30, 2013, the General Fund will
realize a 13 percent reduction in expenditures, and a reduction to the net-county-cost ($9.5 million).
Recommended General Fund appropriations for FY 2013-14 are $69.1 million, or 5 percent less less
than the adjusted FY 2012-13 budget. Contributing factors include the following: The County
refunded the long-term debt on the Shasta County Administration Building which yielded lower
annual debt service expense ($494,512). The prior fiscal year included a one-time appropriation

($2.8 million) for the contract with Haven Humane for animal care and sheltering. These two
account for the bulk of the reduction.
In the aggregate, the CEO’s Recommended FY 2013-14 budget for select budget units, excluding
special districts, totals $391.2 million, which when compared to the 2012-13 Adjusted Budget, is an
increase of $8.5 million, or 2.2 percent. The bulk of the growth is in the Public Assistance budgets
due to preparations for implementation of the Affordable Care Act, and in Public Safety budgets due
to implementation of community corrections programs in response to AB 109.
The following Table compares by Fund the 2012-13 Adjusted Budget (at 01/31/2012), versus
estimated expenditures at 6/30/2013, with the 2013-14 Recommended Budget for select budget
units.

As part of their two-year general fund reduction requirement, the California Department of Food and
Agriculture (CDFA) was directed to take a $12 million permanent reduction in its FY 2012-13 budget.
While most of the CDFA’s general fund reductions went into effect last fiscal year, their Division of
Measurement Standards continues to struggle financially. Counties have been notified that the state
will not provide counties with funding for the Petroleum and Weighmaster programs as they have
been doing for many years. The department has historically received approximately $8,000 annually
for these activities.
ASSESSOR
The function of the Assessor is to produce an annual assessment roll that reflects the taxable values
of land, improvements, and personal property by the Assessor’s parcel numbering system or
account numbering system. In addition to the taxable value, the roll must also indicate the current
status of ownership; the owner’s mailing address and the existence of any exemptions. To
accomplish this, the Assessor must discover, classify and appraise all locally assessable property
according to constitutional, statutory, and administrative requirements. In addition to preparing the
annual local assessment roll pursuant to Section 601 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code,
the Assessor must produce the supplemental assessment roll as provided in Sections 75 through
75.8 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
For FY 2012-13 there were 108,814 locally assessed properties in Shasta County with a taxable
value of $14,649,497,044 generating more than $146 million in property tax revenue for use by
Shasta County agencies that include: County government, the three cities, school districts, and other
local taxing agencies. These figures represent a decrease of 1.36 percent in taxable value and
property tax revenue over the previous year.
In their FY 2013-14 Requested Budget, the department requested the re-classification of the
Executive Assistant-Confidential. The reclassification was studied and approved by County
Personnel for an Agency Staff Services Analyst I/II.
CAPITAL PROJECTS
The Capital Projects budget (Land, Buildings and Improvements) includes 5 projects totaling $2.1
million: 1) Placer Street DPW Upper-N Remodel, $390,000; 2) MHSA Breslauer Remodel, $1.38
million; 3) Mental Health Building Roof, $50,000; 4) Opportunity Center Transit Shelter, $170,451;
and 5) Jail Phase-1 Hot Water System Upgrade, $150,000. Each project is funded by a dedicated
funding stream and none require a General Fund contribution.
Additionally, we broke ground on the new juvenile rehabilitation facility on April 24, 2012. This
multi-year project includes appropriations of $6.7 million in 2013-14. When fully built-out the project
is estimated to cost $18.45 million, with a County-match of $3.4 million. The County-match has been
fully appropriated.
COUNTY FIRE
The FY 2013-14 requested budget reflects a 7.5 percent increase in appropriations, a 5.8 percent
decrease in revenues, and is predicated on use of fund balance in the amount of $1.45 million.
However, the department projects returning $1.43 million to fund balance at the end of FY 2012-13. 

General Fund support is almost $1.73 million, an increase of $78,000 to fund the Volunteer
Firefighter Stipend which increased from $6 to $12 per call as approved by the Board on February 5,
2013, and effective July 1, 2013. General Fund support has declined from a high of just over $2.1
million in FY 2007-08. County Fire has continued to provide the same level of services to
communities by relying on fund balance. Continued reliance on fund balance to balance the budget
could cause the department’s fund balance to be depleted by FY 2015-2016 and/or could eventually
impact emergency response services in the future.
The department has requested just over $1.15 million in capital assets for FY 2013-14, an increase
of $658,616, or 132.9 percent, from the FY 2012-13 Adjusted Budget. The new requests for FY
2013-14 include one new fire engine for Keswick Volunteer Fire Company (VFC) ($332,000), two
water tenders – one for Soldier Mountain VFC and one for Old Station VFC ($500,000 total), one
breathing support vehicle for Palo Cedro VFC ($260,000), one defibrillator ($32,345), and one truck
for County Fire administration ($30,000).
ELECTIONS
The FY 2013-14 requested budget includes expenditures in the amount of $2.07 million and
revenues in the amount of $587,547 which results in a status quo budget as compared to the FY
2012-13 adjusted budget.
In 2011, local elected boards received approval from the Board of Supervisors to completely
eliminate the Shasta County odd-year election. This results in a more even budget, with variation
coming over a longer period of time.
It should be noted that in FY 2012-13, Shasta County was forced to conduct a Special Vacancy
Election. The cost of the Special Vacancy Election was not included in the department’s FY 2012-13
budget. The County’s Contingency Reserve was increased by 1 million dollars to cover the cost of
this Special Vacancy Election. The department was able to conduct the Special Vacancy Election
without additional County General Fund cost. The department should be commended for their
prudent use of county resources.
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
The combined budgeted fund balance draw for FY 2013-14 from the Social Services, Mental Health,
and Public Health reserves is approximately $4.3 million. The requested HHSA budgets are
conservative; however, the reserves could become too low to sustain future years of fund balance
draw absent revenue growth or relief from non-mandated services.
There are immediate concerns relative to the Mental Health budget. Despite significant efforts to
reduce costs for treatment of acute and long-term psychiatric conditions, the volume and severity of
clients coming into the local mental health system has increased significantly over the past year and
the cost of providing the most intensive services has risen as well. An analysis of current
expenditures indicates that those related to support and care of persons will exceed $11 million, or
more than half of the total Mental Health expenditures in FY 2012-13. Mental Health expenditures in
the “support and care” category are expected to surpass the current budget by more than $1.8
million.
HHSA staff have taken steps to identify and implement efficiencies and curb controllable costs such
as holding essential but non-critical positions vacant and allocating costs to Mental Health Services
Act programs wherever appropriate. However, those actions are not sufficient to sustain the Mental
Health budget. For this reason, the Board of Supervisors approved a transfer of $1.19 million in

1991 realignment revenue from Social Services to Mental Health on May 7, 2013. Although Social
Services is experiencing 1991 realignment growth and can sustain the $1.19 million transfer, cash
flow is a continuing concern for Mental Health and Social Services due to the timing of
reimbursements from the State and that some of the revenue received by Mental Health must be
transferred to the Mental Health Services Act budget based on allowable services.
Additionally, the settlement of the Katie A. lawsuit makes mental health services for foster children
an entitlement. Shasta County’s child welfare and mental health systems have worked together with
service providers to address the mental health needs of children, youth and families in the child
welfare system for a significant period of time. Although this coordination is already occurring,
further expanded services will be necessary to meet the court ordered requirements. Counties
completed Readiness Assessment and Service Delivery Plan documents. These actions are
designed to pull together people and information from the Child Welfare Service system, the Mental
Health system and other stakeholders. The timeline for completion of these documents and their
submission to the State Department of Health Care Services was May 15, 2013. A Fiscal Task
Force is meeting at the State level to continue to work on funding resources for mandated services.
Some children and youth previously served in the Healthy Families program are now eligible for
Medi-Cal in FY 2013-14, due to a change in the eligibility criteria. This expansion of Medi-Cal
eligibles and changes to the eligibility criteria for those most in need of mental health services in the
Healthy Families program is expected to increase the number of children and youth eligible for
services through county Mental Health departments. Some additional funding was provided under
the 2011 realignment to reflect the expanded population, but it remains to be seen whether the
additional funding is sufficient to meet the needs of the children transferred from the Healthy
Families program.
Unfortunately, much of HHSA’s fiscal future rests with decisions at the state and federal levels in an
attempt to alleviate their budget deficits. The Governor’s May Revise, which was released May 14,
2013, proposes a path for state-based expansion of health care coverage allowed under federal law
and a commensurate shift in some responsibilities to counties. The State currently dedicates about
$1.5 billion annually to counties for health care, primarily for services for indigent adults, which are
many of the same people who will move to Medi-Cal coverage under the new law. The Governor
indicates that the State is taking on more responsibility for health care, so counties should take on
more financial responsibility for certain human services programs over time. To ensure adequate
funding remains at the county level for safety net services, dollars would be redirected to counties
based on actual county-by-county experience. The reliability of those dollars being available to
counties is a concern.
Medi-Cal, the second largest state General Fund expense, is experiencing higher costs of
$467 million statewide, principally as a result of the federal government and courts either rejecting or
delaying approval of previously adopted legislative actions. In addition, actions taken by the federal
government to address its own fiscal challenges could further strain the state budget. This could
result in shifting of program costs from the federal government to states and/or reducing overall
federal spending in California.
INTERMOUNTAIN FAIR
In FY 2011-12, the California Department of Agriculture, Division of Fairs and Expositions funding
was eliminated from the state budget. With the loss of this funding the Intermountain Fair can
continue to operate without additional support for two to three more years by relying on fund
balance. In order to extend the life of the department’s fund balance, the Intermountain Fair
Manager retired at the end of 2012 and is currently working part time.

a crime. The County does so through a County Public Defender’s Office and a Conflict Public
Defender contract. Both budget units fund legal representation for persons unable to afford counsel
in certain kinds of cases where life or liberty is at stake. Primary legal services are provided by staff
in the County’s Public Defender Office (Cost Center 207). For cases in which the Public Defender
must declare a legal conflict of interest, a local, private attorney provides services through a single
contract (Cost Center 203). Federal and State laws mandate that these services be provided,
however, the cost of providing legal counsel to indigent clients falls mainly to the County. In cases
where both the Public Defender and local contracted public defender must declare a conflict, the
courts will appoint an attorney.
Although the Public Defender has always provided defense for Probation Revocation Hearings, the
2011 Realignment legislation, signed by the Governor on April 4, 2011 and effective October 1,
2011, requires the Public Defender to now also provide defense for Mandatory Supervision and Post
Release Community Supervision Revocation Hearings as well. Additionally, effective July 1, 2013,
this will also include most state Parole Revocation Hearings. Federal and State laws mandate that
these services be provided, however, the cost of providing legal counsel to indigent clients falls
mainly to the County.
While every effort is made to accurately project the expense for any given fiscal year, ultimately the
number and complexity of cases determine the final County cost for indigent defense. A recent case
involving multiple defendants has created a significant workload in the Public Defender’s Office for
the past several fiscal years. However, it is estimated that this case will be adjudicated by the end of
FY 2012-13. The Adopted Budget includes a contingency reserve in the conflict public defender’s
budget. This reserve of $250,000 will fall back to the General Fund at the end of the fiscal year if is
not needed.
PUBLIC SAFETY
As a starting point the public safety departments - District Attorney, Juvenile Hall, Probation, and the
various Sheriff’s budget units, were directed to budget for status quo General Fund support and 3
percent decrease in Public Safety Augmentation (Prop 172) revenue. The District Attorney, Chief
Probation Officer, and the Sheriff have worked diligently to provide a FY 2013-14 budget that
protects public safety and fulfills their core missions with consideration for the County’s overall fiscal
health.
Funding for public safety subvention programs such as booking fees, small and rural sheriff’s grants,
COPS, SAFE grant, CalMMET grant, juvenile reentry, juvenile justice, Youth Offender Block Grant,
and juvenile probation has declined as a result of the Great Recession but is now funded via 2011
Realignment and the funding source is Constitutionally protected via Proposition 30 approved by the
state’s voters on November 6, 2012. State revenue projections have been realized in fiscal years
2011-12 and 2012-13.
Total Recommended FY 2013-14 appropriations for the public safety group are $60.3 million, an
increase of over $1.9 million from the current year primarily due to the new and expanding county
duties and obligations related to 2011 Realignment (such as the opening of the Community
Corrections Center/Day Reporting Center) and increased operational costs for the new Juvenile
Rehabilitation Facility scheduled to open the winter of 2013. Revenues from all sources total nearly
$54.7 million, including $22.9 million from the General Fund, and $12.8 million from Public Safety

balance, the District Attorney will use $430,935 in fund balance, and the Probation Department will
use almost $3 million in fund balance. However, of these amounts, which total a little over $5.6
million, approximately $3.9 million are from Restricted fund balance accounts such as 2011
Realignment, asset forfeiture, and SB 678 (revenue from the state related to shared savings by
reducing the number of adult felony probationers who return to prison); therefore the department’s
request a use of Public Safety fund balance in the amount of $1.7 million in order to balance their FY
2013-14 budgets.
It is worth noting that the District Attorney’s Office (although always required to staff Probation
Revocation Hearings), is also likewise affected by the 2011 Realignment legislation, which requires
the District Attorney to now provide staff for Mandatory Supervision and Post Release Community
Supervision Revocation Hearings. And, like the Public Defender’s Office, effective July 1, 2013, will
also be required to provide staff for most state Parole Revocation Hearings.

The new Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility is scheduled to open mid-way through the 2013-14 FY and
so budget requests will fund additional operational costs for the new larger facility which can house
up to 90 juvenile wards (more than twice the size of the current facility), along with operating the
current facility during the transition (some parts of the current facility will remain in operation as it
houses the Juvenile Probation Division as well as Juvenile Court). Total FY 2013-14 requested
appropriations will increase by 22.6 percent, or $805,662, from $3.57 million to $4.37 million. It is
important to note that this level of funding will only support housing up to 35 juvenile wards, or the
opening of only two of the three pods, in the new facility. There are five new Juvenile Detention
Officers position allocations requested to staff the new facility. No new capital assets or equipment
are requested; however, funding for these types of costs for the new facility are budgeted, as part of
the required County match, in the Juvenile Rehabilitation Facility construction project budget at
$167,000.
Requested revenues of just over $3.8 million will increase by 7.5 percent, or $265,947, from the FY
2012-13 Adjusted Budget, primarily due to an increase in Proposition 172 support of $300,005, or
46.3 percent. General Fund support for the FY 2013-14 budget year has decreased slightly (less
than one percent) and other revenues have been very conservatively budgeted. The department
requested use of Public Safety fund balance in the amount of $569,645 to balance the FY 2013-14
Requested Budget. However, the CEO recommended various minor technical changes in the
budget that resulted in a decrease use of fund balance, or $507,854, and recommends this deficit is
funded from Proposition 172 Reserves, and not Public Safety fund balance. There are sufficient
Proposition 172 Reserves to fund this deficit.
PUBLIC WORKS
The Department of Public Works consists of the following divisions: Facilities Management, Road
Operations, and County Service Areas. Revenues for the Road Division have increased by $6.4
million and expenditures have increased by $5 million.

The Facilities Management Division is financed through charges for service to user departments and
does not receive General Fund support. The Division has experienced an increase of $511,936 in
revenues and expenditures as a result of the increase in department project and service requests.
The Division has requested the addition of a Custodian I/II due to the increased square footage of
County facilities. The Division has been operating at minimal staffing for several years, and has
difficulty in covering shifts when employees utilize accrued vacation and sick leave hours. Effective
July 1, 2013, the Facilities Management Division of Public Works will manage all of the County’s fleet
operations. Currently, Fleet (non-Public Works vehicles) is managed by the Department of Support
Services.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
The Department of Resource Management consists of the following divisions: Air Quality
Management District, Building Division, Environmental Health Division, Planning Division and
Community Education Section.
Environmental Health is requesting, and the County Executive Officer supports the addition of an
Environmental Health Technician I/II to review Environmental Health permits and perform field work
that does not require a Registered Environmental Health Specialist certificate. The General Fund
continues to support one full-time Senior Environmental Health Specialist position that works on unreimbursed
community Environmental Health programs.
The Building Department serves as the code enforcement arm of the Resource Management
Department. This includes serving as the code enforcement officer for Medical Marijuana cultivation.
The Department is requesting, and the County Executive Officer recommends an increase in
General Fund support for the addition of a Building Inspector III to address nuisance complaints
generated by the cultivation of medical marijuana.
The Planning Department is requesting, and the County Executive Officer recommends the addition
of a Planning Division Manager for the daily administration and coordination of the Planning Division.
Building and planning activity is relatively stable with the department is concentrating on several
projects, including the General Plan. A General Fund contribution of $440,000 is budgeted for the
General Plan update. Fund balance will be utilized to offset any revenue shortfall.
General Plan Update
By law, each California County must adopt and maintain a comprehensive, long-term general plan
that governs physical development and land use within its boundaries. Shasta County has adopted
a five year interval for review. The last comprehensive General Plan was adopted in 2004. On
March 23, 2010 the Board of Supervisors elected to proceed with a limited General Plan update
which will address the critical greenhouse gas requirement in a new air quality element and will
include the mandatory housing element update with integration of both elements into the rest of the
General Plan as needed. The update will include editorial updates to policy language and to County
profiles (population, economic trends, etc.). The total estimated cost of the limited General Plan
update is $552,000. Each fiscal year we increase the appropriation from General Revenue to
Planning to offset the expense of the update, but we only transfer actual expenses. To date,
approximately $6,500 has been spent on the contractor and the project is 2 percent complete.

the Courts (AOC) on siting the new courthouse building. The County and the AOC executed a
Purchase Acquisition Agreement whereby the AOC exchanged its equity in the Main Courthouse
and Courthouse Annex, and the Justice Center, for the Public Safety Building. The agreement
allows each party to holdover in their respective buildings. The Recommended Budget includes $1
million for activities related to relocating the Sheriff and the Probation Department from the Public
Safety Building. The start-date for construction of the new courthouse building has been delayed
due to the State budget. The CEO will work with the AOC to extend our holding over in the Public
Safety Building until, at a minimum, December 31, 2014. Future costs will include yet unknown
expense to relocate county-staff, although the CEO continues to research co-locating staff within
available County square footage. Upon completion of the new courthouse the Court will vacate the
Main Courthouse/ Courthouse Annex and Justice Center; the Department of Public Works has
estimated remodel of the Main Courthouse will cost upwards of $4 million.
VETERANS HALLS
One project is scheduled to be completed this year, the replacement of the heater at the Fall River
Mills Veterans Hall at a cost of $15,000. Two projects were completed in FY 2012-13: the
replacement of the roof of the Redding Veterans Hall and the refinish of the floor at the Fall River
Mills Veterans Hall. The completion of these two projects has decreased the net county cost of the
Veterans Halls by approximately $75,000 compared to the FY 2012-13 adjusted budget (a General
Fund expense).

The Recommended Budget provides for a workforce of 1862.5 full-time-equivalents (FTE’s). This
includes a net increase of 14 FTE’s. The sunset date for 41 positions will be extended from June 30,
2013, to June 30, 2015. Also, the position allocation will be cleaned-up to more accurately reflect
the assignments for eleven positions; for example, if the incumbent was under-filling a higher
classification, or from a study which recommended a reclass.

The Recommended Budget relies on $7.8 million of unallocated salary savings. This savings is
realized through normal attrition as well as by leaving positions unfilled. This mechanism allows
departments to submit balanced budgets pending resolution of yet unknown revenue shortfalls
caused by the State budget. Compared to Regular Salaries of $94 million, the unallocated savings
is approximately 8.3 percent. In the aggregate the anticipated savings are: Housing $5,000;
General Fund $196,963; Public Safety $1.1 million; and Health and Human Services $6.4 million.

As of March 21, 2013, total vacancies were 226, or 12.2 percent. Some of the vacancies may be
due to the County’s Controlled Hiring Process. The CEO confers with Support Services weekly to
review all requests to fill positions. This is in part to reduce expenditures, but also to preserve
positions for employees facing a layoff situation.
The CEO will continue to review all requests for new positions to ensure they are offset by long-term
reliable revenue.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
The cost of workers compensation insurance, CalPERS retirement, health insurance rate increases,
and retiree health care continue to impact the County. In December 2007 the Board of Supervisors
adopted an 80 percent confidence level for the County’s self-insured workers’ compensation and
liability insurance programs. The County is committed to maintaining a prudent reserve.
The County’s employer share of CalPERS retirement had already experienced volatility due to the
investment losses CalPERS experienced during the downtown in the market. In April 2012,
CalPERS announced an assumption change which included the reduction of the discount rate from
7.75 percent to 7.5 percent. Additionally, CalPERS will change other important benchmarks such as
the average mortality of retirees and their survivors. Then, in April 2013, CalPERS announced a
change in their amortization and smoothing policies. That is, they will employ an amortization and
smoothing policy that will pay for all gains and losses over a fixed 30-year period with the increases
or decreases in the rate spread directly over a 5-year period. This new policy will affect the County’s
employer share of CalPERS beginning in FY 2015-16. Using CalPERS model, over a five-year
period starting in July 2015, the County’s employer contribution to employee retirement could reach
as high as 20 percent for miscellaneous employees (up from 13.69), and 48 percent for safety
employees (up from 35.59). It is yet uncertain what impact pension reform will have on employee
retirement. The County successfully bargained reduced retirement benefits with labor, many of
which are now the state-norm. While beneficial to the County’s long-term fiscal health, these
pension changes will not realize an immediate financial benefit.
On the local level, the County has successfully negotiated with 9 represented bargaining units and 3
unrepresented bargaining units for wage and/or benefit concessions. Active employees will pay the
employee share of PERS retirement, and new hires will be working longer (to age 62 for
miscellaneous and 57 for public safety) and their retirement will be based on the average of high
three years (instead of highest year). Across-the-board, wages have been stagnant for several
years, with elected officials and unrepresented managers forgoing and/or postponing scheduled
cost-of-living adjustments and leave buy-outs.
The County of Shasta provides post-retirement medical and dental benefits (OPEB) to eligible
employees who retire directly from the County. Eligible retirees pay a portion of the medical
premium based on the PEHMCA (CalPERS medical program) “unequal method.” The remaining
premium is shared by the County and active employees in accordance with bargaining agreements.
Like most governmental agencies, the County pays for these post-retirement benefits on a “pay-asyou-
go” basis. This means that OPEB costs are ignored while an employee renders service and
recognized only after the employee retires.
GASB 45 requires governmental agencies to conduct an actuarial valuation of the liability for OPEB
and report them on their financial statements. The Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liability is the
excess of the Actuarial Accrued Liability over Plan Assets. This represents the amount of the
Actuarial Accrued Liability at the valuation date that still must be funded. The County’s estimated

Unfunded Actuarial Liability as of June 30, 2012, is $188.4 million.
Although GASB does not require governmental agencies to pre-fund their OPEB liability, Shasta
County is taking positive steps towards addressing OPEB. The County established two irrevocable
OPEB Trusts with initial funding of $6 million each; and implemented a one percent charge, as a
percent of payroll, effective July 1, 2008. This percentage will be increased to 2 percent effective
July 1, 2013. The combined assets of the two OPEB Trusts as of June 30, 2012 was $21,785,373.
We continue to advocate for legislative changes to PEMHCA to give counties greater flexibility in
establishing a tiered benefit system; and to work towards OPEB cost avoidance through labor
negotiations. Within available resources the County may incrementally increase the payroll charges
for OPEB to pass a portion of this expense to state and federal programs when appropriate.

Department heads have worked diligently to control spending in the current fiscal year to create fund
balance carryover for FY 2013-14. The CEO directed every General Fund department to submit a
status quo budget, which could be realized by reductions in 2012-13, and/or 2013-14. General Fund
departments will achieve a 13 percent reduction ($9.5 million) in the year ending June 30, 2013,
which will result in a fund balance carryover of $11.0 million. The CEO also recommended a status
quo subsidy to non-general fund budgets. Exceptions were made for those budgets with a minimum
maintenance of effort (MOE), and for certain Board approved projects.
Total funding requirements for the General Fund, which includes the subsidy to non-general fund
departments, is $69,159,406. This will be offset by revenue, $58,469,159, leaving a structural
imbalance of $10,689,247. This will be offset by use of approximately $11.0 million from fund
balance carryover. The carryover estimate is developed through a joint effort of staff in the Auditor-
Controller’s Office and the County Administrative Office. The actual fund balance figure is not firm
until the County’s books are closed at the end of September, subsequent to the adoption of the
County budget.
Recognizing the lasting impact on County resources due to the great recession, over a period of
several years, benefit concessions have been realized through collaborative bargaining with our
represented labor groups. Elected officials and unrepresented managers have also conceded
wages and benefits. This partnership contributed to our ability to present the Board with a balanced
Budget.
Department heads and their fiscal managers are to be commended for their willingness to manage
spending within available resources while continuing to meet the needs of our community.