The FY2013/14 Recommended Budget for Governmental Funds is balanced and totals $817,735,009 (Schedules 1 and 2). The
total budget represents decrease of $27 million, or -3.2%, when compared to the FY2012/13 Adopted Budget and relies on fund
balances and draws from Reserves.
The most significant changes are reflected in the Special Revenue Funds and the Capital Project Funds. There is an increase
in the Special Revenues Funds primarily due to growth in Public Safety and Health & Social Services. The increases in both
funds are attributed to new service level requirements as a result of 2011 Public Safety Realignment AB109 and the FY2013/14
implementation of the Federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA). Both areas of County Government are
anticipating increases in staff and services in order to meet the requirements of these two mandates. The decrease in the
Capital Project Fund is due to the construction of the new AB900 funded Claybank Jail which began in FY2012/13. The
FY2013/14 budget reflects capital projects and capital renewal/repairs, including the new Animal Care Expansion Project.
While the FY2013/14 Recommended Budget uses fund balances and draws down from designated reserves, it maintains
several reserves, including the General Fund Reserve for FY2014/15 and FY2015/16, and relies on projected fund balances to
fund County core services. In FY2012/13 the County received one-time revenues of $9.4 million from the dissolution and
disposition of housing and other assets held by the former redevelopment agencies in the county. These one-time revenues are
recommended to be used to help pay for increased unfunded liabilities for employee related costs including accrued leave
payoff, projected PERS employer rate increases, deferred maintenance for county buildings, shelter and housing needs and/or
SB 375 compliance projects, and to help bridge the gap for non-profits (clinics, family resource centers, etc.) given the transition
to the ACA during FY2013/14.
The Recommended Budget provides for a workforce of 2,732.9 FTE positions, excluding extra help positions. This reflects a net
increase of 151.3 FTE from FY2012/13 Adopted Budget. The additional positions reflect staffing needs to address new
mandates and associated services related to AB109 Public Safety Realignment, ACA and cost avoidance measures.
A Budget Summary narrative has been prepared and accompanied by a series of budget tables that are intended to describe
the budgeted expenditures and associated revenue used to fund the programs and services in the budget units. The individual
Recommended Budget narratives provide the following department information: the purpose; function and responsibilities;
significant challenges and accomplishments as identified by the department head; workload indicators (where pertinent and
relevant); a summary of significant adjustments to the operation or budget; summary of position changes; and identification of
pending issues and policy considerations as identified by the Department Head.
The FY2013/14 Recommended Budget addresses known revenue challenges and proposes reductions and adjustments in
operating expenditures to address these challenges, while allowing for some continued investments in technology, training, and
capital renewal. The Budget includes some one-time funding in the General Fund of $9.9 million, the Library Fund and several
other operational budgets. While there remains uncertainty in funding streams and potential costs, what is certain is that County
Department Heads and the Board can anticipate the need for continued discussions and the ongoing review of programs and
services in FY2013/14.

The County’s FY2013/14 Recommended Budget for the General Fund of $219.2 million is balanced with revenues of $176.1
million, drawdowns of $800,000 from the Reserve for Accrued Leave, $2.4 million from the Reserve for Deferred Maintenance
and the remainder being funded by Fund Balance.
The Recommended Budget for General Fund reflects an increase in revenues of $2.7 million when compared to the FY2012/13
Adopted Budget of $173.4 million. The increase in revenues is primarily attributed to an anticipated increase in Tax Revenues
of $2.1 million from the redistribution of residual taxes in the dissolution of the redevelopment agencies. While there was a lot of
uncertainty last fiscal year and there still remains uncertainty with Redevelopment Dissolution, in FY2012/13, the financial
impact was less severe. The County received a share of the tax increment revenues (ABX1 26 Residual Taxes) formerly
distributed to the redevelopment agencies; and we received Pass-through revenues (ABX1 26 Pass Through). We anticipate
the County will continue to receive a share of the residual taxes and Pass-through, however, there are still many lawsuits and
proposed legislation pending that may impact the distribution of the former redevelopment tax increment and therefore, impact
our share of those taxes in the coming year.
The Recommended Budget reflects reduced General Fund appropriations of $219.2 million when compared to FY2012/13
Adopted Budget of $221.7 million. The net decrease of $2.5 million is primarily due one-time transfers totaling $4.3 million in the
prior year to fund the Fouts Springs Boys Ranch demobilization and a one-time debt service transfer. The Health & Social
Services Fund is anticipating a decrease in GF Contribution of approximately $0.8 million due to an anticipated decrease in
some Public Assistance expenditures. The decreases were offset by an increase in General Fund Contribution to the Public
Safety departments of $2.4 million primarily due to the Sheriff’s Office in anticipation of the new AB900 Claybank Jail opening in
Spring 2014.

PENDING ISSUES:
Supplemental Budget:
The Recommended Budget document was prepared early in the month of May to facilitate a May release and longer review
period prior to Budget Hearings in June. To accommodate the earlier release, we have reflected in the department budgets only
the known and approved State and Federal programs changes as of May 15, which will take effect July 1, 2013.
Historically, the County Administrator’s Office prepares a Supplemental Budget document following the completion and
distribution of the Recommended Budget, as more of an administrative function, primarily to address accounting notations. To
the degree possible, the Supplemental Budget may reflect additional program and service changes including possible reductions
that can be expected based on the Governor’s May Revision. Unfortunately, we do not know the speed in which the California
State Legislature will act on the Governor’s proposals in the May Budget Revision. With the passage of Proposition 30 – the
temporary sales tax measure- the State has received some financial relief. However, with the implementation of the Affordable
Care Act on the horizon, there remains a lot of uncertainty and unknowns at the State level that could significantly distress the
County’s FY2013/14 Budget (e.g. 1991 Realignment) and several other operational budgets. If this materializes in the coming
weeks, the CAO and County Departments will return to the Board with additional budget recommendations.
Affordable Care Act: The Governor has proposed to shift certain programs from the State to the counties. The program shift
and revenue shift exposes the County to a loss in revenue of up to $3 million due to health care realignment.
AB109 Growth Factor. The budget recommended by the Solano Community Corrections Partnership (CCP) included the
appropriation of AB109 growth funds based on a proposed allocation provided by the Realignment Allocation Committee (RAC).
The proposed allocation, which was anticipated to be included in the Governor’s May Revise, is still under evaluation by the
RAC and is yet to be finalized. The Solano County AB109 growth allocation is anticipated to be $727,416 and has been included
in the $15.7 million as available FY2013/14 funding. The County is continuing to monitor the status of the AB109 growth
allocation and will provide an update on the funding when available.
Property Tax Appeals. Currently there are 835 active property tax appeals on file with the County Clerk representing $9.5 billion
(cumulative over 10 years) in assessed value. This is a significant amount given that the total annual valuation of Solano
County is only $39.2 billion. The final resolution of these appeals can have a significant impact on the County’s property tax
revenues in the future.
Capital Renewal and Major Maintenance – County Roads and Bridges
As required by law, the Board adopted a 5-Year Capital Investment Plan for Roads and Bridges on December 4, 2012, which
shows an estimated $5 million in unfunded road maintenance and bridge replacement projects. The Board’s existing policy has
been for the County to secure State and Federal funds for large projects, such as bridge replacements and major road
reconstruction, and to use the local Road Fund to provide for all other required maintenance. As State and Federal funding for
this area of responsibility continue to diminish, other options and further consideration regarding this area of liability and
responsibility will be necessary. (Refer to Public Ways budget.)